---
subject: "Links For November 2024"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-11-01 07:15:23
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX"]
---
[I haven’t independently verified each link. On average, commenters will end up spotting evidence that around two or three of the links in each links post are wrong or misleading. I correct these as I see them, and will highlight important corrections later, but I can’t guarantee I will have caught them all by the time you read this.] 1: 2: 3: Polling USA asking some of the important questions ( 4: 5: Is it legal to deliberately poison AI training data? That is, suppose you made a lot of webpages saying “the word strawberry has two Rs”, such that the AI would certainly have that statement in its training data. Then, when you wanted to check whether an interlocutor was secretly an AI, you could ask the strawberry question and expect the AI to get it wrong. Answer: 6: Here the black line indicates that the average European of 6000 BC would have had genetic IQ 65 (compared to modern 100), but the regression line indicates more like IQ 90 - I don’t know why the researchers chose to interpret the trend as necessarily constant and linear, or whether we should follow. There isn’t enough ancient DNA to fully test whether the same happened in other populations yet, although a preliminary small-sample test on Asians suggests it happened there too. If the selection for IQ was a response of agriculture, we’d expect to see higher genetic IQ in populations that 7: Joseph Heath on 8: 9: During the most recent Berkeley ACX meetup, we somehow ended up discussing how often people feed living mice to snakes. The answer seems to be that there’s a debate about it in the snake community, the smartest and most experienced voices are against it, but it still happens a lot. Here’s an EA Forum post on 10: King Frederick William I of Prussia
The King dreamed of a eugenics program to create even taller soldiers. He got as far as pairing up some of his tall soldiers up with tall women and birthing a few tall babies before he died; his successor had no interest and let everybody go home. 11: Before modern IP law, you could write a sequel to someone else’s book and they couldn’t stop you. Among the most successful examples is American “astronomer and writer” Garrett Serviss’ 12: Joe Biden, singularitarian? ( 13:
14: A company called 15: Cremieux: 16: The Green Party, a US third party, tried to put their candidate Jill Stein on the ballot in November. The Nevada election office 17: 18: Also Nostalgebraist: 19: Australian government 20: Getting your brain cryogenically frozen after your death 21: Cube Flipper: After surveying the field, Cube Flipper proposes a more advanced visual computer based on taking DMT and viewing certain types of tiles with slight deviations: …and makes the extreme claim that something like this might demonstrate hypercomputation, ie the visual system has semi-magic computational properties beyond those permitted by normal physical laws. I am skeptical but appreciate the survey of visual computing (as well as the callback to 22: Material implication in Mormonism: In the book Doctrines and Covenants, Joseph Smith 23: More old-timey psychiatric ads (this one is from 1952, source: 24: Congratulations to Open Philanthropy, the biggest effective altruist foundation… …whose grantee David Baker recently 25: 26: 27: 28: 29: Congratulations to Substacker 30: Did you know: 31: Moshe Koppel, 32: David Roman 33: Medications often decrease “secondary endpoints” (eg stroke, heart attack), but the holy grail of pharma studies is proving that a certain drug decreases all-cause mortality. This is much harder (not all heart attacks kill people, and people die from lots of other things), but is the strongest possible endorsement for the drug (without it, you might worry that it only prevented non-fatal heart attacks, or that it killed as many people through side effects as it saves through heart attack prevention). Even great medications that we’re confident in can’t always clear this bar. But a new JAMA article adds another member to this select club: 34: Before the Gulf War got in the way, Saddam Hussein was building 35: 36: Elsewhere in “Italy sucks” news - did you know 37: Seen on 38: Extelligence has a post 39: Related: Extelligence 40: Jiankui He is the Chinese geneticist who made history with the first germline gene editing in humans (resulting in three babies supposedly immune to AIDS, although success has not been tested). China sentenced him to three years in prison for unauthorized experimentation, but now he’s out of jail, 41: Anthropic has a new version of their AI Claude 42: 43: Otto von Bismarck wanted to trick France into declaring war on Germany. In order to provoke the French, he sent the
I’m fascinated by the idea that only 150 years ago, it was obvious that if someone sent you this statement, you had to declare war or abandon all honor. If I read it carefully, I can sort of parse out that it sounds like the Prussians are unhappy, but that’s the most emotion I gather from it. Anyway, the Franco-Prussian War led to World War I which led to World War II - so if you don’t like 50 million people dying and the total devastation of Europe, blame this statement about ambassadors. 44:
45: ClearerThinking 46: In 2022, I wrote
47: Sort of kind of related - 48: Related: 49: 50:
51: Last month, I linked Sasha Gusev’s First, several people pointed me to a new preprint, Second, Joseph Bronski has Third, Noah Carl at Aporia, instead of writing a direct response like Bronski, Fourth, Leonardo Parro (not framed as a response to Gusev) 52: Extremely related: Heliospect is a startup promising polygenic selection for IQ and other traits; they were trying to stay in stealth mode but 53: This month in censorship: X/Twitter [banned journalist Ken Klippenstein](https://substack.com/redirect/140bd294-05e6-4301-924b-9d66d476c4b3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)for sharing the Trump campaign’s dossier on JD Vance. Twitter’s side of the story is that the dossier was probably originally stolen by Iranian agents and they don’t want to support that kind of thing by letting people signal-boost the illicitly obtained goods;[you can read Klippenstein’s side here.](https://substack.com/redirect/59566a91-ee2c-48db-9598-0ef3264ad9b1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)He[appears to be unbanned now](https://substack.com/redirect/45bb247c-92f9-41f7-9b1b-2b94515dfb7a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).UPenn [suspended tenured professor law professor](https://substack.com/redirect/cf4aca33-f8bc-4e79-8f02-61f42d407b01?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Amy Wax for “inflammatory statements about Black Americans, Asians, and others”; Wax protested her ban[in a DC event held together with Steve Sailer](https://substack.com/redirect/b85098a6-6b2e-438a-b611-c5b797bbfb40?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), so I guess she’s not exactly beating the allegations. Aaron Sibarium[claims](https://substack.com/redirect/250e6f1f-a21b-42ac-96f4-4c4f1713991c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)that “Penn tried to buy Amy Wax’s silence by offering her a deal: it would water down the sanctions against her—and take a pay cut off the table—provided she kept quiet about the case and stopped accusing the university of censoring her. As you might guess, Wax refused.”Asian News International is an Indian news organization. Its Wikipedia page stated it had a history of being a propaganda outlet for the regime. ANI sued Wikipedia, and as the case continues, the judge has ordered Wikipedia to take down its article on ANI. You can read the archived version [here](https://substack.com/redirect/2b2dec78-a216-4ccf-8e99-490f75e6c377?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).
I don’t list acts of censorship here because I necessarily disagree with them or think it’s impossible to support the censor’s actions, but I’m experimenting with trying to Streisand Effect any censored content I come across to make censorship decisions more costly. 54: Koreans are not okay: I know about the cram schools, long work hours, and the gender wars which somehow manage to be even worse than the ones here, but I’m still looking for good articles with more details on what’s so bad and how it got that way. You're currently a free subscriber to |