---
subject: "A $1 billion telecom tender against Make in India"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2020-04-27 02:36:01
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031"]
---
I don’t know if the founders of India’s telecom network companies are part of the organisation called the “CEO Club of India” (I’m sadly not), but if they were, they may have been thrilled to hear one of India’s most senior cabinet ministers, Nitin Gadkari, over a video call this weekend:
“There is a great hatred against China. No one wants to deal with China and many countries also don’t want any goods from there. You all must be aware about the Japanese PM announcing a package for their industries which want to shift base from China to other countries. There are similar indications from the US government,” he said. The Covid-19 pandemic was an opportunity for Indian entrepreneurs to attract investment from companies that want to move out of China and diversify their base.
Forget foreign customers, a few might even have blurted out, we have BSNL!
BSNL is India’s public sector telco, which though loss-making, is being kept alive by the government for strategic reasons at a cost of nearly $9 billion. Up to $4 billion of which could come from a massive 4G network upgrade over the next 3-4 years. And if the telecoms requirements of other Indian agencies such as the railways, defence, and public sector units are added, the estimated telecoms spend balloons to nearly $6.5 billion over this period, according to an assessment by a group of industry players.
Forget hatred against China. All the equipment makers wanted was love for India.
Alas, no one sent BSNL that memo. So, it came out with a bid document that cleverly excluded all Indian companies. Not by saying, “Indians needn’t apply”, but by crafting conditions like prior experience of millions of telecommunications lines installed, or having millions of subscribers in at least two countries. Or bidders having a minimum turnover of over a billion dollars each in the last two years.
“Not just the turnover, the technical specs are such that no Indian or new company can ever fulfil it,” says the chief executive of a telecom tech manufacturer in Bengaluru. He declined to be named as he doesn’t want to publicly criticise BSNL. “It’s like saying, ‘I want a search engine built, but I want all the tech specs of Google and I want it to work better.’”
Left unchallenged, the only two companies who might have qualified are China’s ZTE and Nokia, already equipment suppliers to BSNL. And already owed hundreds of millions of dollars by BSNL.
Thankfully, there was a big hue and cry. But that’s not the story by Seema and Pratap. Instead, it's about how one arm of the Indian government does not know what the other arm is doing when it comes to much vaunted initiatives like Make in India. And when it comes to a strategic sector like telecom, how this amplifies badly. Here’s their story, it's a free read: [https://the-ken.com/story/bsnls-rs-8000-crore-tender-make-for-india-not-make-in-india/](https://link.the-ken.com/uni/ls/click?upn=sy6ExvMQ-2BqIqW2Qsf-2FVG5sc84ge4M35NkSHIl0HH-2B5DXZh4Ql0G2YGG3B1CvLO6J8nPUFGfjEcbSEXDuzBL57VqM1COAzecm4q-2Bg9HrcoCNVNQEx5bmX66fQijKe-2BCp6qgmjNmNscJjmGxXO1O4TMl-2BmCcddkwJDPaVwQZL0RP9kvSVAnQac9FKKKICAxn3p88gl9wjMVF7dGriZ8dsmxt9cZK4YoB0S1DsSaXy8Huk-3DR5G1_dmDs81p1OM5gBGYvHfsMFvgp9PcMB6iZkwowmLx-2FVhwlHXbL5m6csiptGuneRwktW27c6ZwIBsjV67BZcfkOlPppVavmb9GVjXF4V-2FTqNpVSWst4QpBeP5RqEpylqb1GVY8GNIY5t4Ai6iKA3-2FeNnyEqpBCWxSBP9kanlPLYC5QrY3EaLxeZIuHRYay-2BTMAx5mBAF9FO0G1kCLXIIuS-2FF47Aa5iR3MpU1-2Ftryr-2BQQBuO2CK6ItR9-2F9a98RTlx6uyUkEu0EYx8wrohXFBKRz99ircOMYbEpqeGV-2BDJO3tILPckaYdSk-2FzWnRqhmPptoji-2FRLZjaqE37y-2FcVfzJHhFrWDGBaWrWWG0NL-2BN-2B9fUDAq3zfUuYh2PrZ11HLv1HPnwk8Ub0QJVTvAwQOjBzlzSHc0po4BmTddmhqCkH4aZSNVRhzgwkXIWlTVKqNQq1y0j) (10-minute read)