---
subject: "ChatGPT's first competitor 🤖, Meta rescinds offers 💼, storing state in the URL 👨‍💻"
from: "\"TLDR 🤖\" <dan@tldrnewsletter.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-01-10 11:30:48
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "TLDR"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_795315172960844453"]
---
[Anthropic’s Claude improves on ChatGPT, but still suffers from limitations (4 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftechcrunch.com%2F2023%2F01%2F09%2Fanthropics-claude-improves-on-chatgpt-but-still-suffers-from-limitations%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001859b727799-fdf3915f-6f5f-4df6-b4f0-dbd2006b2efb-000000/Qr6f3Hjm2gcU7_aLpC2des4fd18h1wZkEfgtnfoLDV8=283)
Anthropic has developed an AI system similar to ChatGPT that appears to improve on ChatGPT in key ways. Claude is accessible through a Slack integration as part of a closed beta. It was created using a technique called constitutional AI that aims to provide a principle-based approach to aligning AI systems with human intentions. Anthropic was co-founded by ex-OpenAI employees and has raised over $700 million in funding. Examples of responses generated by Claude are available in the article.
|
Science & Futuristic Technology
|
[This biotech startup says mice live longer after genetic reprogramming (5 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Farchive.ph%2FeYEVE%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001859b727799-fdf3915f-6f5f-4df6-b4f0-dbd2006b2efb-000000/15MsBYtbqWD27IPLXjDv2U7R8m1TuvQ7WwTG2hlG0VA=283)
Rejuvenate Bio, a San Diego biotech company, claims that it has used a technique called reprogramming to rejuvenate old mice and extend their lives. Reprogramming works by exposing cells to a set of three or four proteins that are typically active in early-stage embryos. The mice who received treatment in Rejuvenate's studies lived 7% longer overall compared to control mice. While the study's results are promising, there are issues with reprogramming, such as an increased risk of cancer.
|
Programming, Design & Data Science
|
[just (GitHub Repo)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fcasey%2Fjust%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001859b727799-fdf3915f-6f5f-4df6-b4f0-dbd2006b2efb-000000/fJvZDZtglq1PdH2aeLI8DtpAsqNmyRcVSHn0SsZahPY=283)
just is a command runner that makes it easy to save and run project-specific commands. It uses a syntax inspired by make. just's error reporting is specific and informative and errors are resolved statically wherever possible. It is supported on Windows, Linux, and macOS.
|
[How to store your app's entire state in the url (2 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.scottantipa.com%2Fstore-app-state-in-urls%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001859b727799-fdf3915f-6f5f-4df6-b4f0-dbd2006b2efb-000000/s_GT9ux3UZHejvY5gm9lbgRms5K4-rUMtwLggVTX4ak=283)
This article presents a method for storing app states in the URL. The method allows users to use apps without storing any data on a server and it also makes sharing with other people easy. It involves encoding the entire application state as a Base64 encoded string in the hashmark of the URL.
|
[AI and the Big Five (21 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fstratechery.com%2F2023%2Fai-and-the-big-five%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001859b727799-fdf3915f-6f5f-4df6-b4f0-dbd2006b2efb-000000/G05ltZ1XcTkuFskfS9WhQGcjVmXkkOs75IvF8lTIU3Q=283)
This article looks at AI and how Apple, Amazon, Google, Meta, and Microsoft are using the technology. It looks at the impact of AI on the big five to determine whether the technology is disruptive. Disruptive technologies bring a very different value proposition to what was previously available, and while they generally underperform established products, they have features that customers value.
|
[Raspberry Pi launches higher resolution camera module, now with autofocus (2 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.theverge.com%2F2023%2F1%2F9%2F23546129%2Fraspberry-pi-camera-module-3-resolution-specs-price-release-date-features%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001859b727799-fdf3915f-6f5f-4df6-b4f0-dbd2006b2efb-000000/_haiJwsU1mgXivSlESvANqUIzzrg4mIBsmlJwcjPNmE=283)
Raspberry Pi has launched the Camera Module 3. The camera has a Sony IMX708 sensor that supports high dynamic range photography and autofocus. It has a resolution of 11.9 megapixels and a higher horizontal resolution that allows it to film HD video. The Camera Module 3 will cost $25 for the standard version and $35 for the ultra-wide angle version. Raspberry Pi has also announced a new version of its High Quality Camera Module that now supports fisheye and other specialist lenses.
|
[TLDR - Founding Sales (Remote, $150k - $300k)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftldr.tech%2Fjobs%2Ffounding-sales%2F82/1/010001859b727799-fdf3915f-6f5f-4df6-b4f0-dbd2006b2efb-000000/-lirpcJ3nHzMauxcplDzJDB6mwJn4G6Kv7fx2UcW_CY=283)
As our first sales hire and fourth employee, you will have a huge impact on our sales process and will start off personally managing our existing sponsors and sponsorship pipeline. Eventually you will be expected to grow and lead a sales team to help us scale.
|
[Mimo - Frontend Developer (Remote, $60k - $61k)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftldr.tech%2Fjobs%2Ffrontend-developer%2F90/1/010001859b727799-fdf3915f-6f5f-4df6-b4f0-dbd2006b2efb-000000/qRRVC6k0NpWZqBvSAhx4BLvZKXCfn4O_zw41O6jO_Pw=283)
Mimo is looking for a frontend developer to join our cross-functional Bootcamp team, developing features that will shape our brand-new product, helping us become the largest tech school and helping millions more to learn to code.
|
For more jobs, please check out our [job board](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftldr.tech%2Fjobs/2/010001859b727799-fdf3915f-6f5f-4df6-b4f0-dbd2006b2efb-000000/DSJf4o9nkKuWi6tbwkKWtaiatqyXfYO1oj7F47hadhM=283). If your company would like to hire through our free job board, please [sign up here](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftldr.tech%2Femployer%2Fsign-up/1/010001859b727799-fdf3915f-6f5f-4df6-b4f0-dbd2006b2efb-000000/vTGK5aJM6nDcWYJLjsD-I9kGcdU5so9ANun5PP7HCq0=283).
|
If your company would like to sponsor TLDR, please take a look at [our sponsor page here.](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftldr.tech%2Ftech%2Fadvertise%3Futm_source=tldr/2/010001859b727799-fdf3915f-6f5f-4df6-b4f0-dbd2006b2efb-000000/8CiwAASdkTwnCdw2KdQSV1Dj3mvp_uqjIQmUxwcmxb8=283)
If you have any comments or feedback, just respond to this email!
Thanks for reading,
Dan
|
|
|
|