---
subject: "Retro Recomendo: Travel Gear"
from: "Recomendo <recomendo@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-05-25 09:01:57
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Recomendo", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8455078693589186571", "UNREAD"]
---
Our subscriber base has grown so much since we first started eight years ago, that most of you have missed all our earliest recommendations. The best of these are still valid and useful, so we’re trying out something new — Retro Recomendo. Once every 6 weeks, we’ll send out a throwback issue of evergreen recommendations focused on one theme from the past 9 years. Travel tip:The cheapest bargain of any overseas vacation is the $25 you might pay for a good travel guidebook, so I always get the latest version. It is better organized and often better researched than online forums. And I have no qualms about cutting it up. I get the large country-scale guide, and then with a razor blade knife I excise only the portions I could possibly use. Then I staple and bind with clear packing tape for very durable, and lightweight, thin booklets. — KK Best bicycle tour bagsThe best way to tour somewhere, IMHO, is via bicycle. E-bikes make that even easier these days. For overnight touring, you’ll need some bags (panniers). The blueribbon panniers are Women’s travel kitI recently visited my grandmother in Mexico, and the first thing I packed was my Collapsible water bottleYou aren’t allowed to bring a bottle of water past airport security, and the bottled water sold at airport convenience stores is expensive. But many airports now have filtered water dispensers. I keep a Water bottle slingFor walks and short hikes, I’ve been leaving my daypack behind in favor of this Maximum baggage for basic economy“Basic economy” is the cheapest way to fly on United. You don’t get to select your seat and you can’t check any bags or even bring a standard carry-on bag without paying extra. You are allowed one personal item, measuring 17x10x9" or less. That’s smaller than most backpacks and is an unusual size. Here’s Recomendo is an authentic, hand-crafted, human-written weekly newsletter that is free, but not cheap. Consider supporting our work with a paid option, now at the low price of $45 per year. Paid subs enable us to keep making it free for others. Recomendo is published by Cool Tools Lab, a small company of three people. We also run the Recomendo Unclassified Ads work! UNCLASSIFIEDS Pets can't tell you what's wrong—but we can. At Sage Veterinary Imaging, pets get human-quality MRI & CT scans for precise answers. People travel from all over to our Round Rock, TX center for expert diagnostics. Learn more at How I broke my guitar plateau: TrueFire's videos reveal pro techniques from multiple angles. Slow-mo features & synced notation make complex parts digestible. 1,500+ courses, all styles. Get smarter about AI in 5 min. Our
Recomendo is copyrighted by Cool Tools Lab, LLC. Commissions may be earned from the links above. |