---
subject: "How to Think Differently: The Stanford Business Experiment"
from: "\"Sahil Bloom's Curiosity Chronicle\" <sahil@sahilbloom.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-09-06 09:02:23
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Sahil Bloom", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_1989028747625928812", "UNREAD"]
---
The Power of Thinking Differentlyread and listen on read time 6 minutes Welcome to The Curiosity Chronicle, a weekly newsletter where I provide actionable ideas to help you build a high-performing, healthy, wealthy life. Programming Note: Each week, I'm going to be answering one professional or life question I receive from my readers. You can find the question and response at the bottom of the email in The Curiosity Counsel section. To submit your question for future consideration, simply reply to this email (and let me know if you'd like it to be anonymized). Be sure to check back to see if yours was chosen to be featured! Today at a Glance:- A Stanford business professor split her class into groups and gave each group $5 and 2 hours to generate as high of a return as possible. The losing groups bartered with the $5 or used the time to generate income. The winning group sold the ad space of the presentation time at the end of the challenge and generated a 12,000% return.
- When faced with a challenge with the potential for outsized rewards, we need to think differently. Three steps to think differently: (1) Avoid the distraction, (2) Ask foundational questions, and (3) Select the leveraged approach.
- Remember: Creative, non-linear, asymmetric thinking generates creative, non-linear, asymmetric outcomes.
To feel your best, you need the best. That's why I use Take advantage of their "zero questions asked" refund policy and when you make a purchase using my link below, you’ll receive a FREE sample pack including 1 packet of every flavor!
The Power of Thinking DifferentlyIn 2009, a Stanford business professor named Tina Seelig split her class into groups and gave everyone a challenge: Each group would have $5 and 2 hours to make the highest possible return on the initial money. At the end of the challenge, each group would give a short presentation to the class on their approach and results. The results of the challenge were fascinating... Most of the groups took a linear, logical approach: - Use the $5 to buy a few items
- Barter with those items (resell or trade them for items of higher value)
- Repeat
- Sell the final items for something (hopefully) more than $5
These groups made a modest return on their initial $5. A few groups ignored the $5 and instead thought up ways to make money in the 2 hours of allotted time: - Made and sold reservations at hot restaurants in town
- Refilled bike tires in the center of campus for $1 each
These groups made a better return on their initial $5. The winning group also ignored the $5, but took an entirely different approach: They realized that the most valuable asset was not the $5 or the 2 hours of time for the challenge, but the presentation time in front of a class of Stanford students. Realizing the value of this asset, they sold the presentation time to a company looking to recruit Stanford students for $650, netting a monstrous return on the $5 of initial capital. The losing groups thought in linear, logical terms and achieved a linear, logical outcome. The winning group thought differently. 3 Steps to Think DifferentlyThere are two types of challenges we face: - Low-Stakes: Lower potential, linear rewards. Decisions are easily reversible.
- High-Stakes: Higher potential, asymmetric rewards. Decisions are not easily reversible.
With low-stakes challenges, given the reward potential is low and the decisions are easily reversible, we can use shortcuts and heuristics to choose our path. We can take a logical, linear approach. With high-stakes challenges, however, the high, asymmetric reward potential means we need to think differently. We want to take a creative, non-linear approach. Let's generalize the learnings from the Stanford business class story and adapt three steps for thinking differently in these high-stakes situations... Step 1: Avoid the DistractionIn the challenge, the $5 was the trap. Most of the groups immediately anchored their thinking around the $5 because it was positioned as the "asset" that the groups needed to focus on leveraging to make a return. In reality, it was nothing more than a distraction. It was entirely possible that the best solutions may have involved the $5, but by narrowing the entire field of solutions to those that were centered around the $5, the groups had limited their field of vision significantly. When faced with a challenge with the potential for outsized rewards, the first thing to do is make sure to avoid the distraction. There will always be an "obvious" solution that is simple, clear, and entirely wrong. Before you select it, make sure you complete Step 2... Step 2: Ask Foundational QuestionsSocratic Questioning (or the "Socratic Method") is a simple process of asking and answering questions that stimulate critical thinking to expose and vet underlying assumptions and logic. To put it into action, follow this general structure: - Start with open-ended questions.
- Propose ideas based on these questions.
- Probe these ideas with progressive questioning.
- Repeat until the best ideas are developed.
Here's a process of how you might apply Socratic Questioning: - Start asking questions: What's the problem you are trying to solve? We often waste time and energy trying to solve the "wrong" problem. Identify the “right” problem before you try to solve it.
- Propose your current thinking on the problem: What is your hypothesis? What are the origins of that thinking?
- Open the floor for targeted questioning: Why do you think this? Is the thinking too vague? What is it based upon?
- Challenge the assumptions underlying the original thinking: Why do you believe this to be true? How do you know it’s true? How would you know if you were wrong? Identify the source of beliefs on a problem. Be ruthless in evaluating their integrity and validity.
- Evaluate the evidence used to support the thinking: What concrete evidence do I have? How credible is it? What “hidden evidence” may exist?
- Understand the consequences of being wrong: Can an error be quickly fixed? How costly is this mistake? Always understand the stakes.
- Evaluate potential alternatives: What alternative beliefs or viewpoints might exist? Why might they be superior? Why do others believe them to be true? What do they know that I don’t? Evaluate them on their merits and ask these same fundamental questions about them.
- After zooming in, zoom out: What was my original thinking? Was it correct? If not, where did I err? What conclusions can I draw from the process about systemic errors in my thinking?
Socratic Questioning takes time. It shouldn't be used on low-cost, easily-reversible decisions. But when you encounter a high-stakes decision with the potential for asymmetric rewards in your business, career, or life, it's worth engaging in the exercise. Step 3: Select the Leveraged ApproachOnce you've avoided the distraction and leveraged Socratic Questioning to expose flawed assumptions and ground yourself in the appropriate ones, you are ready to make a decision on the optimal path forward. The winning group selected the path of selling the presentation time as the path with the highest leverage and likelihood of success. You can do the same: Slow down and select the path most likely to generate the asymmetric, risk-adjusted returns. How to Think DifferentlyWhen faced with an important challenge with the potential for non-linear rewards, follow these three steps: - Avoid the distractions: There's always an approach that seems obvious and simple, but may be entirely wrong. Avoid falling for the trap.
- Ask foundational questions: Strip away flawed assumptions and ground yourself in foundational ones. Use Socratic Questioning to unpack the problem.
- Select the leveraged approach: Select the highest-leverage approach with the highest likelihood of success. Slow down and identify the true assets and points of leverage in the system. Use them to your advantage.
Remember: Creative, non-linear, asymmetric thinking generates creative, non-linear, asymmetric outcomes.
The Curiosity CounselIn the newsletter, you focused on the importance of getting in the rooms that are filled with ambitious people. How do I get in those rooms?
I'm of a conflicted mind because the city where I live has a slight shortage of people doing big things. A lot of influencers will say move to an environment where you increase your chances of success. But what if that move means moving away from family? What would you do?
There were at least 10 variations of this question asked in response to my There are three keys to this: (1) Find the rooms, (2) Get in the rooms, and (3) Engage and create value in the rooms. Find the Rooms: There are physical and digital rooms. Start with digital and progress to physical. Digital rooms are easier to find, because they are everywhere. Find the communities on Twitter, LinkedIn, Discord, etc. where growth-oriented people are talking to one another and place yourself in that conversation. Build connections here that can get you invited to a physical gathering. For instance, I've had coffee/meals with at least a dozen people who have reached out to me and built a connection through Twitter. Digital to physical. If you don't live in a location that has regular gatherings of smart, ambitious people, consider whether there are ways to get to those locations for ~1 week stints to immerse yourself in the environment. Get in the Rooms: This is pretty simple, just ask. At worst, you're told no, but generally speaking, if you are genuine in your interest and excitement, the answer will be yes. The real key is developing a comfort with putting yourself out there. Engage and Create Value: When you're starting out, the easiest way to engage and create value when you feel out of your league is by taking notes and sharing follow-ups, summary points, and action items. For example, you may not feel comfortable going deep on the topics being discussed by the other participants, but if you can synthesize the important points and share that with the group, you will have created value for everyone. They will want to keep you around and have you come back. Find the rooms, get in the rooms, and create value for others once you're in them. Sahil's Recommendation ZonePerfect your morning routine with I get asked about my morning routine all the time. It changes from time to time, but It replaced an entire cabinet of supplements for me in one daily scoop—seriously, its latest iteration covers a multivitamin, multi-mineral, prebiotics, probiotics, adaptogens, greens, and more. It keeps me feeling healthy and strong throughout the year, even when I'm traveling (thanks to the travel packs). Athletic Greens is offering Curiosity Chronicle subscribers an exclusive deal:
Refer Friends, Earn Rewards!
|