---
subject: "Dwarkesh on slow AI take-off"
from: "Marginal REVOLUTION <donotreply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-06-05 09:26:12
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tyler Cowen", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2466199532210586699", "UNREAD"]
---
I’ve probably spent over a hundred hours trying to build little LLM tools for my post production setup. And the experience of trying to get them to be useful has extended my timelines. I’ll try to get the LLMs to rewrite autogenerated transcripts for readability the way a human would. Or I’ll try to get them to identify clips from the transcript to tweet out. Sometimes I’ll try to get it to co-write an essay with me, passage by passage. These are simple, self contained, short horizon, language in-language out tasks - the kinds of assignments that should be dead center in the LLMs’ repertoire. And they're 5/10 at them. Don’t get me wrong, that’s impressive.
But the fundamental problem is that LLMs don’t get better over time the way a human would. The lack of continual learning is a huge huge problem. The LLM baseline at many tasks might be higher than an average human's. But there’s no way to give a model high level feedback. You’re stuck with the abilities you get out of the box. You can keep messing around with the system prompt. In practice this just doesn’t produce anything even close to the kind of learning and improvement that human employees experience.
The reason humans are so useful is not mainly their raw intelligence. It’s their ability to build up context, interrogate their own failures, and pick up small improvements and efficiencies as they practice a task.
Here is [the whole essay](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=bd8e548721fab86296ac6d6baef5930250b1cee3d26591a1f997b22d56e5e662&blog_id=42693868&post_id=90805&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=8bf8b85595bd37d733c468e030b50887&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuZHdhcmtlc2guY29tL3AvdGltZWxpbmVzLWp1bmUtMjAyNT9tYW51YWxyZWRpcmVjdD0&email_id=3656e571a98ec80f933d38755901b9a7), I am in agreement.