---
subject: "Meta's Open-Source AI Economics, Re-Revisited"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <the-diff@ghost.io>"
to: ""
date: 2024-07-29 14:32:09
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX"]
---
|
|
In this issue: - Meta's Open-Source AI Economics, Re-Revisited—It's easy to articulate why Meta can build a powerful open-weight model. It's harder to explain why that's what they've chosen to do, though the company has taken a stab at it.
- The Quantum Gambit—If the core business isn't doing well, spin off something more exciting.
- Monetizing Volatility—The return of convertible bond issuance.
- Banking and Credit—Buy Now, Pay Later—but don't Pay Later with a Chase credit card.
- How Long is the Long Game?—Why Twitch is a tough business.
- Sticky Expectations—Japan got inflation, at last. It's not working as expected.
Today's issue of The Diff brought to you by our sponsor, Meta's Open-Source AI Economics, Re-RevisitedWe talked a few weeks ago about A lot of what Meta emphasizes in Meta has some interesting advantages that help explain why they're able to ship an open-weights model whose performance is in the same ballpark as the biggest closed models. They and Google have both made plenty of preexisting investments in evaluating the quality of content for ranking purposes, and both companies have spent a long time identifying the kinds of content that they don't want showing up at all regardless of how high its production values are. But Meta probably has more experience than any other entity in the world in the specific task of taking a chunk of user-generated content and instantly determining whether it should be at the top of a feed or should never be visible to anyone who isn't actively looking for it, and that means that Meta's relative advantage is strongest in scooping up huge volumes of long-tail material, filtering out everything irrelevant, and keeping the valuable training tokens. They also have some interesting remarks about synthetic data. There's been some And on the topic of expense, Meta's latest entrant is another datapoint in favor of continued high spending on model training. As models scale, there are more questions about how long AI scaling laws will hold, how dependent they are on an ultimately finite pool of human-generated tokens, whether or not it's really plausible that throwing more compute at the same data will keep leading to better results, etc. Llama 3.1 is not quite on the line of best fit for performance versus FLOP input—it's a little bit better. As AI gets more mature, inference grows faster than training. This doesn't necessarily mean that the costs scale the same way, since that partly depends on the pace of hardware and software efficiencies, but in terms of total useful computing operations, it's what we should expect. There are a few different forces driving this: - An obvious one is that the absolute cost of training a new model is rising (Meta trained this model on 16,000 H100s, or about $480m worth of GPU hardware alone). The higher that cost, the more carefully companies have to underwrite the investment in new models instead of tweaks to older ones.
- Meanwhile, each model has broader use cases, so there are more reasons to be satisfied with them. For some purposes—answering customer support questions that are contained in documentation, and detecting when to switch back to a human—legacy models do just fine.
- A subtle consequence of higher model skill is that the organizational cost of replacing models goes up as the wages of the workers being replaced rise. It's pretty straightforward to replace a job that could be done by an intern with a job that can be done by Claude; you just change which window you type your natural language instructions into, and expect to get results a few orders of magnitude faster. But it's harder to say which parts of the job of a lawyer, investment banker, marketer, etc., get changed, and to figure out what their new responsibilities are. A corollary to that is that, even holding the pace of new model launches constant, the dollar retention rate of models rises over time, and that effect gets stronger if the pace of new model releases slows down.
One way to conceptualize the open source bet is that there's more leverage for reducing costs on the software side than the hardware side. Specialized inference hardware is an investment that makes sense for either a) someone who already has a model they're charging for and wants to use this to increase margins and offer more competitive pricing, or b) for a very large-scale cloud host who can capture that upside themselves. But if the constraint is software, and if there are many execution tricks that work best in different domains, then an open source model will tend to be cheaper. (It also doesn't have to amortize the cost of that hardware R&D. As in so much of tech, your incentive is to spend as fast as humanly possible if you're likely to be the winner, and to pivot to cutting costs if you expect to lose, or think that winning will take longer than the rest of the industry recognizes.) That seems to be the meta-bet that Meta is making: if the big cost savings show up in software, then open source models win. So there are good reasons to think Meta has a cost advantage in building a model, and debatable reasons to think that openness will extend those advantages. Which leaves the question: why bother? However much Meta can save by using GPUs it already paid for and moderation and translation data it's already collected, an even cheaper option is to not train a model at all. They present this as a strategic decision, rather than one with a directly measurable financial payoff:
One strategic angle for Meta, worth considering but not dwelling on, is spite. Or, more charitably: there might be a fairly finite amount of room for strategic maneuvering among big tech companies, and if they're doing something defensive in AI, they're not doing something offensive somewhere else. Meta has been on the receiving end of this before; some of Apple's privacy moves make a lot more sense as a way to impair the economics of one of the companies that earns the most on iOS. There's also a political angle, somewhat related to competition. Lina Khan has Disclosure: Long META As much as software engineers like to think of hardware as instanting algorithms, it really is made out of metal and plastic, and that has real-world consequences. Specifically, Meta notes a 1-2% fluctuation in throughput based on temperature changes. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/0c29f3cc?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)Which will, of course, have less working code, but which will also tend to change faster, so more of the existing code either won't work or won't make use of new features. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/6e4c1b9a?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)Like many others in tech, they need to [read their Machiavelli](https://www.thediff.co/r/816562a0?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99). Not the underrated Discourses, in this case, but The Prince: "Hence it is to be remarked that, in seizing a state, the usurper ought to examine closely into all those injuries which it is necessary for him to inflict, and to do them all at one stroke so as not to have to repeat them daily; and thus by not unsettling men he will be able to reassure them, and win them to himself by benefits. He who does otherwise, either from timidity or evil advice, is always compelled to keep the knife in his hand; neither can he rely on his subjects, nor can they attach themselves to him, owing to their continued and repeated wrongs. For injuries ought to be done all at one time, so that, being tasted less, they offend less; benefits ought to be given little by little, so that the flavour of them may last longer."[↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/dd00c33d?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
You're on the free list for The Diff. Last week, paying subscribers read about A Word From Our SponsorsStill running payroll the old way?
Unlike bloated platforms pushing unnecessary features like applicant tracking systems and performance reviews for your employees, Warp is laser-focused on the essentials. Get in, get it done, get out. Say goodbye to endless payroll reminders and cryptic notices from tax departments. Reclaim your time and focus on what truly matters – growing your startup. Get started now at ElsewhereThe Quantum GambitA few weeks ago, The Diff covered Monetizing VolatilityA roughly accurate way to think about financial structure is that bonds and loans monetize stability, converting some predictable future stream of cash flows from the company into liquidity that's available now. Equity monetizes growth, converting hypothetically higher earnings in the future into cash today. You might think that convertible bonds split the difference, by functioning as bonds when the company does poorly and stock when it does well, but given their embedded option, they're actually closer to a way for companies to monetize their volatility. And Banking and CreditHyman Minsky's model ( How Long is the Long Game?Amazon acquired video game streaming site Twitch for $1bn in 2014, and Disclosure: Long AMZN. Sticky ExpectationsJapan has been trying to increase its inflation for decades, and Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. See a sampling of current open roles below: - A company building ML-powered tools to accelerate developer productivity is looking for ML researchers with a knack for converting research into Github repos. (Washington DC area)
- Growing team at a multi-strategy firm is looking for senior quantitative researchers with direct experience or exposure to a relevant field (statistics, optimization, ML) 400k+ (NYC)
- A company reinventing the way Americans build wealth for the long-run by enabling them to access "Universal Basic Capital" is looking for fullstack engineers with prior experience in fintech. (NYC)
- A well funded early stage startup founded by two SpaceX engineers is building the software stack for hardware companies, and is looking for an experienced hire who can head their marketing operations. 3+ years experience in marketing for a sales-focused company ideal, especially with experience in hardware (LA)
- A well-funded company building AI-powered compliance tools is looking for legal analysts who can help build and refine AI models. 2+ years of experience in a highly regulated industry, with compliance exposure. (NYC)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. |
||||||||||
|
|
|
||||||||||
|