---
subject: "o3 Is a Lying Liar"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-04-23 19:53:27
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
I love o3. I’m using it for most of my queries now. But that damn model is a lying liar. Who lies. This post covers that fact, and some related questions. o3 Is a Lying LiarThe biggest thing to love about o3 is it just does things. You don’t need complex or multi-step prompting, ask and it will attempt to do things.
The biggest thing to not love about o3 is that it just says things. A lot of which are not, strictly or even loosely speaking, true. I
Here are some additional examples of things to look out for.
All This Implausible Lying Has ImplicationsWe need the alignment of our models to get increasingly strong and precise as they improve. Instead, we are seeing the opposite. We should be worried about the implications of this, and also we have to deal with the direct consequences now.
You don’t say. I do not see o3 or Sonnet 3.7 as disappointing exactly. I do see their misalignment issues as disappointing in terms of mundane utility, and as bad news in terms of what to expect future models to do. But they are very good news in the sense that they alert us to future problems, and indicate we likely will get more future alerts. What I love most is that these are not plausible lies. No, o3 did not make multiple phone calls within 8 seconds to confirm Blue Bottle’s oatmeal manufacturing procedures, nor is it possible that it did so. o3 don’t care. o3 boldly goes where it could not possibly have gone before. The other good news is that they clearly are not using (at least the direct form of) Misalignment By DefaultThis isn’t quite how I’d put it, but directionally yes:
I think the right characterization is more that LLMs that use current methods (RLHF and RLAIF) largely get aligned ‘to the vibes’ or otherwise approximately aligned ‘by default’ as part of making them useful, which kind of worked for many purposes (at large hits to usefulness). This isn’t good enough to enable them to be agents, but it also isn’t good enough for them figure out most of the ways to reward hack. Whereas reasoning agents trained with full reinforcement will very often use their new capabilities to reward hack when given the opportunity. In his questions post,
I see it as: Base models are not aligned at all, except to probability. They simply are. When you introduce RL (in the form of RLHF, RLAIF or otherwise), you get what I discussed above. Then we move on to question two.
I don’t think that solution works. Robust general skills will generalize, and they will include the ability to find and use the exploits. We have a Russell Conjugation problem - I maximize performance, you overfit to the scoreboard, the AI reward hacks. I think there is in an important sense no solution to reward hacking. There are only mitigations, and setting the reward wisely so that hacking it does things you want. What differentiates a reward hack from an optimization? Roughly, that the reward hack maximizes the defined objective function but clearly performs poorly in terms of the intent or spirit of that objective. There are standard mitigations. You can use red teaming, impact penalties, shielded reward channels, tight and robust primary rewards, secondary guards, adaptive oversight, governance fuses, close the loopholes and exploits as best you can and so on. Diverse environments likely helps a little. But that’s accepting the problem and trying to mitigate it, which is going to be leaky at best and doesn’t seem like a great plan once the AIs are a lot smarter than you are. Is It Fixable?Thus, my answer to Patel’s third set of questions:
That’s not what people typically mean by ‘alignment-by-default.’ Most people use that to mean ‘the models don’t reward hack to begin with.’ This is more, ‘by default we will work hard to try and fix it, at least in places it is doing visible harm.’ We do live in a world where practical alignment is commercially valuable, so much so that everyone is dramatically underinvesting in alignment work (except possibly Anthropic, but see Claude 3.7) from a pure mundane utility standpoint. You need your models to not reward hack in a given task in order to be useful for that task. When o3 makes things up or Claude 3.7 has their unit test be ‘return true’ and hides that, then the user is not having a good time. The problem is that the known mitigations to reward hacking hide or postpone the problem. Which might be good enough for most use cases, but in the long run this does not solve the problem. Indeed, it makes things worse, because it hides the problem. Right now, the models are gloriously transparent in their reward hacking and misalignment. They don’t try to hide it at all. The harder you try to penalize and stop reward hacking, the more you’re teaching the model to hide its reward hacking and do it trickier ways. To their credit, the major labs are avoiding The Most Forbidden Technique - they know not to look at the chain of thought or do interpretability as part of training, except at most as part of an overall a checkpoint evaluation (and you need to be very careful even then). But you probably have a version of the same problem if you try to play whack-a-mole and penalize reward hacks. By penalizing the reward hacks you can identify, you’re training the AI to find reward hacks you can’t detect, and to only do them when you won’t detect them. Which means that as capabilities go up, you think you’ve solved your problems, but you’re sitting on a time bomb. Another point I’d forgotten but o3 pointed out is that penalizing reward hacking in training tells the model not to reward hack in training. That doesn’t ‘generalize perfectly,’ and is another way you’re creating a hidden time bomb. One way of thinking about this is as a contest of Deception Escalation Dominance. You can try to fool me, or try to fool my ability to detect you fooling me, or fool my ability to detect when you’re fooling my ability to detect when you’re fooling me, and indeed humans often play supremely complex games of this type and it’s a lot of what caused us to end up with bigger brains. If I ‘raise the stakes’ by clamping down on various meta levels of deception and misaligned behavior to bluntly, that works and everything is cool if I can pull it off beyond your ability to adapt. But by trying, I’m escalating and complexifying the struggle, so I shouldn’t go down that road unless I can ‘win.’ Which is going to keep getting harder. In some ways, the fact that we’re seeing obvious misalignment in current models is very reassuring. It means the labs are not trying to sweep this under the rug and not escalating these fights. Yet.
No, we are very much not on top of this. This definitely would not make me chill, since I don’t think lack of deception would mean not doom and also I don’t think deception is a distinct magisteria, but would help a lot. But to do what Miles is asking would (I am speculating) mean having the model very strongly not want to be doing deception on any level, metaphorically speaking, in a virtue ethics kind of way where that bleeds into and can override its other priorities. That’s very tricky to get right.
|