---
subject: "Jane Street scores a point in its high-stakes duel with Sebi"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-09-10 01:32:22
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
Long and Short
Wed, 10 Sep 25
The story behind the numbers and motivations driving India's stock market.
Good Morning Ishan,
Yesterday afternoon, Jane Street would have heaved a sigh of relief, having just managed to buy some crucial time for itself. By the end of the first hearing of the US-based hedge fund giant’s appeal against Sebi’s July findings, the Securities Appellate Tribunal (SAT) had directed the market regulator to file its reply within three weeks and posted the next hearing to 18 November. That’s more than two months away. Is tareekh pe tareekh (adjournment after adjournment) in store for this case too, like it is so many in India? Who knows? Meanwhile, the knives are well and truly out.
Essentially, Jane Street wants Sebi to give it a long list of additional documents. These, it says, are crucial for its defence against the regulator’s 3 July interim order, a watershed in the Indian capital market.
I had [written](https://the-ken.com/long_and_short/did-nse-sleep-at-the-wheel-in-the-jane-street-saga/) about this a couple of months ago.
In the meticulous interim [order](https://www.sebi.gov.in/enforcement/orders/jul-2025/interim-order-in-the-matter-of-index-manipulation-by-jane-street-group_95040.html) by whole-time member Ananth Narayan G (on 3 July), Sebi laid out in great detail how the US-based hedge-fund giant carried out elaborate, massive manipulation in India’s stock market and derivatives (options) trades since 2023. The regulator has now banned the Jane Street group from the Indian securities markets and ordered it to disgorge the over Rs 4,800 crore it made in unlawful gains—the largest such penalty ever imposed by Sebi. More could follow with the probe continuing.
The Ken had [broken](https://the-ken.com/story/the-mystery-fund-playing-god-and-wreaking-havoc-on-the-stock-market/) the story in January 2025 about a mystery fund playing God and wreaking havoc on India’s stock market. We followed this up with a [story](https://the-ken.com/story/is-jane-street-the-all-powerful-hidden-hand-in-indias-stock-market/) in June 2025 pointing to Jane Street as the all-powerful hand in India’s stock market. “Sebi’s action is vindication,” [said](https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7346806245581836289/?commentUrn=urn%3Ali%3Acomment%3A(activity%3A7346806245581836289%2C7348222067852439552)&dashCommentUrn=urn%3Ali%3Afsd_comment%3A(7348222067852439552%2Curn%3Ali%3Aactivity%3A7346806245581836289)) Mayank Bansal, the Dubai-based options trader who had alerted The Ken about the rampant, large-scale manipulation.
Did NSE sleep at the wheel in the Jane Street saga?, [The Ken](https://the-ken.com/long_and_short/did-nse-sleep-at-the-wheel-in-the-jane-street-saga/)
Sebi is in no mood to oblige Jane Street more than it already has. It told the SAT as much—that it will not provide any documents that it had not relied upon for passing the interim order. It also told the SAT that the investigation against Jane Street is at a critical juncture and ongoing, and that the final order on the matter could be much wider than the interim one.
SAT, in its wisdom, directed Sebi to file a reply on why it cannot share any more documents.
Jane Street has reason to breathe easy, for now. While it paid the Rs 4,800-odd crore soon after the interim order, its lawyers Khaitan & Co filed an appeal with SAT just days before its personal hearing with Sebi was to happen on 15 September. That hearing, if it had taken place, might not have gone well for Jane Street. The Sebi hearing has now been stayed until SAT hears the matter on 18 November. Ananth Narayan G, who wrote the interim order, will have left Sebi by then, unless he gets an extension; his three-year term ends in October. That means Sebi will head into that hearing without its spearhead in the case, so to speak.
Speaking of which, its appeal with SAT shows Jane Street’s demand for additional documents from Sebi has an interesting backstory. The Ken has seen parts of the appeal document. It turns out that after the interim order, Jane Street had asked for an inspection of records, which Sebi scheduled for early August. A letter by Jane Street’s lawyers to Sebi says that during the inspection, various “surprising facts” were unearthed. Among these were the “clean chits” given by the NSE in November 2024 and Sebi’s integrated surveillance department in December 2024. But towards the end of December 2024, after purported “complaints” and media reports, an inter-departmental team—consisting of officers from the market regulation department and the integrated surveillance department—investigated the trades again, which led them to conclude that Jane Street was manipulating the market. The market regulation department is headed by Ananth Narayan G.
In its appeal, Jane Street picked holes in Sebi’s finding that it was guilty of manipulating trades after supposedly finding it not guilty before. It is now asking for a host of additional documents to prepare its defence—more than 60 in number—including those relating to the earlier investigations, communications between Sebi and the NSE, and between Sebi and Mayank Bansal.
Sebi, while refusing to share the additional documents, could also take the position that prior investigations do not in any way prevent it from undertaking new investigations. For its part, Jane Street will also leave no stone unturned to prove its innocence.
For both parties, the case is just too big to lose.
Jane Street isn’t just facing the prospect of monetary loss—which could balloon to many multiples of the Rs 4,800 crore it has already deposited with Sebi. There is also the reputational loss and the risk of regulators in other geographies going after it if it loses this appeal. For Sebi, a reversal after taking on one of the biggest names in international finance will not just be a loss of face. It would also bring into question its efficacy in curbing market manipulation and protecting retail traders in India, most of whom have been losing heavily in options trading. Sebi might have got a tacit nod from the finance ministry, too, in its investigation against Jane Street—going by the tax enquiries into the hedge fund and its trade execution partner Nuvama after the regulator’s 3 July report. Many would be left red-faced if the order gets overturned at SAT or in higher courts.
This might well be the toughest test yet for Tuhin Kanta Pandey, who took over as Sebi’s chairman in March and under whose watch the regulator has passed arguably its biggest order so far.
That’s a wrap for this week. Please write to longandshort@the-ken.com with your thoughts or leave a comment on our web edition.
Regards,
Anand
Got a tip? If you have a lead for a great story that The Ken can pursue, please send it to tips@the-ken.com or share it through [this form](https://theken.typeform.com/got-a-tip). To find out more about how to do this securely, read our [blog post](https://the-ken.com/blog/help-the-ken-tell-the-next-big-story/) about sharing tips with The Ken.