---
subject: "The Nutgraf: How Swiggy, Zomato, and Zepto are coping with the slowdown"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-07-05 04:32:36
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
Last week’s [edition](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/ai-sells-swords-at-dawn-and-shields-at-dusk/) of The Nutgraf about how AI companies create problems to then sell their solutions got a lot more reactions and comments than I expected. I was hoping to send out a follow-up this week, but came down with something on Tuesday—which I soon discovered was Covid. So I’ve pretty much been in bed all week, resting and isolating. I’m still recovering, so this week’s edition is going to be a bit shorter than usual.
I’ve deliberately stayed away from writing about food delivery and quick commerce for the past few months, partly because I didn’t really have anything new to say, but mostly because they had just gotten much more boring. I really enjoyed writing about them in 2024, when companies in the space were doing some really counterintuitive stuff. But then, it started to feel like everyone was doing variants of the same three or four strategies—to mixed results. More importantly, I sensed a bit of fatigue from readers too. So I stopped tracking the sector for a while and figured I’d return when things started to shift.
And well, things have shifted.
After almost a year, Zomato, Swiggy, and Zepto don’t appear to be on the frontfoot any longer. From a market size standpoint, I’d been writing that Zomato and Swiggy’s food-delivery businesses were more or less flat for several quarters. Since then, both companies have been focused on squeezing more out of existing customers by raising platform fees and selling subscriptions. However, this is more or less when the quick-commerce gold rush began. Suddenly, a new consumer market was born, and Swiggy and Zomato gleefully cashed in. Zepto, the challenger, found an opportunity (and to their credit), really pushed the envelope with some unconventional approaches. As [surprising](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/the-surprising-resilience-of-10-min-grocery-deliveries/) as the resilience and growth of quick commerce has been, most of us knew it couldn’t last forever. The market was bound to tap out at some point, and it was always going to plateau much faster than food delivery did.
And well, it looks like that day is here.
Today’s edition is less about what this means, and more about how Swiggy, Zomato, and Zepto are reacting to this new reality.
Tune in to The Ken’s premium audio experience
From original podcasts to writer-narrated versions of our subscriber newsletters, existing Premium subscribers can listen to all our premium audio, available exclusively via our subscriber apps. Discover them all at [the-ken.com/podcasts](https://the-ken.com/podcasts), including the [latest volume](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/the-nutgraf/how-swiggy-zomato-and-zepto-are-coping-with-the-slowdown/) of this newsletter.
Not a Premium subscriber? You can subscribe to [The Ken Premium](https://podcasts.apple.com/in/channel/the-ken-premium/id6744577070) on Apple Podcasts for an easy monthly price (Rs 299 in India).
Someone once shared a well-known framework with me about how humans respond to perceived threats.
Turns out, there are four possible responses.
I’ll start with Zepto, which is going through the most classic response—freeze.
Until very recently, Zepto was quite aggressive in investments, growth, and hiring. The company had publicly (and quite loudly) declared its intention to go public this year. In fact, just a couple of months ago, Moneycontrol reported that Zepto was deferring its IPO to 2026 partly because it wanted to rein in its costs, which were getting a bit out of hand.
Moneycontrol had exclusively reported that Zepto was burning $30-35 million (around Rs 250-300 crore) around November, the burn figure then nearly doubled around the January-February period as the firm responded to an intensely competitive market where Eternal’s Blinkit and Swiggy’s Instamart are both present, as per a second source.
Zepto has also been grappling with higher fixed costs. Zepto’s employee salary bills are at around Rs 100 crore each month, around 80-90 percent of rival Swiggy and 60 percent of Eternal (Zomato), despite having half the workforce, Moneycontrol had exclusively reported earlier.
Zepto defers IPO to 2026, seeks private funding from overseas and domestic investors, [Moneycontrol](https://www.moneycontrol.com/news/business/startup/zepto-defers-ipo-to-2026-seeks-private-funding-from-overseas-and-domestic-investors-13094776.html)
Zepto’s freeze response has been comprehensive. According to a note sent by the investment bank JP Morgan to its clients early this year, Zepto [added](https://www.ndtvprofit.com/business/blinkit-swiggy-instamart-expand-dark-stores-rapidly-zepto-slows-down-jp-morgan) just 22 dark stores in the previous two months. One year ago, for roughly the same time period, it had added over 300.
In addition, Zepto also predictably froze its marketing budgets. In his newsletter, Manish Singh [reported](https://indiadispatch.com/p/blinkit-leaps-ahead-as-zeptos-dark), “Sensor Tower data shows Zepto’s paid-ad-driven downloads plummeted by 97% between January and May 2025, dropping from over 250,000 daily downloads to fewer than 10,000. While rivals Blinkit and Swiggy’s Instamart have also trimmed promotional budgets by about 50% and 25%, respectively, Zepto’s deeper cut has widened the gap in user engagement.”
I imagine Blinkit and Instamart are secretly relieved that Zepto has panicked and hit pause. The pace was getting red-hot, even for them, and they all wanted to stop and take a deep breath. Zepto’s freeze has done just that.
Zomato, on the other hand, has adopted a different threat response, i.e., fight.
In a way, it makes sense that Zomato would choose to fight. It’s a veteran in the space. Having weathered multiple cycles of threats, booms, and busts, all of this is second nature by now. The unusual thing, though, is the kind of fight that Zomato is willing to undertake right now. Last month, it [informed](https://www.moneycontrol.com/news/business/startup/zomato-introduces-long-distance-fee-rider-assurance-plan-for-restaurants-to-boost-order-margins-13106255.html) restaurants that it would charge them an additional fee for orders that come from a longer distance.
To be honest, when I first read this news, I thought I had misunderstood it. How on earth does it make sense for Zomato to charge restaurants—but not customers—for orders placed by its own users, on its own app, and delivered by its own riders? All the restaurant does is make the food (irrespective of where the order comes from), yet the restaurant is the one paying a fee based on who places the order.
At a time when restaurant associations are already unhappy with Swiggy and Zomato, it seems like an unnecessary battle.
And yet, Zomato is choosing to fight because these are no longer ordinary times.
Which finally brings us to Swiggy.
As expected, Swiggy’s way of responding to the threat has been to try and do everything for everyone.
Some people do this too. It’s the exact opposite of a freeze response—they cope by trying to please everyone. When faced with a crisis, they become overly accommodating and go out of their way to keep everyone happy. Psychologists call this the fawn response.
I’ve tried (and given up) trying to figure out what Swiggy really believes and why they change their mind. For a long time, Swiggy was big on the “one app for everything” strategy, until they changed their mind and spun out Instamart, their quick-commerce vertical, into a separate app (which is also housed on the original app). Then it spun out another app called Snacc, which was their version of a 10-minute food delivery app. Sometime last year, they jumped into live events and launched something called “Scenes”. You’d think that an orthogonal product like this deserves a separate app, except… no, it’s integrated in Swiggy’s app. Then they launched something called Pyng, which is, in their words, “AI-powered platform for services.” Okay, sure. And now, there are reports that Swiggy is [piloting](https://entrackr.com/exclusive/exclusive-swiggy-pilots-travel-and-lifestyle-concierge-app-crew-9380338) an elite, invite-only concierge service which they’re calling Crew. Oh, and just this week, the company announced a new offering called the “99 Store”, i.e., meals priced under Rs 100, aimed at younger customers.
Somehow, Swiggy is building products with different value propositions across multiple dimensions—pricing, delivery time, service, and verticals. I realise no single customer is going to encounter all these products simultaneously, but frankly, just writing about it makes my head hurt. It feels like a lot, and it’s not clear to me which ones are bold bets, and which ones are throwaway experiments. I hope someone in Swiggy does.
So now what?
I guess the main thing to note is that this is how Swiggy, Zomato, and Zepto are responding today. Tomorrow is going to be different, especially after the companies get their bearings. And when that happens, their responses are going to change.
This is when I expect all of these companies to adopt the fourth response—flight.
In general, the flight response is the most common reaction to a threat. If someone tells you a danger is coming, you try to run away. And over the next few months and quarters, I expect Zomato, Swiggy, and Zepto to exit businesses that would’ve otherwise made sense to do when quick-commerce was in a different place. This has already begun. Just yesterday, Swiggy indicated that it would shut down Minis—one of the many businesses it had spun up a few years earlier.
If you have a favourite app or service from these companies, it might be wise not to get too attached.
Some of them could disappear overnight.
Regards,
Praveen Gopal Krishnan