---
subject: "Death Spirals"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <the-diff@ghost.io>"
to: ""
date: 2024-03-11 14:31:53
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
In this issue: - Death Spirals—Death spirals happen whenever something—an organization, a country, a policy, a species—encounters some problem that leaves them more vulnerable to the next problem. These will always happen because some things are unsustainable, but don't look that way until they encounter a sufficiently bad shock.
- Ads!—Uber and Lyft are increasingly monetizing with ads, and the likely result is that, as with streaming video, the non-distracted experience will still exist but only at a premium price point.
- Healthcare and Insurance—GLP-1s may get more insurance coverage because they eliminate enough future healthcare costs to be positive-sum even though they're expensive.
- Transition Economics—Saudi Aramco is earning less but paying higher dividends, as the company helps the Saudi state liquidate its dependence on oil.
- Volatility—Volatility-selling is back.
- Strategic Investments—Nvidia's strategic investments amortize one research expense while creating a valuable proprietary dataset.
Death SpiralsThe economic world and the natural world are full of mean reversion, by process of elimination. Something truly unsustainable either a) hasn't been started yet or b) has already gone out of existence. What's left is either stable or growing. But growth doesn't last forever; the stable processes you see are the result of something that looked like it was going through unstoppable, runaway growth until it reached some natural limit and slowed down. Continued growth does happen, but But mean-reversion doesn't necessarily last forever, either. The pre-modern economy was a mean-reverting one: good times tended to create enough of a calorie surplus to lead to population growth, which led to bad times through disease, famine, war, or revolution. Within that cycle, you'll have some institutions that tend to shrink when they're deprived of resources, but grow back to their natural extent later. Death spirals are worth thinking about and understanding because they're the mechanism by which almost-sustainable processes—whether they're companies, careers, civilizations, or species—finally die off. They're quite common, but take many forms. A corporate death spiral happens when a company's financing options are limited to borrowing at greater than the company's cost of capital or issuing equity at a value below where the business could liquidate. Doing either of those things for an extended period cannot be sustained. Both of these practices are basically handing a growing share of the company's economics to whoever supplies enough cash to keep it in business for a little longer, which usually means it's a wealth transfer from existing investors to new ones, management, employees, and suppliers. Death spirals can show up in other places, too, like Polities face them, too, and for the same reason: a state with high pension obligations and slow economic growth is imposing an invisible head tax on immigrants, since those immigrants' taxes will fund future pension payouts. The number varies by state, but if you're considering a move from, say, Nebraska (pension liability per capita: $300) to Illinois ($17k) it's at least worth factoring it in. For the most part, there's a positive correlation between a state having unfunded pension liabilities and getting immigration from high earners for whom that extra liability doesn't make a huge difference; if the reason you're saying goodbye to Nebraska is because you finally landed that amazing job you've been angling for, the pension issue isn't going to make the final decision all that different. But it does make a difference to lower earners. A trader doesn't have to worry about pension obligations, unless they're a discretionary trader in munis. A trucker does need to worry that they'll be squeezed by a higher tax burden and deteriorating services, and that by the time they realize this is a problem, they won't have the cash on hand to move. If taxes on high earners go up, the trader can move to Miami; the trucker is more likely to stay put. And that's the key ingredient in a death spiral: if the biggest taxpayers are more mobile and the smallest taxpayers stay put, taxes will end up being effectively more regressive, even if on paper they're not. When an institution is going through this, it doesn't stand still. But its incentive is to countersignal: death spirals are about perception catching up to reality, and it takes time to fix reality. That leaves perception as the lever. So it ends up being a useful heuristic for when someone has to come out and say what should be unquestioned—there are no plans to adjust the currency peg, the bank's liquidity position is strong, we've never had so many great applicants, etc.—it's usually a sign that things will reverse. They may even go through an extinction burst, where they're hyper-compliant with the narrative before they give in (during the 1992 Sterling Crisis, the UK defended the pound's value by raising rates from 10% to 12% intraday, and promised to raise them as high as 15%; they backed down and let the currency drop hours later). In the long run, a statistical judgment on whether some process is sustainable or not means judging what's contained in not-yet-observed samples from the left tail of the bell curve. By necessity, there's never enough data to know for sure. But what you can estimate in advance is when something will reach the point of no return. This mostly applies to cities, which [tend to be where ancient ones were](https://www.thediff.co/r/abc0145a?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99), in part because water-based transportation determines which areas are easy to settle and in part because settlements create denser land-based transportation networks that make the city a better destination for trade and immigration. But it also works on a country level: China[occupies roughly the same area it did in 1760](https://www.thediff.co/r/2a55b952?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99), for example; half-of-China and 110%-of-China are equally non-viable. So at a species level, some strategies keep on working and get reimplemented over and over, like[the crab](https://www.thediff.co/r/4061432b?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99).[↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/f49aa05a?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)It would be hard to collect this data, but [Raj Chetty could do it](https://www.thediff.co/r/a0955510?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99): you could measure the effective incidence of a tax hike by looking at which earners relocate. The efficacy of higher income taxes in New York and New Jersey can only truly be measured by looking at how many people relocate from the Upper East Side to Miami in response.[↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/e233ffbd?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
You’re on the free list for The Diff! Subscribers-only pieces you missed this week: Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. See a sampling of current open roles below: - A CRM-ingesting startup is on-boarding customers to its LLM-powered sales software, and is in need of a backend engineer to optimize internal processes and interactions with customers. (NYC)
- A company building the new pension of the 21st century and building universal basic capital is looking for a product designer with fintech experience. (NYC)
- An investment company using AI to accelerate investment in esoteric asset classes is looking for a product engineer with Python and Typescript experience; preferably someone with a track record of building on their own (Bay Area, remote also a possibility).
- A data consultancy is looking for data scientists with prior experience at hedge funds, research firms, or banks. Alt data experience is preferred. (NYC)
- A VC firm using data science and ML to source and evaluate opportunities is looking for a senior data engineer. (Menlo Park, CA or NYC)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. ElsewhereAds!The WSJ has Healthcare and InsuranceThe Diff spends comparatively little time on healthcare because it's a complicated topic where progress is expensive. But GLP-1 agonists have been a promising new category that seems to meaningfully impact health. Part of the problem is making them, and part of it—another reason writing about healthcare is tricky—is the question of who pays and how. Fortunately for pharma companies, Transition EconomicsSaudi Aramco VolatilityOptions-selling investment vehicles are - Over long periods,
[writing options does produce decent returns](https://www.thediff.co/r/38d33321?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99). - Over shorter periods, particularly the ones where there's a lot of options-selling from people who don't fully understand the bet that they're making, these strategies sometimes blow up, and tend to all blow up together.
When there's systematic writing of options, one result is that it's cheaper for other investors to take highly levered positions with controlled risk; you can make a levered long investment paired with a put, or, equivalently, buy a call option. And the VIX is a standard proxy traders use to measure how worried other traders are; a low-VIX environment is one where more leverage feels safer. So these strategies tend to go through a cycle, where when they work, they gather assets, which makes them work better (if you're an options seller, you have an immediate mark-to-market gain when someone else sells more of the same options you sold). And then, there's a swift reversal. Strategic InvestmentsThe WSJ has |
||||||||||
|
|
|
||||||||||
|