---
subject: "Apple spatial photos 📱, talking to whales 🐋, GitHub's hidden features 👨‍💻"
from: "TLDR <dan@tldrnewsletter.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-09-05 10:16:30
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "TLDR", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_795315172960844453", "UNREAD"]
---
[Apple could bring spatial photos to 'iPhone Ultra' after Vision Pro release (2 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fappleinsider.com%2Farticles%2F23%2F09%2F04%2Fapple-could-bring-spatial-photos-to-iphone-ultra-after-vision-pro-release%3Futm_medium=rss%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018a64d7f995-5b33b11b-6b8a-4bf4-af57-34c186f5c93c-000000/mDufuJic0Wr7-SDc-Io3-O21vygpqTp8a7bOg7kBgC0=317)
A leaker claims that a future iPhone model may be able to take spatial photographs and videos that could be viewed by the Apple Vision Pro headset. Apple's Vision Pro has a three-dimensional camera capable of taking spatial photographs and videos. Current cameras will likely not be able to create 3D images good enough to be used in the headset. Apple will need to include an extra sensor on the opposite end of the rear of the iPhone to offer quality spatial photography. |
[Meta and LG reportedly working together on a new Apple Vision Pro competitor (4 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2F9to5mac.com%2F2023%2F09%2F04%2Fmeta-lg-new-headset-vision-pro%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018a64d7f995-5b33b11b-6b8a-4bf4-af57-34c186f5c93c-000000/VKTyj7yxLQb_BtYGnG9xHrA9A3WI8hdX1ZpwgUE_FAo=317)
A new report suggests that Meta has been working with LG to build a new VR headset. The partnership involves working with many LG subsidiaries, such as LG Electronics, LG Energy, LG Innotek, and LG Display. Meta appears to be interested in targeting both premium and entry-level segments. The headset will apparently launch in 2025 for a price of around $2,000. Meta will launch the Quest 3 around the same time for $499. |
Science & Futuristic Technology
|
[This Neural Net Maps Molecules to Aromas (3 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fspectrum.ieee.org%2Fdigital-smell%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018a64d7f995-5b33b11b-6b8a-4bf4-af57-34c186f5c93c-000000/R_kC17FaMQ5YxQzMa5LMMDzrrifYCNcW2JcUOrOT9kc=317)
Researchers have created a model that maps chemical structure to odor descriptors using a type of deep learning algorithm called a graph neural network. The model can successfully predict how humans would describe new smells. It could potentially be used to digitize smells. The Principal Odor Map is open source. A link to the repository for the project is available in the article. |
[Can We Talk to Whales? (47 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.newyorker.com%2Fmagazine%2F2023%2F09%2F11%2Fcan-we-talk-to-whales%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018a64d7f995-5b33b11b-6b8a-4bf4-af57-34c186f5c93c-000000/PKYlPVCJYhgNsDYmQ8OvbChfmy3nD-Jkw-UHyVPJIHo=317)
Sperm whales can generate streams of clicks using a specialized organ in their heads. These clicks can be used for echolocation or communication. Communications using these clicks seem to have the structure of a conversation. The Cetacean Translation Initiative (CETI) is using machine learning to decode these communications. This article takes a look at the current state of CETI's work. Generative AI models may be able to create whale conversations that they understand, even if humans aren't able to understand them. |
Programming, Design & Data Science
|
[Cuber (GitHub Repo)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fcuber-cloud%2Fcuber-gem%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018a64d7f995-5b33b11b-6b8a-4bf4-af57-34c186f5c93c-000000/lQcESREmU3gGnZQyiYXbuqcHc6NRIjOTupiU4oCxMQA=317)
Cuber is an automation tool that can package and deploy apps on Kubernetes. It is made to reduce complexity and make the deployment process more standardized and reliable. While Kubernetes is complex and requires many steps and configurations, it is cheaper compared to other similar solutions and it doesn't lock developers into any cloud provider. Cuber provides developers with the simplicity of a Platform as a Service at the cost of bare infrastructure. |
[GitHub has too many hidden features (2 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fbuttondown.email%2Fhillelwayne%2Farchive%2Fgithub-has-too-many-hidden-features%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018a64d7f995-5b33b11b-6b8a-4bf4-af57-34c186f5c93c-000000/4lJ_yyfLqAA7b7k7ikfmXi_4nkrzU62A4maBJI7zuDg=317)
This page contains a list of hidden features in GitHub. The list includes opening repos in online VSCode using '.', adding experimental features, and regex code search. These features are all in the official documentation. |
[Pete Hines on Starfield, Bethesda, and bugs: "We embrace chaos" (11 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.gamesindustry.biz%2Fpete-hines-on-starfield-bethesda-and-bugs-we-embrace-chaos%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018a64d7f995-5b33b11b-6b8a-4bf4-af57-34c186f5c93c-000000/uxVVZNmzz-PiHgVcHA2JWhAKY0NYT_mN869_1RLYIWM=317)
This article contains an interview with Pete Hines, head of global publishing at Bethesda, where he discusses the company's history with bugs, the state of the games industry, Starfield, the influence of Xbox and Game Pass, and more. The company is known for having quirky bugs in its open-world RPGs. Hines says that Bethesda would rather have these bugs than limit player freedom. He says that the bugs don't take away from the gaming experience and that the games are still consistently fun. |
[Why I don’t want to grow my freelance design studio into an agency (16 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fneladunato.com%2Fblog%2Fwhy-wont-grow-freelance-studio-into-agency%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018a64d7f995-5b33b11b-6b8a-4bf4-af57-34c186f5c93c-000000/il-U3a5qpwS1isndapX8gx1MskYVpg82aIBoLXum3p8=317)
Some freelancers don't want to grow their businesses beyond one person. This is one freelancer's explanation of why they don't want to permanently become part of any team ever again. The main reason is that the way they work best is incompatible with agency work norms. Working independently allows for a lot of freedom and flexibility. Growth isn't always necessary, especially when you're happy with what you have. |
We help cutting edge companies hire world class technical talent through our job listings. If you're hiring software engineers, AI/ML engineers, product managers, designers or other tech talent, [click here to learn more](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fshare.hsforms.com%2F1hmOFVmqOTrON_SRvaRqEbQee466%3Futm_source=tldr%26utm_medium=newsletter/2/0100018a64d7f995-5b33b11b-6b8a-4bf4-af57-34c186f5c93c-000000/VrB211MIJgKbfrQwZpDU-ZbzExqt2ZNqmVf3K3YsCUo=317).
|
If your company is interested in reaching an audience of tech executives, decision-makers and engineers, you may want to [advertise with us](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fshare.hsforms.com%2F1OxvmrkcFS4qsxKpNXCi76wee466%3Futm_source=tldr%26utm_medium=newsletter/2/0100018a64d7f995-5b33b11b-6b8a-4bf4-af57-34c186f5c93c-000000/Z7tI_ZLXjHmcX0MGvqPk1koZ3leBz70zl_nxZ-bjh1E=317).
If you have any comments or feedback, just respond to this email!
Thanks for reading,
[Dan Ni](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2Ftldrdan/1/0100018a64d7f995-5b33b11b-6b8a-4bf4-af57-34c186f5c93c-000000/l3SPS4exKq-MZzLrrEH54rlI8OB-LPgm5y6r-RurTmA=317) and [Stephen Flanders](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2FSteveFlanders22/1/0100018a64d7f995-5b33b11b-6b8a-4bf4-af57-34c186f5c93c-000000/6VirD-9zFUeGMXcCQAllNFjboTZPI8twJUYUbtYtLUs=317)
|
|
|
|