---
subject: "Amazon doubling down on RTO (return to office)"
from: "The Pragmatic Engineer <pragmaticengineer+the-scoop@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-03-16 18:17:20
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "The Pragmatic Engineer", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_6413324878686416177", "UNREAD"]
---
|
👋 Hi, this is [Gergely](https://substack.com/redirect/c786417d-1a5f-4712-8840-8487320e2058?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) with a bonus, free issue of the Pragmatic Engineer Newsletter. We cover one out of four topics in today’s subscriber-only [The Scoop issue](https://substack.com/redirect/b980d793-0d40-4b39-8591-11b2c279e4d4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). To get full issues twice a week, subscribe:
One month ago - on 17 February - Amazon announced its new remote work policy. From 1 May, employees are expected to spend at least three days per week in the office.
[I shared insider details](https://substack.com/redirect/a42a4872-7e0c-4a39-a920-5c8c516af423?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) on the unprecedented pushback that this new policy has received. A big part of the pushback came because of three big reasons:
Many employees accepted offers from Amazon with the understanding that their position will be full remote. About 30-40% of Amazon’s current staff was hired in the past 18 months, based on an engineer I talked with, looking at the “Old Fart” ranking - a system that shows what percentage of employees were hired after you.
Plenty of employees are not within commuting distance from their assigned office.
From 2021, directors had the autonomy to decide if their teams worked as remotely, hybrid, or in-office. When hiring employees, directors often assumed that this setup would stay permanently.
More than 10,000 employees signed a petition asking for this new RTO policy be reversed, and more than 25,000 people joined an internal Slack channel to protest against the RTO policy change.
Engineers I talked with were hopeful that Amazon’s leadership team - the S-Team - would reverse the policy or at least soften it. Until now, the S-Team did not communicate further about these changes.
Until today, that is. Today - on 16 March - Amazon updated their FAQs about RTO. There is no softening of the policy: Amazon is doubling down on it. The company published answers to 28 frequent questions, including these (emphasis mine):
Q: “If I now live far away from my assigned office, do I need to come into the office 3 days a week once my building is ready?”
A: “Yes. We expect all employees to return to their assigned office at least three days a week when their building is ready. If there is a reason in which you cannot do so, please discuss with your manager to explore options such as allowing extra time until you can relocate back to your assigned area of transferring to another team near your location.”
The question about when your team is remote but you are not:
Q: “What if I’m the only or one of just a few people from my team in the office I’m assigned to - do I still need to go in at least three days a week?”
A: “Yes. We believe that employees are much more likely to understand our unique culture and become part of it if they are surrounded by other Amazonians in person, even if not on their immediate working team. We encourage managers to work towards having as many of their team members together in one physical location as possible. We recognize that this will take time, and in some cases, managers may choose to make an exception and designate certain individuals as remote, but this will be a very small minority of the company overall.”
Sales and Customer Support will probably be exempt from the RTO requirement: however, employees do not yet have details on exactly what teams. For people outside Sales and Customer Support - such as Engineering - exceptions need to be requested to work remotely. If the exception is not related to a disability accommodation: this exception requires [S-Team](https://substack.com/redirect/d5f9da71-1213-4f1e-b506-641be4340574?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) approval - which, practically, means an SVP or VP-level approval.
So what is the mood like inside Amazon? Grim, talking to engineers. On Slack, people are talking about resigning, and the topic of unionizing is coming up more frequently. Amazon is known for being a company that [wants to stop unionization](https://substack.com/redirect/96a39840-ac18-43c4-9aa9-64b8244c2f20?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) by every means possible - so bringing up unionization - or, as engineers, I talked to called it: ‘the forbidden U word’ is an unusually strong response.
The same engineers upset about the RTO policy here to stay are also talking about canceling their Prime memberships or boycotting Amazon.
What I hear from all of this is that many engineers find their situation hopeless: I am talking about people living too far from an office to make their commute practical. These people have no other option than to apply for a remote work exception - and hope they get it from the S-Team. Failing that: it will be a very long commute from May or having to find another job and resign.
What does Amazon’s approach signal for other companies? I consistently pay attention to what Amazon does, as the company has read the market well for the past decades: both from a business perspective, and also from how to attract and retain software engineers - doing this in a frugal way.
The fact that Amazon’s S-Team did not blink, and refuses to soften the return to work policy signals that they either don’t expect much attrition, or have calculated with additional attrition. Given that the company is in the middle of [cutting 18,000 positions](https://substack.com/redirect/e1d214ca-3810-4db2-813c-9a1a6516fd49?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), there’s a fair chance that this RTO policy is a way to further increase attrition.
At the same time, looking at the market, it’s hard not to ask the question: if people want to leave, where will they leave to? Meta just announced more cuts - and closing all 5,000 open positions. Dozens of tech companies have put similar, 3-day return to office policies in place starting from December, when an [RTO wave started](https://substack.com/redirect/4b0b2e98-8451-4956-844e-634e4b3d2ed0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), as we covered [in The Scoop #34](https://substack.com/redirect/4b0b2e98-8451-4956-844e-634e4b3d2ed0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).
There are, of course, still companies out there that are hiring for either full-remote or remote-friendly roles: a large number of startups and scaleups, and some better-known tech companies like Shopify, Spotify, GitLab our Automatic.
Still, I cannot help but observe that we have passed “peak remote work,” and workplaces that have been office-first before the pandemic: most of them are reverting to a hybrid setup of 3 days per week in the office.
Just like Meta has [hinted of doing exactly this](https://substack.com/redirect/dd93ea06-ce6e-4b60-abea-c13d60015f42?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), likely preparing for a policy change, also to target three days per week in the office.
This was one out of the five topics covered in this week’s The Scoop. A lot of what I share in The Scoop is exclusive to this publication, meaning it’s not been covered in any other media outlet before and you’re the first to read about it.
The [full The Scoop edition](https://substack.com/redirect/b980d793-0d40-4b39-8591-11b2c279e4d4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) additionally covers:
Meta: a second round of layoffs and restructuring to come. The tech giant announced it will let another 11,000 staff go, and is also closing 5,000 open positions. I talked with software engineers there to get a sense of the mood inside the company, and what they expect will happen. Exclusive.
Is ChatGPT causing panic within Big Tech? Large-scale language model ChatGPT is taking the industry by storm, despite Big Tech companies having invested heavily for years in natural language processing (NLP) teams. Are these teams now panicking, and can we expect Big Tech to increase or decrease investment in NLP? Analysis.
How much do full-remote take-home exercises pay? During their interview process, several full-remote companies ask software engineers to complete take-home exercises, which can take several days to complete. Among companies which pay candidates for their time, what are the rates? I gathered details from engineers. Exclusive.
[Senior Software Engineer, Distributed Systems](https://substack.com/redirect/eaae0517-ca64-42e7-869d-15dda1c08df8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)at Mixpanel. $200-270K + equity. New York, San Franciso, Seattle or Remote (US).[Senior Software Engineer, Fullstack](https://substack.com/redirect/938dec77-d945-4b69-8c01-c78de26ab1f2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)at Mixpanel. $200-270K + equity. New York, San Franciso, Seattle or Remote (US).[Head of Infrastructure and Risk](https://substack.com/redirect/b9c8a651-51b3-433d-b6d8-eebe6a31a799?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)at X1 Card. $250K+ + equity. Remote (US).[Tech Lead - part time option](https://substack.com/redirect/6df3a527-f7ad-4f1a-95c8-120f17c6fbc4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)at FINN. €105-115K + equity. Munich or Remote (EU).[Software Development Manager - eCommerce](https://substack.com/redirect/ac6d00af-7ad3-4b45-a652-8468f181d1dc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)at Card Kingdom. $175-195K. Seattle, WA or Remote (US).[Solution Engineer](https://substack.com/redirect/90e4ef29-2efa-4bdc-b996-2a7553f9331c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)at Tint. San Francisco or Remote (US time zones).[Backend Software Engineer](https://substack.com/redirect/d3c9ecd4-b2c1-4b17-b839-9bef073dca42?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)at X1 Card. Remote (US).[Senior Frontend Engineer](https://substack.com/redirect/6dce43d3-7060-4b1c-89d7-6e2511eee589?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)at Pento. £80-92K. Remote (Global).[Senior Fullstack Engineer](https://substack.com/redirect/b843668e-049f-444c-b4bc-aedc80da1e8f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)at Synthesia. £70-110K . Remote (Europe or US Eastern time) or onsite (London, Amsterdam, New York).[Senior Backend Engineer](https://substack.com/redirect/bd41618e-0ac7-47d8-9c75-907076e89516?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)at Synthesia. £70-110K . Remote (Europe or US Eastern time) or onsite (London, Amsterdam, New York).[Lead Backend Engineer](https://substack.com/redirect/280b45c3-d11b-4a8f-80bb-07e3c97c3ad9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)at Instapro Group. Amsterdam.[Staff Engineer - MacOS](https://substack.com/redirect/2399a543-e5b0-4347-9c08-792cf2701006?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)at Reframe. Remote (Global).[Staff Engineer - Windows](https://substack.com/redirect/ba1edb02-0cf7-40bb-88ed-abad06950928?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)at Reframe. Remote (Global).[Senior Frontend Engineer](https://substack.com/redirect/ea80e1c8-f60d-4d7e-8b2b-1e66292620d7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)at (catch) Health. $90-120K + equity. Remote (North America).[Staff Backend Engineer](https://substack.com/redirect/3946ce42-ddad-4aee-b815-46f5f40354c0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)at Pento. £95-115K. Remote (Global).[Software Engineer (React / Node)](https://substack.com/redirect/45e8e761-6a9f-4dd9-a67c-83d5adb6bfcd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)at Airtime. Budapest, Hungary.[Senior Site Reliability Engineer](https://substack.com/redirect/9a051c2b-2c22-4a5a-85c9-506ccb01dc9e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)at Tint.ai. Remote (US timezone).[Senior Full Stack Engineer (Laravel / Vue)](https://substack.com/redirect/70023e17-72cd-4559-8f5f-cee39cfdb1d0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)at RXMG. Remote (Global).[Sr. Cloud Infrastructure Support Engineer](https://substack.com/redirect/263ed9c5-24a5-4d69-949f-ec3d06765363?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)at RXMG. Remote (Global).[Senior Full Stack/Frontend Engineer](https://substack.com/redirect/a380041c-907e-4485-8d13-e29d4c2c653b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)at Vitally.io. $180-270K. New York or Remote (US).[Senior Software Engineer - Core Platform](https://substack.com/redirect/8c51101c-d4c3-4d70-ae95-25a554de8d64?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)at CAST.AI. €72-€96K. Remote (EU).[Senior Software Engineer - Cost Optimization](https://substack.com/redirect/e325c245-7f76-458f-8e42-941b055bbcc9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)at CAST.AI. €72-€96K. Remote (EU).[Solution Architect](https://substack.com/redirect/d6165141-637e-4e96-8d19-5f06111bf1c1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)at CAST.AI. Remote (EU).[Senior Software Engineer - Security](https://substack.com/redirect/f3f96be2-53cf-45e8-99bb-a7b61deb361e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)at CAST.AI. Remote (EU).[Backend Engineer (Node)](https://substack.com/redirect/d57d8503-7cb9-4e6c-a871-f4552077c5be?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)at FINN. €70-100K. Munich or Remote (EU).[Founding Engineer, Front End and API](https://substack.com/redirect/8befab36-08b0-4e11-a310-e762b43ccf49?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)at Causal. $175-225K + equity. Boston.
See more senior engineer and leadership roles with great engineering cultures on [The Pragmatic Engineer Job board](https://substack.com/redirect/9c29fc00-9322-40d8-b8f3-8666961a6f1f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) - or post your own.
If you’re hiring, join [The Pragmatic Engineer Talent Collective](https://substack.com/redirect/ed4435c1-66b5-41e6-b1aa-ebe65b7e4b47?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). It’s the #1 talent collective for software engineers and engineering managers. Get weekly drops of outstanding software engineers and engineering leaders open to new opportunities. I vet every software engineer and manager - and add a note on why they are a standout profile.
Companies like Linear use this collective to hire better, and faster. If you’re hiring, apply here:
If you’re open for a new opportunity, join to get reachouts from vetted companies. You can join anonymously, and leave anytime:
You’re on the free list for [The Pragmatic Engineer](https://substack.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.tAMQOzUfiJL2qSzI6EXWeRux8Y0kBYKAYPmVxLh4fZY?). For the full experience, [become a paying subscriber](https://substack.com/redirect/2/eyJlIjoiaHR0cHM6Ly9uZXdzbGV0dGVyLnByYWdtYXRpY2VuZ2luZWVyLmNvbS9zdWJzY3JpYmU_dG9rZW49ZXlKMWMyVnlYMmxrSWpveE5EVTJNek14T1N3aWFXRjBJam94TmpjNE9Ua3dOalk1TENKbGVIQWlPakUyT0RFMU9ESTJOamtzSW1semN5STZJbkIxWWkwME5UZzNNRGtpTENKemRXSWlPaUpqYUdWamEyOTFkQ0o5Lm0zNmFHRk5sa1ZCTThBRmZVODNySXFMbmw2OGZDSU5OZm1UTDRBRmI2dW8mdXRtX3NvdXJjZT1wb3N0IiwicCI6MTA4ODQyMTQ5LCJzIjo0NTg3MDksImYiOnRydWUsInUiOjE0NTYzMzE5LCJpYXQiOjE2Nzg5OTA2NjksImV4cCI6MTY4MTU4MjY2OSwiaXNzIjoicHViLTAiLCJzdWIiOiJsaW5rLXJlZGlyZWN0In0.SHgG3kkj377I1tyvp1Jx45HqDbmnvuWKDZ5izXjICOU?). Many readers expense this newsletter within their company’s training/learning/development budget.
This post is public, so feel free to share and forward it.