---
subject: "Nestaway attempts to change its rental engines mid-flight"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2019-10-21 02:35:48
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031"]
---
As long as human beings need a house to live in, rentals will always be a massive market opportunity in any country. A 2017 estimate placed the residential rental market in India at roughly $17 billion annually, projected to rise to $41 billion by 2023.
Nestaway, headquartered in Bangalore and established in 2015, was one of the first companies to go after this market in a structured way. Aided by over $100 million in venture capital cumulatively, it offered a simple but potentially disruptive offering - a “no-hassle” rental platform where homeowners put up their properties on one side, and individual customers rent it out from the other. In a country where tenants pay 8-10 months worth their monthly rental as an interest-free "security deposit”, Nestaway asked for just 2 months. And took on the responsibility for maintenance and repairs, too.
Sadly, that model isn’t working. Nestaway’s business model required the economies of scale provided by dense and clustered apartments, but that didn’t materialise. It required an occupancy rate of 90%, but current estimates peg that around 65%. Even its disruptive 2-month security deposit is at risk of becoming the national norm, as a proposed new tenancy act caps deposits at 2 months.
So, Nestaway is subtly pivoting towards the current rental flavour-of-the-month among investors: co-living. In 4 months, it has aggregated over 10,000 rooms under its new brand, The Hello World (THW). But other competitors are already entrenching themselves. Both Softbank-funded OYO and Zolostays claim to have over 30,000 rooms.
Vandana does a great job of balancing Nestaway’s past (4 years in the life of a fast-growing VC-funded startup is often like 10-15 years for others), its present and its possible futures. Do read her story: [https://the-ken.com/story/nestaway-testing-times/](http://link.the-ken.com/uni/wf/click?upn=HQSq6eeRV1xAVaGuFOahuNCZVVXPeP-2FJpSqxhvIUDrlLx5ub-2BpeiYZ9T5i-2B2JzmGvomJeT4e61hcjZ7cshaPAujAWh3Xw9pVYJ-2Bop0DqJuJBX5z8HOtbuwPl3tj-2FihYfPTNUNh2AAarkH-2BCkUqpfb-2BHEhM80q45I4jbZTDFzJjU-3D_S4jLOsNx-2Fv6Jev2nvow8b7P9pBCWGd8KNZfb200gkZLQNlXQHio0noZzXtsWoloZmPWeyZsh7a4QCV9ufwCUKi00jlBT0uEdvwYDMuVuqcMcg0VXA7gQxQ0t3cRYI-2Bta9zhgjvdsc92CZMqelBy12LZpszBUc2iUG3YxOvTtoXjF3bShI1H6zSpmAOQa-2BFlHwS1sBr-2BADuAw9BAYYWzNpXEfmu-2Fb3B3jh8I7tVBmg3gL-2Bpi-2FduowF-2FtEhiFTswBSaLdimFO-2BwFRQsdIrx2AkBTMwhZ2P-2FBWxhWDH6wt00vXX4CFFYoNPIYbBPY96wyQnRfm7FHnicFYJ1CKYMj-2FtQe4lqRzhgJbTlcCdjKvGeUtKW24iX78tkeNfl2MmLKZWCsNPiuCDEseiBk2Q7CfZ-2BRff-2Brx13llmF77DZSROkII-3D)
Sincerely,
Rohin Dharmakumar