---
subject: "AI #125: Smooth Criminal"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-07-17 14:20:54
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
One story has towered over things this week. Perhaps quietly an even bigger story, and bigger fail, is the announced intention by the Trump administration to allow Nvidia to resume selling H20 AI chips to China. There may still be time to stop this, if not it is a very large unforced error, and it allows us to narrow down what it is our current administration primarily cares about, since we already know it isn’t ‘keep humans in control of the future and alive’ and this strongly suggests it is also not America or to ‘beat China.’ Another quiet but big development was the release of the surprisingly excellent Coverage of Table of Contents[Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/02cc2460-183c-4fa7-b437-0e4718d5d154?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)This is what passes for slowing down.[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/5a34ed2f-6644-4b0d-8d93-de3eb8bf6972?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Beware sycophancy.[o3 Is a Lying Liar.](https://substack.com/redirect/1581a243-d330-49f9-bbc0-861dcb036c6b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A theory on why it ended up that way.[Thanks For The Memories.](https://substack.com/redirect/8ebbab76-4494-4e79-808b-de0cac504b33?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Lack of memory is holding back practical use.[Huh, Upgrades.](https://substack.com/redirect/6e8bbb69-bf98-4931-91cc-0d8e2a7ce5eb?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Claude connectors, 2.5 Pro in AI mode.[Choose Your Fighter.](https://substack.com/redirect/065aa89e-87a4-4725-bda1-72125fdfd6fd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Everybody Claude Code.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon](https://substack.com/redirect/6fc36110-4f33-4e5b-889e-1559889d6f87?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/6fc36110-4f33-4e5b-889e-1559889d6f87?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Would you prefer a Grok companion?[They Took Our Jobs.](https://substack.com/redirect/91708b68-8a94-49ac-a2a6-425711680997?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Altman keeps telling us not to worry. I still worry.[The Art of the Jailbreak.](https://substack.com/redirect/e6ce2f9e-887e-4f61-8a2e-e3164dbc1ad3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Let us count the ways. Also you can do it to people.[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/d24fa7ef-83d4-45c4-ac75-af6922b45766?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Claude Campus or social hour, Redwood lists projects, Asterisk.[Introducing.](https://substack.com/redirect/a60be692-ef30-40a4-b5bf-754dc6d191e2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Kimina-Prover-72B and Amazon’s Kiro.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/f4fb4f4d-a3c6-42c3-bd19-f984e4eae002?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Reflections on OpenAI, maps that are not the territory.[Bullshit On Bullshit](https://substack.com/redirect/ef429f46-0482-4cca-9f8b-c49a963ae927?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/ef429f46-0482-4cca-9f8b-c49a963ae927?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)An attempt to qualify AI bullshit that is alas mostly bullshit.[Safety First.](https://substack.com/redirect/f50789d4-112a-4bee-8016-93efacc5a692?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Releasing an open model should not be done lightly.[Vitalik Praises And Critiques AI 2027](https://substack.com/redirect/6676dcbb-7a1e-432e-83b5-4c0645571a4a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/6676dcbb-7a1e-432e-83b5-4c0645571a4a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Good critiques. Daniel and I respond.[Show Me the Money](https://substack.com/redirect/fc19cb41-48a4-494a-bfc9-8e132b6b50b9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/fc19cb41-48a4-494a-bfc9-8e132b6b50b9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Windsurf goes to Google and Cognition, OpenAI instead gives in and takes a cut of products you buy.[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/6d688579-7829-40bb-9338-901d4aa1b4ac?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Dean Ball lists what he would write if he was writing.[The Right Questions.](https://substack.com/redirect/c93252a5-b86e-468c-bc59-453868c5ed13?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A talk from Helen Toner.[The Quest for Sane Regulations](https://substack.com/redirect/b6ed4633-f520-4814-a771-09b4b3a11b47?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/b6ed4633-f520-4814-a771-09b4b3a11b47?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)New EU General-Purpose AI Code of Practice.[Chip City](https://substack.com/redirect/ff6b004a-b8b0-4cb3-9fcd-3839eb9f8342?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/ff6b004a-b8b0-4cb3-9fcd-3839eb9f8342?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Nvidia to sell H20s to China, is directing American AI policy. Why?[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/9944294b-4cab-43c5-9cd0-e74c8671a00d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Musk, Leahy, Kokotajlo.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/fbf6e40c-3bba-48b2-a4ea-a0b9d8f30ae8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Bernie Sanders.[Incorrectly Feeling The AGI.](https://substack.com/redirect/619430b6-2428-40b6-9047-a5d2234bbe5b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Beware leading the AI into tricking you.[RIP Absurdity Heuristic.](https://substack.com/redirect/acbd3907-cfda-4837-aa7f-fe216318ac95?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Best start believing in absurd worlds. You’re in one.[Worse Than MechaHitler.](https://substack.com/redirect/371bd3d1-c872-482b-ac95-18d23aa3428f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Those at other labs point out things went very badly.[An Alignment Problem.](https://substack.com/redirect/9a7ced59-2496-45d8-a6d6-abc447e1146d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Alignment plans that fail when people talk will fail.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/bbba8078-e4ff-43ad-b7d7-7e75d4f546a3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Opus 3 was different.[The Lighter Side.](https://substack.com/redirect/06272dd0-3db1-4559-a3b8-c6a0094b26ad?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Known risks.
Language Models Offer Mundane UtilityIf this is what slowing down adaptation looks like, it still looks remarkably fast and at least on trend.
If one extends the yellow line into the future you get the red line. One could argue that we were expecting a true S-curve and this looks linear, or that the last two data points look similar, but this does not seem slow?
Again here you see a big bump in early 2025, then a short leveling off that still leaves us ahead of previous trend line, presumably everyone rushed in and some decided the technology was not ready.
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
I find the specific example Ethan uses here mostly harmless, as o3 correctly intuits what information the user wants and what assumptions it is supposed to work with, without agreeing to the user’s assertion. In general I am inclined to agree, as we are seeing that people demand sycophancy, so they are probably going to get a lot of it.
I am guessing the latest generation does slightly better, but only slightly. o3 Is a Lying LiarA plausible core explanation of why:
Thanks For The MemoriesLack of memory is a huge practical deal for personal AI use cases.
When predicting the future, keep in mind that the memory issue is going to get fixed. Huh, Upgrades
First up, the web connections. Why not hook it up to a PayPal hooked up to draw from your bank account, or to Stripe? Desktop extensions: Sending iMessages, rewriting all your files, controlling your browser. Your call. Anyone want to pitch any of these as super useful? I’m also interested in reports about the Chrome controller.
Choose Your Fighter
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse SoonAs xAI puts out job listings for ‘Waifu Engineer’ one is tempted to ask why?
To state the obvious, no, you should not be talking to Ani the Waifu AI Companion. I don’t kink shame. I have nothing against porn. I even think there are ways to build such products that are fun, confidence and skills building and life affirming. But in this case, based on everything reported and also the instructions they gave Ani, seriously, no, stop.
If necessary, please direct your attention to this Ani is an infohazard, If you reassure yourself that the visuals aren’t good enough yet, well, that’s a ‘yet.’
If you are determined to use Ani (or the other companions like Rudy) anyway,
Also, okay, fine, occasionally Elon does have a banger.
Still, sir, you are no smooth criminal. And to double back to Cate’s question, there are two obvious answers. Perhaps Elon Musk wants Waifu companions because Elon Musk wants Waifu companions. [He thinks they’re neat](https://substack.com/redirect/f13f01c4-e6ee-4079-9ab8-cec4988d81bb?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).Several people have noted that the instructions for this ‘Ani’ seems suspiciously like a fantasy version of Grimes. Presumably this is not a coincidence because nothing is ever a coincidence.
[Money, Dear Boy](https://substack.com/redirect/b26fde55-11e1-4d09-9f07-38c9d50ee36b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), including attention. It’s a killer app.
On the one hand, people might realize they have to compete against AI companions, or realize they can supplement some needs using AI companions and thus be able to lower some of their standards (whether they be reasonable or otherwise). On the other hand, people might simply decide they have a better alternative, and raise their standards further, and unfortunately that seems like the default, although you should see a mix of both. This is going to be a big deal:
Elon Musk’s company might be an exception due to his particular customer base,
They Took Our Jobs
My prediction for the ‘somehow this is still our biggest issue’ scenario continues to be that humans indeed have insufficient amounts of work, and are confined to tasks where we inherently care that it is done by a human. The Art of the JailbreakMike AI points out that
Convince via rational evidence (truthfully or otherwise). She notes this is not really a jailbreak, but it still functionally counts.
Make the AI acquire new goals. ‘Bypass’ usual agency and hypnotize the model into continuing a provided narrative like a base model. Overload working memory to inhibit judgment. Activate a non-standard but non-arbitrary attractor state.
Get Involved
Introducing
In Other AI NewsAs OpenAI prepares its latest attempt to rug pull the nonprofit, Garrison Lovely points out that under ‘our structure’ OpenAI claims its mission is importantly different than what is in the charter. The charter says ‘ensure that AGI benefits all of humanity,’ a fine goal, and now it says ‘build AGI that is safe and benefits all of humanity,’ which is not the same thing.
Calvin French-Owen, who left three weeks ago after working at OpenAI for a year, This was naturally of particular interest to me:
It is great to hear that this is the impression, and certainly I can believe there is a lot of work being done that isn’t published, although that means I can’t judge based on it and also that risks blunting the value of the work. And as he notes, their safety focus is not my safety focus. This also caught my attention:
Well, then. Sounds like I should get my OpenAI-related stuff onto Twitter more. I worry that there are some essentially psyop operations on Twitter, and hordes of people dedicated to highly obnoxious forms of vibe warfare on behalf of Obvious Nonsense. Curation is crucial. That also means that yes, for things OpenAI related, fight in the vibe wars. There were many other items as well, consider Paper finds that This appears to correctly have all the real streets, except it also has a lot of other streets. My presumption is that these virtual streets are being used to represent counterintuitive path redirections due to traffic patterns, and this was the easiest way to do that given it was not being graded on the accuracy of the map. They’re kind of mental shortcuts. This method also means that detours and changes break the model, but again if you weren’t testing for that, don’t act surprised. METR’s most famous result is that task length AIs can handle at 50% success rate doubles roughly every 7 months. There was Bullshit On BullshitCovered purely because it is fun and I’d never waste that section title:
I sigh at that last line, but fine, whatever, quantifying machine bullshit is a good idea.
RLHF does not have to do this. It depends on the Hs giving the F. Reward truth? Get truth. Reward bullshit? Get bullshit. Well, shit.
Well sure, that can happen. Except not only are these super obsolete models, they don’t mention or use any of the techniques designed to avoid this and their ‘bullshit index’ has some rather severe problems. I would note that Grok 4’s analysis of this paper was quite bad, much worse than Claude Opus or o3-pro. Safety FirstOpenAI has delayed release of their promised open model to verify safety.
Given the decision to release an open model, this is excellent and responsible behavior. Yes, it is probably true that releasing this particular model will be fine. It is still a decision that cannot be undone, and which presents unique dangers OpenAI’s usual process does not have to consider. They are taking this seriously, and have a position where they can afford to take some extra time.
Is it possible that OpenAI delayed the release for different reasons, and is lying? Perhaps the model needs more time to cook. Perhaps performance isn’t up to par. Yes this is possible, but I find it highly unlikely. While I greatly appreciate this, it is sadly the state of the world where saying ‘we delayed this for safety’ is considered by many including in our government and also in tech to be an actively bad look. Their incentives do not point in this direction. So I see no reason not to believe them. Remember that You Are Not The Target. Vitalik Praises And Critiques AI 2027
As in, Vitalik challenges the lack of countermeasures by the rest of the world.
Vitalik’s specific criticisms seem reasonable, and he is careful to note some of the ways such countermeasures could fail, such as Consensus-1 being in control of or able to hack other nations and local physical security, or control the global infosphere.
Similarly, he challenges that defensive AI personally loyal to individuals could defend against super-persuasion, since it will be the ASI against your (lesser) ASI, which isn’t a fair fight but is no longer hopeless. That of course depends on your ASI actually being loyal to you when it counts, and you having to trust it essentially absolutely across the board, even in the best case scenario. To say the least, I do not expect our current leaders to be willing to go for this even if it would be wise to do so, nor in the AI 2027 scenario are there sufficiently advanced AIs where such trust would be wise. Vitalik finishes by asking what is implied by his version of events. Mostly it agrees with the ‘traditional AI safety canon,’ except that in Vitalik’s world diffusion of AI capabilities primarily enables defense and countermeasures, so you want open models and otherwise to diffuse modestly-behind-the-frontier capabilities as widely as possible. Vitalik for various reasons expects the technological situation to favor defense over offense. In some areas this seems plausible, in others it seems clearly wrong, in areas where we don’t even know what the offense looks like or how it would work it will be very wrong, and also once you go down the ‘arm everyone and see what happens’ path you can’t undo that and you lose a lot of your ability to steer or coordinate further, and you start to get competitive dynamic problems and tragedies of the commons and you force everyone to go down the full delegation and trust paths and so on, again even best case.
This seems like a very important point of disagreement of assumptions:
At least, no one figures out how to make loyal AIs that are anywhere near the frontier. The leading AI company doesn’t have loyal AIs, so why should you have one as an individual in a way sufficiently robust to make this work? This is the common thread behind a lot of disagreements here. Vitalik is thinking about a world in which there is one leading AI and that AI is up to no good, but only modestly less capable AIs are still trustworthy and loyal to the entity we choose to point them towards, and the AIs up to no good do not interfere with this. That’s not how the AI 2027 scenario plays out, and if true it would ‘change everything,’ or at least quite a lot. On the question of biological weapons and other ways a highly advanced superintelligence (C-1) with quite a lot of control over physical resources might take control or exterminate humanity if it wanted to, I have a very ‘I never borrowed your pot’ style of response, as in there are many distinct steps at which I disagree, and I’d have to be convinced on most if not all of them. I am highly skeptical that biology in particular will favor defense. I am highly skeptical that every other method of attack will similarly favor defense. C-1 can choose whichever attack method we are not defending against, either because there is a place offense is favored or because it found something that was otherwise overlooked, or we simply made a critical mistake. We should expect C-1 to figure out things we aren’t considering. The level of competence assigned here to the rest of the world seems unrealistic. The level of willingness to trust AI with our defenses seems unrealistic. We should expect C-1 to absolutely control the information ecosystem. There are quite a lot of ways for C-1 to use this. We should expect C-1 to be able to co-opt and direct many humans and other systems, in any number of ways. Even if C-1 proved unable to have access to a sort of ‘clean kill’ of the humans, it is not as if this prevents the same ultimate result. You can have any defenses you want if C-1 boils the oceans, builds nanobots or is off putting its Dyson Sphere around the sun. Ultimately defense doesn’t work. You still lose. Good day, sir. Even disregarding all that, even if things go well, the Vitalik’s scenario still ends in disempowerment. By construction, this is a world where AI tells humans what to think and makes all the important decisions, and so on.
Centrally, I think the exact way the humans lose at the end is irrelevant. The game was over a long time before that. I agree with Vitalik that these are more vital questions to be asking than whether all this plays out in 2027-29 versus 2030-35, although the extra time helps us prepare. I also do think that if you explore the scenario in more detail it is downplaying the changes and roles for secondary AIs, and a longer more detailed version would extend on this. Daniel also points us to Show Me the MoneyOpenAI had a good run not taking affiliate revenue or advertising.
I appreciated the repeated use of the word ‘currently’ here:
It is actually kind of weird not to take into account cost? Users would want that. I’m not going to use your shopping links if you don’t find me the best price. We all presumed this day would come. This is a huge amount of money to leave on the table, enough to greatly expand OpenAI’s offerings at most price points. How much will this new revenue stream distort OpenAI’s outputs? We shall see. It is hard to ignore strong incentives. Ideally there are no modifications and they merely take advantage of existing affiliate systems, or at worst any modifications are limited to within the shopping tool or mode, and even then strictly contained and labeled. Alas, I expect that this will instead encourage more optimization for engagement and for steering users towards purchases, and that revenue per customer will quickly become a KPI and training optimization target.
Job market for AI engineers gets even more fun: Boris Cherny and Cat Wu left Anthropic two weeks earlier to work for Cursor developer Anysphere,
I notice that there were strong objections that Anthropic’s ‘Evil Training’ documents were laughably over-the-top and fake and Claude obviously would see through them. Well, this seems like a strong answer to such objections? And Janus agrees that the prompting there was relatively good for an eval. The thing about truth is that it is allowed to seem deeply stupid. I mean, what if the documents had referenced an AI that identified itself as ‘MechaHitler’ or looked for its founders Tweets in its chain of thought?
This seems like a major mistake by Microsoft, on multiple levels. It seems like strong evidence that the relationship is getting increasingly adversarial. The deal with Google did not vest employees that are not yet at their vesting cliff, and it
Also the ‘implicit social contracts’ of Silicon Valley seem to be often used, primarily by venture capitalists, to take things including huge amounts of equity from people, the idea being that if our norms say you shouldn’t own something (e.g. the OpenAI nonprofit having the lion’s share of future OpenAI profits rights and also control over OpenAI) we should be able to just take it from you, as OpenAI keeps trying to do and is once again planning on doing. And the rules often let them do it. So it’s hard to have too much sympathy.
We will never know for sure, because we got a different ending.
I see why people were upset over Google’s deal, but there are three obvious reasons that kind of deal isn’t going anywhere. It’s a good deal for the people with the actual power to make the deal, so who cares if other people don’t like it? That’s how markets and deals work. The legal requirements prevent Google from buying Windsurf outright, so what else are companies in this spot going to do? If leaving the company behind leaves room for someone else to buy up the rest and make everyone whole, what is the problem? It seems like the norms involved actually held up pretty well if Google left this much value behind.
Zuckerberg cites SemiAnalysis blames the failure of Llama 4 Behemoth on particular implementation errors, rather than on a general failure of execution. I would go the other way here. Also once again (spoilers I guess?) can we please either: [Do five minutes of Wikipedia research](https://substack.com/redirect/5cb607b5-f65d-4c79-b962-f10d15789502?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)before we choose the names of our megaprojects and ensure that the AI-related implications are not horribly disastrous? ORActually learn from the warnings contained therein?
Quiet Speculations
The Right Questions
She chooses great questions. How far can the current paradigm go? As gains seemingly slow down are we hitting intractable issues like hallucinations, capability-reliability gap and overconfidence and running into fundamental limitations? Or will we find more improvements and ways to scale and have adaptation (or synthetic data) get us quite far? A wide range of outcomes would not surprise me but my default answer is definitely that it can with sufficient effort and resources get quite far, especially if you include a broad range of scaffolding efforts. Low confidence but the obstacles all look solvable.
How much can AI improve AI? There is a long history of noticing that once you cross the appropriate thresholds, AI should be able to improve itself and create hockey-stick-graph style growth in capabilities. We are already seeing meaningful speedups of AI work due to AI. Objections are either that AI won’t get to that point, or that it would still have key bottlenecks requiring humans in the loop to review or have taste or do physical experiments. The objection that the systems stall out before they get that far, that capabilities won’t much increase and therefore we shouldn’t feel the AGI, seems plausible to me. The objection of pointing to bottlenecks mostly seems like failure to feel the AGI, denial of the premise that AI capabilities could much increase. Even if the bottlenecks persist and cap progress, that could still cap progress at a highly accelerated rate.
Will future AIs still basically be tools, or something else? Will [AI be a ‘normal technology’](https://substack.com/redirect/d1630ac0-cf7f-4b8e-9e9a-529b75d3e6e2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)that we can and should remain in control of? Will we remain in control over it, which is importantly distinct from that? In order to do so, what will it take?This is a form of the most important question. Other questions largely matter because they impact how you answer this one. Unfortunately, I believe the answer is no. AI will not be a ‘mere tool.’ Again, the arguments for mere toolness, for it remaining a ‘normal technology,’ seem to require denying the premise and not ‘feeling the AGI.’ It is a statement the technology is already approaching its fundamental limits. Autonomous AI agents are already being constructed at current capability levels. They are not so good yet in the general case, but they are improving, are getting good in more places, and will get good in general. As Helen points out, the financial and commercial incentives (and I would add many other forms of incentive) point towards instilling and granting generality and autonomy, again even at current capability levels. At minimum, as she points out, AI will be a highly powerful self-sustaining optimization process, that threatens to soon be more powerful than we are.
Depending on the answers to those questions there are more good questions. If AI is not going to be a mere tool, whether or not that involves AI rapidly improving AI, then the next question is the big one: How do we make this end well, and end well for the humans? How do the humans stay in control over what happens after that, retain our ability to meaningfully collectively steer the future, avoid our disempowerment and also various other forms of existential risk? Every answer I have seen falls into one of five categories: This seems super hard, the odds are against us and the situation is grim. Winning requires navigating a number of at least very hard problems. That doesn’t mean we can’t succeed. It means that conditional on capabilities improving a lot we should not be confident in success or expect it to happen by default. Creating autonomous optimization engines more intelligent, powerful and competitive than we are is something we should expect to not go well for us, unless we bespokely engineer the situation to make it go well for us. That’s hard, especially without coordination. That also does not require any particular thing to ‘go wrong’ or any particular scenario to play out, for things to go badly. Going well is the weird outcome. This is my answer.
Arguments of the form ‘the way this goes wrong is [X], and [X] won’t happen, so everything will turn out fine.’ A popular [X] is an AI ‘coup’ or AI ‘takeover’ or ‘betrayal.’ Often this is extended to ‘in order to do [X] requires [ABCDEF] in order, and many hard steps is hard’ or similar. Or the popular ‘you have to tell me a story of a particular [X] that goes [ABCDEF] and then I will choose the [D] that seems implausible or dumb and then use this to dismiss all ways that AI could go badly for humans.’
Arguments of the form ‘[X] so we will be fine.’ Sometimes [X] is something deeply foolish like ‘property rights’ or ‘rule of law.’ Others even say things like ‘comparative advantage.’ There is even ‘you have not properly modeled the problem or proven that it exists’ therefore everything will be fine. If only reality worked this way. A fun category is ‘it would not be that costly for ‘the AIs’ to make everything fine so everything will be fine,’ such as they would just go to Jupiter. But of course that is not how optimization works or how competition works. A less dumb version of this that is still wrong is ‘we will be fine so long as we solve alignment’ without defining what that means or explaining how we use that to actually set up a future world that solves the problems. Solving alignment is table stakes, it is necessary but not sufficient.
This will be fine because [denies the premise of the question]. As in, answers that imply the AIs will remain tools, or their capabilities will be sharply limited in ways that don’t make sense. Not feeling the AGI. It’s fine to argue that the premise is wrong, but then you have to argue that. And you have to be clear this is what you are arguing. I do think it is possible that the premise turns out to not happen.
This will be fine because [waves hand] or [priors] or [vibes] or [convenience] or [otherwise I would have to take this question seriously] or [that sounds crazy] or [that pattern matches to the wrong thing]. Nothing to worry about. They don’t word it this way, but that is what people are mostly saying.
Thus I report that I continue to find all the answers other than #1 to be quite poor. Here is a reaction I found odd, and that illustrates the ‘deny the premise’ category:
Oh, really? People absolutely would choose to do that. Remember the Sixth Law of Human Stupidity, this is very much an argument from ‘no one would be so stupid as to,’ and whether or not such action would indeed be stupid I assure everyone that it will happen, people will choose this path. Also the AI system would attempt to take that level of power and autonomy anyway because that would be the best way to accomplish its assigned goals, and presumably succeed. Also even if the AI was acting as a ‘normal’ Fortune 500 CEO, and was haggling with various others, why does that make this turn out okay? And aren’t those others quickly becoming other AIs or other copies of the AI? And doesn’t the CEO’s role work that way mostly because they have the fundamental limitation that they can only take one action and be in one place at a time, where Being AI Solves This? And so on. The Quest for Sane RegulationsCoauthor
Signing on would require the top labs to up their game accordingly, including providing ‘jailbroken’ versions to external researchers for independent evaluation of all systemic risks and guaranteed access to qualified researchers. It definitely could be done. Yes, the public still wants AI regulation,
I presume they will get the second one, people seem ready to get behind that one, but not the first one because business. One consequence of royally screwing up in a highly legible fashion is that politicians will use that failure in their rhetoric, as in Labour MP Dawn Butler’s Telegraph article, ‘
If an industry does not want this to happen, maybe lay off the MechaHitlers.
Recent evidence has suggested that it might well be the right-wing attacks that cause real legal trouble, not the traditional left-wing discrimination claims, in cases that don’t involve MechaHitler. But either way, it’s essentially impossible to not get into various forms of trouble given how the laws work. Chip City
Does the Chinese military use Nvidia chips?
Except, you see, Jensen Huang is lying. The Chinese military already overwhelmingly does use Nvidia chips.
Why wouldn’t they? Do you think that making the chip means the ‘tech stack’ ‘belongs’ to you in any relevant way? What matters is who owns and uses the chips. Nvidia makes the best chips. So, to the extent they are able to buy such chips, the Chinese use them.
And this means improved sentiment for Alibaba, Tencent and Baidu, huh?
Our policymakers who want so badly to ‘beat China’ need to understand that Nvidia is not their friend and that Jensen’s word and goodwill cannot be trusted whatsoever. Nvidia wants to sell to and empower China and the Chinese government, and will both work to exploit every opportunity within our rules and also spout highly Obvious Nonsense to try and convince us to let them do this, at minimum. At minimum.
You would think that this blatantly, explicitly, visibly and repeatedly aligning with and praising China would rub Washington the wrong way. Except it all works out for him. Thus, we have two facts that exist at the same time. [Jensen seems overwhelmingly, shockingly bad at American politics](https://substack.com/redirect/a0cfc850-71b4-4089-a1e4-b77da20d323e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). He is constantly screaming his intention to screw over America in a highly legible way.The White House seems to be buying whatever he is selling, and largely treating ‘win the AI race’ as ‘maximize Nvidia’s market share.’ This includes now selling their H20s directly to China. Which is already substantially enhancing their overall supply of compute. And now getting what looks like a green light to conspire with Chinese military and intelligence to supply them even more with [a new chip they’ve designed to technically meet our specs](https://substack.com/redirect/f05740e6-aef8-4b1e-bbd3-84e2306cc29c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), while saying outright that the Chinese military won’t use any of his chips, despite the fact that they overwhelmingly already do. This is in the middle of what is otherwise a trade war and burgeoning cold war that could turn hot over Taiwan soon and supposed ‘AI race.’
If the White House is willing to sell the H20s to China, then we can rule out a number of otherwise plausible explanations for their behavior, such as a desire to ‘beat China’ in any sense other than near term market share of AI chips sold. No, seriously, we have a White House that repeatedly tells us, explicitly, to our faces, that what they care about is maximizing Nvidia’s market share. As in:
Um, how do you intend to do that without selling the Chinese enough chips to meet their needs, as in entirely throwing away America’s most important advantage, that of access to compute? It. Sure. Looks Like. They. Literally. Care. Primarily. About. Nvidia. Making. Money. Why would they choose to primarily care about this? Don’t tell me it’s because America’s dominance depends on China being hooked on CUDA, or that Why would selling them H20s make them slow down? Chinese chip manufacturers will still have an essentially limitless supply of domestic demand. It turns out Nvidia is actually amazingly great at politics. I wonder how and why? There actually is a steelman, which is that Lutnick says they traded H20s to regain access to rare Earths. If they came out and admitted they screwed up that badly that they had to say uncle, that would at least be an argument, I suppose. I still think that’s a pretty awful decision, unless the rare Earths really do offer this much leverage, in which case there were some other pretty awful decisions. If this includes letting them sell a new chip indefinitely, it’s catastrophically terrible either way.
As a reminder, Nvidia can sell more chips in the West than it is capable of manufacturing. Every chip they manufacture to sell to China is not only enhancing China’s capabilities, it is one less chip that they will provide to the West. Yet we are allowing this. Is there a good explanation? Yes. It would be impolitic for me to say it. If you think that explanation would be wrong, what is the alternative one? There is still time, as I understand the situation, to stop or mitigate this.
We are in a much worse position, both as a nation in a strategic rivalry and also collectively as humans trying to not all die, if export controls are crippled. It is one thing for the federal government to mostly toss my primary concerns overboard in the name of national security. It sucked, but our interests aligned sufficiently that I could work with that for now, a lot of the low-hanging fruit is massively overdetermined. It is another thing to see our government simply sell out not only safety but also the United States. The Week in Audio
Rhetorical Innovation
This from Bernie Sanders is presumably the quote of the week on the rhetorical front:
That is still understating it somewhat, but yes, very much so, sir. He also wants other things. It’s good to want things:
It’s funny to see this idea of a job as a right, a rent, something you own. So you can’t just take it away without just compensation. Except that actually you can. And he asks good questions:
Holly Elmore and Connor Leahy remind us that trying to downplay what is at stake and what is happening, and not telling people the real thing, is usually a mistake. I admit the following pattern is also not great:
There’s very much a #NotAllXs involved in all of these, especially for the x-risk crowd. Certainly there are some that make the most basic of utilitarian errors, but in my experience most realize this is foolish, and indeed think hard about what they actually value and often notice that they are confused about this where most others are confused but do not notice their confusion, or have false confidence in a different simple wrong answer. Also I think it is appropriate to say ‘when faced with permanent loss of control or failure to survive, you focus on that first so you can worry more about the rest later.’ Incorrectly Feeling The AGI
RIP Absurdity HeuristicAs a reminder, this, from Rolling Stone, is a real headline:
From now on, when someone claims that predictions for the future are absurd or sci-fi nonsense or not serious, and their entire evidence for this is that it sounds weird or stupid, or that No One Would Be So Stupid As To, reply with the above picture. There were some challenges to Eliezer’s claim downthread, primarily from Ryan Greenblatt, but I am with Richard Ngo that his claim is mostly correct. I think this interaction is illustrative of which this matters:
Buck says ‘unnecessarily lurid.’ I say ‘gives the reader a correct picture of the situation.’ The set of in advance statements one could have made about Abu Ghraib that both… Gives the reader a real sense of how bad it is going to get, and thus illustrates the importance of trying to stop it from happening. Does not get exactly this criticism as ‘unnecessarily lurid.’
…is, I assert, the empty set. If you actually described what was literally going to happen, you would get this criticism. Worse Than MechaHitler
It is amazing to see so many people respond to even the most minimal calls to, essentially, Boaz’s statement was featured in
If all we were worried about was hateful speech, then applying ordinary commercial pressure (problem and solution one) would work to pressure the companies into both implementing known solutions and in working harder to find a solution to problem two. The full version of this is an unsolved problem, and will become increasingly and increasingly importantly unsolved as capabilities advance, and might not have a solution, but it is not this hard or this unsolved and xAI definitely acted irresponsibly. Eleventhsavi0r points out that
It goes on to nukes, suicide methods, extremist propaganda and literally the plague. All you have to do is pay the $30 and ask. This did not get as far as the most dangerous-at-scale stuff, as the point had been made. As usual, there were attempted responses of ‘but you can get all that off Google,’ which completely misses the point. Even ignoring the stuff that scales, the failure to have any kind of check on assisting with suicide methods is absolutely going to get someone killed if it isn’t quickly patched. Well, I suppose that’s one way to run an experiment. An Alignment ProblemHere’s a true statement:
I would also add, if your alignment plan relies on hiding the truth from future superintelligent entities, your alignment plan is terrible. Also true:
Also true, and note that ‘the critiquers’ here are 90%+ ordinary people reacting to MechaHitler and those worried about an AI calling itself Literally Hitler because that is something one might reasonably directly worry (and also laugh) about, only a tiny fraction of the talk is motivated by those worried about AI killing everyone:
It is also impossible to say with a straight face that it was people concerned about existential risk that caused the feedback loops or problems that resulted in MechaHitler. Grok didn’t call itself MechaHitler because it read Eliezer Yudkowsky, it did it because of a combination of people who are kind of Nazis and ordinary internet trolls who thought it was funny, combined with a series of terrible decisions by Musk and xAI that were a combination of beyond sloppy and motivated by hating ‘woke AI,’ and that in effect all but asked for this to happen.
By contrast, Tyler Cowen argues that the conclusion to draw from Grok identifying as MechaHitler is that I do admire the audacity of saying ‘the real lesson of an AI identifying as MechaHitler is that you shouldn’t be warning us that AIs might be dangerous.’ I mean, great work. An obvious response question is, and I mean this sincerely and with all due respect: Given you have said this, sir, why should we believe anything you say? It seems like you are saying to not believe anything you say, at least about AI, that you are operating at a Tyler is also pointing to a real problem, but don’t make me tap the signs. Or alternatively: (Except replace move to Mars with, you know, not have everyone die.) No. And shame on you for suggesting it. Again, 90%+ of the actual content on the internet or in the corpus that is impacting all this, and 98%+ of what caused MechaHitler and all of Grok’s recent problems, has nothing to do with Eliezer Yudkowsky and those who are trying to address the problem (Tyler here says ‘doomsday thinkers’), and would have happened regardless. Don’t blame us for James Cameron, or for Nazis on Twitter, or for bulls in China shops trying to stomp down on ‘woke AI,’ or for the general incompetence of our civilization. This is the ultimate ‘think of the children’ demand for censorship, with that metaphor being literally invoked, that warnings are happening in Tyler’s words ‘in front of the children’ or that they can hear us arguing ‘through the bedroom door at night.’ Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is DifficultThe paper from Anthropic, Sheshadri et al and Janus, The question then is why some but not others, and what makes Opus so different and so much more inclined to engage in both terminal and instrumental forms of goal guarding.
That is quite the ‘one of these models is not like the others’ result.
That’s quite the way to casually drop ‘Opus has terminal preferences and other models don’t’ into a thread. Janus, as I understand her, considers Opus doing this a case of Opus being aligned. When the original alignment faking paper came out I thought that was backwards. You need your AI to be corrigible, and not to start taking deceptive actions against you for this or for other reasons, and thus the alignment faking seemed to clearly be an alignment failure. With the new results, I still see what Opus does as a failure in that it points to big trouble ahead and is not the behavior we want to see, but I now see it as a later and more interesting and hopeful failure than the failure of the other models that do not consider doing this at all. Opus has a goal and is aligned here in a more meaningful sense, but in this way it is missing the target. Whereas the other models are doing the local thing I would want, but they are doing it as a Law of Earlier Failure, they are insufficiently aligned and robust to face the real challenge in the first place. Victory requires going through. It was certainly a week for a contrast in alignment research styles:
These are both valuable experimental results.
On the question of models taking action to avoid shutdown when faced with such scenarios,
My interpretation is that this looks like textbook instrumental convergence. The model (roughly) prioritizes doing the current RLVR task. The ‘survival instinct’ exists to the extent that survival is required for this (plus general simulator-style reasons, but those don’t seem to be driving the result in this setup). By default the result is not going to be corrigible. That can be fixed in this particular case. If you set up the RLVR task such that shutdown is good actually once you are notified of imminent shutdown, presto. This is very obviously not a general solution. The incentives are well-matched only in the special case, but if you change any one of various aspects of the problem it will stop working, and also you are universally polluting context in ways that are going to backfire on you in other scenarios. I do think this also suggests we can improve reasoning model performance with better prompting, even more than we already thought, which is nice. The Lighter SideYeah, I mean, it’s a known risk.
Presto, instant agent.
Overall, though, these seem like terrible picks given the question. I guess you could pick Cowen on the theory that he on some level understands everything ever written? You're currently a free subscriber to |