---
subject: "Housing Roundup #6"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-09-20 13:08:08
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
The listings will continue until people can afford houses in places they want to live. New City By the Bay, Who DisThey want to live in San Francisco, but San Francisco has no interest in building homes. What to do? The city’s answer is to spend massively to support its homeless population, causing it to grow, while letting the housing shortage get worse. Some tech billionaires instead propose to go to Solano 60 miles away, and start the initiative California Forever on 55k acres to build a new city. We have our first look at what they are imagining, and That still wouldn’t have been my move. I would have gone Chinese megacity on everyone. Why not build skyscrapers off the bat, or at least New York style twelve story apartment buildings, and plan the place accordingly? Get some real bang for your buck. Even in the ultimate YIMBY, the NIMBY spirit lives on. That’s before the new residents of the new town start to weigh in.
Housing is ExpensiveDespite housing costs that look increasingly unaffordable, Noah Smith joins the chorus of those confused by the other chorus that complains about unaffordable housing costs and how Millennials can’t afford homes.
There is little doubt that housing has become more expensive. This first official graph is not indexed for inflation, but You have to live somewhere. In many places the rental market is at best thin. Home ownership rates have not declined much because many will respond by buying and living in a smaller house, or one in a much worse location, or most importantly by having fewer children. I don’t think you can understand the housing cost problem or declining fertility without considering both.
If you go back to the era of the homestead act, I presume the statistics (which we don’t have) would show much higher rates, but within our lifetimes this is the trend. So most of us do find a way to own, or live with someone who does. Yet the intended message could easily be importantly true, in the sense that the majority of Americans, if they needed a house, would be unable to purchase one. They might live with someone who owns one, perhaps their parents or spouse. They might happen to already own one, which is a gray area, due to either inheritance, family assistance or getting in early. But if they had to go from renter to owner, they would be unable to do that, certainly unable to do that quickly. Also a lot of people are making huge life sacrifices on this alter. If you don’t have children because you can’t afford a house that would fit them, you can’t afford housing. If you are paying 50% of your income on housing and you have no savings otherwise because of this, there is a real sense in which that is unaffordable, even if you ‘afford’ it anyway, especially if that also means no kids. GPT-4 estimates that, if they needed to within a year, only 10%-20% of non-homeowners would be capable of buying a home. That seems right. Recently the situation has gotten much worse.
American median household income was $70,784 in 2021. After federal taxes, that’s $57k or so, add in state and local and the average is maybe $52k. Could one spend $28k of that on housing? I mean, one could, although it is dicey. If there are substantial additional costs to homeownership, and there are, then it rapidly gets a lot dicier. This is sustainable in the sense that nothing obviously stops it from continuing. It is not sustainable as a way to maintain a civilization. If it is sustained, it would be a disaster including a fertility collapse. And it will be no mystery why regular people think the economy is terrible, no matter how many other statistics you point to.
I am here to give the contrarian take and say this is great. Much better to tax construction than to ban it or throw up insane regulatory barriers. This helps provide the buy-in to prevent or mitigate those risks. The money goes to the city, and serves to compensate existing stakeholders. New houses pay the property taxes for everyone seems like an excellent compromise. Deadweight losses should be minimal, reasonable decisions made. If the house is worth the extra $50k, it will get built. If it isn’t and the lot sits idle instead, then we didn’t need the house all that badly, it wasn’t adding all that much value. Not Having Housing is Expensive
The problem is that time off for Covid led to an unusually high number of students trying to finish all at once. The story is about the lack of housing solutions, but it seems like this would also create other issues around things like class sizes.
If that isn’t an issue and a student can catch back up, then this seems like a fantastic deal. The $10,000 is no small thing. Then there are a bunch of complaints about why money isn’t being spent elsewhere or that less well off people might be more likely to give something up in exchange for payment of money. College towns are not typically in the habits of helping students find housing. Usually quite the opposite, NIMBY vs. YIMBY
Adam Singer: Computer, encapsulate the NIMBY spirit in a single headline for me would you.
Building Houses Where People Want to Live
The number is not population-adjusted. Still, look at these differences. Let’s keep up the momentum.
Hawaii also attempts to be so back.
I am torn. On the one hand, that is not what the word ‘emergency’ (or ‘crisis’) means. We do not have a Housing Emergency, almost all of the declared or supposed ‘emergencies’ are not in fact emergencies, stop saying everything is an emergency. The Covid ‘emergency powers’ uses mostly were well-intentioned but showed we are not a nation of laws or one where words have meaning. I get emails claiming New York has a ‘blood emergency’ yet it is not such an emergency that one can show up to donate without an appointment, or get an appointment until two days later. And so on. On the other hand, the housing situation is completely out of control and measures like this are necessary to fix it. It certainly is better than
This would not solve our biggest issues, especially in the places we need more housing the most like NYC and SF. We still need not-so-light-touch density measures. It would still be a big help to allow incrementally more housing elsewhere, as opposed to intentionally driving prices up to keep undesirables away.
There is a very everything-bagel flavor here, which is almost never useful:
Also this does not tackle the big issues, and the sizing for the other programs seems likely to be miniscule, and they are relying on subsidies to convince municipalities to change their laws. There are much more effective tools available if the administration wanted to spend political capital on looking weird. This still does seem like it is better than doing nothing. Overall, we’re somewhat back, definitely not all that back. Georgist ReduxTyler Cowen suggested caution on land value taxes a while back and I never got around to publishing my response. Here are his central objections.
As far as such classes of argument can go, I find the ‘this will never pass or require massive bribes that invalidate it’ compelling in practice, although not in new as yet properly developed areas. I say we should do it anyway, even if it did require massive compensation, partial exemptions or even full exemptions. A long term phase-in for existing stakeholders would still get the job mostly done over time. And yes, urban planning is broken in many big ways that this would not directly address. Yet it would address it in the sense that a land tax reverses or neutralizes the incentives driving those interest groups. If I am bleeding a ton of money each year on land value taxes, perhaps I would not be so strident in preserving that status quo instead of taking advantage of the value of that land. There is a missing mood here. Rather than treat this as ‘yes the case is overwhelming, this is the right thing to do even if it is not practical’ it is treated as not the right thing. I find that strange. I can think of good objections that have nothing to do with the difficulty passing the required laws, that I don’t have great answers to, but as usual I see no sign of them.
This does not seem like a good reason to try and stop power from confiscating our whole surplus. It does make the job more difficult, an eternal struggle. I also think it isn’t entirely true. It is somewhat true, yes if you cut off one avenue they will seek another one. However, if your shutting down that avenue gives them less incentive to fight for, less to protect, they will respond accordingly. If you take away the profits from the unimproved value of land, or make other changes, it can shift the further incentives of insiders. One can make essentially six objections to a land value tax, listed in order of how much they refute the central point if true. It won’t work. It would work, but you can’t suddenly impose confiscatory taxes. It would work, but not in practice given implementation. It would work, but it would be weird and upset power. It would work, but we won’t do it, so stop wasting your time. It would work, but wouldn’t solve all problems, so why do it?
The objections I saw made are mostly I see #5 (with some #3 and a little #4 mixed in), a hopeless ‘NIMBY interests control cities and will steal the entire surplus for themselves regardless.’ Well, yes. If NIMBY interests control your city, you aren’t passing a land value tax, and if you nominally do pass one it is not going to count - if you exempt everyone who would pay, or you return the money to those who paid, you didn’t implement much of a tax. The best objection, #1, is rarely offered and was not present here. Nor do I see the principled case for #2, which seems like the strongest objection. It’s not only that people would demand exemptions because they are collecting rent, which is part of numbers three to five, it is that this is a massive confiscation of property, a total one if the tax rate as is traditionally proposed approaches 100%. Also at 100% the tax will have people actively trying to destroy the unimproved value of their own land, a new mutant NIMBY form that could be even stronger than current models. Thus I strongly think both it would be unwise for the tax to approach anywhere near 100%, and one does not want to hit existing stakeholders with the full tax all at once on existing value. Instead, in an ideal world, I am now more or less a half-Georgian, although it is a much more lightly held and lightly considered position than I would want before actually implementing such a thing. I want to aim for more like a 50% tax on the unimproved value of land, with existing land values phased in gradually over a long (20-50 year) period, with any increases taxed fully right away. Rent Control
Yet they never learn. Traffic
I mean, would you want to work with the MTA or NJ Transit? So it makes sense. You're currently a free subscriber to |