---
subject: "The Nutgraf: We just found out how to break the Swiggy, Zomato duopoly"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-22 04:45:12
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
If you want to listen to me read out today’s edition of the newsletter, just subscribe to The Nutgraf podcast.
A few weeks ago, we recorded a Two by Two [podcast episode](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/two-by-two/zomato-swiggy-and-the-rise-of-the-10-minute-dark-cafe/) about Zomato and Swiggy launching 10-minute food-delivery apps. Throughout the episode, multiple times, I posed a question to all my guests—how will Swiggy and Zomato get disrupted?
My point was that in two major sectors, the incumbent duopolistic players got disrupted by newer, smaller companies. Meesho came along and disrupted Flipkart and Amazon. Rapido and Namma Yatri mounted a serious challenge to Uber and Ola. It wasn’t clear to me at the time what Meesho and Rapido specifically did, because they seemed to have taken two different approaches in two different industries.
All of us came at it from our own perspectives. My co-host Rohin, for instance, was convinced that Zepto would eventually emerge as the company that would offer a different value proposition than Swiggy and Zomato. He called it “the joker in the pack”. One of my guests, Thomas Fenn, co-founder of the restaurant Mahabelly and joint secretary at the National Restaurant Association of India (NRAI), made the intriguing point that the disruption would come when “aspirational brands” banded together and offered delivery on a separate app. On the other hand, I wasn’t really convinced and kept insisting that the answer was supply-driven. We discussed ONDC for a bit. It was a fun discussion, but I don’t think we really got a specific answer.
Anyway, I think I’ve finally figured out how Swiggy and Zomato are going to be disrupted. If you’re an aspiring entrepreneur interested in taking a big slice out of the food-delivery market in India, I’m giving away the strategy in this newsletter. Send me equity (and free pizzas for life) later.
It all clicked when I read this news a couple of days ago.
Ride-hailing giant Uber has announced a significant change in its operational model for auto drivers in India, shifting from a commission-based system to a Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) subscription model. As part of this transition, all auto rides booked via the Uber app will now be cash-only, effective from February 18.
A notification on the Uber app informed users of the change. This change aims to keep Uber competitive within the industry. An Uber spokesperson explained, “Given the industry’s shift towards a subscription-based model for drivers, we have decided to align our approach accordingly so as not to be at a competitive disadvantage.”
Ride-hailing platforms such as Rapido and others have already implemented similar subscription-based services for auto drivers. Under this model, drivers pay a fixed fee for access to the platform rather than a commission per trip.
Uber auto goes subscription-based: No more commissions, cash-only rides, [Mint](https://www.livemint.com/news/uber-auto-goes-subscription-based-no-more-commissions-cash-only-rides-11739901816675.html)
Aha.
So, essentially, Uber was forced to move away from a commission model to a subscription or a “flat fee” structure thanks to Rapido, and more importantly, Namma Yatri. In Uber’s own words, they weren’t doing this out of the goodness of their hearts, but because they wanted to remain competitive. The suppliers (in this case auto-drivers) don’t like a commission model. They prefer to pay a flat fee upfront to access a platform.
People who’ve worked in SaaS probably have frameworks that inform you when to charge customers on usage and when to charge them for accessing the software.
But forget about SaaS, guess who else has disrupted incumbents in a competitive industry by foregoing the commission model?
I’ll give you one guess.
One company is a coincidence.
But two companies following a similar playbook is where things get interesting.
They aren’t the only ones. If there’s one thing we’ve learnt over the last decade in India, newer, younger companies have disrupted incumbents who’ve built a robust two-sided platform business. And they’ve all done it the same way—by introducing some form of a zero-commission model. Zerodha did this to stock-broking platforms. Nobroker followed the same strategy with real-estate renting. Meesho did it to Flipkart. And now Rapido and Namma Yatri have done it to Uber.
Only one market remains.
Food-delivery.
At this point, you’re probably mentally drafting a strongly worded email to me. “Well, Praveen, actually, food-delivery is fundamentally different from all these businesses. Let me explain using seventeen bullet points…”
Stop. Just stop. No. It isn’t.
As platforms go, Swiggy and Zomato are strikingly similar to Flipkart and Amazon or Uber and Ola. All of these are companies who’ve built their business from the ground up, over the past decade, using a business model that made the most sense in the 2010s, in a market that was expansionary. The one difference is that both Swiggy and Zomato’s food-delivery businesses (especially Zomato) are slowly starting to generate profits, which puts them in a relatively better position. This is probably why the zero-commission disruption hasn’t come for them yet, but I don’t expect this to last too long. Ultimately, these platforms are operations-first companies that sit in between users on one side, and fragmented suppliers on the other. There’s been no real innovation that’s happened in food-delivery in the last several years. One could even argue that it’s not even possible to disrupt it through some radical new technology or paradigm of operations. Structurally, there’s nothing significantly different between Swiggy and Zomato and, say, Uber and Ola or Flipkart and Amazon.
The similarities don’t just stop at the companies but extend to the market itself. It’s fairly well-established that Amazon and Flipkart have hit the limit of transacting customers, and that’s also true about ride-sharing for Ola and Uber. These aren’t markets that are growing rapidly anymore. Growth in revenue for all of these companies comes from their ability to carve out margins rather than in expanding the market.
And well, who else is hitting these limits?
Here’s Zomato’s last quarterly report. Just look at the trend of the monthly transacting users for their food-delivery segment.
And here’s Swiggy.
The food-delivery market, just like ride-sharing and traditional horizontal e-commerce, has hit a ceiling.
Which brings me to the last and the most important reason why Swiggy and Zomato are next in line for a disruption—the restaurants on these platforms. We discuss this in much more detail in the [podcast episode](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/two-by-two/zomato-swiggy-and-the-rise-of-the-10-minute-dark-cafe/) I mentioned at the beginning. Two-sided networks insulate themselves from disruption because, for suppliers, the cost of shifting is pretty prohibitive. But just like how sellers were unhappy with Flipkart and Amazon, and just like how drivers were unhappy with Ola and Uber, restaurants are unhappy with Zomato and Swiggy. Give them a better option, and they’ll jump without a second thought, even if that option isn’t that great to begin with. I’m not convinced that demand lock-in matters much anymore, especially in India. Once suppliers jump, customers will follow without so much as a backward glance. If you don’t believe me, just look at what Namma Yatri did.
Put all together, I think it’s quite likely that we’ll see a new food-delivery challenger to Swiggy and Zomato emerge pretty soon. Food delivery is a meaty market (no pun intended), both incumbents are somewhat distracted chasing 10-minute grocery deliveries, and there’s enough discontent among suppliers and enough margin for someone to try something radically different. Also, I can also imagine VCs simply throwing a few million dollars if the right player comes along offering a different model, even if it results in an acquisition. The opportunity is too big to pass on, and the timing seems perfect.
So how will this disruption happen?
I’m not sure, but if we draw a line from Rapido, Namma Yatri, and Meesho, I expect one of three things to happen.
The most obvious route is going to come from the bottom of the market. Meesho and Rapido disrupted the incumbents by offering zero commissions, which attracted low-end suppliers—suppliers whom the incumbents were happy to relinquish because it wasn’t seemingly worth it for them. Rapido went after autos and two-wheelers, and Meesho went after suppliers who sold kurtas for Rs 250. And because the platforms gave up their margins, the value passed on to the customer. I can imagine a similar kind of aggregation happening in food-delivery. Maybe someone creates a platform to offer, say, home-cooked meals for entry-level white collar employees at companies, at a price that’s so ridiculously low, that it seems like a no-brainer for a significant chunk of low-value consumers. Neither Swiggy nor Zomato would want to play in this space. And this is how disruption comes from below. This is more or less what Meesho and Rapido did to Uber and Ola.
Another way for it to happen is if some platform is able to aggregate a certain type of supply that’s desirable and makes it exclusive. If there’s a fast-food-delivery app that exclusively lists Dominoes, KFC, Popeyes, Burger King, and others, this can pose some serious problems to Swiggy and Zomato. All it requires is for one enterprising, persuasive company to do it, and for a group of restaurants to say, “yeah, let’s give it a shot”. This is what Namma Yatri did. It brought auto drivers on one app, and boom, well, everyone started using it.
Or maybe there’s a third way we don’t see yet. This is the most likely scenario. All disruption typically comes from directions that are unexpected. And if Zomato can try its hand at becoming a SaaS company, what’s to say a SaaS company can’t try food-delivery?
If you have ideas on how Swiggy and Zomato will get disrupted, write to me at praveen@the-ken.com. I’ll publish some of the entries.
Regards,
Praveen Gopal Krishnan