---
subject: "The Monday Media Diet with Matthew Weaver"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-12-05 10:30:22
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Matthew Weaver (MW) formerly worked for the US digital service and currently works at Layer Aleph. He has a background in problem solving in complex environments. We find him very interesting and it’s great to have him on the page. -Colin (CJN) Tell us about yourself. I'm a son, brother, loving husband, I've a background in distributed systems operations, which I've had the privilege of practicing at every level across multiple economic sectors. I even had a spell serving inside the US federal government, spending time in more than ten agencies. I grew up in the American midwest, and am now based in a rural part of the same. I've lived in both city and country up and down both coasts, and sometimes miss my time living in the Rockies. I aspire to wisdom, patience, steadfastness. Describe your media diet. I've trimmed my intake over the past 5 years down to a small, intentional set of streams. Unless I'm traveling and pick up a Sunday FT or this week's Economist to read while waiting, my main source of news is the BBC World Service's Global News Podcast. Why bother tuning in to I subscribe to newsletters, which I always read – if I stop reading one, I drop the subscription. There's about a one-per-quarter churn, with the Lindy Effect strongly expressed (the older subscriptions are more likely to stick around). Right now, I'm following I've two graphic novel/comic inputs right now. Lordess Fourde's serial The space left by my secession from social media is filled by various group chats with my closest friends, colleagues, and various mindshares, mostly using iMessage or Signal. Some Discord, now, in the past year. What’s the last great book you read?
What are you reading now?
What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication? For either of my favorite publications – The Economist (180 years in publication), or The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction (80 years in publication) – I make a quick skim of the table of contents in case I can be excited by a topic or author I enjoy. Then, I read straight through, cover to cover, in chunks dictated by circumstances (before bed, before boarding, sleepy weekend afternoons, etc). I skip the poetry (my apologies to the poets: it's not you, it's me). Who should everyone be reading that they’re not? My hope is that more folks read Joseph Henrich. An anthropologist, he's studied the evolution of cooperation, including running behavior experiments around game theory fundamentals across a vast array of different human societies. Mostly, he found that game theory predictions rooted in self-interest not only failed, they failed differently in different cultures. He writes What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone?
Plane or train? Nothing beats a good train. Seeing what is on the earth between here and there, the proximity to infrastructure, the tunnels and back sides of our roads, waterways, power and communication lines. An idealized liminal space, perfect for thought and deep work. What is one place everyone should visit? The Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into. I found out that Martin Luther wrote treatises from hiding after the Diet of Worms (which put a price on his head), answering questions – a sort of "Dear Luther" column. They are fascinating, including one answering the question of whether a "good Christian" should flee the plague. It was a bad year with the Black Death. One passage from Luther's answer (translated from German) is pretty striking: "I shall fumigate, help purify the air, administer medicine, and take it. I shall avoid places and persons where my presence is not needed in order not to become contaminated and thus perchance infect and pollute others, and so cause their death as a result of my negligence." (MJW) WITI Classifieds: We are experimenting with running some weekly classifieds in WITI. If you’re interested in running an ad, Coaching for creative professionals who want deeper personal insight, a conviction in their work, and to make waves in the art world. You like interesting things: come check out Nautilus. Science storytelling with style. Also, a holiday gift for the brightest you know. Nudge, get customer insights with ease. Royal Braun connects cutting edge companies with key creative talent. |