---
subject: "Gemini 2.5 is the New SoTA"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-03-28 14:16:23
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Gemini 2.5 Pro Experimental is America’s next top large language model. That doesn’t mean it is the best model for everything. In particular, it’s still Gemini, so it still is a proud member of the Fun Police, in terms of censorship and also just not being friendly or engaging, or willing to take a stand. If you want a friend, or some flexibility and fun, or you want coding that isn’t especially tricky, then call Claude, now with web access. If you want an image, call GPT-4o. But if you mainly want reasoning, or raw intelligence? For now, you call Gemini. The feedback is overwhelmingly positive. Many report Gemini 2.5 is the first LLM to solve some of their practical problems, including favorable comparisons to o1-pro. It’s fast. It’s not $200 a month. The benchmarks are exceptional. (On other LLMs I’ve used in the past and may use again when they update: I’ve stopped using Perplexity entirely now that Claude has web access, I never use r1, and I only use Grok narrowly for when I need exactly real time reactions from Twitter.) Introducing Gemini 2.5 Pro
It would be great to either actually have a robust system, or to let everyone have their fun without having to insert that kind of system prompt. Their Lips are SealedI am highly disappointed in Google for its failure to properly document a model that is very, very clearly state of the art across the board. Gemini 2.0 had the same problem, where Google shared very little information. Now we have Gemini 2.5, which is far more clearly pushing the SoTA, and they did it again. The thing about this failure is that it is not simply irresponsible. It is also bad marketing, and therefore bad business. You want people seeing those details.
I don’t think Peter goes far enough here. This is a problem now. Or, rather, I don’t know if it’s a problem now, and that’s the problem. Now. To be fair to Google, they’re against sharing information about their products in general. This isn’t unique to safety information. I don’t think it is malice, or them hiding anything. I think it’s operational incompetence. But we need to fix that. How bad are they at this? Check out what it looks like if you’re not subscribed.
That’s it. There’s no hint as to what Gemini Advanced gets you, or that it changed, or that you might want to try I’m not saying do this… …or even this… …but at least try something? Maybe even some free generations in the app and the website? There was some largely favorable tech-mainstream coverage in places like On Your MarksOne always has to watch out for selection, but this certainly seems very strong. Note that Claude 3.7 really is a monster for coding. Alas, for now we don’t have more official benchmarks. And we also do not have a system card. I know the model is marked ‘experimental’ but this is a rather widespread release. Now on to Other People’s Benchmarks. They also seem extremely strong overall.
Claude Sonnet 3.7 is of course highly disrespected by Arena in general. What’s amazing is that this is despite Gemini’s scolding and other downsides, imagine how it would rank if those were fixed.
That is ahead of everyone except o3-mini-high (61.4), o1-medium (70.8) and o1-pro (82.3). Speed-and-cost adjusted, it is excellent, but the extra work does matter here. Here are some of his other benchmarks: Note that lower is better here, Gemini 2.5 is best (and Gemma 3 is worst!): Performance on his creative writing benchmark remained in-context mediocre: The trueskill also looks mediocre but is still in progress.
The People Have SpokenImage generation was the talk of Twitter, but once I asked about Gemini 2.5, I got the most strongly positive feedback I have yet seen in any reaction thread. In particular, there were a bunch of people who said ‘no model yet has nailed [X] task yet, and Gemini 2.5 does,’ for various values of [X]. That’s huge. These were from my general feed, some strong endorsements from good sources:
For those who want to browse the reaction thread, here you go, they are organized but I intentionally did very little selection:
It’s worth noting that a lot of people will have a custom system prompt and saved information for Claude and ChatGPT but not yet for Gemini. And yes, you can absolutely customize Gemini the same way but you have to actually do it. Things were good enough that these count as poor reviews.
There will always be those who are especially disappointed,
An unfortunate mistake, but accidents happen. Adjust Your ProjectionsLike all frontier model releases (and attempted such releases), the success of Gemini 2.5 Pro should adjust our expectations. Grok 3 and GPT-4.5, and the costs involved with o3, made it more plausible that things were somewhat stalling out. Claude Sonnet 3.7 is remarkable, and highlights what you can get from actually knowing what you are doing, but wasn’t that big a leap. Meanwhile, Google looked like they could cook small models and offer us large context windows, but they had issues on the large model side. Gemini 2.5 Pro reinforces that the releases and improvements will continue, and that Google can indeed cook on the high end too. What that does to your morale is on you. You're currently a free subscriber to |