---
subject: "Best of SatPost (First Half of 2024)"
from: "Trung Phan <trungphan@workweek.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-06-29 06:01:22
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Trung Phan"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_7971156048460647958"]
---
***
Delta Airlines is Winning: Delta Airlines opened its Delta One Lounge in New York’s JFK Airport earlier in the week. The 40,000 square foot space looks very very baller and is the latest move by Delta to cement its status as America’s “premium” airline. It's probably the nicest lounge in North America now.
Of course, everything is relative. Delta isn’t in the same luxury-league as the top Asian or Middle Eastern carriers but it has completed an impressive turnaround in the past decade and the Delta One lounge is the latest feather in the cap, [per CNBC](https://link.workweek.com/click/35901040.43993/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuY25iYy5jb20vYW1wLzIwMjQvMDYvMjUvZGVsdGEtYWlyLWxpbmVzLWFtZXJpY2FzLWx1eHVyeS1haXJsaW5lLWFuZC13aGF0LXVuaXRlZC13YW50cy10by1kby1hYm91dC1pdC5odG1sP2hhc2hlZF91c2VyPTBlYmVmMTJjNDI5MTE4NDU2MmRhYzA5OTY1YmNlODA4/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B1253b1f1).
Lucrative AmEx relationship: The Delta SkyMiles AmEx has brought American Express’ high-earning customers into Delta’s fold. These customers are so valuable to AmEx that the credit card company paid Delta ~$7B last year for the partnership.
Most profitable US carrier: Delta’s premium position and high-paying customers helped it achieve a profit margin of 9%, which is top in the country and nearly double United (5%).
Premium revenue growth: ~50% of Delta $58B revenue is from its loyalty business, premium cabins and other streams (and these segments are growing faster than the economy/coach class business lines).
VC Alex Immerman has interesting details on the [economics of the AmEx/Delta deal](https://link.workweek.com/click/35901040.43993/aHR0cHM6Ly94LmNvbS9hbGV4aW1tL3N0YXR1cy8xODAzMTE3MDY5NTY4OTcwODI0P3M9NDYmdD1SRTZFM1FfY1I3Y0JNVWRRU2lMN0pBJmhhc2hlZF91c2VyPTBlYmVmMTJjNDI5MTE4NDU2MmRhYzA5OTY1YmNlODA4/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B4e813d0b):
Half of Delta's profits come from its Amex partnership, and it's a win for Amex too. Co-brand credit card partnerships can work. Delta is as much a fintech as an airline. Its Amex co-brand credit card spend is approaching 1% of US GDP.
Amex pays Delta 4% of credit card spend, $7b revenue (which converts at 40% free cash flow margin!)... how is this sustainable? Interchange is only 2-3% spend, but Amex earns net interest income on nearly $30b balances (~10% on amount not paid off each month) along with annual fees, service fees, etc.
Unlike the Bilt-Wells Fargo dynamic [a very unprofitable relationship for Wells], these revenue streams more than offset the costs so Amex earns a healthy profit too and happily calls Delta its largest strategic partner. The hardest part of building a financial services business oriented? Distribution. Delta is the #5 US ecommerce retailer and Amex is willing to pay up to reach its high value customer base.
Delta is now worth double United ($31B vs. $16B). [Here is a good thread on the Delta One Lounge’s exclusive amenities](https://link.workweek.com/click/35901040.43993/aHR0cHM6Ly90aHJlYWRyZWFkZXJhcHAuY29tL3RocmVhZC8xODA1NTg2NjIzMjg5MDI4OTgzLmh0bWw_aGFzaGVkX3VzZXI9MGViZWYxMmM0MjkxMTg0NTYyZGFjMDk5NjViY2U4MDg/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B81a89cf7). The 515-seat setup is meant for Delta’s top spenders (select business and first-class cabins), which means you definitely won’t be seeing me there. But I will be loitering in front with my re-fillable Stanley cup and tupperware for leftover Union Square pastries that exiting guests can’t finish.
***
Do you raw-dog airline flights? Speaking of air travel, the most viral article this week was from Kate Lindsay at GQ about [“men who are ‘rawdogging’ flights — no entertainment, no headphones, just watching the flight map for 8+ hours (bonus points if you don't pee or eat).](https://link.workweek.com/click/35901040.43993/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuZ3EuY29tL3N0b3J5L3doeS1tZW4tYXJlLXJhd2RvZ2dpbmctZmxpZ2h0cz9oYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B2fa499a6)” Apparently, ‘rawdogging’ flights make it feel faster. I dunno.
Looking back at the past 5 years or so, I did probably 87% of my book-reading on flights. I refuse to pay for in-flight wifi and don’t like watching movies on small screens, so I am forced to read. ‘Rawdogging’ a flight has never crossed my mind. It feels like one of those silent retreat challenges that I want no part of.
It’s also pretty hard to ‘rawdog’ a flight when you’re flying with wife and kid because they won’t be pleased if you’re just staring into the ether (maybe I’m just making excuses because my mind is too weak to handle meditating for an entire intercontinental flight).
***
Profile of LVMH’s Bernard Arnault: I wrote about the [Paris 2024 Olympics](https://link.workweek.com/click/35901040.43993/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cucmVhZHRydW5nLmNvbS9wL3doeS1hcmUtdGhlLW9seW1waWNzLXNvLWV4cGVuc2l2ZT9oYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B4a3bc11f) last week and forgot to mention that the Games’ top advertising partner is LVMH, the $500B luxury giant (based in Paris).
Bloomberg has a new profile on its CEO Bernard Arnault — worth $200B and perennially in the top 3 richest person in the world list — and [here is an excerpt on how LVMH uses real estate to outcompete its rivals](https://link.workweek.com/click/35901040.43993/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9mZWF0dXJlcy8yMDI0LWx2bWgtYmVybmFyZC1hcm5hdWx0Lz9hY2Nlc3NUb2tlbj1leUpoYkdjaU9pSklVekkxTmlJc0luUjVjQ0k2SWtwWFZDSjkuZXlKemIzVnlZMlVpT2lKVGRXSnpZM0pwWW1WeVIybG1kR1ZrUVhKMGFXTnNaU0lzSW1saGRDSTZNVGN4T1RNeE9UUXdPU3dpWlhod0lqb3hOekU1T1RJME1qQTVMQ0poY25ScFkyeGxTV1FpT2lKVFJrMVFNRGxFVjFKSFJ6QXdNQ0lzSW1KamIyNXVaV04wU1dRaU9pSkJSakpGTkRNeFFUZ3pSamswT1RVM1FVSXhOemc1TlRnd09FVTJRMFl4TWlKOS4tWHc1VmdTRFd4U19LeWx4SGZwckVoTVBMUE5jMEFNX200VmZxc2U3dDVZJmhhc2hlZF91c2VyPTBlYmVmMTJjNDI5MTE4NDU2MmRhYzA5OTY1YmNlODA4/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B96085f6c):
Arnault exploits this imbalance in a few ways, namely through real estate. His private equity arm, L Catterton, owns properties worth billions of dollars, including premier retail locations and office buildings in most major cities, and it’s taken advantage of cheap borrowing costs to accelerate the pace of acquisitions. Last year, LVMH spent €2.45 billion on real estate acquisitions, a record for Arnault’s group. He makes money from his own stores, from leasing space to rivals—and from the appreciation of premium real estate.
When LVMH buys a building, it takes the best storefronts for its own brands and often asks rivals to move out when their leases expire. Companies such as Kering and Prada have tried to keep up, buying their own properties. Kering’s recent €1.3 billion building purchase in Milan, coupled with the struggles at its main label, Gucci, even hurt its credit rating. “It’s just a clever way to distract competitors and make them sweat more,” says Solca, the Bernstein analyst. “It’s very difficult for anyone to keep pace.” […]
For rivals, all this creates an intolerable imbalance of power. They are either at the whim of property owners desperate to score a Dior or Vuitton store—or LVMH itself is their landlord. Either way, they’re likely to get bumped from the best locations. One rival luxury brand CEO, who asked not to be identified because he works with LVMH in multiple ways, was apoplectic. “Luxury is a disaster. There is no competition. It’s not a game for everyone, it’s just them,” this person says. “Everywhere you go, they try to kick you out.”
Arnault does not have a lot of sympathy for that sentiment. “We have good and efficient competitors, and you see the result, and we have competitors that are not as good. Usually, the ones who complain are the ones who are not the best,” he says. “They need excuses.”