---
subject: "The Parable of the Two Monks, Capability Gap, & More"
from: "\"Sahil Bloom's Curiosity Chronicle\" <sahil@sahilbloom.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-12-08 14:12:19
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Sahil Bloom", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_1989028747625928812", "UNREAD"]
---
The Capability Gap, Gut-Brain Connection, & Moreread and listen on read time 6 minutes Here are 5 interesting ideas to spark your curiosity heading into the weekend. Today at a Glance:- Question: The weight you carry.
- Quote: The simple path.
- Framework: The Capability Gap.
- Tweet: Gut-Brain connection.
- Article: Reflections on losing a child.
Connect with your team and do more with Slack Pro When it comes to scaling your business, mundane tasks can be a serious drag. Emails piling up, back-to-back meetings, and a to-do list that feels never-ending. The good news? Today's sponsor Slack can help. It's your one-stop shop for connectivity, info sharing, and boosting your team's productivity. With Slack Pro, my team and I: - Centralize our conversations: Whether it's in-house chatter or collaborating with external partners, Slack Pro keeps everything and everyone neatly organized in one spot.
- Access and spread knowledge seamlessly: From files to chats, everyone gets the scoop they need to keep the wheels turning and make strategic decisions.
- Dive into instant huddles: Need to brainstorm? Huddles mean instant audio or video chats. Plus, we can share screens and start a thread for notes.
Slack is offering my community 50% off your first 3 months of Slack Pro to help get your business started!
Question to let go of the weight you carry:What is the burden that you're still carrying? There is an old Buddhist parable that I love: An old and young monk are walking along on a journey when they encounter a rushing river. As they ready themselves for the crossing, they see a woman who is struggling to get to the other side. She asks for their help. The two hesitate, as they've both taken vows to avoid contact with women. The older monk then walks over to the woman, places her on his shoulders, carries her across the river, and drops her on the other side, before continuing on his journey. The younger monk is stunned, but says nothing for many miles as they continue their walk. Finally, after several hours, he confronts the older monk: "We are not allowed to touch a woman, how could you carry her that way?" The older monk pauses, then replies: "I set her down miles back on the side of the river, why are you still carrying her?" The lesson of the story is simple: We are all carrying the burdens of our past far beyond the riverbank where we should have set them down. We can choose to hold on to them and continue to feel their strain, or we can choose to set them down and move forward with a new lightness. What burdens are you still carrying? Perhaps it's time you place them down on the riverbank. The simple path to a life well lived:"It’s so simple: You spend less than you earn. Invest shrewdly, and avoid toxic people and toxic activities, and try and keep learning all your life...And do a lot of deferred gratification because you prefer life that way. And if you do all those things you are almost certain to succeed. And if you don’t, you’re gonna need a lot of luck." - Charlie Munger The simple path to a life well lived. Simple, not easy. Framework to reframe your potential:The Capability GapAlabama football coach Nick Saban is known as one of the toughest coaches in the world. He demands a lot from his players and holds them to an extremely high standard. While it has occasionally gotten him in trouble with the media, it has also led to one of the most legendary coaching runs in the sport. One Saban idea that I can't stop thinking about: The Capability Gap. In an "We oftentimes talk about what someone's potential is, but I think to put it in better terms...the Capability Gap is what you're capable of relative to what you're doing...if you understand the truth about that, you can actually take information that can help you close that gap." The Capability Gap is a simple idea with powerful implications across all areas of your life. It requires an understanding of: - Your full capability
- Your current delivery
In my experience, most people underestimate their full capability and overestimate their current delivery. In other words, they think their Capability Gap is very small, when in reality it's much larger than they realize. Having mentors, coaches, friends, and family members who help you see the truth about your full capability and keep you honest on your current level of delivery is everything. This isn't about sports, this is about your life: - Do you have people in your life who help you think bigger about what you're capable of?
- Do you have people in your life who tell you that your current delivery isn't good enough?
We all need those people in our lives. We need people who push us to get uncomfortable, to think bigger, and to be better. We need people who push us to be better partners, parents, friends, siblings, colleagues, community members, and leaders. Find the people who tell you the two truths: - What you're truly capable of
- What you're currently delivering on
Identify your Capability Gap and then work relentlessly to close it! Understanding the gut-brain connection:Interesting thread on the gut-brain connection (i.e. why your "gut feeling" is actually a real thing). It seems like scientific (and mainstream) understanding of the importance of the gut microbiome on overall mental and physical health is really progressing. Exciting to see what comes out of the space in the coming years.
A hard reset on the important things: Warning: Do not read this article if you aren't prepared to cry. The article is written by a father three weeks after the sudden passing of his young son as he wrestles with the trauma, regrets, and meaning. Most importantly, he offers wisdom for all of us: "Hug your kids. Don’t work too late. A lot of the things you are likely spending your time on you’ll regret once you no longer have the time. I’m guessing you have 1:1 meetings on the books with a lot of people you work with. Do you have them regularly scheduled with your kids? If there’s any lesson to take away from this, it’s to remind others (and myself) not to miss out on the things that matter." A hard—but important—read. In Case You Missed It:In 10 of his most impactful ideas that changed my life: - The Most Valuable Riches Take Time: Whatever "rich" you're going after, know that it won't happen overnight. It will take a long time—probably longer than you've ever imagined—but the most valuable "riches" of life are always worth waiting for.
- Avoid the Second Arrow: In 1953, a 29-year-old Charlie Munger faced a series of crushing blows, losing his 9-year-old son to leukemia, his wife to a divorce, and his money to medical bills. Charlie Munger was struck by the first arrow (harder than most of us can imagine), but he stared into the darkness and realized that the second arrow was optional.
-
Develop Real Knowledge: There are two types of people:
- Type 1: People who know how to talk about the thing.
- Type 2: People who know the thing.
- The goal is to be Type 2 in a few domains—and to spend time with more Type 2s in the domains where you aren't one.
- Success Follows Interest: Most people focus too much on being interesting and not enough on being interested. Being interested is how you become interesting.
- Invert, Always Invert: Complex problems are sometimes better solved backwards. When you encounter a challenging life problem, rather than attempting to solve it forwards, invert and solve it backwards:
- Avoid the Ostrich Effect: An ostrich will bury its head in the sand to avoid danger. If you want to be right more than you want to uncover the truth, you're in for a long, hard life.
- Never Mimic the Herd: The fight against normalcy is the most important fight of your life. No one can compete with you, at being you.
- Create a "Too Hard" Pile: There are no style points in life. The "too hard pile" is a useful tool for avoiding the stupidity that comes from attempting to tackle the big, complex, scary problem when there's a small, simple, obvious one right in front of you.
- Live What You Want to Receive: Make a list of the values you want to find in a partner, then go out and actually embody those values yourself. You can't hope to attract a set of values that you yourself aren't embracing.
- Wisdom Compounds: Small things become big things. In the wise words of Mahatma Gandhi, "Live as if you were to die tomorrow. Learn as if you were to live forever."
Sahil's Recommendation ZonePerfect your morning routine with my partner I get asked about my morning routine all the time. It changes from time to time, but It replaced an entire cabinet of supplements for me in one daily scoop—seriously, its latest iteration covers a multivitamin, multi-mineral, prebiotics, probiotics, adaptogens, greens, and more. It keeps me feeling healthy and strong throughout the year, even when I'm traveling (thanks to the travel packs). Athletic Greens is offering Curiosity Chronicle subscribers an exclusive deal:
Refer Friends, Earn Rewards!
|