---
subject: "Clean Trades and Dirty Hedges"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <diff@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-06-13 11:53:07
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Coming in the next few weeks, we'll look at a company that's pivoting through acquisitions, what's good about bad financial models, and how a prop trading firm developed a competitive advantage in the world's most purely commoditized industry.
|
|
This newsletter goes out to 33,018 readers, up 536 since last week. In this issue:
Clean Trades and Dirty Hedges
Cash as Cosmetics
Two Inflations
AI
Offline-to-Online
Starlink
Diff Jobs
Active investing is one part determining something that's misunderstood about the world and another part finding the best way to express it. Different kinds of investing will have a varying mix of these. It's obviously pretty easy to express a view like "Apple is overvalued" by shorting Apple, but a view like "there will be a persistent oil shortage" might need more work: is it better to buy oil futures directly, or invest in an oil company. And if you're investing in an oil company, how do you think about the difference between high and low production costs (more operating leverage if prices go up, but higher odds of bankruptcy if operating costs rise and prices are high-but-volatile), geographic concentration (weighing ESG risk in developed countries against expropriation and instability risk in developing markets), capital return policies, etc. In fact, there are some jobs within the financial sector that can be described entirely as trying to convert directional thematic views into specific trades:
ARK's basic thesis is that the future is going to be really great, and in a lucrative way; what they charge for is the specific mix of bets on companies building that future.
A derivatives trader will often be hedging a fairly exotic risk using more conventional trading instruments. Or, more simply, an options market-maker is often writing an option (X will trade at or above $Y by date Z) and hedging it by holding varying quantities of X.
Sector-focused funds or portfolios, even if they're ostensibly trying to be market-neutral, will typically make more money when their sector is doing well.
But this doesn't just apply to pure financial decisions. It's a question that comes up in job choices all the time. If you're at a good company in a lousy industry, or vice-versa, how do you weigh one or the other? If you're optimistic about an industry but recognize that it's winner-take-all, is a job offer from the #3 player an exciting opportunity or a waste of time?
[The Laws of Trading](https://email.mg-d1.substack.com/c/eJw9UU1v5CAM_TXhNhEfgQwHDpW6e2pP3T0jB5wMakIiII1mf_2SmaqSZcsP-9k8Oyg4relutjUXcjpb7huaiEeesRRMZM-YbPCGdVIJwTTxRuiBXp0iIdsxIS4QZlPSjmTbhzk4KGGNjxbdCUpuxlPQXgvaUQp06Pq-o447AcILJdhIn4Nh9wGjQ4NfmO5rROLWZcFYTioym1spW27ES8N_VzuOo4UF_q2xrWUVeIMjX_4k8CFOj4gpX17RhVy3ubzD54n_-qau9X6rjjGmZd9xdm1EZVU_NkOcdpiwEa8Y7d-PCiUcbU0h2znYnG2ZSTCcck4VE4xJQftWtD1IqQY6cs-VkohNR5fp4lmb9yEXcJ_nuiSZkG8Q21O6WjGd8fFQFbTnt_cYyt1ihGFG_xS3PI_0kNtOGDHV43kLxTAlJeOM017116eYVTKpeU-10qRO9mvtisaHcfwPhNuktg)
Understanding this requires stepping back and thinking of two ways to look at markets: the natural approach is returns-first, where different investments can create different levels of wealth over time, but also come with different amounts of risk. Keep all of your money in inflation-protected TIPS and you'll sleep well, but you won't get rich. Sprinkle your money into lots of early-stage investments and most of the news you get will be bad news, but you might eventually hit it big. But many traders flip this around, and use a risk-first approach: variance is intrinsic to the economic fundamentals of different investments, and returns are what you get paid for absorbing various kinds of risks.
So when you're looking at a job, especially the kind of high-variance job that early-stage startups offer, the place to start is with an acknowledgement that the upside—what your options would be worth if the company hit it big—is entirely there to compensate for the downside that it probably won't work out.
You can break the high-level risk down into several more specific ones, around the market size, the company's ability to execute, and what the long-term economics of the business are. And here's where things start to get interesting. Many companies and their investors like to talk about "flywheels"—more TikTok videos means a bigger audience means more creators means more TikTok videos; Disney IP creates more Disney+ subscribers and more theme park attendance, funding more IP; searches create data that helps to provide better search results, leading to more searches; etc.
A "flywheel" is just a description of how the expected joint probability of getting several important things right rises as you get more of them right. For example, one negative thesis on a given startup might be that even if the industry they're in grows, they may not be positioned to capture most of the value created. What if they end up providing a commoditized input to a business that's dominated by a consumer-facing brand? Or what if they're one of dozens of consumer-facing solutions to a problem that really amounts to reselling a technically challenging product with few producers. (In other words, one risk is that the business ends up selling the sugar to high-margin Coca-Cola and Pepsi, while another version is the risk of being one commoditized PC manufacturer among many where most of the gross margin goes to whoever makes the chips.)
But a company that's growing fast in a new industry can mitigate that risk because it has more visibility into where the hard problems and pricing power reside. Look back far enough in Google's history, and you can see a company that thought it was selling an enterprise product but that turned out to be creating a standalone customer-facing brand. Shopify would be a much smaller business today if it were a snowboarding site with a ridiculously well-made backend, but they spotted where the opportunity was early.
Which means that someone looking for an early-stage startup job is actually in the same position as a savvy derivatives trader: looking for cases where surprising correlations show up at extremes. That doesn't affect the modal outcome, which is still failure (the derivatives trader, unlike the job-seeker, can diversify pretty easily). But it does affect the magnitude of wins. This points to a hierarchy: the right approach to risk management at the level of single companies is to bet on teams first, markets second, and current progress third—although the current rate of progress matters a lot as a proxy for how good the team really is.
I mentioned above that traders have an edge in this general problem because they can diversify. You can live a long and prosperous life as a trader betting on a sufficient volume of low-probability but positive expected-value outcomes, as long as they're uncorrelated. Employees have two meaningful ways to compensate:
A job, even at a company that ends up folding, has what a trader would call positive carry: you get paid. The dream trade for sophisticated investors is a bet that has positive exposure to some extreme event with underrated probability, but also generates income along the way. These are rare, and are the trade of which legends are made. ²Experience and connections derived from working at a company that doesn't win its market can still be parlayed into a position at a company that does win. The team at Summize was wrong that social media search could be a viable product independent of a social media company, at least when they started. But [they ended up getting acquired and turned into Twitter search](https://email.mg-d1.substack.com/c/eJwlkc1uhSAQhZ_mstPwc4HLgkU3fQ2DMCqpooWhjX364jUhZxKYMyfz4R3CvOfTHntBcsmA5wE2wW9ZAREyqQXyEINlT6mEYIYEK8xIX16RWIYpA2wurhZzBXLUcY3eYdzT22KegpLFUqGFNFKHKTjHnXtRPo6CaS-NnhQLd7CrIULyYOEH8rknIH7fNkh4jSKrXRCP8hAfD_7ZDoJffK7JL31raxec0lcrVDdhsonf0xTzBqHD33it0jn_XWOG0pW6bfEPugIu-6WDNMcEzUKi5ZRzqphgTAqqe9FrJ6Ua6cQDV0oCPJ50m7vA-lLHgs5_Xfkk21gWl_qLReuYr_p-aEiGa4-aIp4DJDeuEG5aeFN_8xtmSJDbb4TBoWVKSsYZp1rp102nMZCGa2qUIS057M2VbIjT9A8N5Zdv). Since competitors tend to solve a similar category of problem, someone who is looking for a new role because their company was crushed by Doordash will have a better-than-average shot at finding a similar role at, well, Doordash.
[Enron's CEO shorting shares of a competitor after quitting](https://email.mg-d1.substack.com/c/eJwlUE2StCAMPU2z-6wEBHTBYmYxF5gDWAixm_kULcCxvP1gW5XKTyV5yXvOFnqu6TTbmgu73FDOjUykI89UCiW2Z0pD8AZbqYTAnnkj-hE6p1jIw5SIFhtmU9JObNvHOThbwhrfK30rgL1MN1ntRS8myXmH4FuUrbQVRItRC4f3Ybv7QNGRoV9K5xqJuXVZKJYLis3mVcqWH-Ljwb-qHcfRHPmnqTO1sqkEN1Ou6fcnAkKvADVgC1IhdMCC4cA5KBSIUoBuRKOtlGqEiXuulCR6tLA8_3ls8j7mYt3_C5slE_LLxuYiWSeeV3w3KtfhenCPoZwDRTvO5G8Zyi3nW5jhSZFSldkPthhUUiJHDlrp7qZdycme6_pxz-plv9ataHyYpj8eP4bi)
Tegus is the first port of call for M&A professionals and institutional investors ramping up on an industry or company.
Get access to a database of 35,000+ expert call transcripts, spanning 5+ years, or schedule expert calls through the platform for a fraction of the usual cost.
When thousands of research analysts are pooling their expert calls into an on-demand database, using Tegus is table stakes. It's the leading platform for due diligence and primary research.
See the power of a Tegus subscription, and get up to data parity with your competitors, with a two week free trial through the Diff.
[raising funds that provide more structured capital to growth companies](https://email.mg-d1.substack.com/c/eJwlkUtuxCAMhk8z7IhIGEhYsOim14h4mAxtAhGPRrl9YUZC2IB_23w2qsAW0y3PmAvq21ruE2SAK-9QCiRUM6TVWzk-Gad0FMhKKjRZDEc-ry4BHMrvsqQK6Kx690YVH8NbIp6UoJdUTiwO1GIFdXwhiiyaEC20cczR2apPYVWth2BAwh-kOwZAJh4HhNJToV2-Sjnzg349pu-2rusa9B7joSFtQ4tsd73rZlQq3uzQ3YlMEyYcE9EOJqpSAf-cR0ybCvgCv72wq8FmXCLWNd44l6auZ8YZ4NeHDRt1-qJ25GXPRfhIx5FRMg90mBVjXBM32YlzBvB4kmPDdhxy1S2P-e1toSR9fqkwdEotYuv2_dBgrf2HNfhyrxCU3sF-OJbPPN5k1w0CpDYnu6oiR87YOI0Tmfm8fLg1OkxMMxFcoFbZxqYK0nrn_gGlh6Ka)
Suppose there's a company that is raising money and thinks that they can achieve an exit for $10bn. And suppose an outside investor thinks $3bn is more realistic. This is a hard gap to bridge—any valuation low enough for the investor sounds like a ripoff to the company. A liquidation preference can theoretically help: if the investor buys in at a $2bn valuation with a 2x liquidation preference, then they collect more if the exit happens where they expect, and (relatively) less (but more in absolute dollars) if it happens at $10bn instead.
[excellent book](https://email.mg-d1.substack.com/c/eJxNUkvPnSAQ_TXXnYbHBXThounXJt226dogjEqKYAU19td39OY2TQiceZxhYI7RGca4nu0SUy6urcvnAm2AI3nIGdZiS7B2zrb0KSTntClsy5ue1EYWLnXDCjBr59u8blAsW--d0dnFcFOaJyfF1MKgRd8wa4EKJQyjXJJBATBaN7KX9nWx3qyDYKCFHdYzBihMnGcI-SpV-HbKeUkP_unBvuI6jqPSs_4TQ4Vp6PiILozlZ724rL1Lc_kthLjfvZRfTAxxPsvvgGBw47ZiLnLsghulpH4qypR68K_Trq2zD_7BKSNMNEQ9GX0wOe3YI7pvGCAfiMfbWHW48qkgkishZY2FaiZq-qYFePOWfMQ3_j3nN7SwIzQvvJvZ-nfER-NC_s9aphOthrCak-Z2Zr2Od8OL1yWOCP-W1nUtaowuyVydIfq3vA7jpserJQjdzx_oWmHo0NSp865Lqcu-cC0-nhEsRqngRFW8UloI2ZOBWSalAHg8yTyWllZp61PW5tc1hmJtXZp0qC5JYMZ4nXcAldFd49yCy2cHQfce7Es0-SW-W0bdCAFWFKXtdG6pFIIyHISSqn6JBKUgGqZII5sCb7YRWaG1bhj-AtOq5Lg)
[US levels are much higher when you strip out food and energy](https://email.mg-d1.substack.com/c/eJxVUcuOhSAM_RrZaXgIXhYsbjK5v2EQqpJRNFBn4t8P6moSShdtz-k5dRZh2tJp9i0jub4ezx1MhN-8ACIkcmRIffCGtVIJwTTxRuiBvpwiIfdjAlhtWAymA8h-DEtwFsMW7xHdCkpmw6hQlPvOatsqJqnwmo7jizolGHjWPsT28AGiAwM_kM4tAnHbukLEC4osZkbccyXeFf-UZ_cUXECbm3wMGa37bkp7KewlcIYajlz7MI6QCkQd4rjce9V72oYF1kp8CthXIsFwyjlVTDAmBe0a0XRWSjXQkXuulASoWrpOtWf_qEgyIc82Npf80jFd-S4UF_pr9SMGPHuItvD5xyB8jL4t6yeIkMoBfG_RMCUl44zTTnWvx5AiW2reUa00Kcx-K1PRXJr-AP49k8s)[the world's consumer of last resort](https://email.mg-d1.substack.com/c/eJwlUMuOhCAQ_JrhpuEhOBw4bLKZ3zAIrUNWwUA7xr9fHJN-JNDV1VXOIswpn2ZLBclVBjw3MBGOsgAiZLIXyEPwhnVSCcE08UbokT6dIqEMUwZYbVgM5h3Ito9LcBZDil-I7gQlb9Mp0NqO3j01ZYpKxaV1WjvHrXWq625iu_sA0YGBD-QzRSAurStEvFaRxbwRt_IQPw_-qnEcR4tv8GGaWpfqw1YzQz32A43bc66rApTGlmauMxCbOSVf8a-avwcJhlPOqWKCMSlo34q2t1KqkU7cc6UkwKOj69x41pZ9LGjdXyVaSTahvG1sL9V1Yr7696OKH66L9xjwHCDacQF_-4K3v1-nhhki5Oq7HywapqRknHHaq_55-1DVSs17qpUmldmniormEvoPBGqQuw)
[been put on leave after claiming that an AI had achieved sentience](https://email.mg-d1.substack.com/c/eJwlUcuu4yAM_ZqySwQkQLNgcTfzGxEPhzCXQAXOVPn7Ia1k2eDXsY-dQQilXvpVGpJbrXi9QGd4twSIUMnZoK7RazYLOU1sIV5Pi6VPJ0ls61YBDhOTxnoCeZ02RWcwlvwpWeaJkl1LRY3wz6dVYAWAlQujs3cz35RibvFfYHP6CNmBhn9Qr5KBuHIckPFuRZLeEV_tMf08-J8u7_d7xB3CaaqPJo89t3sR3J5LKuHqH0457-bvmbtm9zOUEhIMkEPMAHUwcbAFh9ZBOjQONplfGBIcpcdJ1HcHKtnEmJioGqdRGSGkpRv3XMq-ymOmRxg8G9tpGxr3e89Bqo5t7zPdxPSMcNtPoPOz3kudOeK1QjY2gf9Sh98TfMhcA2So_TR-NaiZFIJxxqmS6vmlqhMiFq7oIhfSkX3pVVn7uG3_AT6tnP4)
[fun claim, basically a cyberpunk Pascal's Wager, that we should go out of our way to be very nice and helpful](https://email.mg-d1.substack.com/c/eJwlUEmOhDAMfA25NcoOHHKYy3wDhcTQUUOCEjOI309oJKss2eWlylmEJeXL7KkguWHEawcT4SwrIEImR4E8Bm-YVFoINhBvxDDR3mkSyjhngM2G1WA-gOzHtAZnMaT4HRmkoORtKFXOy1lK28vZASgqOe-l7tXEYO74c9gePkB0YOAP8pUiEJe2DSLeq8hq3oh7acRPw39rnOfZrlDKmVNc2sqsNbRLxZw-qbwmW8IayocEwynnVDPBmBK0a0XbWaX0RGfuudYKoJF0W16eteWYClr3ufeRbEJ529je8ipjufO3UVWO92tHDHiNEO20gn8MwMfIryXjAhFyNdiPFg3TSjHOOO101z-Cqyw18I4OeiD1sk91Khof5vkfKl2JEA)
[taking commissions to paint people's NFTs](https://email.mg-d1.substack.com/c/eJwlkU2OhCAQhU_T7DT8CLYLFrOZaxiQQkkrGijHePuBNqGgQr3iwcdkEOY93frYM5I6jXgfoCNceQVESOTMkMbgNOukEoINxGkxWPqeFAl59AlgM2HVmE4gx2nXMBkMe_y2DJ2gZNHediD5wO1bWeM74xTQHjx7S9qpgYrH2JwuQJxAwx-ke49Apn3bIGI9iqx6QTzyS_y8-G8Z13W1uFTpDG0Rli0umKxRq2Fdg9myPdPcRI_NnIz3AUNNomvSDuWmcW6suadmSveB-3HGDwmaU86pYoIxKWjfirY3UipLPXdcKQnw6ug2N461-bQZzfSp9iTpkBcT2wqjKOa6fguFyVgfcsaA9wjR2BXcgwsf7F-A4wwRUvkONxrUTEnJOOO0V_37wVMgyIH3dFADKc5uL11Ru-D9PypRmXg)
[helped Ukrainian forces coordinate their attacks](https://email.mg-d1.substack.com/c/eJwlkMuOhCAQRb-m2Wl4COiCxWzmNwxCaZNGMDzG-PeDbUKKClWXqnuMLrDFdKkj5oLuMJfrABXgzB5KgYRqhjQ7q8jABWNkQlaxacGjEcjleU0Au3ZelVQBHXXxzujiYvhKpoFh9FarXfA0WkksXs1EmB2wlkCHVS4j10CfwbpaB8GAgj9IVwyATNx3COX-Cnn1LuXIL_bzor_tnOfZH9G74kzsobYXnVruoWXgY-j2mj9d_STtAnS56ORd-LQicopiSrEgjBDOsOxZLzXnYsErtVQIDvAa8L51lvS5Lk1qPn1bBSXl8luH_vbbOrb7_haa7fnetQZXrhmCXjzYh0h5yH4ZzRsESI24nXVRRHBOKKFYCjk-BJpPPlGJJzGhNtnGpgrKunX9B3ucj58)[wrote up Starlink last year](https://email.mg-d1.substack.com/c/eJwlkMuOhCAQRb9GdhoeArpgMcmkf8PwKFvSCgZwjH8_2CYUJAWXW_dYXeAd06X2mAu6t6lcO6gAZ16hFEjoyJAm7xTpuWCMjMgpNho8WIF8nuYEsGm_qpIOQPthVm918TF8JWPPMFqUtFRiziU3hlJjhR21NGzQYuiFGTB5jPXhPAQLCv4gXTEAsnHbIJT7K7SqpZQ9N-ynoa-6zvPsygLOz3NnY23stcpSx2nNsa6t1RlyO8fU5qLT6sOnYa8q_z2RVxRTigVhhHCGZcc6qTkXBs_UUSE4QNPj7d060uXDVL39VI8NJeXzokN3B64v3vf5vai5p3vYI_hyTRC0WcE9SMqD9gtpekOAVJG7SRdFBOeEEoqlkMODoAblY2U1ihFVZxerKqg74z9mwY5N)
If you're interested in pursuing a role, please reach out—if there's a potential match, we start with an introductory call to see if we have a good fit, and then a more in-depth discussion of what you've worked on. (Depending on the role, this can focus on work or side projects.) Diff Jobs is free for job applicants.
A company creating a new investment platform using NLP to generate thematic portfolios is looking for a senior engineer on the data side. (NYC)
A company giving emerging markets retail investors access to US equities is looking for a senior frontend engineer. (the Americas, remote)
A company building a new set of tools for family offices and wealth managers is looking for backend and full stack engineers. (US, remote)
A company helping venture funds with the fund closing process is looking for their first product manager. (NYC, Philadelphia, US, remote)
A company offering traditionally underbanked small businesses access to working capital is looking for a data scientist. (SF)
1
You can never prove that you've exhausted the space of future risks, but one thing you can do is find evidence that someone else is engaged in systematically suboptimal behavior. I've talked before about the longstanding observation that the lowest-rated investment-grade bonds have relatively poor risk-adjusted returns, and the highest-rated junk bonds have relatively good ones. The explanation for both is the same; managers who are required to invest in just one category of bonds will look for the most interesting opportunities, which are rarely the highest-rated ones in their investment universe. And a company that's just been downgraded from barely-investment-grade to barely-junk has just had some turnover among the analysts who cover it. That's a small market inefficiency, but it's a real one.
Similar things can happen to stocks whose market cap falls below some round-number threshold, like $5bn or $1bn, or companies that have operations in one country but are listed in another. Spinoffs and restructurings used to be an abundant source of this kind of analyst-shortfall inefficiency, and sometimes still can be. But in this case, the opportunity became so well-known that some funds and investors specialize almost exclusively in these kinds of companies, closing the analysis gap. Markets hate inefficiency, especially any kind where describing it implies an obvious way to exploit it.
2
[Magnetar trade](https://email.mg-d1.substack.com/c/eJwtkdGupCAMhp9muMMADjhecHFu9jVMharkIBgsa-btF2c2IdAU_v7lqwPCNZe3PfJJ7N4meh9oE15nRCIsrJ5YpuCtfGrT93Jk3vbjLF7OsHBOS0HcIURLpSI76hyDAwo5fSTjsxdss0YDiEUgjE4CghMDCDmo2YM0o3nh1xiqD5gcWvyL5Z0TMpf3HRPdpVi0G9FxPvqfh_rT1nVd3VHyf8cul7UloVBwEe8oRk4b8h3WhASFUwGPfMsXb5X5hn5FvtTkWxgP9PwX8fgotlzPkFY-13mOyIJVQilhZC-l7sXQ9d0AWptZLMorYzTi4yn2lXvZnXU-Cdxv1xpnxYZzg9TddNqL9T4_F63l6f5ZTYHeEyZoNv7Lj75z-BCdVkxY2nz8BGSl0VoqqcRghteXV6OiRzWI0YysOfvcVMn6sCz_AKUKoPw)
3
It would be nice if there were lots of simplistic, straightforward ways to convert a view about the world into either a trade or a job whose success was 100% tied to that view. But it’s almost never that easy. One of the functions of asset markets, as opposed to prediction markets, is that they force participants to estimate not just whether or not they’re right but whether or not it matters. If you assembled a good track record betting on elections in prediction markets, but that didn’t translate into profits from betting on currencies, interest rates, or various countries’ equities, it would imply that many of those electoral predictions were either priced-in or were unimportant.
4
This always strikes people as a suspicious move—"Yeah, inflation is fine because I don't eat or drive." But it's useful because these components are so volatile. For energy, the case for looking at it separately from other inflation components has theoretically gotten stronger in the last decade, since fracking can make energy production more responsive to supply and demand. What petroleum engineering giveth, investor demands taketh away, though; the frackers have gotten pretty disciplined about adding production just because oil is up a measly 72% YoY.
You’re a free subscriber to [The Diff](https://email.mg-d1.substack.com/c/eJwlkE2OhCAQhU_T7MbwI9guWMxmrkEQCiWjYKAc4-0H26RCJcCr975yFmHO5dJ7rkjuw-C1g05w1hUQoZCjQjHRa9ZLJQQbiddinOjbKRKrCQVgs3HVWA4g-zGt0VmMOX0kYy8oWTR9U9lLGjx3QQ5qYqFnnko68F5aHuRjbA8fITnQ8AflygmIy9sGCe9RZNUL4l5f4vvFf1qd59nhAj6G0LncLkjUnHJOFROMSUGHTnSDlVJNNHDPlZIAr55u85dnXT2mitb9NulGio51sam7OdqP-e6fh4Zj7gxHingZSHZawT-k-Gzsw25mSFDaJr2xqJmSknHG6aCG90PW8suRD3RUI2nOPjdV0nf0f7H2f6Y). For the full experience, [become a paid subscriber.](https://email.mg-d1.substack.com/c/eJxdUsuS2jAQ_Bp8i0sPbOODDrCExFsxZDc8sntxyfLYCCwZZDlgvj4ykEuqVFJNq6ZnpnsEt1A1pmenprXecGW2PwHTcGlrsBaM17VgMlkwPA5CSnHsFYzGOZqI0JNtVhoAxWXNrOnAO3V5LQW3stH3lHhMkbdnIXAgiOIJjgKSR3wyIQGUUBCgMRdl9CjMu0KCFsDgD5i-0eCJRinQdqDyara39tSO6HREFu5cLhff7qGQZemLxgFtl7fCyBxGdGGbI-gRnUP_igXZ9r9JfUwOzXU535D0ll5Xvy6S7xbojh02OF0n1_QwpT9eXmv4PpWrw1eyXAuartM-nYs2UfVN9EmY6Bn-kOi6Wr_d0pekTfTSxQ5Xy-ZztzQ53aJEI19E1Xl7_dmpM2xBEarPUGTfPt8-ZtVsN83xu1l3-D2otvVmRMLOqqxtOiNc6_NBiv-xYTTLxfGJKzd1p4bxBuWfoGi0dVo9GYTlnmQEEYJCTDEOKIp86kc8CMIclaQgYRgAjMZIVV8K7P-r4KRUnmGy3XPt39nHqBre-4ezNxs86bS0fQaa5zUUD-ftY4PuHWUVaDBus4qMW4bDIMAEExSF0eThtPMziEmE4jD2XOWicVmaDVb-BRNe3uw)