---
subject: "beyond The Merge; on-chain ceremonies; regulatory moves"
from: "web3 weekly from a16z crypto <a16zcrypto@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-09-13 00:00:17
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "a16zcrypto"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_2535365729249697677"]
---
1. In focus: Proof of stake blockchains; beyond The Merge to Ethereum roadmap & hot topicswith Tim Beiko; Sonal Chokshi, Valeria Nikolaenko, Tim Roughgarden, Ali Yahya In these two most recent episodes of our podcast ‘
2. Code drop: Trusted setup ceremonies, now on-chainby Valeria Nikolaenko, Sam Ragsdale Blockchain projects conduct trusted setup ceremonies to generate cryptographic parameters that originate the root of trust for their systems. But all such ceremonies to date rely on centralized coordinators. So we open-sourced a tool that enables people to run these ceremonies — known as a Kate-Zaverucha-Goldberg (KZG) or “powers-of-tau” ceremony — completely permissionlessly, in perpetuity, and in a decentralized way.
3. Top of mind: Navigating downturnsby Jeff Amico, Maggie Hsu, Ed Lynch, Emily Westerhold From decentralized autonomous organizations (DAOs) to traditional startups, teams are reckoning with a market environment featuring high inflation, low yields, and a tightening of financing options across both public and private markets. And while treasury management is a core function of any organization, it is particularly relevant today. Especially for decentralized organizations, how can teams place greater emphasis on conservative cash management principles to help weather storms and emerge stronger on the other side? Based on our experiences and observations from DAO governance, go-to-market for web3, and more, we share a basic framework with some principles to help decentralized teams steer the waters now… as well as prepare for and prevent any issues long-term. 4. Regulatory moves & newsDavid Sverdlov 🦅 Congress U.S. House of Representative Tom Emmer (R-MN) sent a [letter](https://substack.com/redirect/ea998816-5b3f-4048-8c22-b80a6ddf2506?r=8o54n)to Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen asking her to explain why the department sanctioned Tornado Cash, writing, among other things, that “[t]he sanctioning of neutral, open-source, decentralized technology presents a series of new questions, which impact not only our national security, but the right to privacy of every American citizen.” He also stated in an[interview](https://substack.com/redirect/73cefec6-cb26-4d54-96cc-6a523287d996?r=8o54n)that OFAC was wrong to sanction Tornado Cash, sharing that “My problem is that this software is controlled by code, not by any person or entity… an unprecedented shift in the Office of Foreign Asset Control in their sanctioning policy.”
Members of the House Committee on Energy and Commerce sent individual letters to four publicly traded crypto miners seeking to learn more about the impact of their mining operations on the environment.
🏦 Federal Reserve Board governor [stated](https://substack.com/redirect/85dd3a9c-b82d-4897-96a9-3c62a0e16549?r=8o54n)at a recent fintech conference that their staff is working to articulate “supervisory expectations for banks on a variety of digital asset-related activities”, including: 1) custody of crypto assets, 2) facilitation of customer purchases and sales of crypto assets, 3) loans collateralized by crypto assets, and 4) issuance and distribution of stablecoins by banking organizations.
The board [announced](https://substack.com/redirect/ebc936f5-5964-4b9e-9f66-800e25a926dd?r=8o54n)final guidelines that establish a set of factors for Reserve Banks to use in reviewing requests to access Federal Reserve accounts and payment services, which may help crypto companies gain access to “master accounts” without the use of intermediaries.
💵 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation In letters issued to five companies and their officers, directors, and employees, the FDIC demanded that they cease and desist from making false and misleading statements about FDIC deposit insurance — clarifying that it only insures deposits held in insured banks and savings associations, not in brokerage accounts or stocks and cryptocurrencies.
🌽 Commodity Futures Trading Commission In an example of the CFTC asserting its anti-fraud and anti-manipulation jurisdiction in the spot (aka cash) market for digital assets — and in contrast to its more traditional jurisdiction over derivatives, e.g., futures, options, and swaps — the CFTC filed a civil enforcement [action](https://substack.com/redirect/4ba628b9-5e18-4750-adae-d96aa94152b4?r=8o54n)against Rathnakishore Giri and his Ohio-based companies.
⚖️ Department of Justice The DOJ [announced](https://substack.com/redirect/9eea48db-f526-4681-bd8d-a55e4fbd3dd8?r=8o54n)that four individuals were arrested for participating in a scheme to steal four million dollars’ worth of cryptocurrency and trick U.S. banks into refunding them for the millions used to purchase that cryptocurrency. The DOJ has charged the defendants with a number of violations, including conspiracy to commit wire fraud and bank fraud, wire fraud, and aggravated identity theft.
A federal court in the Central District of California [entered](https://substack.com/redirect/05883acd-50fb-4472-a557-41e0481cf4ca?r=8o54n)an order authorizing the IRS to serve a John Doe summons on a cryptocurrency prime brokerage, seeking information about U.S. taxpayers who conducted at least the equivalent of $20,000 in transactions in cryptocurrency between 2016 and 2021 with or through SFOX. The government uses such John Doe summonses to obtain information about possible violations of law by individuals whose identities are unknown, and this particular summons is the fourth of its kind issued to digital asset platforms that seeks to identify taxpayers who fail to report the tax effects of cryptocurrency transactions.
👮 Federal Bureau of Investigation The FBI issued a public service [announcement](https://substack.com/redirect/259b206e-310d-4a39-a7fa-c353700761a9?r=8o54n)warning investors that cyber criminals are increasingly exploiting vulnerabilities in DeFi platforms to steal cryptocurrencies, and encouraged investors to contact them if they believe that cyber criminals have stolen their DeFi investments.
🌉 California The California State Assembly passed the [Digital Financial Assets Law](https://substack.com/redirect/0fdd72f1-bb7a-49a7-997a-93358a8caa7f?r=8o54n), which requires digital asset exchanges and crypto companies to acquire an operating license from the California Department of Financial Protection and Innovation. If California Governor Gavin Newsom signs the bill, it will go into effect in January 2025. [see also a16z crypto’s Miles Jennings on this move,[here](https://substack.com/redirect/e8dd8291-c2e6-4b7f-a982-4f93524a56bb?r=8o54n)]
🌍 International The Korea Financial Intelligence Unit ( [KoFIU](https://substack.com/redirect/feda33ff-3a3b-449f-b825-7ec53fa451a5?r=8o54n))[announced](https://substack.com/redirect/e0df0c9c-a07d-43a3-9a09-42f47fe1b835?r=8o54n)that it had reported the business activities of 16 Virtual Asset Service Providers (VASPs) to the Korean investigative authority for failure to register with the proper financial authority.
The South African Reserve Bank released [guidelines](https://substack.com/redirect/81fb09c5-8428-46b8-bd46-dc193bc59e81?r=8o54n)for local banks to do business with cryptocurrencies and cryptocurrency companies. The guidelines advise banks to employ anti-money laundering and counterterrorism financing for all crypto transactions.
The Afghanistan Police Force [reportedly](https://substack.com/redirect/2bbf7e7c-cd67-40eb-b612-a2107bd8b825?r=8o54n)shut down 16 crypto exchanges in the country’s western Herat province. Afghanistan’s central bank banned crypto trading practices, following reports that suggested an increased demand for cryptocurrencies on the part of Afghani residents.
The Mendoza Tax Administration, the tax authority for the province (the fifth-largest territory in Argentina) [announced](https://substack.com/redirect/b87cc084-5c1a-4881-869f-1d1c67d121ea?r=8o54n)that taxpayers may pay provincial taxes and fees with cryptocurrencies. Mendoza will purportedly only accept stablecoins, including DAI and USDT, as payment.
--Robert Hackett, Sonal Chokshi, Stephanie Zinn, and a16z crypto team You’re receiving this newsletter since you signed up for it on our website(s) or elsewhere (you can opt out using the ‘unsubscribe’ link below). Please note that this newsletter is provided for informational purposes only, and should NOT be relied upon as legal, business, investment, or tax advice. Furthermore, the content is not directed at nor intended for use by any investors or prospective investors in any a16z funds. This newsletter may link to other websites or other information obtained from third-party sources, but a16z has not independently verified nor makes any representations about the current and enduring accuracy of such information. Please see a16z.com/disclosures for additional important details, including link to list of investments. subscribe to our podcast ' |