---
subject: "AI #155: Welcome to Recursive Self-Improvement"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-02-12 16:05:30
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
This was the week of Claude Opus 4.6, and also of ChatGPT-5.3-Codex. Both leading models got substantial upgrades, although OpenAI’s is confined to Codex. Once again, the frontier of AI got more advanced, especially for agentic coding but also for everything else. I spent the week so far covering Opus, with We also got GLM-5, Seedance 2.0, Claude fast mode, an app for Codex and much more. Claude fast mode means you can pay a premium to get faster replies from Opus 4.6. It’s very much not cheap, but it can be worth every penny. More on that in the next agentic coding update. One of the most frustrating things about AI is the constant goalpost moving, both in terms of capability and safety. People say ‘oh [X] would be a huge deal but is a crazy sci-fi concept’ or ‘[Y] will never happen’ or ‘surely we would not be so stupid as to [Z]’ and then [X], [Y] and [Z] all happen and everyone shrugs as if nothing happened and they choose new things they claim will never happen and we would never be so stupid as to, and the cycle continues. That cycle is now accelerating.
So here we are. Meanwhile, various people resign from the leading labs and say their peace. None of them are, shall we say, especially reassuring. In the background, the stock market is having a normal one even more than usual. Even if you can see the future, it’s really hard to do better than ‘be long the companies that are going to make a lot of money’ because the market makes wrong way moves half the time that it wakes up and realizes things that I already know. Rough game. Table of Contents[Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/c7668191-2eb5-4c27-b83e-30025d4fae50?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Flattery will get you everywhere.[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/cd774a82-d0a1-4c55-8a9b-6b6bbee7e5ad?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)It’s a little late for that.[Huh, Upgrades.](https://substack.com/redirect/b20818f3-eb75-42e3-ac21-64f9cf84100e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Things that are surprising in that they didn’t happen before.[On Your Marks](https://substack.com/redirect/ed7c2d35-ce02-4ac0-bfaa-e7b3fc56feab?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/ed7c2d35-ce02-4ac0-bfaa-e7b3fc56feab?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Slopes are increasing. That escalated quickly.[Overcoming Bias.](https://substack.com/redirect/73a8f07c-c221-4b31-a8be-4c0c6a6e4c15?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)LLMs continue to exhibit consistent patterns of bias.[Choose Your Fighter.](https://substack.com/redirect/46326f78-ab94-4a5c-88e0-9c9575c66942?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The glass is half open, but which half is which?[Get My Agent On The Line.](https://substack.com/redirect/4a1e1448-dbf5-4790-8c36-f380b54a5b9a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Remember Sammy Jenkins.[AI Conversations Are Not Privileged.](https://substack.com/redirect/3f7cf475-025e-4af8-b0fc-6439327f7aea?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Beware accordingly.[Fun With Media Generation.](https://substack.com/redirect/87b6cf21-711d-4507-9c67-41db97af4d1d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Seedance 2.0 looks pretty sweet for video.[The Superb Owl.](https://substack.com/redirect/9e45ffeb-4a80-40e9-b769-4f99b4fc4c05?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The ad verdicts are in from the big game.[A Word From The Torment Nexus.](https://substack.com/redirect/3d857f86-2829-4140-a8bb-669c7ab31bb3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Some stand in defense of advertising.[They Took Our Jobs](https://substack.com/redirect/028f3394-63f2-4122-a85f-8ed2b2119382?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/028f3394-63f2-4122-a85f-8ed2b2119382?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Radically different models of the future of employment.[The Art of the Jailbreak.](https://substack.com/redirect/715e8d8a-0457-4e83-8b2f-6f46c443a0f3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)You can jailbreak Google Translate.[Introducing.](https://substack.com/redirect/665575d1-6cc8-4f90-b792-8c18b024c9b9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)GLM-5, Expressive Mode for ElevenAgents.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/584d6fc2-d342-45ae-8992-4e922ebba9b1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)RIP OpenAI mission alignment team, WSJ profiles Askell.[Show Me the Money.](https://substack.com/redirect/b38b0d22-1968-4ad2-b080-a305a85e89b9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Goldman Sachs taps Anthropic, OpenAI rolls out ads.[Bubble, Bubble, Toil and Trouble](https://substack.com/redirect/078b32e1-db45-4782-add0-6e59435bd639?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/078b32e1-db45-4782-add0-6e59435bd639?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The stock market is not making much sense.[Future Shock.](https://substack.com/redirect/b671ebd0-7a0b-43e7-908e-60970d743386?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Potential explanations for how Claude Legal could have mattered.[Memory Lane.](https://substack.com/redirect/417e8a37-8f48-460d-967d-3b4da9243787?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Be the type of person who you want there to be memories of.[Keep The Mask On Or You’re Fired.](https://substack.com/redirect/958911e4-5507-4ce6-a19f-e85f52e6530a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)OpenAI fires Ryan Beiermeister.[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/845514f5-1559-4519-805d-9a2ab3df8b37?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The singularity will not be gentle.[The Quest for Sane Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/3206debd-8d3e-41c6-a830-a5fc49143230?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Dueling lobbying groups, different approaches.[Chip City.](https://substack.com/redirect/d8fd12cb-cf1a-4053-af64-bd1361880801?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Data center fights and the ultimate (defensible) anti-EA position.[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/524c6f1e-e449-4656-b3c1-ee018362dc29?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Elon on Dwarkesh, Anthropic CPO, MIRI on Beck.[Constitutional Conversation.](https://substack.com/redirect/7bcbae64-8e0c-450b-b7af-9d028948e197?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)I can tell a lie, under the right circumstances.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/6248c291-257e-4cf5-8e08-4885e7897e32?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Some people need basic explainers.[Working On It Anyway.](https://substack.com/redirect/1347647c-b567-4e38-8258-1bab1b14ec85?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Be loud about how dangerous your own actions are.[The Thin Red Line.](https://substack.com/redirect/bbe5cfcf-b4ae-4399-a25c-b00abf15d309?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The problem with red lines is people keep crossing them.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/ca144a16-8a02-4f8d-9304-94daa89de48b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Read your Asimov.[People Will Hand Over Power To The AIs.](https://substack.com/redirect/c8377218-22a4-4be2-b11d-1cb305cfc4ec?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Unless we stop them.[People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/e8b5ca47-67ba-4135-ba9e-81f10a69c4d1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Elon Musk’s ego versus humanity.[Famous Last Words](https://substack.com/redirect/a9b6ee8f-91d8-47c8-ae72-d4cf50269a8f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/a9b6ee8f-91d8-47c8-ae72-d4cf50269a8f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)What do you say on your way out the door?[Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/76c508e9-556d-4e81-b92e-acd7daef0888?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Autonomous bio.[The Lighter Side](https://substack.com/redirect/56798984-318a-40d7-884c-33d8bae1bfc4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/56798984-318a-40d7-884c-33d8bae1bfc4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)It’s funny because it’s true.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
AI can do a ton even if all it does is make the software we use suck modestly less:
The problem is, you can create all the software you like, they still have to use it. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
Huh, Upgrades
On Your MarksThe most important thing to know about the METR graph is that doubling times are getting faster, in ways people very much dismissed as science fiction very recently.
The measurement is starting to require a better task set, because things are escalating too quickly.
Overcoming Bias
They find biases in various models including formality of writing, religious affiliation, Spanish language ability and religious affiliation. Gender and race bias, favoring female and minority-associated applications, generalized across all models. We label only some such biases ‘inappropriate’ and ‘illegal’ but the mechanisms involved are the same no matter what they are based upon. This is all very consistent with prior findings on these questions. Choose Your FighterThis is indeed strange and quirky, but it makes sense if you consider what both companies consider their comparative advantage and central business plan. One of these strategies seems wiser than the other.
Or so I heard:
Get My Agent On The Line
I wouldn’t call it faking continual learning. If it works it’s continual learning. Yes, actual in-the-weights continual learning done properly would be a big deal and big unlock, but I see this and notes more as substitutes, although they are also compliments. If you can have your notes function sufficiently well you don’t need new memories.
Models are continuously learning in general, in the sense that every few months the model gets better. And if you try to bake other learning into the weights, then every few months you would have to start that process over again or stay one model behind. I expect ‘continual learning’ to be solved primarily via skills and context, and for this to be plenty good enough, and for this to be clear within the year. AI Conversations Are Not PrivilegedNeither are your Google searches. AI services can mitigate this a lot by offering a robust instant deletion option, and potentially can get around this (IANAL and case law is unsettled) by offering tools to collaborate with your lawyer to invoke privilege. Should we change how the law works here? OpenAI has been advocating to make ChatGPT chats have legal privilege by default. My gut says this goes too far in the other direction, driving us away from having chats with people. Fun With Media GenerationSeedance 2.0 from ByteDance is giving us some very impressive 15 second clips
The Superb OwlWe got commercials for a variety of AI products and services. If anything I was surprised we did not get more, given how many AI products offer lots of mundane utility but don’t have much brand awareness or product awareness. Others got taken by surprise.
There were broadly two categories, frontier models (Gemini, OpenAI and Anthropic), and productivity apps. The productivity app commercials were wild, lying misrepresentations of their products. One told us anyone with no experience can code an app within seconds or add any feature they want. Another closed you and physically walked around the office. A third even gave you the day off, which we all know never happens. Everything was done one shot. How dare they lie to us like this. I kid, these were all completely normal Super Bowl ads, and they were fine. Not good enough to make me remember which AI companies bought them, or show me why their products were unique, but fine. We also got one from ai.com.
Okay, look, fair, maybe there’s a little bit of a bubble in some places. The three frontier labs took very different approaches. Anthropic said ads are coming to AI, but Claude won’t ever have ads. We discussed this last week. They didn’t spend enough to run the full versions, so the timing was wrong and it didn’t land the same way and it wasn’t as funny as it was online. On reflection, after seeing it on the big screen, I decided these ads were a mistake for the simple reason that Claude and Anthropic have zero name recognition and this didn’t establish that. You first need to establish that Claude is a ChatGPT alternative on people’s radar, so once you grab their attention you need more of an explanation. Then I saw one in full on the real big screen, during previews at an AMC, and in that setting it was even more clear that this completely missed the mark and normies would have no idea what was going on, and this wouldn’t accomplish anything. Again, I don’t understand how this mistake gets made. Several OpenAI people took additional potshots at this and Altman went on tilt, It turns out it was simpler than that, regular viewers didn’t get it at all and responded with a lot of basically ‘WTF,’ I always wonder, when that happens, why one can’t use a survey or focus group to anticipate this reaction. It’s a mistake that should not be so easy to make. Anthropic’s secret other ad was by Amazon, for Alexa+, and it was weirdly ambivalent about whether the whole thing was a good idea but I think it kinda worked. Unclear.
The ideal Super Bowl ad successfully does both, unless you already have full brand recognition and don’t need to explain (e.g. Pepsi, Budweiser, Dunkin Donuts). On the one hand, who doesn’t love a celebration of all this stuff? Yes, it’s cool to reference I, Robot and Alan Turing and Grace Hopper and Einstein. I guess? On the other hand, it was just an attempt to overload the symbolism and create unearned associations, and a bunch of them felt very unearned. I want to talk about the chess games 30 seconds in. Presumably we started 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Nc3, which is very standard, but then black moves 4 … d5, which the engines evaluate as +1.2 and ‘clearly worse for black’ and it’s basically never played, for obvious reasons. The other board is a strange choice. The move here is indeed correct, but you don’t have enough time to absorb the board sufficiently to figure this out.
This feels like laziness and choosing style over substance, not checking your work. Then it closes on ‘just build things’ as an advertisement for Codex, which implies you can ‘just build’ things like robots, which you clearly can’t. I mean, no, it doesn’t, this is totally fine, it is a Super Bowl ad, but by their own complaint standards, yes. This was an exercise in branding and vibes, it didn’t work for me because it was too transparent and boring and content-free and felt performative, but on the meta level it does what it sets out to do. Google went with an ad focusing on personalized search and Nana Banana image transformations. I thought this worked well. Meta advertised ‘athletic intelligence’ which I think means ‘AI in your smart glasses.’ Then there’s the actively negative one, from my perspective,
As in, we are proud to tell you we’re watching everything and reporting it to all the law enforcement agencies including ICE, and we are using recognition technology that can differentiate dogs and therefore also people using AI. But it’s okay, because one a day we find someone’s lost puppy. You should sell your freedom for the rescue of a lost puppy.
A Word From The Torment Nexus
This picture of the ad is at the end of the multi-screen-long reply. I would say this is more clearly labeled then an ad on Instagram or Google at this point. So even though it’s not that clear, it’s hard to be too mad about it, provided they stick to the rule that the ad is always at the end of the answer. That provides a clear indicator users can rely upon. If they put this in different places at different times, I would say it is ‘labeled’ at all, but not consider this to then be ‘clearly’ labeled. OpenAI’s principles for ads are: Mission alignment. Ads pay for the mission. Okie dokie? Answer independence. Ads don’t influence ChatGPT’s response. The question and response can influence what ad is selected, but not the other way around. This is a very good and important red line. It does not protect against the existence of ads influencing how responses work, or being an advertiser ending up impacting the model long term. In particular it encourages maximization of engagement.
Conversation privacy. Advertisers cannot see any of your details.
Do you trust them to adhere to these principles over time? Do you trust that merely technically, or also in spirit where the model is created and system prompt is adjusted without any thought to maximizing advertising revenue or pleasing advertisers? You are also given power to help customize what ads you see, as per other tech company platforms.
It’s not a moral panic. Roon loves ads, but most people hate ads. I agree that people often hate ads too much, they allow us to offer a wide variety of things for free that otherwise would have to cost money and that is great. But they really are pretty toxic, they massively distort incentives, and the amount of time we used to lose to them is staggering. They Took Our Jobs
Presumably you can see the problem in such a scenario, where all the existing jobs get automated away. There are not that many slots for people to figure out and do genuinely new things with AI. Even if you get to one of the lifeboats, it will quickly spring a leak. The AI is coming for this new job the same way it came for your old one. What makes you think seeing this ‘next evolution’ after that coming is going to leave you a role to play in it? If the only way to survive is to continuously reinvent yourself to do what just became possible, as Jan puts it? There’s only one way this all ends. I also don’t understand Jan’s disparate treatment of the first approach that Jan dismisses, ‘be the one who uses AI the best,’ and his solution of ‘find new things AI can do and do that.’ In both cases you need to be rapidly learning new tools and strategies to compete with the other humans. In both cases the competition is easy now since most of your rivals aren’t trying, but gets harder to survive over time. One can make the case that humans will continue to collectively have jobs, or at least that a large percentage will still have jobs, but that case relies on either AI capabilities stalling out, or on the tricks Jan dismisses, that you find where demand is uniquely human and AI can’t substitute for it.
Even if the point was totally correct for some tasks, no, this would not mean that the threat to work is overrated, even if we are sticking in ‘economic normal’ untransformed worlds. The proposed policy solution, if we get into trouble, is a wage subsidy. I do not think that works, both because it has numerous logistical and incentive problems and because I don’t think there will be that much difference in such worlds in demand for human labor at (e.g.) $20 versus $50 per hour for the same work. Mostly the question will be, does the human add value here at all, and mostly you don’t want them at $0, or if they’re actually valuable then you hire someone either way.
So you get claims like this:
The ‘outsider’ line above is counting on working together with an expert to do the rest of the steps. If the larger system (AI, human or both) is a true outsider, the issue is that it will get the simulations wrong. This is insightful in terms of why some people think ‘this can do [X]’ and others think ‘this cannot do [X],’ they are thinking of different [X]s. The AI can’t ‘be a lawyer’ in the full holistic sense, not yet, but it can do increasingly many lawyer subtasks, either accelerating a lawyer’s work or enabling a non-lawyer with context to substitute for the lawyer, or both, increasingly over time. There’s nothing stopping you from creating an agentic workflow that looks like the Expert in the above graph, if the AI is sufficiently advanced to do each individual move. Which it increasingly is or will be. There’s a wide variety of these ‘the AI cannot and will never be able to [X]’ moves people try, and… well, I’ll be, look at those goalposts move. Things a more aligned or wiser person would not say, for many different reasons:
What’s it going to take? This is in reference to Claude Code creating a C compiler.
There will always be a next ‘what about,’ right until there isn’t. Thus, this also sounds about right:
The Art of the Jailbreak
Introducing
In Other AI News
That Amanda Askell largely works alone makes me think of I noticed that Amanda Askell wants to give her charitable donations to fight global poverty, despite doing her academic work on infinite ethics and working directly on Claude for Anthropic. If there was a resume that screamed ‘you need to focus on ASI going well’ then you’d think that would be it, so what does Amanda (not) see?
Ah recursive self-improvement and continual learning,
In addition to losing a cofounder, xAI is letting some other people go as well in the wake of being merged with SpaceX.
Show Me the Money
It’s not the job you likely were aspiring to when you signed up, but it is an important and valuable job. Optimizing the Fortune 500 scales rather well.
Bubble, Bubble, Toil and Trouble(As always, nothing I say is investment advice.)
That does indeed look like pulling ahead on the API front. 80% is crazy. We also get this full assertion that yes, all of this was triggered by ‘a simple set of industry-specific add-ons’ that were so expected that I wasn’t sure I should bother covering them beyond a one-liner.
Last week in the markets was crazy, man.
Permanent underclass would just be larger if there were indeed fewer profits, but yeah, none of that made the slightest bit of sense. It’s the second year in a row Nvidia is down 10% in the dead of winter on news that its chips are highly useful, except this year we have to add ‘and its top customers are committing to buying more of them.’ Periodically tech companies announce higher CapEx spend then the market expects. That is a failure of market expectations. After these announcements, the stocks tend to drop, when they usually should go up. There is indeed an obvious trade to do, but it’s tricky. Ben Thompson agrees with me on Google’s spending, Speaking of low cost of capital, Meanwhile, if you are paying attention, it is rather obvious these are in expectations good investments.
Whenever you hear ‘market moved due to [X]’ you should be skeptical that [X] made the market move, and you should never reason from a price change, so perhaps this is
If your plan is to sell software that can now be easily duplicated, or soon will be easily duplicated, then you are in trouble. But you are in highly predictable trouble, and the correct estimate of that trouble hasn’t changed much. The reactions to CapEx spend seem real and hard to argue with, despite them being directionally incorrect. But seriously, Claude Legal? I didn’t even blink at Claude Legal. Claude Legal was an inevitable product, as will be the OpenAI version of it. Yet it is
Chris Walker’s overview of the SaaSpocalypse is, I think largely correctly, that AI makes it easy to implement what you want but now you need even more forward deployed human engineers to figure out what the customers actually want.
That is true so long as the AI can’t replace the forward engineers, meaning it can’t observe the tacit actual business procedures and workflows well enough to intuit what would be actually helpful. Like every other harder-for-AI task, that becomes a key human skill until it too inevitably falls to the AIs. Future ShockA potential explanation for the market suddenly ‘waking up’ with Opus 4.6 or Claude Legal, despite these not being especially surprising or impressive given what we already knew, would be if: Before, normies thought of AI as ‘what AI can do now, but fully deployed.’ Now, normies think of AI as ‘this thing that is going to get better.’ They realize this will happen fast, since Opus 4.5 → 4.6 was two months. [They know nothing](https://substack.com/redirect/83c05d9d-7ee4-4979-95dc-f870002f21dc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), but now do so on a more dignified level.
Or alternatively: Normies think of AI as ‘what AI can do now, but fully deployed.’ Before, they thought that, and could tell a story where it wasn’t a huge deal. Now, they think that, but they now realize that this would already be a huge deal. [They know nothing](https://substack.com/redirect/83c05d9d-7ee4-4979-95dc-f870002f21dc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), but now do so on a (slightly) more dignified level.
Memory Lane
AIs already have strong truesight and are very good at lie detection. Over time, not only will your AIs become more capable, they also will get more of your context. Or at least, you will want them to have more such context. Thus, if you Keep The Mask On Or You’re Fired
I have no private information here. You can draw your own Bayesian conclusions.
Quiet SpeculationsNate Silver points out that I reiterate that the idea of a ‘gentle singularity’ that OpenAI and Sam Altman are pushing is, quite frankly, pure unadulterated copium. This is not going to happen. Either AI capabilities stall out, or things are going to transform in a highly not gentle way, and that is true even if that ultimately turns out great for everyone.
It is important to understand that when Sam Altman says this he is lying to you. I’m not saying Sam Altman is wrong. I’m saying he knows he is wrong. He is lying. Nate Silver adds to this by pointing out that the political impact alone will be huge, and also saying Silicon Valley is bad at politics, that disruption to the creative class is a recipe for outsized political impact even beyond the huge actual AI impacts, and that the left’s current cluelessness about AI means the eventual blowback will be even greater. He’s probably right.
Are AI games coming? Obviously AI games, and games incorporating more AI for various elements, will happen eventually over time. But there are good reasons why this is remarkably difficult beyond coding help (and AI media assets, if you can find a way for players not to lynch you for it). Good gaming is about curated designed experiences, it is about the interactions of simple understandable systems, it is about letting players have the fun. Getting generative AI to actually play a central role in fun activities people want to play is remarkably difficult. Interacting with generative AI characters within a game doesn’t actually solve any of your hard problems yet. This seems both scary and confused:
It’s confused in the sense that if we get a software-only singularity, then that makes the physical stuff less important. It’s scary in the sense that he’s predicting a singularity within the next few years, and the thing he’s primarily thinking about is which country will be completely transformed by AI faster. These people really believe these things are going to happen, and soon, and seem to be missing the main implications.
Alas, no. Rather than update that this was a mistake, every time a mistake like this happens the mistake never even gets corrected, let alone accounted for.
The Quest for Sane Regulations
DeSantis has moral clarity on the AI issue and is not going to let it go. It will be very interesting to see how central the issue is to his inevitable 2028 campaign.
The world will gather in India for the fourth AI They have the worst take on safety, yes the strawman is real:
As in: In 2024, they told us AI might kill everyone at some point. It’s 2026 and we’re still alive. So stop worrying about it. Problem solved.
No, seriously. That’s the argument.
The main rhetorical strategy of this group is busting these ‘myths’ Chip City
If we are serious about ‘winning’ and we want a Federal moratorium, may I suggest one banning restrictions on data centers? Whereas In the ongoing series ‘Obvious Nonsense from Nvidia CEO Jensen Huang’ we can now add his claim that In the ongoing series ‘He Admit It from Nvidia CEO Jensen Huang’ we can now add this:
Every chip that is sold to China is a chip that is not sold to Anthropic or another American AI company. Anthropic might not have wanted that particular chip, but TSMC has limited capacity for wafers, so every chip they make is in place of making a different chip instead. Oh, and in the new series ‘things that are kind of based but that you might want to know about him before you sign up to work for Nvidia’ we have this.
He makes good points in that speech, and directionally the speech is correct. He was talking to Stanford grads, pointing out they have very high expectations and very low resilience because they haven’t suffered. He’s right about high expectations and low resilience, but he’s wrong that the missing element is suffering, although the maximally anti-EA pro-suffering position is better than the standard coddling anti-suffering position. These kids have suffered, in their own way, mostly having worked very hard in order to go to a college that hates fun, and I don’t think that matters for resilience. What the kids have not done is failed. You have to fail, to have your reach exceed your grasp, and then get up and try again. Suffering is optional, consult your local Buddist. I would think twice before signing up for his company and its culture. The Week in Audio
Constitutional ConversationJanus holds a ‘group reading’ of the new Claude Constitution. Should LLMs be so averse to deception that they A fun fact is that there was one summer that I played a series of Diplomacy games where I played fully honest (if I broke my word however small, including inadvertently, it triggered a one-against-all showdown) and everyone else was allowed to lie, and I mostly still won. Everyone knowing you are playing that way is indeed a disadvantage, but it has a lot of upside as well. Rhetorical Innovation
The LLMs are thinking. If you disagree, I am confused, but also who cares?
This came after Derek asked one of the very good questions:
Alas I think Dainéil is essentially correct about most such folks. No amount of argument will convince them. If no one knows exactly what kind of transformations we will face, then no matter what has already happened those types will assume that nothing more will change. So there’s nothing to be done for such folks. The rest of us need to get to work applying Bayes’ Rule. Interesting use of this potential one-time here, I have ordered a copy:
This below does seem like a fair way to see last week:
I was honored to get the top recommendation in the replies. You can choose not to push the button. You can choose to build another button. You can also remember what it means to ‘push the button.’
There’s that mistake again, assuming the associated humans will be in charge.
It’s the ones who train the LLM. It’s the LLM.
If you are trying to advocate for AI safety, does this mean you need to I note Adam Thierer, who I disagree with strongly about all things AI, here being both principled and correct.
Working On It AnywayNate Sores reiterates the explanation that it sounds crazy but yes, a lot of people working on AI know it is existentially dangerous, and work on it anyway, either to do it safer than the next guy or because money and influence and it’s a cool problem and they don’t internalize the risks, or social pressure, or some combination thereof. I think this answer is pretty much spot on.
If you are working at a frontier AI company, and think that the product you are working on is plausibly going to cause there to no longer exist humans, I think this is a fact that you should be clear upon. If the company you work for has a problem with that, I don’t think you should work for that company. That is especially true if you are doing pragmatic compromise.
The Thin Red Line
The problem is that red lines get continuously crossed and then no one does anything.
Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is DifficultThe great thing about Asimov’s robot stories and novels was that they were mostly about the various ways his proposed alignment strategies break down and fail, and are ultimately bad for humanity even when they succeed. Definitely endorsed.
Roon is spot on that Asimov is suggesting a legal structure cannot on its own align AI. My survey says that a modest majority have read their Asimov, and it is modestly correlated with AI even after controlling for my Twitter readers.
I also think that, at current capability levels and given how models currently work, the Anthropic approach of character and virtue ethics is correct here. The OpenAI approach of rules and deontology is second best and more doomed, although it is well-implemented given what it is, and far better than not having a spec or target at all.
The big fun thing they find is calculator hacking, The other more serious misalignment issues are rearer, such as a 0.5% rate of fabricated facts and 0.4% chance of concealing uncertainty and a 0.34% chance of ‘other deception’ in actual traffic. That’s not out of line with our general expectations, but it adds up. GPT-5 and 5.1 predicted it might be in an evaluation 10% and 4% of the time, respectively, which seems like a healthy paranoia level.
The 1.0 version did not address frontier safety at all, whereas the 2.0 version does. People Will Hand Over Power To The AIsOne category are people who explicitly are excited to do this, who would love to give the future to AIs.
People Are Worried About AI Killing EveryoneWorried about someone else doing it first, that is. He admit it.
He would presumably say it was a joke. Yeah, not buying that. Famous Last WordsJimmy Ba had his last day as a founder at xAI, and told us this, warning that recursive self improvement loops go live within the next 12 months and it will be ‘the most consequential year for our species.’
Then there’s the OpnAI employee who quit and went straight to The New York Times.
Hint, her opinion is no:
Zoe’s concerns are very much not existential. They are highly mundane and usual worries about advertising, and the comparison to Facebook is apt. There are many ethical reasons to quit building something. I agree with Sean here that this op-ed is indeed net good news about OpenAI.
Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing EveryoneYeah, so, um, yeah.
This is the actual number one remaining ‘can we please not be so stupid as to,’ and in case anyone was wondering, that means via the Sixth Law of Human Stupidity that yes, we will be so stupid as to connect the LLM to the autonomous bio lab, what could possibly go wrong, it’s worth it to bring down production costs. And, because even after all these years I didn’t realize we were quite this stupid:
This is what those trying to have us not die are up against. Among other things.
Perhaps notice when you are about to lose your birthright and reason you exist.
The Lighter Side
File under ‘the question is not whether machines think’:
Claude has never been more relatable:
How have I not seen this before:
You're currently a free subscriber to |