---
subject: "Ford Madox Ford on Joseph Conrad"
from: "Marginal REVOLUTION <donotreply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-12-09 06:20:27
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tyler Cowen", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2466199532210586699", "UNREAD"]
---
And, above all things else, as the writer has somewhere pointed out, Conrad was a politician. He loved the contemplation of humanity pulling away at the tangled skeins of parties or of alliances. Until, suddenly a strand gave, a position cleared up, a ministry was solidly formed, a dynasty emerged. He was, that is to say a student of politics, without prescription, without dogma, and, as a Papist, with a profound disbelief in the perfectibility of human institutions. The writer never saw Conrad read any book of memoirs except those of Maxime Ducamp and the Correspondence of Flaubert; those we read daily together over a space of years. But somewhere in the past Conrad had read every imaginable and unimaginable volume of politicians’ memoirs, Mme de Campan, the Duc d’Audiffret Pasquier, Benjamin Constant, Karoline Bauer, Sir Horace Rumbold, Napoleon the Great, Napoleon III, Benjamin Franklin, Assheton Smith, Pitt, Chatham, Palmerston, Parnell, the late Queen Victoria, Dilke, Morley.... There was no memoir of all these that he had missed or forgotten—down to Il Principe or the letters of Thomas Cromwell. He could suddenly produce an incident from the life of Lord Shaftesbury and work it into Nostromo: which was the political history of an imagined South American Republic. That was one of the secrets of his greatness.
But certainly he had no prescription. Revolutions were to him always anathema since, he was accustomed to declare, all revolutions always have been, always must be, nothing more in the end than palace intrigues: intrigues either for power within, or for the occupancy of, a palace. The journalists’ bar in the palace of the Luxemburg where sits the present Senate of the Third Republic was once the bedchamber of Marie de Medicis. That is not to say that Conrad actively desired the restoration of the Bourbons: he would have preferred the journalists to remain where
[[Pg 60] they were rather than have any revolution at all. All revolutions are an interruption of the processes of thought and of the discovery of a New Form ... for the novel.]
The short book, [online and free](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=629c3f39ef5340574a4bcd2baba62d904513165065f810e07a4c505c26fc7661&blog_id=42693868&post_id=91981&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=433bc7ce6776a133947de615521803be&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly9ndXRlbmJlcmcuY2EvZWJvb2tzL2ZvcmRmbS1qb3NlcGhjb25yYWQvZm9yZGZtLWpvc2VwaGNvbnJhZC0wMC1oLWRpci9mb3JkZm0tam9zZXBoY29ucmFkLTAwLWguaHRtbA=&email_id=74ac7cfd6c75a9301c24d6bc0c3fa9bf), is interesting throughout. Ford knew Conrad well, and appreciated him at a deep level.