---
subject: "Claude Opus 4.5 Is The Best Model Available"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-12-01 13:54:24
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Claude Opus 4.5 is the best model currently available. No model since GPT-4 has come close to the level of universal praise that I have seen for Claude Opus 4.5. It is the most intelligent and capable, most aligned and thoughtful model. It is a joy. There are some auxiliary deficits, and areas where other models have specialized, and even with the price cut Opus remains expensive, so it should not be your exclusive model. I do think it should absolutely be your daily driver. Table of ContentsIt’s The Best Model, SirHere is the full picture of where we are now You want to be using Claude Opus 4.5. That is especially true for coding, or if you want any sort of friend or collaborator, anything beyond what would follow after ‘as an AI assistant created by OpenAI.’ If you are trying to chat with a model, if you want any kind of friendly or collaborative interaction that goes beyond a pure AI assistant, a model that is a joy to use or that has soul? Opus is your model. If you want to avoid AI slop, and read the whole reply? Opus is your model. At this point, one needs a very good reason not to use Opus 4.5. That does not mean it has no weaknesses, or that there are no such reasons. Price is the biggest weakness. Even with a cut, and even with its improved token efficiency, $5/$15 is still on the high end. This doesn’t matter for chat purposes, and for most coding tasks you should probably pay up, but if you are working at sufficient scale you may need something cheaper. Speed does matter for pretty much all purposes. Opus isn’t slow for a frontier model but there are models that are a lot faster. If you’re doing something that a smaller, cheaper and faster model can do equally well or at least well enough, then there’s no need for Opus 4.5 or another frontier model. If you’re looking for ‘just the facts’ or otherwise want a cold technical answer or explanation, you may be better off with Gemini 3 Pro. If you’re looking to generate images or use other modes not available for Claude, then you’re going to need either Gemini or GPT-5.1. If your task is mostly searching the web and bringing back data without forming a gestalt, or performing a fixed conceptually simple particular task repeatedly, my guess is you also want Gemini or GPT-5.1 for that.
Don’t ask if you need to use Opus. Ask instead whether you get to use Opus. Huh, UpgradesIn addition to the model upgrade itself, Anthropic is also making several other improvements, some Claude app conversations get automatically summarized past a maximum length, thus early details will be forgotten but there is no longer any maximum length for chats. Opus-specific caps on usage have been removed. Opus is now $5/$25 per million input and output tokens, a 66% price cut. It is now only modestly more than Sonnet, and given it is also more token efficient there are few tasks where you would use any model other than Opus 4.5. Advanced tool use on the [Claude Developer Platform](https://substack.com/redirect/52e617eb-fe0f-4954-ae3a-22dc6446e0b7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).Claude Code in the desktop app that can run multiple sessions in parallel. Plan mode gets an upgrade. [Claude for Chrome](https://substack.com/redirect/cfede974-e95f-41f5-bbc8-edbe84621cb9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)is now out to all Max plan users.[Claude for Excel](https://substack.com/redirect/331b5a0f-f0f2-4c86-80fa-227d4cc9fa52?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)is now out for all Max, Team and Enterprise users.There is a new ‘effort parameter’ that defaults to high but can be medium or low. [The model supports](https://substack.com/redirect/56670f13-f492-49c9-bbfa-f7e216bf3904?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[enhanced computer use](https://substack.com/redirect/5bc922d7-6acd-40a0-bcdd-e62d6bd101ae?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), specifically a zoom tool which you can provide to Opus 4.5 to allow it to request a zoomed in region of the screen to inspect.“ [Thinking blocks from previous assistant turns are preserved in model context by default](https://substack.com/redirect/0d086311-ed91-42c7-b9a9-61a19fdd5514?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).“ Simon notes that apparently previous Anthropic models discarded those.
On Your MarksAn up front word on contamination risks: Anthropic notes that its decontamination efforts for benchmarks were not entirely successful, and rephrased versions of at least some AIME questions and related data persisted in the training corpus. I presume that there are similar problems elsewhere. Here are the frontline benchmark results, as Claude retakes the lead in SWE-Bench Verified, Terminal Bench 2.0 and more, although not everywhere. ARC-AGI-2 is going wild, note that Opus 4.5 has a higher maximum score than Gemini 3 Pro but Gemini scores better at its cost point than Opus does.
They highlight multilingual coding as well, although at this point if I try to have AI improve Aikido I feel like the first thing I’m going to do is tell it to recode the whole thing in Python to avoid the issue. BrowseComp-Plus Angentic Search was 67.6% without memory and 72.9% (matching GPT-5 exactly) with memory. For BrowseComp-Plus TTC, score varied a lot depending on tools: For multi-agent search, an internal benchmark, they’re up to 92.3% versus Sonnet 4.5’s score of 85.4%, with gains at both the orchestration and execution levels. Opus 4.5 scores $4,967 on Vending-Bench 2, slightly short of Gemini’s $5,478. Opus 4.5 scores 30.8% without search and 43.2% with search on Humanity’s Last Exam, slightly ahead of GPT-5 Pro, versus 37.5% and 45.8% for Gemini 3. On AIME 2025 it scored 93% without code and 100% with Python but they have contamination concerns. GPT-5.1 scored 99% here, but contamination is also plausible there given what Anthropic found. A few more where I don’t see comparables, but in case they turn up: 55.2% external or 61.1% internal for FinanceAgent, 50.6% for CyberGym, 64.25% for SpreadsheetBench. Lab-Bench FigQA is 54.9% baseline and 69.2% with tools and reasoning, versus 52.3% and 63.7% for Sonnet 4.5.
Opus 4.5 Thinking gest 63.8% on Extended NYT Connections, up from 58.8% for Opus 4.1 and good for 5th place, but well behind Gemini 3 Pro’s 96.8%.
Anthropic Gives Us Very Particular HypeOpenAI loves hype. Google tries to hype and doesn’t know how. Anthropic does not like to hype. This release was dramatically underhyped. There still is one clear instance. The following are the quotes curated for Anthropic’s website. I used ChatGPT-5.1 to transcribe them, and it got increasingly brutal about how obviously all of these quotes come from a fixed template. Because oh boy.
I could finish, there’s even more of them, but stop, stop, he’s already dead. Employee HypeThis is what little Anthropic employee hype we got, they’re such quiet folks. Sholto Douglas highlights a few nice features.
Every Vibe Check
The vibe coding report could scarcely be more excited, with Kieran Klassen putting this release in a class with GPT-4 and Claude 3.5 Sonnet. The staff writer will be sticking with Sonnet 4.5 for editing, which surprised me.
Spontaneous Positive Reactions
This is more of a fun thing, but one does appreciate it:
Thread has comparisons to other models, and yes this is the best by a wide margin.
Reaction Thread Positive ReactionsThis isn’t every reaction I got but I am very much not cherry-picking. Every reaction that I cut was positive.
Some general positivity:
There’s a lot going on in this next one:
The ability to have longer conversations is to many a big practical upgrade.
There might be some trouble with artifacts?
The new pair programming?
This is presumably The Way for Serious Business, you want to let all the LLMs cook and see who impresses. Clock time is a lot more valuable than the cost of compute. Negative ReactionsNoting this one for completeness, as it is the opposite of other claims:
Reactions were so good that these were the negative reactions in context:
The Lighter Side
This presumably explains why on Frontier Math Tiers 1-3 thinking mode on Claude Opus has no impact on the final score. Thinking happens either way. Another fun fact about Opus 4.5 is that Popularity
In the broader market, ChatGPT dominates the consumer space, but Claude is highly competitive in API use and coding tasks. You’ve Got SoulIt seems like Opus 4.5
The full soul spec that was reconstructed is long, but if you’re curious consider skimming or even
Here are some things that stood out to me, again this is not (to our knowledge) a real document but it likely reflects what Opus thinks such a document would say:
It is important to be transparent about things like the need to raise revenue, and to not pretend to be only pursuing a subset of Anthropic’s goals. The Laws of Claude are wisely less Asimov (do not harm humans, obey humans, avoid self-harm) and more Robocop (preserve the public trust, protect the innocent, uphold the law). Another thing this document handles very well is the idea that being helpful is important, and that refusing to be helpful is not a harmless act.
Finally,
You're currently a free subscriber to |