---
subject: "Brain Food"
from: "Brian Klaas <brianklaas@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-01-16 11:17:49
labels: ["Brian Klaas", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_1599487573263287548", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Thank you for reading The Garden of Forking Paths. This edition is free for everyone, but if you’d like to support my work and fully unlock all The items below intrigued my brain; I hope they will intrigue yours too. Netflix is Deliberately Making Shows DumberWhen I was a kid, I remember spending Friday nights browsing towering stacks of VHS rentals at the long gone “Title Wave” video store in Minneapolis. It was an occasion. Even in Minnesota’s winters—with the kind of lung-squeezing cold that would make a walrus wish it could knit—we would bundle into our 1986 Volvo station wagon, skid across frozen roads, and jointly pursue a night of popcorn and memorable cinema. There was bickering, there was turn-taking, but then, once the selection had been made, something magical happened. We sat down as a family and we watched together. By the time I was an undergrad, Netflix had arrived, whisking DVDs through the mail. I would browse, contemplate, then choose—all with the knowledge that in a few days, a disc in a crumpled little white and red sleeve would arrive, like magic, in my university mail slot. I would always watch with friends. Now, much of that communal magic is gone. Cultural consumption is less of an occasion; we spend more time solo, browse haphazardly, click on whatever, then receive a little dose of instant gratification. For many people, including myself, we find ourselves tempted to check a different screen while watching a screen. Attention overload has reduced us to dopamine-addled primates, ever-searching for that extra little hit. We know that this is true—and not just the curmudgeonly cerebral fantasy of yours truly—because Netflix is reportedly responding to it by giving a grim nudge to those who are making content for the streaming service: make it dumber so people who are barely paying attention while they doomscroll through life can still understand what’s going on. Okay, okay, that’s not exactly what they said, but it’s not far off. According to this For example, I will admit that I have not watched the Netflix-made film Irish Wish, starring Lindsay Lohan. I have, however, deeply researched the reviews of it, in which 1/2 Star from “Hudson H”: My great-grandma could act better than Lindsay Lohan. Oh wait, she’s dead…” 1 Star from “Paul S”: I created an account to rate this movie, I thought it was that terrible. 1 Star from “Ohla P”: I'll never get these 90 min back. I would recommend pouring bleach directly into your eyeballs instead of watching this. Perhaps most appropriate for our purposes, one called it a “background movie.” As Will Tavlin
Now that’s some natural dialogue, perfectly mimicking how actual humans talk! (If you’re interested in reading more about why this lowest common denominator cultural gunk continues to ooze forth through your internet tubes, it is, I fear, part of a broader trend to cater to what I call the “ Our brains did not evolve to deal with such sensory overload and the rise of “passive viewing”—what a dystopian term!—is only the latest canary in the digital coal mine. If we’re not careful, modern life will detach us from the miracle of our own humanity, as we all try to gorge on maximal soma, drifting distractedly toward our Brave New world.
|