---
subject: "AI #48: The Talk of Davos"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-01-25 16:07:33
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
While I was in San Francisco, the big head honchos headed for Davos, where AI was the talk of the town. As well it should be, given what will be coming soon. It did not seem like anyone involved much noticed or cared about the existential concerns. That is consistent with the spirit of Davos, which has been not noticing or caring about things that don’t directly impact your business or vibe since (checks notes by which I mean an LLM) 1971. It is what it is. Otherwise we got a relatively quiet week. For once the scheduling worked out and I avoided the Matt Levine curse. I’m happy for the lull to continue so I can pay down more debt and focus on long term projects and oh yeah also keep us all farther away from potential imminent death. Table of ContentsIntroduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. Might not come cheap. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. The ancient art of walking. Copyright Confrontation. It knows things, but it still cannot drink. Fun With Image Generation. Poisoning portraits in the park. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. Use if and only if lonely. They Took Our Jobs. The one saying it won’t happen interrupted by one doing it. Get Involved. New jobs, potential unconference. In Other AI News. Various people are doing it, for various values of it. Quiet Speculations. How fast is efficiency improving? Intelligence Squared. Why so much denial that importantly smarter is possible? The Quest for Sane Regulation. New polls, new bad bills, EU AI Act full text. Open Model Weights Are Unsafe and Nothing Can Fix This. More chips, then. The Week in Audio. Nadella, Altman and more. Rhetorical Innovation. Are you for or against the existence of humanity? Malaria Accelerationism. All technology is good, you see, well, except this one. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. Diversification needed. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Anton and Tyler. The Lighter Side. No spoilers.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
There is a strange response that ‘profits are razor thin.’ That cannot possibly be true of the engineering costs. It can only be true of the marketing costs. If you are getting customers via running mobile ads or other similar methods, it makes sense that the effective margins could be trouble. And of course, when marginal cost of production is close to zero, if there are many entrants then price will plunge. But a lot of customers won’t know about the competition, or they will know your works and be willing to pay, so a few gouged customers could be the way to go.
Prompting knowledge seems very low across the board. A lot of that is that prompting is work, it is annoying, and people in practice won’t do it. I notice myself largely not doing it. I mean, I do the basics, but nothing like what would get optimal results, because most of the time I don’t need optimal results.
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
Aidan Gomez says lacking an inner monologue is a big issue for LLMs, Copyright Confrontation
Their argument instead is that it is more like queries like ‘Who are Clearview AI’s investors?’ the answer to which comes from a 2020 NY Times investigation. But how does that harm NY Times? All of us are constantly doing exactly this, drawing on knowledge that others originally uncovered. Nor does this lose the Times revenue. Even if NY Times content could not be used for training data, no doubt this information has been remixed countless times elsewhere, and would get into the model anyway. I would hope we are not going to say that it is on OpenAI to remove any knowledge whose initial public sourcing was NY Times? The actual argument seems to be that Generative AI provides knowledge, and the Times provides knowledge and can’t stand the competition. They agree that copyright law does not forbid this even for an AI, and thus conclude that existing law is a poor fit. Fun with Image Generation
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
Part of a common pattern:
The pattern here is: AI creates a practical problem. AI can’t (for now) technologically addressing the issue, for technical reasons. Those who want uncontrolled AI development say that since AI solutions don’t work, the burden is on everyone else to find a technical solution instead.
Yann says, well, it would be terrible to subject AI models to standard regulation, certainly they can’t be expected to get together and agree to standards on their own, that would be crazy and also not doing that is good actually. So the burden of dealing with fake photos should fall on those making real photos, who need to together adapt their technologies and standards to solve the problem. There are precedents for exactly this, such as defending the currency against counterfeiting, or banks against wire fraud. So this could well be the practical solution. But also note what the law has to say about such other cases. They Took Our Jobs
Get Involved
Not AI, but self-recommending:
In Other AI News
Forbes reports that
Also there’s this:
Once again, if you want to cooperate with China on this, all you have to do is pick up the phone. I am not saying they will ultimately be willing to make a deal we can live with, but the ball is clearly in our court and we are the ones dropping it. Another note from that AP article:
Musk raising money for Grok, reportedly has already raised $500 million aiming for a valuation of at least $15 billion. That seems… very high.
Quiet Speculations
I notice I am skeptical that we are seeing so many different OOM-level improvements compounding at the same time, while GPT-4 continues to be our best public model despite being essentially two years old. Or, alternatively, if we have seen this many OOM improvements and only now is even Google likely matching performance, with lots of attempts continuously landing at 3.5-level, then perhaps various other things are more becoming limiting factors?
I say, build now anyway. Do now anyway. In my experience, it is by building and doing now, when the tools are not quite there, that you are ready to build and do first and better when the tools finally arrive. Not all the work I did with Magic strategies that were clearly ‘not there yet’ until new cards were available ended up paying off, but a lot of it did. Similarly, when you work with an early stupid AI and learn how to fix its issues, this seems like a useful way to be better prepared to understand and best use a future smarter AI, even if a lot of the specific things you do get thrown away. Often you build a business (that, as Paul Graham might say, won’t scale) early on, learn what you are doing and what the market wants, then replace it later anyway. Doing that with GPT-4-based wrappers, then replacing later, is no different. If your business plan relies on a core incompetency persisting, of course, that’s bad. Similarly, if all you care about is getting a particular set of work done and it will be so slow that AI will advance faster than the work, and you don’t otherwise learn or profit by doing, that is also different.
The goal people are after is a general purpose agent. I buy that the short term goal should instead be a specific purpose agent. Or at least, that should be the goal if what you want are users. Don’t focus on making it good at anything at all. Ship the actual MVP, which is similar to Maps navigation, an assistant that you tune to be very good at a limited set of actions towards a limited set of goals. An LLM-based agents can rapidly become excellent at this. Intelligence SquaredHow much smarter can things get than human beings? Quite a bit smarter. Humans occupy a narrow range with big differences even within it.
Claiming this is an S-curve, and that humans happen to lie in a close-to-optimal position on it, such that more intelligence won’t much matter, seems like a thing you can only conclude by writing that conclusion at the bottom first and working backwards. I do not understand why very smart people are almost intelligence deniers. They continuously claim that the smartest humans are not substantially more effective at key tasks, or at many tasks, than other humans, and also that it is not possible to importantly smarter than those smart humans. This is so obviously, trivially false. Relatively capable humans are different in kind in terms of what they can accomplish, along many axes that AIs will soon exceed humans, including the components of intelligence. A version of me, with the additional abilities that would be trivial to add if I was a digital intelligence, would be vastly dramatically different in terms of what it could do. So I notice I am confused.
Yeah, I don’t get it either.
I do not get how people can keep claiming ‘AI will always be only a tool’ like this.
Here is another form of this kind of intelligence denialism.
I would argue with the ratio, but the exact number does not matter. The the CEO spends a lot of time being a social animal, sure. But again, why would you think that extraordinary intelligence does not matter when taking meetings with investors, customers or policymakers, mediating feuds or especially recruiting new employees? Of course it matters, and it matters a lot. Both because it helps people develop those skills, and also because it helps adapt on the fly. Yes, people like myself and Timothy prefer to focus on other things and would like such skills to matter less. That does not mean that those skills don’t involve analyzing information, making good decisions and steering towards the best outcomes. If I had to pick the smartest person I have ever met, there are two plausible candidates. One of them opted out of the dominant ape thing. The other was a wildly successful cofounder and CEO. Did they have the dominant ape thing (and also the ambition thing, and the hard work thing, and so on)? Absolutely, but it was very closely tied to their intelligence on multiple fronts. They would not have had the same success if they were only normal smart.
It strikes me as such a bizarre answer. Yes, those extreme cases are ‘included in the regression.’ That is a statement about the calculation and methodology selected, not about the ground truth of impact of intelligence on earnings. Yes, there are over two thousand billionaires, over a thousand of whom likely earned that money. So a lot of them will not be IQ 180, or even be among the smartest people one has met. And indeed, most of the billionaires or other highly successful people I have met are not IQ 180. But that is because the base rate of that by definition is 1 in 20.7 million, so there are about 400 of them in the world, of whom I have plausibly met at most two, one of whom is a prominent billionaire. I happen to have had the opportunity to meet several other billionaires and other wildly successful people over the years. One thing they all have in common? They are all very smart. Never have I walked away from someone who earned nine or more figures in their life and been unimpressed by their intelligence. If you are one of the fortunate top 400 in the world in intelligence, what is the chance you will become a billionaire, whether or not that was your goal? Of those I polled about a third said it was over 0.1%, the rest said lower. That’s still a very large jump versus the base rate of roughly 1 in 3 million, or 0.0003%, very different from a 100% jump, but not as big as all that. The two best arguments against a larger increase that I saw were that you are not so likely to have been born in the West so you’d often lack opportunity, and that many such people don’t optimize for this result. Whereas if you were born in the West, and you do optimize for this result, the odds look much better. Why do we say intelligence ‘doesn’t matter much’ in these situations? Partly because no one who isn’t smart gets to these positions. Partly because when we say ‘smarts’ we often mean the nerd stuff rather than intelligence, where the CEO chose to ‘study’ the dominant ape thing instead. Partly because for related reasons the truly intelligent have the active disadvantage that they hate such activities and avoid them, whereas an AI need not have this issue. Partly because at current intelligence levels and human architectures, it is wise to largely fall back upon our instinctive brains and intuitions, whose level of ability is not as correlated with other forms of intelligence. Partly because there are other factors that impact ability, that get heavily selected for, and which are easier to notice.
Can the future more intelligent AGI do the CEO’s job? I think it plausibly could even without a proxy if it didn’t squick people out, people would adjust their expectations. Until then, this is definitely a place where a hybrid is very clearly better than a human. As in, the human takes orders via a voice in their ear (or even electrical signals to their muscles at some point?), at a micro level and also a macro level, from the voice in their ear, while playing the ape role. The AI makes all the decisions. If you have a human CEO actually in charge of your company in an AGI-infused world, I have two words for you: You lose. The Quest for Sane Regulations
I have learned not to trust people’s descriptions of what such acts say until I have a chance to read them, unless I highly trust a particular secondary source. I tried to read a previous version in depth and it was pure pain. This is important, though, so I will try again when I can get the time and gumption.
Connor Leahy This vision of banning deepfakes is essentially a ban on open model weights for image models. That is how the technology works. There is no way to create a worthwhile image model that cannot then be modified to create deepfakes. Similarly, any ban on LLMs that can do (bad thing that LLMs at this capability level can do) would be a ban on open model weight LLMs. This is, of course, because (as the section title says) open model weights are unsafe and nothing can fix this. Thus, you have two choices. You can allow models to be unsafe, which is fine if you are OK with what they can do (an ‘unsafe chair’ is a chair), or you can say models need to be in some ways safe. If your method of technology cannot be done safely, or cannot adhere to the needs of a normal regulatory state? Well, like many before you, there is some bad news.
Just in case, I looked up what AI means here, they are using the provision in
So the Hawaii bill is pretty obviously crazy and unworkable as written. That is the thing. People introduce stupid bills a lot. There are a lot of state legislators. Many of them do not know how any of this works, do not let that stop them, and there
Love it. By it I mean the in-fighting. I mean, as an investigation this is pretty dumb. OpenAI has plenty of competition, Microsoft was not otherwise going to be a serious competitor, I do not see issues from integration, what are they even talking about.
The pattern is clear. Note that Hawley includes ‘out of the hands of our adversaries.’ I am sure some of that will be chips, I continue to wonder to what extent such players are willing to discuss the consequences from open model weights. Concerns are outpacing excitement. Partisan splits on regulation are inevitable, but this is as good as it gets, and Republicans are slightly more supportive than Independants: Politico warns of this being increasingly partisan, saying ‘the split is faint but it is there.’ Hammer, meet nail. Open Model Weights Are Unsafe And Nothing Can Fix This
One source for this is VentureBeat, who also claimed that ‘open source AI won 2023’ which is the kind of statement that I don’t even know how to parse properly. Here is where Mark says his head is at:
This is a remarkably myopic perspective on AGI. AGI as a next-generation service provider. I mean, yes, it would be able to totally do that, and allow service features otherwise impossible. It is also a world-class example of burying the lede, and the world’s lamest excuse or explanation for why one must build non-human general intelligences, seemingly without even noticing that there are ways this might not turn out so well. Then again, note what Zuckerberg actually says in the video (around the 40 second mark):
Notice that extra word: Responsibly. Aye, now there’s the rub. Can you ‘responsibly’ release the weights to Llama-2? In terms of direct results, it depends on what counts as responsible. The safety work they did on Llama-2 can be entirely removed within a day at minimal cost. Luckily, there is nothing so terrible that a model at that level can do, so in direct terms it is fine. The real concerns are instead about how this impacts future releases and the overall pace and structure of development of AI. What happens when a future model would actually be dangerous if fully unleashed in the wrong hands, or even inherently dangerous without any intent to misuse it? If you ask me the extent to which you can ‘responsibly’ release the model weights of an artificial general intelligence? My response is going to be none whatsoever. You absolutely cannot do that. Perhaps we will later figure out a way to do it, but under current methods, there is very clearly not a way to do that. Whether or not there is a ‘safe’ or ‘responsible’ way to build AGI at all, any releasing of the model weights undoes all that on so many levels at once. So then the question is, what the hell does ‘responsible’ mean here, and what will ultimately happen? I do not think it is inevitable that he intends, let alone actually carries out, his threat. If Meta were to actually develop an AGI, and it was not at minimum well behind current state of the art, there would be plenty of information that the responsible thing to do is not ‘let anyone however malicious fine-tune this any way they want and then use it for anything they want.’ Then he pitches glasses so that the AI can see what you see, and presumably (although he does not say this) you can stop thinking entirely. Which is not a knock, letting people not think is indeed a true killer app. Yes, it has unfortunate implications, but those were there anyway. It is also noted that Meta’s chief scientist Yann LeCun So what is the plan? It is to train more Llama models, it seems. And to buy really quite a lot of that good old compute.
I would agree with Robin’s assessment with all those chips were exclusively for training Llama models. I do not think Meta has the other complementary tools for that much training compute. However Dan is right that presumably most of this is largely for inference and providing various services. Meta will not be selling these chips. They are also insurance. The default case is that costs go down as production rises, but I see multiple ways that could fail to happen. Perhaps there will be a war in Taiwan. Perhaps demand for chips grows even faster than supply, and prices do not fall. Perhaps Nvidia starts charging like a monopolist. Perhaps Nvidia decides not to sell to you, or to demand something in return. Perhaps the governments of the world start allocating or taking the supply. Perhaps restrictions are put in place on who can buy at this scale. Perhaps restrictions are put in place on irresponsible actors.
In addition to those ways for prices not to fall, there is also: This temporarily starves the competition of chips, perhaps meaningfully. If there are chips not being used, you can rent out the surplus compute. Getting into good position now is plausibly super valuable. Ten billion versus the future is pretty much chump change. What were you going to spend on instead, the Metaverse? Helps there too.
Meta is doing its best to play the cartoon villain role. But perhaps it is a bit more complicated than that?
Reviewers seems clearly right. I can’t speak to tensorflow. The counterargument on Nvidia is that the market clearing price of GPUs has for a while been much higher. If all the gamers and crypto miners and AI companies were actively bidding against each other and the market fully cleared, the cost of compute would go up a lot. Yes, the people who value it the most would get more of the best chips, but they would also be paying a lot more for them. If you think that Nvidia and TSMC are rate-limited and can’t scale faster with the resulting higher profits, it is not obvious which way this net effect goes. The bold claim of course is Meta. I think Dan is wrong and Gallabytes below nails it, but it is hard to underestimate how often directional effects are highly unclear, and such arguments do need to be taken seriously.
Meta makes it more difficult to make money in AI by shipping substandard base models, but who was doing that? The ‘can try things’ ability seems way more important. As for international competition, I do not believe China considers ‘use Llama variants’ an acceptable solution, so I do not think it decreases competition. Instead, it hands better tools to those behind in the competition, making it more intense.
Remember That, on a highly practical level. If there is a closed model from OpenAI, Google or Anthropic, you know the deal that you do not know what they are telling the model to do. If a model were fully for-real open source, where anyone can look at the data set and the training procedure, that would allow for the usual open source procedure of various people digging for potentially malicious data and debugging the algorithms and running various experiments and searching for possible backdoor triggers throughout and so on. To be clear, I am not saying I want people to go out and do that with frontier models and give everyone all the tools and work together to advance capabilities. I am not saying that because of the resulting diffusion and advancement of capabilities. It would be in a form you cannot take back and that goes to every bad actor forever and gets expanded over time. If we were only talking about 3.5-level models, or even 4-level models, or 4.5-level models, or hell maybe even 5-level models, I could accept that. We could talk price. But it also lays the foundation for and sets us down a path we won’t be able to turn off. The whole point of open source is that information wants to be free and There are only two ways to respond to an exponential, too early or too late. This is a crowd that takes pride in not stopping too early. What I am instead saying is that, if you want the benefits of open source, you have to actually be open source. Open model weights gets you a lot of the downside, without getting you most of the upside. Meta is trying to have it both ways. They are trying to claim the full benefits of open source without actually being open source. Even if open source proponents were fully right, it still would not work that way. The Week in Audio
This statement is not true. Here is the trend: You can claim, of course, if you want to, that the world’s GDP numbers are widely falsified and that all of this is hogwash, that we are not actually producing and consuming larger quantities of stuff than we previously did. I do not consider that claim credible. I certainly do not think that this is what Nadella would say if he were asked a follow-up question. Also Nadella’s follow-up was that there is no growth and that AI was the only potential future source of growth. The context he adds later is weird and raises further questions. He says his goal is to ‘get back to 2%-3% real economic growth’ via AI. He says the last time we had growth was the PC. What? I don’t know if Nadella actually believes this. If he doesn’t, he is lying. If he does, then we learned something very important about his epistemics and how much he cares about being accurate even on important questions. I would think that knowing economic growth was positive would be kind of important to the role of the CEO of Microsoft. If this was not true then they should make many different decisions. Either way, we now have common knowledge that he will make big important claims, about things highly pertinent to his job, that are untrue, and which he has the ability to easily learn are untrue.
Nadella’s call around 17:45 is for evaluations of foundation models and risk-based assessments of applications. That is a reasonable answer given he has no intention of taking this fully seriously. At 19:30 is he is asked for governments are up to understanding the situation, and he says we will always be up for being able to regulate and control any technology. That the tech and the principles of its governance should be simple and clear. Again, not taking the situation seriously.
Rhetorical Innovation
This is classic form Scott Alexander, where he takes extra care to fine the best steelman of the opposing positions (with varying degrees of ability to find them, such as him noting that ‘humans and AIs merge’ does not actually make any competitive sense and is not going to be a thing), thinks well perhaps me and everyone I know should die or everything I know or believe in is wrong or everything I value should be overruled, maybe I am actually Worse Than Hitler and should never ever ever ever ever ever leave my house again, without a hint of derision or mockery. Then, of course, comes the part where he thinks he’s done enough interpretive and emotional labor that it might be acceptable to say that there is some small chance that it is in part the seemingly crazy people that are wrong, which here is sections II and III.
I am less ambivalent than Scott on this. I am sure that there exist potential far future states of the universe that capture large percentages of maximum potential value, not only non-zero value, in which there exist zero (or on a cosmic scale almost zero) biological humans, or even close digital simulations of humans, and that it is possible we could get there from here in an acceptable way. I also very much do not expect that to happen by accident or default or without an extraordinary effort, and would very much like humans to stay alive and in control of the future for a while, thank you very much. And I assert that I get to have preferences over world states in this way.
The entire universe is math. What, me worry? Malaria AccelerationismMaybe I shouldn’t be mentioning this at all but it’s too beautiful. Also we need to be able to remind others of this later. Everyone has a technology they dislike. A place in which humanity has a duty not to mess with nature’s natural order. A way of helping people that is so unethical that principle means we must condemn people to die. Because if you give people fishing nets they control and can use for whatever they want, people might decide to misuse those mosquito nets to instead use them for fishing, you see. And it turns out that there are negative externalities to them doing that, because they might deplete common resources, or their toxic features might disturb fishing ecosystems. I mean, man, do you even hear yourself? If you thought any of this was principled, you can put those fears to bed. It is pure vibes, pure tribal politics of us and them, pure selfish talking of one’s book.
As poetic as this all is, this is not quite as good as when he wrote (the excellent!) ‘It’s Time to Build’ and then lobbied to prevent housing construction in his neighborhood. It’s still close. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
The core case is that, well, you’re not going to stop trying to do the alignment part, so now you have defense in depth, if either half of the plan works you are fine. The counterargument is that in practice this will not result in the same level of precaution and required other progress, you don’t get ‘free extra’ security for the same reason people drive faster with seat belts, and also you only have so much attention to pay to such techniques and especially to requiring others to use them. And I am constantly thinking ‘oh that’s another potentially false assumption’ as I read such work. I could go on, but I mostly have laid out my concerns and objections previously and from what I saw this does not much change them. As usual, I am very much not saying ‘do not work on this.’ By all means, please do keep working on this, we need a diverse portfolio of efforts even if I can’t see how it could work out. It is even harder if you do not know what is going on.
Interpretability is great. I do still worry this is succeeding a bit too well. Interpretability has many advantages, you can show clear incremental progress, the whole thing is legible. It is easy to see how to jump into it and start trying things. All of which is good. The concern is that it is sucking up too much of the safety or alignment effort, and we have an increasingly unbalanced portfolio. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone
Tyler Cowen continues to not worry, As has become his pattern, Tyler analyzes a world of only mundane AI, not considering what would happen with AI sufficiently intelligent and capable that it ceases to be centrally a tool for humans to use and humans cease being the ones doing the important thinking. He does not even mention this here, even to dismiss it. Since he does not offer arguments that such transformations won’t happen or won’t have the catastrophic or existentially risky consequences, I’ve realized the more useful way to respond to Tyler is to act as if he is only discussing the intermediate world of mundane AI, where both of us are similar optimists, and compare notes on implications there. It is a key question in its own right. One thing that caught my eye: He warns that writing skill might decline in value.
I agree with him that being bilingual will decline in value, but I am not convinced on writing. Yes, the AI will help you ‘punch up’ or fix your writing, and especially help you transpose forms and perform class. And it will help you with basic writing generic tasks. But I do not feel as if my skills are under any threat, and would expect to have far bigger problems or at least concerns (and opportunities) if they were under such threat. One might say that mundane AI will decrease returns to competence and the cost to get competence, across many areas, while perhaps increasing returns to excellence. If you can produce quality that the AI cannot match, then that will be in even higher demand in the places where that is valuable. Similarly, if AI generates a baseline, many ‘wordcel’ competitions will accelerate in complexity and skill, again assuming a ‘mundane’ AI world. Similarly, while the returns to being an articulate lawyer may well decline, especially as a function of medium-term oversupply relative to demand before labor allocation can adjust, I expect exceptional lawyers to thrive. I also think there is a large chance that lawyers will see that demand scales up rapidly as quality increases and cost falls, and that lawyers who can keep up end up doing well. On the flip side, using current tech trends, being as he suggests a carpenter currently looks to offer high returns. But will that last? I would be confident in my five year plan, but it would be shocking to me even with relatively slow AI progress if AI did not figure out ways to operate as a carpenter. Also, with the rise of vision and soon I presume video inputs to models, the same ‘skilling up’ process should greatly aid in skill development and helping people muddle through in such realms also, increasingly over time, even if the robotics and other physical steps continue to be elusive. The Lighter Side
I agree, except the ‘they’ in question is ‘The Internet.’
Forth: After years of meme jealousy, second-guessing, millions of repetitions, it finally comes full circle to where it needed to go Giving memes happy endings could be an entire genre. You're currently a free subscriber to |