---
subject: "The Pirates of the Caribbean Scent Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-02-07 11:01:38
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
[@wishescandleco](https://substack.com/redirect/12a6818e-ddce-4045-9bdc-49c0da56a256?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)
[Well, shiver me Timbers #piratesofthecaribbean #wishescandleco](https://substack.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.p7fI37r8Vz1jjlipGgZ0cRMTz8QqAbwEJfr5OLEGs9g?/#tiktok-iframe?media=1&app=1&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.tiktok.com%2F%40wishescandleco%2Fvideo%2F7138193155085585706%3Fembed_source%3D121331973%252C70972778%252C120811592%252C120810756%253Bnull%253Bembed_card_play%26refer%3Dembed%26referer_url%3Dwanderwisdom.com%252Fnews%252Fcandle-pirates-caribbean-ride%26referer_video_id%3D7138193155085585706&key=e27c740634285c9ddc20db64f73358dd)
Colin here. One of my first memories was being terrified on the Pirates of the Caribbean ride at Disneyland. My guess is my parents brought me on it a little too early because those subtle waterfalls and the animatronic pirates hit differently. I recently re-visited Disneyland and could still remember that first plunge where I lost my mind so many years ago. Also, the ride manages to hold up despite being pretty low-fi—cannonball splashes and all. Another sensory element that hits you as you return after 35+ years is the scent. Turns out I’m not the only one to notice. The unique smell of Pirates of the Caribbean is owed to the chemicals the park uses to keep things sanitary (as sanitary as a bunch of pirates can be— aarrr). Instead of using chlorine, they use a chemical called bromine, which has a unique damp and musty odor. But given the surroundings—swamps, old wood, and boats—somehow, it doesn’t seem all that off. According to
Why is this interesting? Disney is known for being hyper-attuned to small details in its theme parks and is said to pump certain smells into rides, restaurants, and booths. We will likely never know if the scent was custom-tuned to its environs or just a byproduct of time and memory. But it turns out the “Pirates” smell is a cult thing. A fan of the ride turned the scent into a candle, which you There are Reddit threads that go deep on Regardless of the intent and the alchemy or accident behind it, it is interesting to see that the scent behind one of Disneyland’s favorite rides is so deeply discussed and dissected. Even if it is only the simple chemical bromide as the culprit. (CJN) WITI Classifieds: We are experimenting with running some weekly classifieds in WITI. If you’re interested in running an ad, My Next Electric is a hella-fun online crash course about how to move from gas to electric cars and stoves. Parlance is a Brand Voice Advisory Studio. We Help Make the Impossible, Relatable. Noah here. I've got a new newsletter about brands and AI called BrXnd Dispatch. If you're in marketing, creative, or just interested in understanding what's up with AI, check it out. Tempo Rubato is a live classical music venue in an old factory shell in the backstreets of inner city Melbourne. The Intermodal Spirit. Writing about Exploring, Relating, and Being. Available by newsletter or online. Daly is a comms+ agency that reaches beyond the standard PR playbook to deliver results (and some magic) for our exceptional clients. — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) —
|