---
subject: "How I write essays"
from: "Henrik Karlsson <escapingflatland@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-12-04 14:04:35
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Henrik Karlsson", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_928547876862665886", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Microscope image of wood tissueOn 24 September, I wrote in the waste book about how I created the essays I’m most happy with. I was The idealized version of how my better essays were written looked like this (abbreviated): I spend plenty of time reading, talking to interesting people, and writing in my notebooks. (Starting essays before I have deeply internalized an idea does not work for me.) When I get excited about something, I articulate that as an “animating question.” In this post, it is, “How do I write good essays?” (Without that, the material is just a lump, and reading it feels like drifting.) I collect my thoughts in a wild sprawling mess. I have one or two million words in my journals and notes: I surface the relevant parts and throw them into a shared document. In this mess, I look for recurring topics and ideas. I rearrange the thoughts so that I get a few strong, separate ideas. Then I prune tangents that don’t fit those clusters. I make a guess about what order to deal with the points. This is not a blueprint, but a prediction. Without looking too much at my blueprint, I write the core part of the essay from “top to bottom.” I no not write an opening, nor an ending. I do not pick a narrative material—I let whatever occurs in the draft occur, for now. I reread the draft and pay attention to any strong ideas or narratives that emerged organically. I strengthen them, and prune the weak ones. I move things around if it creates more movement or stronger centers. Now, I write the opening and the end. The goal is to strengthen the whole and makes it feel coherent. I edit until I can’t find any more ways to improve it (or run out of time).
(Notice that this sequence describes creating essays—which are like amulets to me, encapsulating important insights, so I can return to them in my head, or reference them in conversations with friends. If I just want to think about something, I write Strategy and process is mostly a mistake when doing creative workAfter I wrote the list above, I wanted to see what would happen if I systematically followed the process. That was 2 months ago. I have now written six essays using the process. To sum up the experience: that list of steps is a good first approximation of what works for me. It avoids many pitfalls that I typically fall into. But to honor the potential of the material I am working with I almost always have to break out of the process and get lost in the desert. Having a method, a process, makes my writing more consistently good. This might sound like a win, but it is a problem. The usefulness and beauty of essays follow a power law, where the outliers create almost all the value—so if I make my essays more consistent, I remove not only the mistakes but also much of the upside. A method can, if used wisely, be a tool that helps you see possibilities. It can’t replace paying close attention to the material and figuring out what it is asking of you. As I was exploring this, I kept a writing diary. What follows is ~3000 words of reflections based on those notes. (See also, “ Subscribe to Escaping Flatland to unlock the rest.Become a paying subscriber of Escaping Flatland to get access to this post and other subscriber-only content. A subscription gets you:
|