---
subject: "ScienceDaily/Minimalist lamp/Avocado tip"
from: "Recomendo <recomendo@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-12-22 10:01:40
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Recomendo"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8455078693589186571"]
---
Latest research newsTo stay informed on the latest research news, I subscribe to Small touch-controlled bedside lamp with charging portsThis Avocado tipFor a steady stream of perfectly ripe avocados, let a bag of avocados come to near ripeness, and put them into a ziplock bag and place them in a refrigerator. They’ll remain in near-ripeness until you take them out one by one, a day before you want to eat them. — KK Bargain mattressesAuto tires are such a bargain at Costco that many folks get a Costco membership just for the tires. Mattresses are a similar bargain. You can get high quality branded mattresses – including classic bedspring models – for a lower price from Costco than from almost anywhere else. And Costco will deliver to the room, set up, and haul away your old mattress at no extra cost. And you can order them Free maze generator
World treasury of folk wisdomA "People seek out big-shots as flies seek out the elephant's tail." (Indonesian) "The full person does not understand the needs of the hungry." (Irish) "Worry often gives a small thing a big shadow." (Swedish) "A greedy person and a pauper are practically one and the same." (Swiss) "When money speaks, truth keeps silent." (Russian)
— MF Recomendo is an authentic, hand-crafted, human-written weekly newsletter that is free, but not cheap. Consider supporting our work with a paid option, now at the low price of $45 per year. Paid subs enable us to keep making it free for others. Recomendo is published by Cool Tools Lab, a small company of three people. We also run the Recomendo Unclassified Ads work! UNCLASSIFIEDS
Be an everyday genius. Learning a little every day can have a huge impact—especially if you're learning on Brilliant. Explore thousands of bite-sized, interactive lessons on everything from math and data analysis to programming, AI, and beyond. Listen to Articles as Podcasts: Email us links, PDFs or newsletters and our AI will deliver human-like narration to your podcast app. Seamlessly turn your readings into podcasts! Enjoy personalized episodes on-the-go. Want to build a website in 30 seconds? With Durable's AI Website Builder, you can. No coding, no design skills, no headaches. Try it for free or use Roswell's loving sanctuary for feral & abandoned cats! We provide food, medical care & spay/neuter services. Help us give these furry friends the life they deserve! Recomendo is copyrighted by Cool Tools Lab, LLC. Commissions may be earned from the links above. |