---
subject: "Martingale Beliefs"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <the-diff@ghost.io>"
to: ""
date: 2024-05-06 14:22:01
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX"]
---
|
|
In this issue: - Martingale Beliefs—Martingale betting is a strategy of continuously doubling-down, which is guaranteed to produce steady returns each gambling session until it completely blows up. This pattern shows up in many domains: in corporate strategy, in trading (of course), and even in the marketplace of ideas.
- Country Equity—The upsides of GDP-linked bonds.
- Costs and Benefits—Microsoft once again focuses on security.
- Continuation Funds—VC borrows a strategy from PE, and the supply of excellent companies accessible to public market investors continues to shrink.
- Deepfaking the Dead and the Last Generation of Celebrities—Getting endorsements from beyond the grave.
- Mature Financial Systems—Most stablecoin activity involves speculation and arbitrage, not real purchases. But that's even more true of fiat currency.
Martingale BeliefsMartingale betting is a popular and effective way to lose all of your money. It goes like this: bet $1 on some game where your odds are 50/50 minus whatever the casino takes. If you win, go home. If you lose, double your bet. Repeat this long enough and you’re guaranteed to make a dollar eventually—unless, of course, you run out of money. Which is inevitable because bankrolls aren't infinite, and because you’ll need to dig deeper into your pockets the longer you have bad luck. But in all probability, losing will be preceded by a very long winning streak in which you train yourself to see all drawdowns as temporary, and eventual profits as a guarantee. Martingales are very obviously a bad idea, albeit a tempting one if you don't think through to the logical conclusion (or don't just take the first-principles view that if your expected value is negative on any given bet, there is no betting strategy that is superior to the others). Regardless, it's a useful pattern to look for, not just because the risk of ruin shows up in so many other places, but because the mid-Martingale psychology is so toxic. There are many live examples, in finance and in other places. On the fundamental side, consider a case where there's a complicated stock with many moving pieces (maybe a Liberty company, maybe a business with messy corporate governance, maybe a company that's threatened by a new competitor—the details change, but the general pattern fits). Let's say that this company is mature enough to generate some free cash flow, and that it periodically buys back stock. An interesting feature of companies that buy back stock regularly is that their expected return rises when the stock declines. Suppose a company trades at 10x free cash flow and uses half of its cash flow to buy back shares. That's a 5% decline in shares each year, so if the business is static, cash flow per share rises 5.3% compounded (i.e. 1/.095). If the stock drops 20%, and the company is still buying back at the same pace, the free cash flow yield is now 12.5%, and that rises at 6.7%. So in a simplistic model where long-term returns converge on yield plus growth, its expected return has risen from 15.3% to 19.2%. Wonderful! Time to buy more! This general approach does work—it's adding a little extra explication to the general concept of buying low and selling high, or of having a value tilt in your factor exposures. But do this religiously, and it becomes a Martingale bet as soon as you add in some uncertainty. That’s ultimately because there are two kinds of cheap stocks: the kind that get cheap for a while and then snap back to normal, and the kind that look cheap all the way down. Consider Jim Chanos: he’s talked about shorting Eastman Kodak at a single-digit earnings multiple, and adding to the short at a similar multiple of 90% lower earnings. A value investor who is mechanically buying larger stakes in companies as their market price drifts further from that investor's assessment of their intrinsic value will end up with a portfolio dominated by mistakes. This gets especially bad when companies make the object-level prudent decision to appeal to their investor base. As the investor base consists of more and more people who are confident in the core business, their incentive is to double down on it, even if the short sellers' view is that this business is challenged and that's why the stock is a good short. So you can have cases where a stock trades at $5, could liquidate and return $6, but is going to keep reinvesting in the business because their shareholders think it's really worth $10. Buying a stock and adding to the position all the way to zero is at the far end of the long-term investing spectrum, but the same Martingale-style returns show up at the opposite end, in market-making. The most naive possible market-making strategy is to look at the midpoint of the bid/ask spread and quote a slightly narrower spread. So if someone can sell shares for $9.95 or buy them for $10.05, you quote $9.96/$10.04. Most of the time, this works just fine! Orders will be roughly 50/50 buys and sells, and the market-maker is earning eight cents on a round-trip. There's some risk, sure, but if the stock doesn't fluctuate much, that risk is not especially damaging. There might be a few unlucky draws—if orders happen at random, a little over 3% of the time you'll get five buys or five sells in a row. But on average, with random orders, it's a wash over time. The catch is, of course, that the stock doesn't stay still. If the midprice is $10.00, on average the stock will be at around $10.00, but sometimes a big buyer or seller will show up, and for the duration of their activity they'll be pushing the stock in whatever direction they're trading. Meanwhile, the market-maker has been helpfully providing competitively-priced liquidity. This strategy entails accumulating large positions at exactly the wrong prices—if you're always the high bidder, then when the stock moves from $10 to $9 you have a large long position with an average price of about $9.50, while a buyer pushing it to $11 means you've shorted a lot at $10.50. This is a small loss for a longer-term, more fundamentals-oriented strategy, but market-makers have an extraordinarily high ratio of dollar volume traded to capital. They really aren't in the business of taking large directional risks, and an implementation of this strategy that got acceptable returns on capital in a stable market environment would be wiped out in a large market move. This applies beyond business and finance. There's also a set of Martingale Beliefs, or, more strictly, Martingale strategies for coming up with things to believe. Natural contrarians are indispensable for advancing our ideas by instinctively shooting down the bad ones, but they're always running a risk: what if they succeed in persuading everyone that they're right? The last few decades have been net amazing for libertarians on social issues—things like cannabis legalization and gay marriage were hypotheticals in the 90s, then snuck into the Overton Window, and, in many places, are now the law of the land. It's a huge political victory. But from there, what's a contrarian to do? What often happens is that some people moderate for the reason that other people drift into extermism—the midpoint changes and their views don't. But the other option is to just stay equally disagreeable, and to find a new cause with a 90% unfavorable rating. (This, of course, drives the former-radicals-turned-satisfied-moderates absolutely crazy. "No, I'm not one of those 'if the grade school student consents to buying Fentanyl' types.") But all of these have a deep commonality: they're all a form of liquidity provision, the means by which resources get transferred to people with better information and analytical abilities. This is literally true in the case of the bad market-maker, who is essentially subsidizing informed traders by letting them take a larger position at a better price. The company that keeps pandering to the desires of shareholders who don't understand how the business is impaired is also giving short sellers more time to refine their thesis, and more opportunities to bet against the stock. And contrarians add liquidity to the market for ideas. It's costly, and usually not worth the cost, to advocate heterodox ideas in public. But sometimes the Overton Window has moved slowly because a given idea has been beyond consideration—even as facts on the ground have made it a better idea. So the contrarians are engaged in a negative expected value pursuit for them, but it's good for the rest of us that they periodically insist on re-raising important questions. This doesn't mean that market-making is an inherently blowup-prone strategy. Anyone can think through this thought experiment, though some DeFi liquidity providers don't. In fact, the skewness of returns from a naive market-making strategy, and the fact that more advanced strategies start with that approach and then elaborate with different ways to manage risk, means that long-lived market-making firms are actually a great repository of unwritten wisdom about risk-management. Not that they're talking; every mistake they avoid that a competitor doesn't is a contribution to their future market share. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/05939624?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
You're on the free list for The Diff. Last week, paying subscribers read about Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. See a sampling of current open roles below: - A company building ML-powered tools to accelerate developer productivity is looking for ML researchers with a knack for converting research into Github repos. (Washington DC area)
- A systematic hedge fund is looking for portfolio managers who have experience using alternative data to develop systematic strategies (NYC).
- A company reinventing the way Americans build wealth for the long-run by enabling them to access "Universal Basic Capital" is looking for someone with legal and ops experience. (NYC)
- A fintech startup that lets investors trade any theme as if there were an ETF for it is looking for a senior backend engineer. (NYC)
- A concentrated crossover fund is looking for an experienced full stack software engineer to help develop and maintain internal applications to improve investment decision-making and external applications to enable portfolio companies. (SF)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. ElsewhereCountry EquityA finance thought experiment, adjacent to "what if we could buy stock in each other?" is "what if we could buy stock in a country?" This is a very old idea; Genoa was Sri Lanka is Costs and BenefitsMicrosoft CEO Satya Nadella has Sometimes memos like this can be dismissed as fluff—what CEO would, after a series of breaches, send out an email saying that security is their #3 priority after next quarter's revenue growth and next quarter's EBITDA margin? Still, they do matter, because large organizations are sufficiently unwieldy that a top-down directive like this is the only way to force a shift in priorities. There's always a near-term speed/security tradeoff, and it's easier to get people at all levels of the org chart to accept delays if there's a top-down mandate explicitly tolerating them. In the long run, speed and security are less of a tradeoff: at least in the next few quarters, Microsoft's pace of shipping would be higher if they'd counterfactually spent a bit more time locking down what they already had. Disclosure: Long MSFT. Continuation FundsOne of the reasons there's a Deepfaking the Dead and the Last Generation of CelebritiesPolitical groups in India are But it's also an instance of changes in media distribution making it harder for new mass-market celebrities to break through. There are still plenty of famous people out there, but they're increasingly famous to a small subset of the population (the Mature Financial SystemsA new study reveals that |
||||||||||
|
|
|
||||||||||
|