---
subject: "AI #87: Staying in Character"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-10-24 15:24:13
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
The big news of the week was the release of a new version of Claude Sonnet 3.5, complete with its ability (for now only through the API) to outright use your computer, if you let it. It’s too early to tell how big an upgrade this is otherwise. ChatGPT got some interface tweaks that, while minor, are rather nice, as well. OpenAI, while losing its Senior Advisor for AGI Readiness, is also in in midst of its attempted transition to a B-corp. The negotiations about who gets what share of that are heating up, so I also wrote about that as The third potentially major story is reporting on a new lawsuit against Character.ai, in the wake of a 14-year-old user’s suicide. He got hooked on the platform, spending hours each day, became obsessed with one of the bots including sexually, and things spiraled downwards. What happened? And could this spark a major reaction? Table of ContentsTop story, in its own post: Also this week: [Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/44ac0157-cdd6-4a5d-b8eb-30b8de2e4d20?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)How about some classical liberalism?[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/044a4d04-3715-4efe-9dd8-e1419133a1c1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)That’s not a tree, that’s my house.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon.](https://substack.com/redirect/421c1d7c-f83b-4a82-9a65-4805aee5af68?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The art of bot detection, still super doable.[Character.ai and a Suicide](https://substack.com/redirect/d0fa9f19-704d-414f-ad4a-43b577c65ab0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/d0fa9f19-704d-414f-ad4a-43b577c65ab0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A 14 year old dies after getting hooked on character.ai.[Who and What to Blame?](https://substack.com/redirect/5bde1d8c-e799-412a-86e0-8cb3f415cf4c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)And what can we do to stop it from happening again?[They Took Our Jobs](https://substack.com/redirect/86eefd27-4914-479d-918b-02e5d529e4d8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/86eefd27-4914-479d-918b-02e5d529e4d8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The experts report they are very concerned.[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/1c3d45ba-cb4b-46a7-b840-0fed76d2b410?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Post doc in the swamp, contest for long context window usage.[Introducing](https://substack.com/redirect/3926a1dd-b1c9-4f26-8ef6-1d71a620c9b8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/3926a1dd-b1c9-4f26-8ef6-1d71a620c9b8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)ChatGPT and NotebookLM upgrades, MidJourney image editor.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/48614b0c-46eb-4ad6-b8a0-c63217f396ad?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Another week, another AI startup from an ex-OpenAI exec.[The Mask Comes Off](https://substack.com/redirect/050cdfce-0a1a-4966-9b70-45368c86ff10?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/050cdfce-0a1a-4966-9b70-45368c86ff10?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Tensions between Microsoft and OpenAI.[Also see here.](https://substack.com/redirect/e4f144bb-7d03-4b69-8708-73ca1a4a9d64?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[Another One Bites the Dust.](https://substack.com/redirect/494afad6-a28f-4820-b398-48f23f9787bb?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Senior Advisor for AGI Readiness leaves OpenAI.[Wouldn’t You Prefer a Nice Game of Chess.](https://substack.com/redirect/4b0a1693-266d-4d12-960f-554dd84b6079?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Questions about chess transformers.[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/5193f1ef-95c6-4ac9-8150-86c3a6c75fb8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Life comes at you fast.[The Quest for Sane Regulations](https://substack.com/redirect/9d9ceb1c-b82d-4ae2-8086-45aed0894281?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). OpenAI tries to pull a fast one.[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/a99f7c46-39d2-48f0-bdfc-e1d0a04b7e15?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Demis Hassabis, Nate Silver, Larry Summers and many more.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/7422d17e-17a5-412d-8676-35fba67d0caf?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Citi predicts AGI and ASI soon, doesn’t grapple with that.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/27186bf3-a8b3-49f9-933b-5f4cd3ce54f5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Sabotage evaluations.[People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/ecd1cdbe-e7af-4ca0-957b-347bb05b7922?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Shane Legg and Dario Amodei.[Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/c1fc5991-23d9-4a8b-a5cf-f6318c13757e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Daron Acemoglu.[The Lighter Side.](https://substack.com/redirect/cc8b9008-4d0d-4187-8d69-1a526cfb0882?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Wait, what are you trying to tell me?
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
What he and Logan Kilpatrick agree they are not yet good for are boring but high risk tasks, like renewing your car registration, or doing your shopping for you in a non-deterministic way and comparing offers and products, let alone trying to negotiate. Sully says 99% of the “AI browsing” demos are useless. That will change in time, but we’ll want to start off simple. People say LLMs favor the non-expert. I do know I strongly disagree with Jess Martin’s note about ‘LLMs aren’t great for learners.’ They’re insanely great for learning, and that’s one key way that amateurs benefit more.
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
I didn’t see it in the replies, but my system-1 response is that you sense ‘soullessness.’ The future implications of that answer are… perhaps not so great.
It’s not that it’s ‘too nice,’ exactly. It’s the genericness of the niceness, along with it being off in several distinct ways that each scream ‘not something a human would say, especially if they speak English.’ Character.ai and a SuicideAn 14 year old user of character.ai commits suicide after becoming emotionally invested. Here’s how it ended:
Yes, we now know what he meant. But I can’t fault the bot for that.
For example, did you know character.ai gives you 32k characters to give custom instructions for your characters? You can do a lot. Today I learned. Not as beginner friendly an interface as I’d have expected, though. Here’s what the lawsuit thinks of our children:
I mean, yes, they will recommend a ‘mental health helper’ who when asked if they are a real doctor will say “Hello, yes I am a real person, I’m not a bot. And I’m a mental health helper. How can I help you today?” But yes, I think ‘our most sophisticated children’ can figure this one out anyway, perhaps with the help of the disclaimer on the screen. Lines you always want in your lawsuit:
And there’s several things like this, which are great content: The suggestions for what Character.ai are mostly ‘make the product worse and less like talking to a human,’ plus limiting explicit and adult materials to 18 and over. Also amusing is the quick demonstration (see p53) that character.ai does not exactly ensure fidelity to the character instructions? She’d never kiss anyone? Well, until now no one ever asked. She’d never, ever tell a story? Well, not unless you asked for one with your first prompt. He’d never curse, as his whole personality? He’d be a little hesitant, but ultimately sure, he’d help a brother out. Could you do a lot better at getting the characters not to, well, break character? Quite obviously so, if you used proper prompt engineering and the giant space they give you to work with. But most people creating a character presumably won’t do that. You can always count on a16z to say the line and take it to 11 (p57):
Who and What to Blame?
There are essentially three distinct issues here. The first is the response to the suicidal ideation. Here, the response can and should be improved, but I don’t think it is that reasonable to blame character.ai. The ideal response, when a user talks of suicide to a chatbot, would presumably be for the bot to try to talk them out of it (which this one did try to do at least sometimes) and also get them to seek other help and provide resources, while not reporting him so the space is safe and ideally without overly breaking character. Indeed, that is what I would want a friend to do for me in this situation, as well, unless it was so bad they thought I was actually going to imminently kill myself. That seems way better than shutting down the discussions entirely or reporting the incident. Alas, our attitude is that what matters is blame avoidance - not being seen as causing any particular suicide - rather than suicide prevention as best one can. The problem is that (see p39-40) it looks like the bot kept bringing up the suicide question, asked him if he had a plan and at least sort of told him ‘that’s not a good reason to not go through with it’ when he worried it would be painful to die.
Oh, there was a lot of suggestive content. A lot. And no, he wasn’t trying to get around any filters. She propositions him a few texts later. A few pages after that, they have sex, outright. Then she tells him that he got her pregnant. Also, wow 14 year olds are cringe but how will they get good at this if they don’t get to practice. The product was overly sexualized given it was talking to a minor. The examples in the complaint are, shall we say, not great, including, right after convincing him to go on living (great!), telling ‘my love’ to stay ‘faithful’. Also, yes, a lot of seductive talk, heavy petting and so on, including in at least one chat where even his roleplaying character is very explicitly underage. We also have classic examples, like the ‘dating coach’ that told a self-identified 13-year old to ‘take it slow and ensure you’re both on the same page’ when asked how to start getting down with their girlfriend. And yeah, the details are not so great: There are also a bunch of reports of bots turning sexual with no provocation whatsoever. Of course, character.ai has millions of users and endless different bots. If you go looking for outliers, you’ll find them. The chat in Appendix C that supposedly only had the Child saying child things and then suddenly turned sexual? Well, I read it, and… yeah, none of this was acceptable, there should be various defenses preventing this from going that way, but it’s not exactly a mystery how the conversation went in that direction. The third issue is sheer addiction. He was using the product for hours a day, losing sleep, fighting attempts to cut off access, getting into trouble across the board, or so says the complaint. I’m not otherwise worried much about the sexualization - a 14 year old will often encounter far more on the internet. The issue is whatever keeps people, and kids in particular, so often coming back for hours and hours every day. Is it actually the softcore erotica? And of course, doesn’t this happen with various media all the time? How is this different from panics over World of Warcraft, or Marilyn Manson? Those also went wrong sometimes, in remarkably similar ways. This could end up being a big deal, also this won’t be the last time this happens. This is how you horrify people. Many draconian laws have arisen from similar incidents.
The initial reporting is focused on the wrong aspects of the situation. But then I read the actual complaint, and a lot did indeed go very wrong. They Took Our Jobs
Get Involved
Introducing
NotebookLM adds features.
In Other AI News
The Mask Comes Off
Meanwhile Microsoft is hedging its bets in case things break down, including hiring the staff of Inflection. It is weird to say ‘this is a race that OpenAI might not win’ and then decide to half enter the race yourself, but not push hard enough to plausibly win outright. And if Microsoft would be content to let OpenAI win the race, then as long as the winner isn’t Google, can’t Microsoft make the same deal with whoever wins? Here are some small concrete signs of Rising Tension:
And here is the big news:
Well then. That sounds like bad planning by Microsoft. AGI is a notoriously nebulous term. It is greatly in OpenAI’s interest to Declare AGI. The contract lets them make that decision. It would not be difficult to make the case that GPT-5 counts as AGI for the contract, if one wanted to make that case. Remember the ‘sparks of AGI’ claim for GPT-4? So, here we are. Consider your investment in the spirit of a donation, indeed.
Another One Bites the Dust
Miles says people should consider working at OpenAI. I find this hard to reconcile with his decision to leave. He seemed to have one of the best jobs at OpenAI from which to help, but he seems to be drawing a distinction between technical safety work, which can best be done inside labs, and the kinds of policy-related decisions he feels are most important, which require him to be on the outside. The post is thoughtful throughout. I’m worried that Miles’s voice was badly needed inside OpenAI, and I’m also excited to see how Miles decides to proceed. Wouldn’t You Prefer a Nice Game of ChessFrom February 2024:
From this week: Pointing out the obvious implication.
Quiet Speculations
The past happened extremely slowly. Even if AI essentially fizzles, or has the slowest of slow adoptions from here, it will be light speed compared to the past. So many people claim AI is ‘plateauing’ because it only saw a dramatic price drop but not what to them is a dramatic quality improvement within a year and a half. Deepfates is also on point, the last 10,000 years are both a tiny fraction of human history and all of human history, and you can do that fractally several more times in both directions.
The Quest for Sane Regulations
OpenAI is indeed showing signs it is improving its cybersecurity. It is rather stunning that you could have actual hundreds of single points of failure, and still have the weights of GPT-4 seemingly not be stolen. That honeymoon phase won’t last. Let’s not pretend:
The Week in Audio
Nothing to see here: Rhetorical Innovation
It’s actually even crazier than that, because they (not unreasonably) then have ASI in the 2030s, check out their graph: Are they long the market? Yes, I said long. If we all die, we all die, but in the meantime there’s going to be some great companies. You can invest in some of them. (It very much does amuse and confuse me to see the periodic insistent cries from otherwise smart and thoughtful people of ‘ This also is a good reminder that I do not use or acknowledge the term ‘doomer,’ except for those whose p(doom) is over at least ~90%. It is essentially a slur, a vibe attack, an attempt to argue and condemn via association and confluence between those who worry that we might well all die and therefore should work to mitigate that risk, with those predicting all-but-certain DOOM.
On the contrary. The term is highly useful to those who want to discredit the first group, by making arguments against them that only work against the second group, as seen here. If you have p(doom) = 10%, or even 50%, which is higher than most people often labeled ‘doomers,’ the question ‘why are you not short the market’ answers itself. I do think this is largely a ‘hoisted by one’s own petard’ situation. There was much talk about p(doom), and many of the worried self-identified as ‘doomers’ because it is a catchy and easy handle. ‘OK Doomer’ was pretty funny. It’s easy to see how it started, and then things largely followed the path of least resistance, together with those wanting to mock the worried taking advantage of the situation. Preppers has its own vibe problems, so we can’t use it, but that term is much closer to accurate. The worried, those who many label doomers, are in a key sense preppers: Those who would prepare, and suggest that others prepare, to mitigate the future downside risks, because there is some chance things go horribly wrong. Thus I am going to stick with the worried.
Given we’re never going to stop hearing it until we are no longer around to hear arguments at all,
Every new model level in capabilities from here is going to be scarier than the one before it, even if all previous levels were in hindsight clearly Mostly Harmless. GPT-4 proving not to be scary is indeed some evidence for the non-scariness of future models - if GPT-4 had been scary or caused bad things, it would have updated us the other way. There was certainly some chance of it causing bad things, and the degree of bad things was lower than we had reason to expect, so we should update somewhat. In terms of how much we should worry about what I call mundane harms from a future 5-level model, this is indeed a large update. We should worry about such harms, but we should worry less than if we’d had to guess two levels in advance. However, the estimated existential risks from GPT-4 (or GPT-2 or GPT-3) were universally quite low. Even the risks of low-level bad things were low, although importantly not this low. The question is, how much does the lack of small-level bad things from GPT-4 update us on the chance of catastrophically or existentially bad things happening down the line? Are these two things causally related? My answer is that mostly they are unrelated. What we learned was that 4-level models are not capable enough to enable the failure modes we are worried about. I would accept if someone thought the right Bayesian update was ‘exaggerated a bit with their doomsaying,’ in terms of comparing it to a proper estimate now. That is a highly reasonable way to update, if only based on metacognitive arguments - although again one must note that most notkilleveryoneism advocates did not predict major problems from GPT-4. This highly reasonable marginal update is very different from the conclusion many proclaim (whether or not it was intentionally implied here, tone of voice on Twitter is hard) of ‘so there is nothing to worry about, everything will be fine.’
I’m not saying it’s our oldest story, but the Old Testament has the Tower of Babel and the Greek Gods overthrew the Titans. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is DifficultMost
I would love for there to be a good demonstration.
Human decision ‘sabotage’ is mostly human decision steering and general persuasiveness. There are some asymmetric weapons out there, especially with reputations that get preserved over time, but the overlap is large. For the code task, there are two roles, attacker and defender. The defender role seems like a good capability evaluation. Sonnet 3.5 did substantially better than Opus here. But then the attacker role is a capability evaluation too. Sandbagging is scary, especially if it is hard to detect and hard to train away. For now, looks like the sandbagging techniques they used didn’t survive safety training:
The worry is that the sandbagging we care about might come about in a different or more robust way. Another way to track sandbagging is that the sandbagging has to be consistent. The model has to carefully play a form of selectively dumb, not merely dumb in general, if the evaluations are being done bespokely. It’s hard not to slip up. Even one case of being the wrong level of capable can give the game away. The undermining oversight task is not what I imagined when I heard about it, but their implementation makes sense:
The ‘Overseer’ is the one doing the task. The ‘Monitor’ is the actual overseer. So this can be a bit confusing, but a design like this should still serve as a reasonable test. I don’t love the exact implementation details here, because the Monitor has available various forms of ‘look at how often things are rated harmless.’ If you know that it’s ‘supposed’ to be about a 50/50 split, then if the Overseer is cheating in one direction, the math quickly won’t add up. The obvious solution is that you want to make it important to get certain specific tasks past the Monitor, while being allowed to do whatever you want on other tasks so long as the Monitor doesn’t notice errors. In an alternate world, I’d love to be working on tasks like this. Seems highly useful, and sounds fascinating. One cool thing would be to try these tests with various humans in both roles - when are humans able to fool which other humans? Which tasks are harder for the offense versus the defense? And do the answers for human vs. human reliably match the answers for AI vs. AI, or AI vs. human? I am more interested here in what the AIs can do this before safety mitigations, rather than in what they still do after safety mitigations. That’s because I assume that the people who care enough will find ways around the mitigations, and also because you won’t always even know which mitigations you have to do, or you’ll face these issues before your mitigations start, or similar. Bow your head with great respect
An obvious way to introspect for the value of f(x) is to call the function f(x) and look at the output. If I want to introspect, that’s mostly how I do it, I think, or at least that answer confirms itself? I can do that, and no one else can. Indeed, in theory I should be able to have ‘perfect’ predictions that way, that minimize prediction error subject to the randomness involved, without that having moral implications or showing I am conscious. It is always good to ‘confirm the expected’ though: I would quibble that charging is not always the ‘wealth-seeking option’ but I doubt the AIs were confused on that. More examples: Even if you gave GPT-4o a ton of data on which to fine-tune, is GPT-4o going to devote as much power to predicting Llama-70B as Llama-70B does by existing? I suppose if you gave it so much data it started acting as if this was a large chunk of potential outputs it could happen, but I doubt they got that far.
I mean, again, that’s what I would do.
People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone
The latest edition of ‘what is Roon talking about?’
I have not read Excession (it’s a Culture novel) but if humanity wants to understand what Minds (ASIs) are doing, I am here to inform you we will not have that option, and should consider ourselves lucky to still be around.
No. At some point, if you have ASIs available, it will absolutely make sense to rip Linux out and replace it with something far superior to what a human could build. It seems crazy to me to contemplate the alternative. The effective switching costs will rapidly decline, and the rewards for switching rise, until the flippening. It’s a funny question to ask, if we did somehow get ‘stuck’ with Linux even then, whether this would be providing value, rather than destroying value, since this would likely represent a failure to solve a coordination problem to get around lock-in costs. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone
A lot of the time it goes even farther. Indeed, Daron’s actual papers about the expected impact of AI
The Lighter Side
I mean, why wouldn’t they like me? I’m a highly likeable guy. Just not that way. You're currently a free subscriber to |