---
subject: "[New post] Case for indexing"
from: "Seeking Wisdom <comment-reply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-02-05 01:59:34
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Jana V", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8135152689830330561", "UNREAD"]
---
Warren Buffet made a compelling case in favor of indexing in the [2021 Berkshire Hathaway's AGM](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=npRYd31diFo).
In 1989, 65% of the top 20 global companies were domiciled in Japan.
After three decades, 65% of the top 20 global companies are from the US. No companies from Japan made into the top 20. None of the top 20 companies from 1989 made into the top 20 list in 2021.
The mental model of an investor from 1989 will be filled with oil, steel, and banks. What are the chances of that investor unlearning old things and relearning new things to move all their positions into tech companies?
The "dumb" index picked all the top 20 companies. The no nothing indexer picked the top 20 companies without burning a single neuron. All the index investor needed was a zen like mind to hold it through thick and thin.
Having a zen-like mind during the downturn isn't easy. Stand in front of the mirror and ask yourself how you behaved during the 2008, 2020, and 2022 market meltdown. Smart people made logical points on why they should be in cash during March 2020. All those points looked rational, except that the market didn't bother what smart investors thought.
How many of the current top 20 will continue to be in the top 20 in the next decade? What are your chances of picking those winners now? An index investor need not worry about picking winners. It happens automatically.
Approximately five years ago, I wrote about my [3-bucket investing](https://public-api.wordpress.com/bar/?stat=groovemails-events&bin=wpcom_email_click&redirect_to=https%3A%2F%2Fjanav.wordpress.com%2F2018%2F07%2F09%2Fthree-bucket-framework-to-investing%2F&sr=1&signature=1f595c64c9e0ae7f9817b477bfaf39a7&user=8c75b1c84af96d984bdb9fbc54a41aa1&_e=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&_z=z) framework investing. The 3 buckets were indexing, picking individual stocks, and investing with money managers. Am I still following the same 3-bucket framework?
The indexing bucket remains my most crucial investment. I persist in buying index funds consistently, regardless of market conditions. My initial index fund purchase dates back to 2006, and I haven’t sold any yet.
I still own individual stocks, but I have decreased the quantity. I went from owning a double-digit number of stocks to just a few. This was because the cost of holding too many stocks was too great, and I could potentially achieve comparable or better returns by adding that capital to index funds. I use the time saved to learn other things. Less is more.
My allocation to the money manager bucket almost went down to zero. The people I partnered with are good human beings and knowledgeable. However the math just doesn't work in their favor. Fees cost between 1-3%. Taxes on capital gains due to portfolio churn costs 2-3%.
Fees and taxes add up to 3-5%. They have to beat the market returns by 3-5% just to be on par with the index. Doing it consistently over 20-30 years is a herculean task. Additionally, I don't enjoy the process of entering all the capital gains information while filing taxes.
Long story short, my 3-bucket framework shrunk to a 2-bucket framework.
Identifying winning fund managers and winning stocks ex-ante is hard. Markets aren’t completely efficient. I’m sure there will be 0.1% - 1% of investors who will outperform the market over the long run. The question that each one of us must ask is if we’re in that 1% elite group.
Change is the only constant. 2020 took humanity into a roll coaster ride, teaching me that I have to learn more about life's unpredictability. Is Google Search the only option? Enter ChatGPT. The notion that software programming cannot be automated is challenged by GitHub Copilot's arrival.
Who knows even the indexing approach mightn't work in the future. Nothing is certain in life. As of now, indexing is the only free lunch. Like the little man Haw in [Who Moved My Cheese](https://www.amazon.com/Who-Moved-My-Cheese-audiobook/dp/B07F7LS2ZW), we need to hang our shoes around our neck as we might need them anytime.