---
subject: "Where are the trillion dollar biotech companies?"
from: "Marginal REVOLUTION <donotreply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-09-03 07:05:34
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tyler Cowen", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2466199532210586699", "UNREAD"]
---
In today’s market, even companies with multiple approved drugs can trade below their cash balances. Given this, it is truly perplexing to see AI-biotechs raise mega-rounds at the preclinical stage - Xaira with a billion-dollar seed, Isomorphic with $600M, EvolutionaryScale with $142M, and InceptiveBio with $100M, to name a few. The scale and stage of these rounds reflect some investors’ belief that AI-biology pairing can bend the drug discovery economics I described before.
To me, the question of whether AI will be helpful in drug discovery is not as interesting as the question of whether AI can turn a 2-billion-dollar drug development into a 200-million-dollar drug development, or whether 10 years to approve a drug can become 5 years to approve a drug. AI will be used to assist drug discovery in the same way software has been used for decades, and, given enough time, we know it will change everything [4]. But is “enough time” 3 years or half a century?
One number that is worth appreciating is that 80% of all costs associated with bringing a drug to market come from clinical-stage work. That is, if we ever get to molecules designed and preclinically validated in under 1 year, we’ll be impacting only a small fraction of what makes drug discovery hard. This productivity gain cap is especially striking given that the majority of the data we can use to train models today is still preclinical, and, in most cases, even pre-animal. A perfect model predictive of in vitro tox saves you time on running in vitro tox (which is less than a few weeks anyway!), doesn’t bridge the in vitro to animal translation gap, and especially does not affect the dreaded animal-to-human jump. As such, perfecting predictive validity for preclinical work is the current best-case scenario for the industry. Though we don’t have a sufficient amount and types of data to solve even that.
Here is [the full and very interesting essay](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=240a00a4ea9b6702374dd17183202e5bf60d1b6fdaeb782233efcf22b0fe221b&blog_id=42693868&post_id=91415&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=d64cfdfcf715dc3997bb88dc980b4fa9&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cubGFkYW51emhuYS54eXovd3JpdGluZy90cmlsbGlvbi1kb2xsYXItYmlvdGVjaHM&email_id=2fc58c66284883c07e50ea6fbc987262), from the excellent [Lada Nuzhna](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=6df474935f4718a95791c808e5cc5e13af8793463ee889b9899b0269de1b85c9&blog_id=42693868&post_id=91415&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=6d612851cdd986d1493d53d7cc65984b&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cubGFkYW51emhuYS54eXov&email_id=2fc58c66284883c07e50ea6fbc987262).