---
subject: "ACX Grants 1-3 Year Updates"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-06-18 11:27:39
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
The first cohort of ACX Grants was announced in Many people said my request for updates went to their spam folder; relatedly, many people have not yet sent in their updates. If you’re a grantee who didn’t see my original email, but you do see this post, please fill in the update form All quote blocks are the grantees’ own words; text outside of quote blocks is my commentary. First Cohort: Three Year Updates1: Discover Molecular Targets Of Antibiotics No update received this year, but see the 2022 update 2: Ballot Proposition For Approval Voting In Seattle
This one is confusing to evaluate; the specific proposal failed, it encouraged its opponents to create a distraction proposal to sabotage it, and the distraction proposal unexpectedly passed, meaning that Seattle did get a more interesting voting method after all (although unclear whether it’s good). Is this a “success” of our grant? 3: Software To Validate New FDA Drug Trial Designs
ACX Grants (almost) always approves of pivoting to AI safety research, but I still wonder what might have been with the original project. Michael says that “The types of software projects in clinical trials that we were initially intending to do seem on track to fall to AI by 2030. We DID succeed at deriving new math techniques, and AI does not yet have a clear path to solving that kind of creative research-level math.” 4: Alice Evans’ Research On “The Great Gender Divergence”
5: Develop Safer Immunosuppressants Trevor pivoted to trying to market the drugs in cats (who also get the relevant diseases) as proof-of-concept and a way to make enough money to be able to scale up to humans. He reports:
In a later update, Trevor said that some of the regulatory issues have been resolved and he is feeling more optimistic. 6: Promote Economically Literate Climate Policy In US States
I don’t know which is weirder - that he wrote a romantic comedy about climate change activism, or that there are apparently enough people who do this that there’s a whole “climate screenplay competition” to find the best ones. When someone I was talking to at the recent ACX meetup mentioned that they were a climate activist, I brought up this funny story about how I knew a climate activist who wrote a screenplay about it. My interlocutor nodded as if this were the most normal thing in the world, and said that he himself had written a I think climate activism without an associated musical theater component is an underexplored cause area, and would be interested in helping incubate this field. 7: Repository / Search Engine For Forecasting Questions
8: Help [Anonymous] Interview For A Professorship [Anonymous] got their professorship and is now leading AI safety research at a good university. 9: Mobile Slaughterhouses To Prevent African Swine Fever No update received this year, but see the 2022 update 10: Hazard Labeling For Endocrine Disruptors
11: Develop Oxfendazole As A New Deworming Medication
12: Biosecurity And Existential Safety Lobbying In Australia This is one of my favorite projects - a veteran Australian lobbyist was a prolific ACX commenter, and we gave them an exploratory grant to start an organization there. After some trial and tribulations, this turned into 13: A Gel That Can Heal The Brain After Strokes No update received this year. Their 14: Survey To Understand Public Attitudes Around Human Challenge Trials
This is great and the paper is great, but is also a microcosm of what I find frustrating about grantmaking. Will this paper change anyone’s mind? Will it lead to human challenge trials being more likely to happen? I assume yes, because 1DaySooner have proven to be generally smart people who know what they’re doing, but it’s hard to measure effects even now when we know exactly what the end product was. 15: Rapid Replications Of New Psychology Papers
I feel bad about this one - even though I funded it and try to follow Spencer, I somehow missed that they’ve been up and running for years, Among the most interesting are I’d be interested in hearing from research psychologists about whether this project is well-known in your field, and how effective it actually is about keeping you guys honest. 16: Research Neural Representation Of Precision Weighting The researcher discovered that this was harder than expected, and would require more work than we could realistically fund, so he pivoted to something else and returned the money. I appreciate his honesty. 17: Crowdfight - A Platform To Create Scientific Collaborations
18: David Bahry Re-Orienting And Doing Further Research Before A PhD No response this time, but 19: A Wiki On Forecasting No response. 20: Microbes From Beetles That Can Digest Plastics
Professor. K adds:
If that’s you, email me at scott@slatestarcodex.com and I’ll put you in touch. 21: Support For ALLFED’s Disaster Modeling No response. More information about ALLFED as a whole and their progress 22: Creating Intelligent Tutoring Systems
23: Start A Biosecurity Center At Stanford This group thinks their project went well, but asks to keep details private. 24: In Vitro Gametogenesis Startup
The only grant evaluator who I trust to know what this means recently started a competing company, so I will just have to hope that all of this is good. According to their website, they seem to be pivoting to polygenic selection for cows, saying that “our technology will increase breeding rates by 10-100x, [making cows orders of magnitude more productive] in a couple of years.” This is a clever strategy I haven’t seen anyone try yet. 25: Sue Factory Farms That Are Illegally Abusing Chickens
I always ask if there’s any other way I can help these charities. Legal Impact For Chickens wants me to advertise that if any of you are in the poultry industry and want to turn whistleblower, you should 26: M’s CRISPR Spellchecking Project Still waiting to see whether I’m allowed to share anything about this publicly. 27: Open Source Vaccines No update. RaDVaC’s They do have a Discord, where they claim to still be working on things including a “vaccine factory in a tube”, but I am bearish on mystery projects coordinated via small private Discords. Several of them have I get the impression that they made a cool COVID vaccine, didn’t overcome the regulatory/ethical/practical challenges to deployment, mostly fizzled out after COVID became less exciting, and are now a collection of small passion projects. In retrospect, I think I should have been able to predict this before the original grant, and my theory of change was overly optimistic. 28: Platform For Psychiatric Drug Screening No update received. I did hear from this team last year, when they said they'd succeeded in making something exciting and were going to spin it off into a startup, but they didn't respond to followup questions and I can't find the startup. 29: Citizen Surveillance Of Pathogens In Drinking Water
30: Writing Forecasting Questions For EA Organizations No update this time, but from last cycle: “Nathan Young has since gotten much larger grants to do much more exciting forecasting work, particularly a platform for generating forecasting questions. With my approval, he’s put my grant on the back burner while he works on other things, but he still hopes to get some questions up on Manifold or Metaculus sometime.” 31: Mass Appraisal Models To Promote A Georgist Land Value Tax Wires got crossed in asking for an update here, but luckily they’ve succeeded enough to leave a public trail: this project became the land valuation company 32: A Robotic System For Automating Cell Culture Media Testing
33: SD’s Neutrino Research No update received. 34: User-Created Prediction Markets
Most of you already know this one! If not, Manifold is not only a great site and one of our biggest success stories, but its founders have gone on to create other spinoffs and projects like: [Manifest](https://substack.com/redirect/6f19ca99-be82-40a1-93b1-31ab13393d95?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), a beloved Bay Area conference on prediction markets and everything else.[Manifund](https://substack.com/redirect/db2b11b0-7c24-4a7f-ac35-34f9ad98f73b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), an experimental charity platform which now co-runs ACX Grants, an impact certificate platform, and various innovations in regranting.[Manifold.Love](https://substack.com/redirect/115837d0-2aae-44b1-af89-589def968b9c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), originally an attempt to make a prediction-market-based dating site. I am told this somehow actually worked in a tiny handful of cases and there are some real people who owe their relationships to people betting on a prediction market that they would be compatible. But this didn’t work at scale and it’s now being spun off as a separate dating site focusing on polyamorous people.[Bet On Love](https://substack.com/redirect/c323fc3f-1782-4760-a3cd-16ca9b259a94?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), a very weird gameshow/musical to advertise some of the above.[Mox](https://substack.com/redirect/2e2beb31-9abd-4263-9081-13665dfcc74f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), an SF coworking space for innovative startups, charities, and artists.[Codebuff](https://substack.com/redirect/8cbd26c3-2af9-4858-801d-16d79e2fe55b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), an AI coding startup
I probably can’t take full credit for all of this just from giving them $20K in seed funding, but I continue to appreciate everything they do for this community and the world. 35: Further S’s Political Career This person didn’t win their election, but has since pivoted to AI safety and works in a well-regarded AI policy think tank. 36: Seeds Of Science, A Journal Of Non-Traditional Research No update received, but this was a public journal and it is easy to follow their work, see their This was about my median expectation for this grant, but it was very inexpensive and I decided to take a chance on it anyway. 37: Good Science Project, Working To Improve Federal Science Funding No update received, but they have 38: Advising Developing Countries On How To Grow Their Economies
39: Help Luca De Leo Get Started In AI Safety Research No update received, but Luca now runs the AI safety group at the University of Buenos Aires, Argentina. 40: Typist For Saharon Shelah This was another ACXG+ Grant, funded by an anonymous outside funder and not listed in the original announcement. Second Cohort: One Year Updates41: Lead-Acid Battery Recycling In Nigeria
42: Compensation For Kidney Donors
Elaine and her org have been working extremely hard on this; you can read a Vox article on their campaign 43: Genetic Hack To Prevent Suffering
I wrote 44: Advocate For Pandemic Response Team At FDA This team prefers has asked me not to discuss their progress publicly, but you can probably guess what their lives are like right now, and your guess would be correct. 45: Anti-Mosquito Drones
46: Tarbell Fellowship For AI Journalism No update received, but they have 47: Germicidal UV Lamp Study
48: Technological Solutions To Animal Welfare Challenges
They add:
49: Assurance Contract Website
50: Cause Prioritization @ Center For Exploratory Altruism Research
The official description sounds maximally generic, but this is an EA charity with a broad mandate whose current thesis is that dietary guidelines in developing countries can have outsized effects in saving lives. They’re making some progress on a salt reduction campaign in a developing country they prefer not to name publicly. 51: Mark Webb Studying Land Reform
52: More AI Advocacy In Australia
This is the same Australian lobbying organization we founded in Year 1, after a change in name and leadership. I continue to be excited about AI safety in middle-tier countries for a few reasons. First, these countries have some power in international organizations to set international standards. Second, companies will usually comply with any not-excessively-burdensome regulation set by any country with a significant market. Third, AI safety is underfunded by the standard of government programs, so Australia setting up a national AI Safety Institute would significantly expand the field. It’s kind of crazy that ACX Grants tier levels of money can have significant effects at this scale, but GA continues to do a great job and we continue to be proud to support them. 53: Campus For African School Of Economics At Zanzibar Charter City
54: Online Training Program For Health Workers In Developing Countries
55: Smartphone Pupillometry To Diagnose Neurological Conditions
They add: “We would welcome connections to anyone that you think might be interested in supporting our work further by investing in our $3M seed round of funding.” 56: Mike Saint-Antoine’s Biology Tutorial Videos
57: Conceptual Boundaries Workshop On AI Safety The workshop was completed successfully; you can read a writeup 58: Apart Research To Incubate AI Safety Scientists No update received, but they have a 59: Primer On How To Achieve Political Change No update received and I can’t find anything about this. 60: Research IVF Clinic Success Rates
61: Replicate Study On Brain Wave Synchronization For Speeding Learning
62: Advocate Repeal Of Interstate Runaway Compact No update received and I can’t find anything about this. 63: Animal Welfare (Especially Fish) In Turkiye
From the longer document, these commitments involve things like reducing overcrowding, or stunning fish before killing them. Over 30 million fish were affected just from their single largest commitment, and they say 100 fish are helped per dollar spent. 64: More Georgism Advocacy Lars and Will used the 2021 grant to co-found ValueBase. Will remained with the company, and Lars left to do advocacy work at the Center For Land Economics. Here’s their summary of how things are going:
65: EN’s Work On Bacteriophage Therapy
Emergent Ventures funded EN before we did and deserves a lot of credit here also. 66: Create An Artificial Kidney
Tugrul has the dubious honor of maybe being "the only person to climb a 4000m peak with severe kidney failure". To raise money and awareness for his artificial kidney project, he is running 67: Add Tardigrade Genes To Human Cells The goal of this one was to make hybrid cells that are more resilient for research and certain medical applications. They report:
68: Teach Forecasting To EU Policy-Makers The original project didn't work out, but our grantee (who still prefers to remain anonymous) is now working with an EU think tank pursuing the same agenda, and has been teaching forecasting workshops to policy-makers for the past two months. 69: Platform For Single-Cell Imaging They ended up unable to accept this grant and returned the money. 70: Open Source Polygenic Predictor For EA/IQ They have an update 71: Improve Flu Vaccines
72: Scenario Analysis For Developing World Agricultural Programs
73: Further C’s Political Career C’s political career is going well, but he continues to think it wouldn’t be strategic to give more information publicly at this time. Lessons LearnedI'm most impressed with our lobbying/advocacy organizations. In particular, Good Ancestors has gotten the Australian government to sign onto an international AI safety declaration, partner with various x-risk-related organizations, and (possibly) extend charity tax deductions to some EA causes that previously didn't have it - I think this on its own goes a substantial way to paying back the cost of all ACX Grants. Coalition to Modify NOTA has a kidney donation bill in front of Congress that the (very illiquid) prediction markets give a 45% chance of passing; if it works, it could save thousands of lives. The Georgists are partly responsible for bills making land value taxes slightly easier to implement in a handful of states. Good Science Project seems to have significantly improved science. Are lobbying organizations a better bet than other types of nonprofit (within the constraints of ACX Grants)? I'm not sure. It could just be that lobbyists are (naturally) better at playing themselves up and sounding successful than (for example) scientists, or that politicians are good at people-pleasing and make people feel heard and encouraged in a way that might not change overall policy later. Also, I recently talked to some grantmakers who funded a lobbying organization that superficially seems excellent, but they expressed concern it was net negative (!) by taking away oxygen and spotlight from potentially more effective orgs. So I am encouraged but wary. Animal welfare organizations were another standout success. Again, I don't know how to think about this - while I think our grantees were exceptional, there's also an issue where the scale of animal welfare challenges is so great, and work on them so neglected, that lots of organizations can save a million chickens here, or a million fish there, without particularly making a splash. On the one hand, this is exactly what effective altruism should be doing - exploring grants that are very high in linear utility even if they don't feel satisfying. On the other, they're unsatisfying - and also hard to assess retroactively. How many chickens should a good animal welfare grant save? Any realistic number will both be overwhelmingly large in absolute terms and far too small in relative terms. I'm most ambivalent about our science grants. Many of them say they are successful and can point to published papers which explain the science they did. But it's hard to judge whether anything useful has changed based on the science getting done. I know it's important to fund basic research and not just last-mile technology startups, but it's hard for a mini-grants program like this one to evaluate these kinds of abstract interventions. One disappointing result was that grants to legibly-credentialled people operating in high-status ways usually did better than betting on small scrappy startups (whether this means charities or companies). For example, Innovate Animal Ag was in many ways overdetermined as a grantee - former Yale grad and Google engineer founder, profiled in NYT, already funded by Open Philanthropy - and they in fact did amazing work. On the other hand, there were a lot of promising ACX community members with interesting ideas who were going to turn them into startups any day now, but who ended up kind of floundering (although this also describes Manifold, one of our standout successes). One thing I still don't understand is that Innovate Animal Ag seemed to genuinely need more funding despite being legibly great and high status - does this screen off a theoretical objection that they don't provide ACX Grants with as much counterfactual impact? Am I really just mad that it would be boring to give too many grants to obviously-good things that even moron could spot as promising? Someone (I think it might be Paul Graham) once said that they were always surprised how quickly destined-to-be-successful startup founders responded to emails - sometimes within a single-digit number of minutes regardless of time of day. I used to think of this as mysterious - some sort of psychological trait? Working with these grants has made me think of it as just a straightforward fact of life: some people operate an order of magnitude faster than others. The Manifold team created something like five different novel institutions in the amount of time it's taken some other grantees to figure out a business plan; I particularly remember one time when I needed something, sent out a request to talk about it with two or three different teams, and the Manifold team had fully created the thing and were pestering me to launch a trial version before some of the other people had even gotten back to me. I take no pleasure in reporting this - I sometimes take a week or two to answer emails, and all of the predictions about my personality that this implies would be correct - but it's increasingly something that I look for and respect. A lot of the most successful grants succeeded quickly, or at least were quick to get on a promising track. Since everything takes ten times longer than people expect, only someone who moves ten times faster than people expect can get things done in a reasonable amount of time. In almost every case where I thought to myself “this is a cool idea, but I don’t know how it’s going to really pay off, as opposed to reaching a cool intermediate accomplishment and then stagnating”, this was a correct criticism, and I should have taken it more seriously. But I can’t rule out that these were good in vague and hard-to-measure ways that I should take more seriously. This one is really self-serving, but in general when people were good communicators (or even bloggers) and wowed me with the writing-composition of their application, they turned out to be a good bet. And when people were hard to understand and annoying to communicate with, even if their ideas seemed good, they were less likely to pan out. Overall ThoughtsThe total cost of ACX Grants, both rounds, was about $3 million. Do these outcomes represent a successful use of that amount of money? Very naively, startups originating from ACX Grants have about $25 million in value¹. If ACX Grants is equivalent to a pre-seed funder, and pre-seed funders usually get ~5%, then if we were VCs we would have a portfolio worth $1.25 million. About 1/5 of ACX Grants were attempting to be market-valued startups, so if we assume the charitable portion did about as well as the startup portion, then we have a total charitable+market portfolio of $6.25 million, ie twice our starting capital. This is good by usual VC metrics, although I don’t know if these apply to charity. I think this is an underestimate, because we were aiming at charity rather than market cap, and any actual market cap we got was an unexpected side effect. It’s harder to produce Inside View estimates, because so many of the projects either produce vague deliverables (eg a white paper that might guide future action) or intermediate results only (eg getting a government to pass AI safety regulations is good, but can’t be considered an end result unless those regulations prevent the AI apocalypse). Because we tend towards incubating charities and funding research (rather than last-mile causes like buying bednets), achieved measurable deliverables are thin on the ground. But here are things that ACX grantees have already accomplished: Improved the living/slaughter conditions of 30 million fish. Helped create Manifold Markets, a prediction market site with thousands of satisfied users, whose various spinoffs play a central role in the rationalist/EA community. Helped create thousands of jobs in Rwanda and other developing countries Passed an instant runoff vote proposition in Seattle. Saved between a few dozen and a few hundred lives in Nigeria through better obstetric care.
And here are some intermediate deliverables from grantees: Made Australian government take AI x-risk more seriously (estimated from 50th percentile to 60th percentile outcome) Gotten the End Kidney Deaths Act (could save >1000 lives and billions of dollars per year) in front of Congress, with decent odds of passing by 2026. Plausibly saved 2 billion chickens from painful death over next decade². Antiparasitic medication oxfendazole continues to advance through the clinical trial process.
And here are some things that have not been delivered yet but that I remain especially optimistic about: Creation of anti-mosquito drones that provide a second level of defense along with bednets. Revolutionize diagnosis of traumatic brain injury Improve dietary guidelines in developing countries Continue to support research and adoption of far UV light for pandemic prevention Reduce lead poisoning in Nigeria
I think these underestimate success since many projects have yet to pay off (or to convince me to be especially optimistic), and others have paid off in vague hard-to-measure ways. Although I don’t think we’ve reached a level where it’s drop-down obvious I should continue ACX Grants, I’m leaning towards doing so. I welcome comments from any more experienced grantmakers who are better able to evaluate this. My current plan is: Make an ACX post with some lingering questions I still have about the structure of ACX Grants, and solicit advice from commenters. Show these results to funders (including funders who are experienced VCs and better able to judge things than I am) and see if they think they got good value for money. Run the commenter advice by them and see if they agree. Open up another application round, probably in a month or so, probably while I’m posting the non-book-review finalists so I can take a break from writing to administer the process.
1 Valuebase was $14 million, Manifold was $22 million, Highway Pharmaceuticals was $5 million, for a total of $41 million, but these are all old numbers, Manifold (the highest) has struggled to find revenue, and I want to leave room for the possibility that they’ve decreased since then. I can’t find evidence that any projects beyond those three have broken into the million-dollar range. 2 I count chickens who were never born at all as “saved”, and I endorse this decision based on my values. Your values may differ. You're currently a free subscriber to |