---
subject: "Llama Does Not Look Good 4 Anything"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-04-09 13:11:39
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Llama Scout (17B active parameters, 16 experts, 109B total) and Llama Maverick (17B active parameters, 128 experts, 400B total), released on Saturday, look deeply disappointing. They are disappointing on the level of ‘people think they have to be misconfigured to be this bad,’ and people wondering and debating how aggressively the benchmarks were gamed. This was by far the most negative reaction I have seen to a model release, the opposite of the reaction to Gemini 2.5 Pro. I have seen similarly deeply disappointing and misleading releases, but they were non-American models from labs whose benchmarks and claims we have learned not to take as representing model capabilities. After this release, I am placing Meta in that category of AI labs whose pronouncements about model capabilities are not to be trusted, that cannot be relied upon to follow industry norms, and which are clearly not on the frontier. Until they show otherwise, they clearly do not belong in the category that includes OpenAI, Anthropic, Google, xAI and DeepSeek.
Table of ContentsLlama We Doing This Again
People are wondering why made an exception and did it anyway. I have two hypotheses for what happened (note: I do not have any private information here). They moved it up because the tariffs were about to potentially cause a Black Monday stock market crash, and Meta wanted to get ahead of that to protect themselves and also to not have the release buried under other news. This seems entirely reasonable under the circumstances. They released on Saturday to bury it, because it isn’t any good.
Those two look to be at cross-purposes, but I’m not so sure. Suppose, for the sake of argument here, that Llama-4 sucks. Investors can’t really tell the difference, especially not by Monday. Those who can tell the difference would be less likely to notice or talk about it.
Who knows. That’s all speculation. What I do know is that the Llama 4 models released so far seem to not be any good. You can download Llama 4 Scout and Maverick at Llama the License Favors Bad ActorsThey offer a Llama license, Putting such requirements on otherwise open weight models gives an advantage to overseas companies and governments, especially the PRC, that can and will simply ignore such rules, while handicapping American companies. European companies are of course handicapped even more,
Not cool. Be open, or be closed. This may be part of a consistent pattern. If the models were good, this would potentially be a rather big deal. Llama You Do It This WayIn terms of techniques used, I would take Meta’s outright statement of ‘
That’s a bold claim. Feedback does not back this up. The two features they do offer are support for 200 languages, and in theory a long context window. I say in theory because it’s easy to offer long context so you can tout it, and hard to make that long context do anything useful and preserve performance. Meta offer some benchmarks, which many noted seem selected, and they also select their competition. Anyone keeping up with LLM progress can see the choices here are a little suspicious.
The Llama models are giant mixture of experts (MoE) models, similar to (and presumably because of and copying) DeepSeek’s v3 and r1. Scout is 17B active parameters, 16 experts, 109B total. Maverick is 17B active, 128 experts, 400B total. The unreleased Behemoth is huge, 288B active, 16 experts and 2T total parameters.
Llama Fight in the ArenaThe strongest data point in Llama 4’s favor is the Arena ranking of 1417. That is good for second place, which is indeed impressive if it is reflective of general performance. Alas, as we all know by now, Arena is being used as an optimization target. Was that done here? We don’t know. Other signs like the selective benchmarks they released are suggestive of such a strategy, and they would be far from the only ones. What does Arena optimize for? A random internet user prefers your response to another model’s response. What makes people prefer one response to another? We can also look at the actual responses, and see, now that
These answers by Maverick, that users voted for, seem absurdly obnoxious and bad. I originally wrote ‘these make me want to puke,’ erased it, but now that I see TDM saying the same thing I’m putting that observation back in. This is the opposite of what I want. And indeed, this also potentially explains Claude Sonnet 3.7’s low Arena ranking. What if people really do prefer syncopathy and lengthy slop? It exists for a reason. It’s clear Llama-4 fell victim to We also know that this version of Maverick on Arena is not the same as the one they released, and it seems, shall we say, ‘slopified.’ The question is, is that all that happened? Did they also outright cheat to get this Arena ranking? I Llama Would You Cheat on Other BenchmarksDid they flat out cheat?
I wouldn’t think Meta would go this far, for the same reasons as Peter, so I doubt it happened. Nor would they have had to go this far. You actually have to work hard to not accidentally de facto train on benchmarks when using 22T+ tokens. So while I’m quoting the post for posterity, I assume this accusation is probably false.
There is however this:
That sure looks like cheating. Again, it doesn’t mean they intentionally train on the test set. If you have 22T+ tokens and throw the entire internet at your model, there’s going to be contamination. All you have to do is not sufficiently care about not training on benchmarks. Alternatively, you can hill climb on your test scores. Previously, I would have doubted Meta would let this happen. Now, I have less doubt. This would not be the first time Meta has broken similar norms.
Those sources seem rather illegal. Meta don’t care. What are you going to do about it? It is 2025. In general, ‘[X] would goes against norms’ is no longer seen as so strong an argument against doing [X]. The question is now, if I do [X], yes it is against norms, but even if you figure out that I did that, what are you going to do about it? That goes double for ‘not doing enough to prevent [X] would go against norms.’ Llama It So Bad on Independent BenchmarksThis is everything I could find that plausibly counts as a benchmark. There are some benchmarks where Maverick is mid, others where it is less than mid.
It also does not do well in
In general, if you have your own benchmark, it doesn’t look good:
I suppose that is possible. Perhaps it has its niche and will be good at that niche once people adapt to it and scaffold it well. But that’s definitely not how Meta is presenting Maverick or the future Behemoth. It’s weird to call it a ‘benchmark’ but worth noting that Llama 4 Scout and Maverick Another sort-of benchmark would be red teaming, That is distinct from asking about misuse, malicious fine-tuning or other sources of potential catastrophic risk from an open weights model - as always, ‘the license says you cannot do that’ is going to get ignored here. One presumes that the main defense is that these models lack the capability to cause new trouble here, at least in the absence of Behemoth. Llama You Don’t Like ItOr, here is what people are saying in other realms.
I’ve had confirmation of Yair’s statement from other reliable sources.
Who was the biggest cheerleader that doesn’t work at Meta?
Failure to mention Gemma 3 feels like strong mood affectation, on top of the marketing issues. Google is known as a closed lab, Meta is known as open. But mainly yes, Google’s marketing is atrocious. But a claim that Gemma 3 put us back in the lead was a lot more defensible than one about Llama 4.
All general reports on feedback say that people are disappointed. It was so disappointing that mostly people treated it as a non-event until asked.
Along similar lines, I don’t think this means model and data size scaling are over. I think it means that if you do not know how to execute, sheer size will not save you, and probably gives you smaller marginal gains than if you executed well. Llama Should We CareThe big takeaway is that we have to downgrade expectations for Meta in AI, and also our expectations for how much we can trust Meta. Despite vastly superior resources, Meta now seems to be trying to copy DeepSeek and coming up short. Exactly how short depends on who you ask. And Meta is, to an unknown degree, making a deliberate effort to make its models look good on benchmarks in ways that violate norms. It is hard to count out a top tech company with tons of compute and almost endless capital. They could still turn this ship around. But they’re going to have to turn this ship around, and do it fast, if they want to be competitive. Right now, America’s open model champion isn’t Meta. It is Google with Gemma 3, and soon it may also be OpenAI, which is planning an open reasoning model soon. I realize that causes some dissonance, but that’s where we are. Beware mood affectation.
You're currently a free subscriber to |