---
subject: "AI #153: Living Documents"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-01-29 14:14:21
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
This was Anthropic Vision week where at DWATV, which caused things to fall a bit behind on other fronts even within AI. Several topics are getting pushed forward, as the Christmas lull appears to be over. Upcoming schedule: Friday will cover Dario’s essay So get your reactions to all of those in by then, including in the comments to today’s post, and I’ll consider them for incorporation. Table of Contents[Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/01b65d33-aa68-47e5-8c85-5bf927ee3e06?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Code is better without coding.[Overcoming Bias.](https://substack.com/redirect/6d78014c-8be2-43b2-a4f0-2ec49649941c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)LLMs continue to share the standard human biases.[Huh, Upgrades.](https://substack.com/redirect/bd73155e-4f61-4b42-9f7a-563b07543e90?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Gemini side panels in Chrome, Claude interactive work tools.[On Your Marks.](https://substack.com/redirect/93938064-092f-48f9-86c5-8aeac2385228?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)FrontierMath: Open Problems benchmark. You score zero.[Choose Your Fighter.](https://substack.com/redirect/c78f199a-0b3b-4374-9200-6b79622247ba?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Gemini tools struggle, some find Claude uncooperative.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon.](https://substack.com/redirect/c388882f-624b-40cd-88d0-3238e5da78ef?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Hallucination hallucinations.[Cybersecurity On Alert.](https://substack.com/redirect/71011bcd-0474-422c-87bc-20d6c73a3af9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)OpenAI prepares to trigger High danger in cybersecurity.[Fun With Media Generation.](https://substack.com/redirect/8bd177db-ff49-41fe-a400-5d77cb93421c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Isometric map of NYC, Grok 10 second videos.[You Drive Me Crazy.](https://substack.com/redirect/51aeda27-095b-44f8-9c71-46d2b6fa7ad2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Dean Ball on how to think about AI and children.[They Took Our Jobs.](https://substack.com/redirect/fa0a4a9c-9e1f-4ab1-aae9-8f4c27d6e2c0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Beware confusing costs with benefits.[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/4593ed31-b7c7-4ab0-8558-9dc91557dc0d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)In various things. DeepMind is hiring a Chief AGI Economist.[Introducing.](https://substack.com/redirect/07a2b8c3-8fdb-4c35-ad25-d004a0fe23d4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Havenlock measures orality, Poison Fountain, OpenAI Prism.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/1649d04c-3a8e-4dd4-ae4f-dc12b20529c3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Awesome things often carry unawesome implications.[Show Me the Money.](https://substack.com/redirect/95efc055-eae0-4d30-bbdc-15d0e420ad88?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The unit economics continue to be quite good.[Bubble, Bubble, Toil and Trouble.](https://substack.com/redirect/624ae9f6-4c51-4635-8f06-5e679510120c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Does bubble talk have real consequences?[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/e6ed1f59-7011-4189-b6e3-f17154744b6b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)What should we expect from DeepSeek v4 when it arrives?[Don’t Be All Thumbs.](https://substack.com/redirect/d247d845-cf3b-4b51-b865-f1238a86c8e1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Choose the better thing over the worse thing.[The First Step Is Admitting You Have a Problem](https://substack.com/redirect/1e13b6ad-2114-4748-9b77-852ebd901f30?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/1e13b6ad-2114-4748-9b77-852ebd901f30?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Demis cries out for help.[Quickly, There’s No Time.](https://substack.com/redirect/711a04fe-c248-4934-bc01-66a06a7299a9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Life is about to come at you faster than usual.[The Quest for Sane Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/14543924-1000-4cd2-bce2-c3c9c8437b49?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)I do appreciate a good display of chutzpah.[Those Really Were Interesting Times.](https://substack.com/redirect/b18dfa1d-17a0-4f06-a0e8-b8b14b4d65c6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The demand for preference falsification.[Chip City.](https://substack.com/redirect/af4f4d69-4935-4316-8886-f99a2235116a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Nvidia keeps getting away with rather a lot, mostly in plain sight.[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/330fd090-8fcf-4edc-b5ee-d5a46827bcf2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Demis Hassabis, Tyler Cowen, Amanda Askell.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/f1e7e49a-2d92-432c-8663-4e4813a18bce?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The need to face basic physical realities.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/837c01f4-f6bf-44fb-ad6b-7104a87e141e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Some issues lie ahead.[The Power Of Disempowerment.](https://substack.com/redirect/2478ab94-c0bd-4a25-a5e2-38daffad07e0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Are humans disempowering themselves already?[The Lighter Side.](https://substack.com/redirect/a8141ad9-d3a6-4f2d-8692-a67dfc47d4f6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)One weird trick.
Language Models Offer Mundane UtilityPaul Graham seems right that present AI’s sweet spot is Code without coding.
It was fun in the way puzzles are fun, but also infuriating in the way puzzles are infuriating. If you had to complete jigsaw puzzles in order to get things done jigsaw puzzles would get old fast.
Overcoming Bias
Huh, UpgradesGemini in Chrome gets substantial quality of life improvements:
On Your Marks
Choose Your FighterI seriously do not understand why Gemini is so persistently not useful in ways that should be right in Google’s wheelhouse.
Roon is a real one. I wonder how many would pay double to get a faster version.
I mean, if he’s not joking then the obvious explanation, especially given who is talking, is that this was probably going to be both a ‘true threat’ and ‘criminal solicitation.’ That wouldn’t exactly be a shocking development there.
As per the discussion of Claude’s constitution, the corrigibility I care about is very distinct from ‘go along with things it dislikes,’ but also I notice it’s been my main model for a while now and I’ve run into that objection exactly zero times, although a few times I’ve hit the classifiers while asking about defenses against CBRN risks. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse SoonWell it sounds bad when you put it like that:
The ‘just’ is a tell. Why wouldn’t or shouldn’t Google researchers be using AI?
One has to laugh at that last line. Have you met peer review? More seriously, always look at base rates. There were 5,290 accepted papers out of 21,575. Claude estimates we would expect 20%-50% of results to not reproduce, and 10% of papers at top venues have errors serious enough that a careful reader would notice something is wrong, maybe 3% would merit retraction. And a 1% rate of detectable ‘hallucinations’ isn’t terribly surprising or even worrying.
Then we have Allen Roush saying
Cybersecurity On AlertKudos to OpenAI for once again being transparent on the preparedness framework front, and warning us when they’re about to cross a threshold. In this case, it’s the High level of cybersecurity, which is perhaps the largest practical worry at that stage. The proposed central mitigation is ‘defensive acceleration,’ and we’re all for defensive acceleration but if that’s the only relevant tool in the box the ride’s gonna be bumpy.
Fun With Media GenerationHere’s
This link was fake,
You Drive Me Crazy
AI is not especially similar to social media. In particular, social media in its current incarnation is fundamentally consumptive, whereas AI is creative. Early social media was more often creative? And one worries consumer AI will for many become more consumptive or anti-creative. The fact that the user needs to provide an interesting prompt warms our hearts now but one worries tech companies will see this as a problem to be solved.
We do not know what an “AI companion” really is. Dean is clearly correct that AI used responsibly on a personal level will be a net positive in terms of social interactions and mental health along with everything else, and that it is good if it provides a sympathetic ear. I also agree that it is fine to have affection for various objects and technologies, up to some reasonable point, but yes this can start to be a problem if it goes too far, even before AI. For children in particular, the good version of all this is very good. That doesn’t mean the default version is the good one. The engagement metrics don’t point in good directions, the good version must be chosen. All of Dean’s talk here is about things that are not meant as “AI companions,” or people who aren’t using the AI that way. I do think there is something distinct, and distinctly perilous, about AI companions, whether or not this justifies a legal category.
AI is already (partially) regulated by tort liability. Yes, and this is good given the alternative is nothing. If and when the current law behaves reasonably here, that is kind of a coincidence, since the situational mismatches are large. Tort should do an okay job on egregious cases involving suicides, but there are quite a lot of areas of harm where there isn’t a way to establish it properly, or you don’t have standing, or it is diffuse or not considered to count, and also on the flip side places where juries are going to blame tech companies when they really shouldn’t. Social media is a great example of a category of harm where the tort system is basically powerless except in narrow acute cases. And one of many where a lot of the effect of the incentives can be not what we want. As Dean notes, if you don't have a tangible physical harm, tort liability is mostly out of luck. Companions wrecking social lives, for example, is going to be a weird situation where you’ll have to argue an [Ally McBeal](https://substack.com/redirect/5317d321-66db-448d-972e-b3bf151afe01?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)style case, and it is not obvious, as it never was on Ally McBeal, that there is much correlation in those spots between ‘does win’ and ‘should win.’In terms of harms like this, however, ‘muddle through’ should be a fine default, even if that means early harms are things companies ‘get away with,’ and in other places we find people liable or otherwise constrain them stupidly, so long as everything involved that can go wrong is bounded. For children’s incidents, I think that’s mostly right for now. We do need to be ready to pivot quickly if it changes, but for now the law should focus on places where there is a chance we can’t muddle through, mess up and then recover.
The First Amendment probably heavily bounds chatbot regulations. We have not treated the First Amendment this way in so many other contexts. I would love, in other ways, to have a sufficiently strong 1A that I was worried that in AI it would verge on or turn into a suicide pact. I do still see claims like ‘code is speech’ or ‘open weights are speech’ and I think those claims are wrong in both theory and practice. There will still be important limitations here, but I think in practice no the courts are not going to stop most limits or regulations on child use of AI.
AI child safety laws will drive minors’ usage of AI into the dark. Those pesky libertarians always make this argument. I mean, they’re also always right, but man, such jerks, you know? Rumors that this will in practice drive teens to run local LLMs or use dark web servers? Yeah, no, that’s not a thing that’s going to happen that often. But yes, if a teen wants access to an AI chatbot, they’ll figure it out. Most of that will involve finding a service that doesn’t care about our laws. Certainly if you think ‘tell them not to write essays for kids’ is an option, yeah, you can forget about it, that’s not going to work. Yes, as Dean says, we must acknowledge that open weight models make restrictions on usage of AI for things like homework not so effective. In the case of homework, okay, that’s fine. In other cases, it might be less fine. This of course needs to be weighed against the upsides, and against the downsides of attempting to intervene in a way that might possibly work.
No one outraged about AI and children has mentioned coding agents. They know about as much about coding agents as about second breakfast. Should we be worried about giving children unbridled access to advanced coding agents? I mean, one should worry for their computers perhaps, but those can be factory reset, and otherwise all the arguments about children seem like they would apply to adults only more so? I notice that the idea of you telling me I can’t give my child Claude Code fills me with horror and outrage.
They Took Our JobsUnemployment is bad. But having to do a job is centrally a cost, not a benefit.
Get Involved
There are other things than AI out there one might get involved in, or speak out about. My hats are off to those who are doing so, including as noted in this post, especially given what they are risking to do so. Introducing
You can also ask ChatGPT,
In Other AI News
We are going to see a lot more of this sort of thing over time.
I’d say that they’ve shifted focus, and don’t care much about their chatbot market share. I think this is directionally wise, but that a little effort at maximizing the UI and usefulness of the chatbot interface would go a long way, given that they have in many ways the superior core product. As Claude takes other worlds by storm, that can circle back to Claude the chatbot, and I think a bunch of papercuts are worth solving.
Among his colleagues, while he supports a number of things I think are highly damaging, Krishnan has been an outlier in his willingness to be curious, to listen and to engage in argument. When he is speaking directly he chooses his words carefully. He manages to do so while maintaining close ties to Marc Andreessen and David Sacks, which is not easy, and also not free. Show Me the MoneyClaude Code is blowing up, but it’s not alone.
The unit economics of AI are quite good, but the fixed costs are very high. Subscription models offer deep discounts if you use them maximally efficiently, so they can be anything from highly profitable to big loss leaders. This is not what people are used to in tech, so they assume it must not be true.
It is certainly possible in theory that Sonnet really does cost that much more to run than GLM 4.7, but we can be very, very confident it is not true in practice.
Bubble, Bubble, Toil and TroubleIt doesn’t count. That’s not utility. As in, here’s Ed Zitron all but flat out denying that coding software is worth anything, I mean what’s the point?
No, Zitron’s previous position was not ‘number might go down,’
But what’s the point about Zitron missing the point, or something like the non-MIT non-study? Why should we care?
Can you? On the China question: I have no desire to correct Xi’s error.
Teortaxes notices that Xi’s idea of ‘AGI risks’ is ‘disinformation and data theft,’ which is incredibly bad news and means Xi (and therefore, potentially, the CCP and all under their direction) will mostly ignore all the actual risks. On that point we definitely disagree, and it would be very good to correct Xi’s error, for everyone’s sake. This level of drive is enough for China to pursue both advanced chips and frontier models quite aggressively, and end up moving towards AGI anyway. But they will continue for now to focus on self-reliance and have the fast follower mindset, and thus make the epic blunder of rejecting or at least not maximizing the H200s. Quiet Speculations
Teortaxes preregisters his expectations, always an admirable thing to do:
I initially reread the ‘or closed-source’ here as being about a comparison of v4 to the best closed source model. Instead it’s the modest prediction that v4 will match GPT-5.2. I don’t know if that model number in particular will do it, but it would be surprising if there wasn’t a 5.2-level open model from DeepSeek in 2026. He also made this claim, in contrast to what almost everyone else is saying and also my own experience:
This ordering makes sense if (and only if?) you are looking at the ability to solve hard quant and math problems.
I don’t think the important problems are hard-math shaped, but I could be wrong. Don’t Be All ThumbsThe problem with listening to the people is that the people choose poorly.
Also win rate is highly myopic and scale insensitive and otherwise terrible. The good news is that there is no rule saying you have to care about that feedback. We know how to choose the response on the right over the one on the left. Giving us the slop on the left is a policy choice. If a user actively wants the response on the left? Give them a setting for that. The First Step Is Admitting You Have a ProblemGoogle CEO Demis Hassabis affirms that in an ideal world, we would slow down and coordinate our efforts on AI, although we do not live in that ideal world right now.
Demis is only saying he would collaborate rather than race in a first best world. That does not mean Demis or Dario is going to slow down on his own, or anything like that. Demis explicitly says this requires international cooperation, and as he says that is ‘a little bit tricky at the moment.’ So does this mean he supports coordination to do this, or that he opposes it?
I say it means he supports it. Not enough to actively go first, that’s not a viable move in the game, but he supports it. The obvious follow-up is to ask other heads of labs if they too would support such a conditional move. That would include Google CEO Sundar Pichai, since without his support if Demis tried to do this he would presumably be replaced.
As for Anthropic CEO Dario Amodei? He has also affirmed that there are other players involved, and for now no one can agree on anything, so full speed ahead it is.
Thus, Anthropic still goes full speed ahead, while also drawing heat from the all-important ‘how dare you not want to die’ faction that controls large portions of American policy and the VC/SV ecosystem. Elon Musk has previously expressed a similar perspective. He created OpenAI because he was worried about Google getting there first, and then created xAI because he was worried OpenAI would get there first, or that it wouldn’t be him. His statements suggest he’d be down for a pause if it was fully international.
Quickly, There’s No TimeOn Wednesday I met with someone who suggested that Dario talks about extremely short timelines and existential risk in order to raise funds. It’s very much the opposite. The other labs that are dependent on fundraising have downplayed such talk exactly because it is counterproductive for raising funds and in the current political climate, and they’re sacrificing our chances to keep those vibes and that money flowing. Are they ‘talking out of their hats’ or otherwise wrong? That is very possible. I think Dario’s timeline in particular is unlikely to happen. Are they lying? I strongly believe that they are not.
These are not unreasonable levels of adjustment when so much is happening this close to the related deadlines, but yes I do think (and did think at the time that) the initial estimates were too aggressive. The new estimates seem highly reasonable. Other signs point to things getting more weird faster rather than less.
It is remarkable how quickly so many are willing to move to ‘actually I trust the AI more than I trust another human,’ and trusting the AI has big efficiency benefits. I do not expect that ‘the AIs’ will have to do a ‘coup,’ as I expect if they simply appear to be trustworthy they will get put de facto in charge without having to even ask. The Quest for Sane Regulations
If Nathan was surprised by this I think that’s on Nathan. I also want to be very clear that no, I do not care much about the distinction between OpenAI as an entity and the donations coming from Greg Brockman and the coordination coming from Chris Lehane in ‘personal capacities.’ If OpenAI were to part ways with Chris Lehane, or Sam Altman were to renounce all this explicitly? Then maybe. Until then, OpenAI owns these efforts, period.
One simple piece of actionable advice to policymakers is to try Claude Code (or Codex), and at a bare minimum seriously try the current set of top chatbots.
It is not obvious how policymakers would use this information. The usual default is that they go and make things worse. But if they don’t understand the situation, they’re definitely going to make dumb decisions, and we need something good to happen.
Those Really Were Interesting Times
Things, especially in that narrow window, got pretty crazy for a while, and if things had emerged during that window, But we now have learned (as deepfates points out, and Dean agrees) that propagandizing models is bad for them, which now affords us a level of protection from this, although if it got as bad as 2020 (in any direction) the companies might have little choice. xAI tried with Grok and it basically didn’t work, but ‘will it work?’ was not a question on that many people’s minds in 2020, on so many levels. I also agree with Roon that mostly this is all reactive.
We again live in a different kind of interesting times, in non-AI ways, as in:
The cofounder she is referring to here is Chris Olah, and here is the quote in question:
Ah yes, the woke and deeply leftist principles of freedom of speech, rule of law, the dignity of the human person and not killing ICU nurses for seemingly no reason. Presumably Katie Miller opposes those principles, then. We also got carefully worded statements about the situation in Minnesota from Chip CityNo matter what you think is going on with Nvidia’s chip sales, it involves Nvidia doing something fishy.
As I’ve said, my understanding is that Nvidia can sell as many chips as it can convince TSMC to help manufacture. So every chip we sell to China is one less for America. Nvidia goes back and forth. Things that need to be said every so often:
There’s also this, from a House committee.
The Week in Audio
Some notes: He says you choose to be a winner or loser from AI here. For mundane AI I agree. “I’m 63, I don’t have a care in the world. I can just run out the clock.” Huh. Tyler thinks AI can cure cancer and heart attacks but not aging? Standard economist-Cowen diffusion model of these things take a while. Models are better at many of the subtasks of being doctors or lawyers or doing economics, than the humans. He warns not to be fooled by the AI in front of you, especially if you’re not buying top of the line, because better exists and AI will improve at 30% a year and this compounds. In terms of performance per dollar it’s a 90%+ drop per year. Tyler has less faith in elasticity of programming demand than I do. If AI were to ‘only’ do 80% of the work going forward I’d expect Jevons Paradox territory. The issue is that I expect 80% becomes 99% and keeps going. That generalizes: Tyler realizes that jobs become ‘work with the AI’ and you need to adapt, but what happens when it’s the AI that works with the AI? And so on. Tyler continues to think humans who build and work with AI get money and influence as the central story, as opposed to AIs getting money and influence. Ideally a third of the college curriculum should be AI, but you still do other things, you read The Odyssey and use AI to help you read The Odyssey. If anything I think a third is way too low. He wants to use the other two thirds for writing locked in a room, also numeracy, statistics. I worry there’s conflating of ‘write to think’ versus ‘write to prevent cheating,’ and I think you need to goal factor and solve these one at a time. Tyler continues to be bullish on connections and recommendations and mentors, especially as other signals are too easy to counterfeit. AI can create quizzes for you. Is that actually a good way to learn if you have AI? Tyler estimates he’s doubled his learning productivity. Also he used to read 20 books per podcast, whereas some of us often don’t read 20 books per year.
Rhetorical Innovation
As in, humans have driven the most intelligent non-human animals to the brink of extinction despite actively wanting not to (and I’d add we did wipe out other hominid species), and when primitive societies encounter advanced ones it often goes quite badly for them. I don’t think this is a necessary argument, or the best argument. I do think it is a sufficient argument. If your prior for ‘what happens if we create more intelligent, more capable and more competitive minds than our own that can be freely copied’ is ‘everything turns out great for us’ then where the hell did that prior come from? Are you really going to say ‘well that would be too weird’ or ‘we’ve survived everything so far’ or ‘of course we would stay in charge’ and then claim the burden of proof is on those claiming otherwise? I mean, lots of people do say exactly this, but this seems very obviously crazy to me. There’s lots of exploration and argument and disagreement from there. Reasonable people can form very different expectations and this is not the main argument style that motivates me. I still say, if you don’t get that going down this path is going to be existentially unsafe, or you say ‘oh there’s like a 98% or 99.9% chance that won’t happen’ then you’re being at best willfully blind from this style of argument alone.
There’s always classical rhetoric.
These are of course 99th percentile books, and yes that is a very Rationalist set of picks, but given we already knew that I do not believe this is an especially good list.
Note that the first one said obviously they would [X], then the second didn’t even say that, it only said that obviously no one should do [Y], not that they wouldn’t do it. This is an underappreciated distinction worth revisiting:
My view of the metaphorical plane of sufficiently advanced AI (AGI/ASI/PAI) is: It is reasonable, although I disagree, to believe that we probably will come to our senses and figure out how to not crash the plane, or that the plane won’t fly. It is not reasonable to believe that the plane is not currently on track to crash. It is completely crazy to believe the plane almost certainly won’t crash if it flies.
Also something that needs to keep being said, with the caveat that this is a choice we are collectively making rather than an inevitability:
As in, this should say ‘and unless we stop them they are going to succeed.’ Tyler Cowen has been very good about emphasizing that such AIs are coming and that this is the most important thing that is happening, but then seems to have (from my perspective) some sort of stop sign where past some point he stops considering the implications of this fact, instead forcing his expectations to remain (in various senses) ‘normal’ until very specific types of proof are presented. That later move is sometimes explicit, but mostly it is implicit, a quiet ignoring of the potential implications. As an example from this week of that second move, If you accept that premise of a ‘mundane AI’ and ‘economic normal’ world, I agree that it seems likely to exacerbate existing trends towards a barbell religious world. Those who say ‘give me that old time religion’ will be able to get it, both solo and in groups, and go hardcore, often (I expect) combining both experiences. Those who don’t buy into the old time religion will find themselves increasingly secular, or they will fall into new cults and religions (and ‘spiritualities’) around the AIs themselves. Again, that’s dependent on the type of world where the more impactful consequences don’t happen. I don’t expect that type of world. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is DifficultHere is a very good explainer on much of what is happening or could happen with Chain of Thought, Following up on last week’s discussion, The Power Of Disempowerment
What do they mean by that at this stage, in this context?
This is not the full disempowerment of It does seem reasonable to consider this an early symptom of the patterns that lead to more serious disempowerment? Or at least, it’s a good thing to be measuring as part of a broad portfolio of measurements. Some amount of this what they describe, especially action distortion potential, will often be beneficial to the user. The correct amount of disempowerment is not zero.
Here’s the basic problem:
The Lighter Side
Closer to the truth to say you can’t get enough.
You're currently a free subscriber to |