---
subject: "Recap: Here's everything we published this week"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-07-21 03:41:17
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
Delivered to Ishan, Subscriber to The Ken.
Sun, 21 Jul 2024
|
The Spotlight by Jonathan Ananda
Newsletter Editor
|
|
Good Morning Ishan,
Welcome to your Sunday recap of everything The Ken had to offer this week.
[Will Flipkart become Phonepe before Phonepe becomes Flipkart?](https://the-ken.com/story/will-flipkart-become-phonepe-before-phonepe-becomes-flipkart/?utm_source=weekly_email&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weekly_recap_card)
Walmart-owned Flipkart and Walmart-owned Phonepe are both headed by ambitious CEOs. Both companies want to IPO. Both have over 500 million users. And both are also increasingly competing on each other’s respective turfs
Flipkart and Phonepe are both leaders in their respective categories, e-commerce and digital payments. They’re both also cousins because they are majority-owned by American retail giant Walmart. But if there were once clearly demarcated turfs for the two to dominate, those lines are getting blurred rapidly. The changes in direction may not be very stark today, but will become apparent with time. Could the two ships be headed for a collision course?
**********
Also in the spotlight…
[Great Place to Work… or not? A CEO’s ouster sparks trust crisis](https://the-ken.com/story/great-place-to-work-or-not-a-ceos-ouster-sparks-trust-crisis/?utm_source=weekly_email&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weekly_recap_card)
A founder deposed a chief executive in the dead of night and offered no reasons. Odd, given the consultancy’s widely used rankings of companies on workplace culture
Yeshasvini Ramaswamy, Great Place to Work India’s CEO for the past three years, was unexpectedly ousted at the end of May. Prasenjit Bhattacharya, who founded and led the India division of the global certification-and-consulting firm for 14 years, had stepped down in 2021. A deal to sell the unit to a private equity firm for Rs 300 crore was on the verge of being finalised but was abruptly called off. The sudden CEO exit has some insiders buzzing, but for most employees and clients, it’s business as usual. [[Read the full story](https://the-ken.com/story/great-place-to-work-or-not-a-ceos-ouster-sparks-trust-crisis/?utm_source=weekly_email&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weekly_recap_card)]
Listed to Daybreak podcast—[Not such a Great Place To Work after all?](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/daybreak/not-such-a-great-place-to-work-after-all/?utm_source=weekly_email&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weekly_recap_card)
**********
[Gaurav Munjal isn’t here to make any friends](https://the-ken.com/edsetgo/gaurav-munjal-isnt-here-to-make-any-friends/?utm_source=weekly_email&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weekly_recap_card)—Amidst reports of an impending sale or merger, the edtech founder remains defiant as ever [[Read here](https://the-ken.com/edsetgo/gaurav-munjal-isnt-here-to-make-any-friends/?utm_source=weekly_email&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weekly_recap_card)]
[Reliance Retail is making its rivals team up. They don’t have a choice](https://the-ken.com/tradetricks/reliance-retail-is-making-its-rivals-team-up-they-dont-have-a-choice/?utm_source=weekly_email&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weekly_recap_card)—Shoppers Stop and Aditya Birla Fashion need to fend off irrelevance [[Read here](https://the-ken.com/tradetricks/reliance-retail-is-making-its-rivals-team-up-they-dont-have-a-choice/?utm_source=weekly_email&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weekly_recap_card)]
[Daybreak Special: Zomato’s the investor’s favourite billion dollar baby. Could Swiggy beat it post-IPO?](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/daybreak/daybreak-special-zomatos-the-investors-favourite-billion-dollar-baby-could-swiggy-beat-it-post-ipo/?utm_source=weekly_email&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weekly_recap_card)—Swiggy pioneered food delivery in India and Zomato followed its footsteps but now, Swiggy has lost its first-mover advantage [[Listen here](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/daybreak/daybreak-special-zomatos-the-investors-favourite-billion-dollar-baby-could-swiggy-beat-it-post-ipo/?utm_source=weekly_email&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weekly_recap_card)]
[Hackers’ shadow looms over Big Tech’s investments in Indonesia](https://the-ken.com/story/hackers-shadow-looms-over-big-techs-investments-in-indonesia/?utm_source=weekly_email&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weekly_recap_card)
Even as the archipelago assesses damages caused by hackers on its systems, the government has an immediate problem to deal with: strengthen cybersecurity to not shoo away Big Tech
In mid-June, a group of hackers by the name Brain Cipher took down over 280 Indonesian government systems. The country has been subject to several such ransomware attacks in the recent past, even as it continues to digitalise public services. The June attack raises concerns about the level of safety that public data has in Indonesia. The expose comes at a time when the archipelago is courting tech giants for infrastructure and other investments. [[Read the full story](https://the-ken.com/story/hackers-shadow-looms-over-big-techs-investments-in-indonesia/?utm_source=weekly_email&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weekly_recap_card)]
**********
[Grab’s Uber-like model in the Philippines is squeezing the life out of its drivers](https://the-ken.com/story/grabs-uber-like-model-in-the-philippines-is-squeezing-life-out-of-its-drivers/?utm_source=weekly_email&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weekly_recap_card)
A day spent with a Grab driver in Metro Manila shows the reality of a system designed to solve business challenges but ultimately creates a human crisis
The Philippines’ ride-hailing industry is dominated by the “boundary system”, where drivers rent cars and pay a daily fee before keeping any earnings. This widespread but unregulated system squeezes profits, leaving drivers struggling to make ends meet. Grab claims high earnings, but drivers report lower actual income due to reduced incentives and competition from motorcycle taxis. Shrinking margins, driver demands for better conditions, and lower commissions from competitors threaten the boundary system’s viability over time. [[Read the full story](https://the-ken.com/story/grabs-uber-like-model-in-the-philippines-is-squeezing-life-out-of-its-drivers/?utm_source=weekly_email&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weekly_recap_card)]
[Chaayos is doing everything to be the anti-Starbucks](https://the-ken.com/story/chaayos-is-doing-everything-to-be-the-anti-starbucks/?utm_source=weekly_email&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weekly_recap_card)
When India is in love with everything premium, the tea chain is decidedly heading the other way. Chaayos has one group to thank for that
Premiumisation is no longer a choice. Especially in the Indian consumer market, where luxurious things lure everyone. And the tea cafe chains are no exception. So, they have upped their premium game, be it in their ambience or the overall experience. Chaayos, however, is talking the walk with its secret crystal ball, making it stay cautious when others are going all in to be premium. But how far can the crystal ball take when there are other problems to fix for the largest tea cafe chain in India? [[Read the full story](https://the-ken.com/story/chaayos-is-doing-everything-to-be-the-anti-starbucks/?utm_source=weekly_email&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weekly_recap_card)]
Listen to the Daybreak podcast—[Wind’s blowing towards all things luxe in India. But Chaayos isn’t going there](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/daybreak/winds-blowing-towards-all-things-luxe-in-india-but-chaayos-isnt-going-there/?utm_source=weekly_email&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weekly_recap_card)
**********
[HDFC Bank and Apple’s exclusive partnership, once the envy of lenders, is over for now](https://the-ken.com/story/hdfc-bank-and-apples-exclusive-partnership-once-the-envy-of-lenders-is-over-for-now/?utm_source=weekly_email&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weekly_recap_card)
A big part of Apple’s record high sales in India is thanks to the affordability programmes it has with the likes of HDFC Bank. But the lenders pay a heavy price for it
Apple and HDFC Bank have parted ways from their exclusive tie-up that offered customers cashbacks for their purchases. SBI Card and ICICI Bank have now replaced HDFC Bank but offering lesser cashback. HDFC Bank spent hundreds of crore each year on this partnership proving to be a very costly deal. For Apple, affordability financing through such deals is crucial if it wants deeper penetration in India. [[Read the full story](https://the-ken.com/story/hdfc-bank-and-apples-exclusive-partnership-once-the-envy-of-lenders-is-over-for-now/?utm_source=weekly_email&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weekly_recap_card)]
**********
[Bira 91 started India’s craft-beer party. Now, it’s sobering up](https://the-ken.com/story/bira-91-started-indias-craft-beer-party-now-its-sobering-up/?utm_source=weekly_email&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weekly_recap_card)
Production snags, plucky new rivals, and a knotty market. The Peak XV-backed brewer has to find a silver lining
Bira gave Indians a taste for premium brews and opened up the market for craft beer. But the Peak XV-backed brand has yet to conquer its supply chain woes. In fact, its cash crunch has only gotten worse, leading to issues like delayed vendor payments. Bira’s founding was a turning point for India’s beer industry, but its downfall might just mark another. [[Read the full story](https://the-ken.com/story/bira-91-started-indias-craft-beer-party-now-its-sobering-up/?utm_source=weekly_email&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weekly_recap_card)]
**********
[Healthify’s great escape from simmering heat in India to America’s fire](https://the-ken.com/story/whats-behind-healthifys-hail-mary-bet-on-the-us/?utm_source=weekly_email&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weekly_recap_card)
One of India’s most-valued healthtechs is standing at a crossroads amid job cuts, stagnant growth, muted AI bets, and a lack of new offerings for the global market
Starting as a calorie-tracking app a decade ago, Healthify now claims to be the “world’s largest AI health and fitness” company. The Bengaluru-based healthtech, with “over 40 million users,” saw a surge in its users during the Covid years. But things haven’t been easy ever since. It’s growth has flatlined, and funding money, which was fueling its marketing to acquire new users, has dried up. Besides, its rebranding and AI bets didn’t align with the needs of Indian users. Now, all eyes are on the US, a more DIY market. [[Read the full story](https://the-ken.com/story/whats-behind-healthifys-hail-mary-bet-on-the-us/?utm_source=weekly_email&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weekly_recap_card)]
**********
Podcasts
[Thinking about an MBA? Here’s how to hide your plans from your current employer](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/the-first-two-years/thinking-about-an-mba-heres-how-to-hide-your-plans-from-your-current-employer/?utm_source=weekly_email&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weekly_recap_card)—The first two years are the stepping stone to an MBA for most people. How do you ensure your employer does not sniff it out? [[Listen here](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/the-first-two-years/thinking-about-an-mba-heres-how-to-hide-your-plans-from-your-current-employer/?utm_source=weekly_email&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weekly_recap_card)]
[How Birkenstock became the Bata for India’s elite](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/daybreak/how-birkenstock-became-the-bata-for-indias-elite/?utm_source=weekly_email&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weekly_recap_card)—In the last decade or so, Birkenstock had a major glow up. It all started with the brand deciding not to settle for being just another comfortable but cringey sandal anymore. [[Listen here](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/daybreak/how-birkenstock-became-the-bata-for-indias-elite/?utm_source=weekly_email&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weekly_recap_card)]
**********
Newsletters
[The Nutgraf turns five. Introducing Two by Two](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/the-nutgraf-turns-five-introducing-two-by-two/?utm_source=weekly_email&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weekly_recap_card) [[Read here](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/the-nutgraf-turns-five-introducing-two-by-two/?utm_source=weekly_email&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weekly_recap_card)]
[Animals and choices](https://the-ken.com/newsletter/first-principles/animals-and-choices/?utm_source=weekly_email&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weekly_recap_card)—We see no hypocrisy in people who don’t eat certain meats or fish if that decision was made in some book thousands of years ago. But when people exercise their own logic to decide what they will and won’t eat, we are quick to attack them [[Read here](https://the-ken.com/newsletter/first-principles/animals-and-choices/?utm_source=weekly_email&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weekly_recap_card)]
[Young people want their dreams back](https://the-ken.com/kaching/young-people-want-their-dreams-back/?utm_source=weekly_email&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weekly_recap_card)—The Union Budget is due next Tuesday. Far from humongous infrastructure projects or investment schemes, more mundane concerns occupy many young employees’ minds [[Read here](https://the-ken.com/kaching/young-people-want-their-dreams-back/?utm_source=weekly_email&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weekly_recap_card)]
[The Ambani wedding extravaganza weaves three distinct narratives](https://the-ken.com/incitingincident/the-ambani-wedding-extravaganza-weaves-three-distinct-narratives/?utm_source=weekly_email&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weekly_recap_card)— It was grand. It was international. It was royal. [[Read here](https://the-ken.com/incitingincident/the-ambani-wedding-extravaganza-weaves-three-distinct-narratives/?utm_source=weekly_email&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=weekly_recap_card)]
That’s a wrap for this week. If you have thoughts or suggestions you’d like to share, leave a comment on our website or app, or write to our writers and podcasters. You can also write to me at jonathan@the-ken.com.
Take care.
Regards,
Jonathan