---
subject: "AI #144: Thanks For the Models"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-11-27 16:16:39
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Thanks for everything. And I do mean everything. Everyone gave us a new model in the last few weeks.
xAI gave us Grok 4.1, although few seem to have noticed and I haven’t tried it. Google gave us both by far the best image model in Nana Banana Pro and also Anthropic gave us Claude Opus 4.5. This is probably the best model and quickly became my daily driver for most but not all purposes including coding. I plan to do full coverage in two parts, with alignment and safety on Friday, and the full capabilities report and general review on Monday. Meanwhile the White House is announcing the Genesis Mission to accelerate science, there’s a continuing battle over another attempt at a moratorium, there’s a new planned $50 million super PAC, there’s another attempt by Nvidia to sell us out to China, Wall Street is sort of panicking about Nvidia because they realized TPUs exist and is having another round of bubble debate, and multiple Anthropic research papers one of which is important, and so on. One thing I’m actively pushing to next week, in addition to Claude Opus 4.5, is For those looking to give thanks in the form of Table of Contents[Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/9fec7521-a76f-4367-b55b-d9b1ffe4b978?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Common tasks for the win.[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/74a75024-bbde-494e-9d53-4c0ddd23957c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Don’t lose sleep over it.[Huh, Upgrades](https://substack.com/redirect/7e1e7bd8-9a58-42ab-a51b-a4550b2b5ecf?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/7e1e7bd8-9a58-42ab-a51b-a4550b2b5ecf?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)What’s going on in the group chat? Or the long chat.[On Your Marks.](https://substack.com/redirect/1e922e33-0e1f-4cec-b75d-1940252118a9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The one dimension of capability.[Choose Your Fighter.](https://substack.com/redirect/a231c8b3-68da-49ed-bf1a-84d4f48292af?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)One prominent CEO’s very high praise for Gemini 3.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon](https://substack.com/redirect/622756aa-d7ef-4a6a-8dbe-dc71ddfc0049?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/622756aa-d7ef-4a6a-8dbe-dc71ddfc0049?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Then they came for Thanksgiving dinner.[What Is Slop? How Do You Define Slop?](https://substack.com/redirect/ee12bedb-d089-46e7-ba9e-c9a407eaa3b6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Volume*Suspicion/Uniqueness (?!).[Fun With Media Generation](https://substack.com/redirect/bc9c4613-d4d0-4874-a431-14f77822f219?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/bc9c4613-d4d0-4874-a431-14f77822f219?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A new era in images you can generate.[A Young Lady’s Illustrated Primer.](https://substack.com/redirect/8e076967-3e21-4725-bab0-4970c797bbf9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)It’s not as so over as I would have guessed.[You Drive Me Crazy.](https://substack.com/redirect/4cde862d-d713-4ca4-99af-66f4306aaa95?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)More detail on exactly how GPT-4o ended up like it did.[They Took Our Jobs.](https://substack.com/redirect/bf42ba96-ad42-45ec-bdd2-9cf36acdddb2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Sergey Brin has Gemini pick our promotable talent.[Think Of The Time I Saved.](https://substack.com/redirect/84746165-322b-43b8-a2ec-0196a8e119e5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Anthropic estimates AI productivity gains.[The Art of the Jailbreak.](https://substack.com/redirect/e240a387-4b77-4458-a801-390dd949c6f2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Ode to a drug recipe?[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/754010fd-a62f-4f09-9c48-5c2e6c847674?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Big Nonprofits Post, Richard Ngo’s donations, UK AISI, Ashgro[Introducing.](https://substack.com/redirect/0dc41dd7-adbb-4596-b8f4-1bf5aa0430cb?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Olmo 3, DeepSeek Math v2, Agentic Reviewer.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/31041969-0f6d-4553-98f9-bae1ed354b0a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Get in everyone, we’re doing the Genesis Mission.[Show Me the Money.](https://substack.com/redirect/64c93dcc-fe72-4993-9b1f-badd4de4f3ba?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)What’s in a TPU?[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/e4435dfb-8c47-4b38-9bca-bc74577b2496?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Who else wants to negotiate?[Bubble, Bubble, Toil and Trouble.](https://substack.com/redirect/4e21d13c-b9db-4b08-8d15-802b5fed0eac?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The only arguments you’ll ever need.[The Quest for Sane Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/fb5309ad-2b2b-4907-b287-d9cd0816a99b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Oh look, it’s an actual potential framework.[Chip City.](https://substack.com/redirect/8a861434-b77e-4134-a5f7-b8b472d38bc8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Nvidia turns its eyes to selling the new H200.[Water Water Everywhere.](https://substack.com/redirect/b1858dde-d30e-42cc-9be3-8ee06530f5e0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Very little of it is being used by AI.[The Week in Audio](https://substack.com/redirect/52480c4b-a99f-4a50-b2a1-f2f12cf7d5f1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/52480c4b-a99f-4a50-b2a1-f2f12cf7d5f1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Sutskever, Yam, Lebenz, Ball and Tegmark, Toner and more.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/d375e660-b202-4bf3-a2ac-1270fac5d11d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)If you come at the Pope.[You Are Not In Control.](https://substack.com/redirect/f4b7ffc7-51d2-44e6-8a27-e63eb690bdd2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Definitions of disempowerment, potential mitigations.[AI 2030.](https://substack.com/redirect/fb10572f-664d-4111-aa46-c2ff4225c174?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Things are moving slower than some expected.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/eac705ab-aa89-43e5-96de-6b7b7c596c1b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Dishonest models.[Misaligned?](https://substack.com/redirect/3fe19d03-f34f-40c5-ac8b-9cebf73328fc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)That depends on your point of view.[Messages From Janusworld.](https://substack.com/redirect/f46ad591-a38b-4cb8-aa59-a9843cb733e8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)You should see the other guy. That would be GPT-5.1.[The Lighter Side.](https://substack.com/redirect/3cee2f99-398f-4e55-aede-ec0dc7c012f3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Turn anything into a comic.
Language Models Offer Mundane UtilityIt’s not this simple, but a lot of it mostly is this simple.
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
Huh, Upgrades
Is 64% product accuracy good? I have absolutely no idea. Claude Opus 4.5 is available. It’s probably the world’s best model. Full coverage starts tomorrow. Claude Opus 4.5 includes a 66% price cut to $5/$25 per million tokens, and Opus-specific caps have been removed from the API. Claude conversations now have no maximum length. When they hit their limit, they are summarized, and the conversation continues.
Claude Code is now available within their desktop app. On Your MarksIt is a remarkably good approximation to say there is only one dimension of ‘general capability,’ with Epoch noting that across many tasks the r^2=0.91.
Choose Your FighterOkay, I like Gemini 3 too but settle down there buddy.
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
Okay, look, everyone, we need to at least be smarter than this:
At this point, if you find a recipe, you need strong evidence it was written by a human, or else you need to assume it might not be. The search and discovery systems we used to have, including around Google, are effectively broken. If real guides and recipes can’t win traffic, and right now traffic to all such sites is cratering, then no one will write them. It does not sound like Google is trying to mitigate these issues.
There are other contexts in which fabricating audio, usually via Frankenbiting where you sew different tiny clips together, or otherwise using misleading audio to create a false narrative or enhance the true one is standard issue, such as in reality television. When you go on such shows you sign contracts that outright say ‘we may use this to tell lies about you and create a false narrative, and if so, that’s your problem.’ Here’s another one, Also, if one of these isn’t AI and you merely sound like one, I’m not going to say that’s worse, but it’s not that much better. If you’re so engagement-maximizing that I confuse your writing for AI, what is the difference? Note that you cannot use current LLMs in their default chatbot modes as AI detectors, even in obvious cases or as a sanity check, as they bend over backwards to try and think everything is written by a human.
There is no actual contradiction here. Different ways to use AI are different. Using AI in professional illustrations is a hard no for the foreseeable future, and would be even without copyright concerns. Using it to generate material for your local D&D campaign seems totally fine. Hard problems remain hard:
Also, real world not using that same model in these ways? Remarkably similar. Rare academic realism victory?
Funnily enough, they ran a sycophancy check, and the more 4o sucked up to the user, the more often the user followed its advice. ‘Surprising’ advice was also followed more often. It’s certainly worth noting that 75% (!) of those in the treatment group took the LLM’s advice, except who is to say that most of them wouldn’t have done whatever it was anyway? Wouldn’t 4o frequently tell the person to do what they already wanted to do? It also isn’t obvious that ‘advice makes me feel better’ or generally feeling better are the right effects to check.
What Is Slop? How Do You Define Slop?We all know it when we see it, AI or otherwise, but can anyone define it?
I don’t think the old definition works. There is a necessary stylistic component. I asked Gemini. It gave me a slop answer. I told it to write a memory that would make it stop giving me slop, then opened a new window and asked again and got a still incomplete but much better answer that ended with this: That’s a key element. You then need to add what one might call the ‘mannerism likelihood ratio’ that screams AI generated (or, for human slop, that screams corporate speak or written by committee). When I pointed this out it came back with:
That’s more gesturing in the direction but clearly not right, I’d suggest something more like SlopIndex*LikelihoodRatio from above, where Likelihood Ratio is the instinctive update on the probability mannerisms were created by a slop process (either an AI writing slop or one or more humans writing slop) rather than by a free and functional mind. Fun With Media Generation
By all accounts it is a big improvement in image models. It is especially an improvement in text rendering and localization. You can now do complex documents and other images with lots of words in specific places, including technical diagrams, and have it all work out as intended. The cost per marginal image in the API is $0.13 for 2K resolution or $0.24 for 4K, versus $0.04 for Gemini 2.5 Flash Image. In exchange, the quality is very good.
Seems great to me. A bit expensive for mass production, but definitely the best place to get title images for posts and for other similar uses. Also, yes, doing things like this seems very cool:
For a while people have worried about not being able to trust images.
Google offers SynthID in-app, but that requires a manual check. I think we’re still mostly fine and that AI images will remain not that hard to ID, or rather that it will be easy for those paying attention to such issues to instinctively create the buckets of [AI / Not AI / Unclear] and act accordingly. But the ‘sanity waterline’ is going down on this, and the number of people who will have trouble here keeps rising.
You can tell this isn’t real if you’re looking, the handwriting is too precise, too correct, everything aligns too perfectly and so on, but if we disregard that, it seems weird to ask for images of handwriting? So it’s not clear how much this matters.
Andres Sandberg is impressed that it one shots diagrams for papers, without even being told anything except ‘give me a diagram showing the process in the paper.’ Are there some doubled labels? Sure. That’s the quibble. Contrast this with not too long ago, where you could give detailed instructions on what the diagram would have been able to do it at all. A Young Lady’s Illustrated Primer
Andrej Karpathy bites all the bullets. Give up on grading anything that isn’t done in class and combine it with holistic evaluations. Focus a lot of education on allowing students to use AI, including recognizing errors.
Will is correctly hating that the students feel this way, but is misdiagnosing the cause. This isn’t an AI problem. This is about the structure of school and grading. If you believe progress requires failure, that is incompatible with the way we structure college, where any failures are highly damaging to the student and their future. What do you expect them to do in response? I also don’t understand what the problem is here, if a student is doing what they work they can and indeed writing the best essay they could. Isn’t that the best you can do? You Drive Me CrazyIn The New York Times, For the worst update in particular, the OpenAI process successfully spotted the issue in advance. The update failed the internal ‘vibe check’ for exactly the right reasons. And then the business side overruled the vibe check to get better engagement.
The most vocal OpenAI users did the same vibe check, had the same result, and were sufficiently vocal to force a reversion to ‘GG,’ which wasn’t as bad about this but was still rather not great, presumably for the same core reasons. What went wrong?
This is more detail on the story we already knew. OpenAI trained on sycophantic metrics and engagement, got an absurdly sycophantic model that very obviously failed vibe checks but that did get engagement, and deployed it. Steps were taken, and as we all know GPT-5 was far better on these issues, but the very parts of 4o that caused the issues and were not in GPT-5 are parts many users also love. So now we worry that things will drift back over time.
This is definitely a concern with all such interventions, which have clear downsides. We should definitely worry about OpenAI and others feeling forced to take such actions even when they are net negative for the user. Humans and non-AI institutions do this all the time. There are strong legal and PR and ‘ethical’ pressures to engage in such CYA behaviors and avoid blame. My guess is that there is serious danger there will be too many refusals, since the incentives are so strongly to avoid the one bad headline. However I think offering the hotline and removing
They Took Our Jobs
Think Of The Time I SavedHow much time is AI saving?
That’s improvements only from current generation models employed similarly to how they are used now, and by ‘current generation’ we mean the previous generation, since the data is more than (checks notes) two days old. We’re going to do vastly better. That doesn’t mean I trust the estimation method in the other direction either, especially since it doesn’t include an estimate of rates of diffusion, and I don’t think it properly accounts for selection effects on which conversations happen, plus adaptation costs, changes in net quality (in both directions) and other caveats. Claude Sonnet was slightly worse than real software engineers at task time estimation (Spearman 0.5 for engineers versus 0.44 for Sonnet 4.5) which implies Opus 4.5 should be as good or somewhat better than engineers on JIRA task estimation. Opus 4.5 is probably still worse than human experts at estimating other task types since this should be an area of relative strength for Claude. Results are highly jagged, varying a lot between occupations and tasks. I noticed this:
The value of an always-available-on-demand performance of $54 in professional labor is vastly in excess of $54 per use. A huge percentage of the cost of hiring a human is finding them, agreeing on terms, handling logistics and so on. Overall my take is that this is a fun exercise that shows there is a lot of room for productivity improvements, but it doesn’t give us much of a lower or upper bound. The Art of the Jailbreak
The details of how much it worked, and where it worked better versus worse, are interesting. The fact that it worked at all was highly unsurprising. Essentially any stylistic shift or anything else that preserves the content while taking you out of the assistant basin is going to promote jailbreak success rate, since the defenses were focused in the assistant basin. Get InvolvedLooking to donate money? Consider looking at
Introducing
In Other AI News
I’m all for trying. I am guessing availability of data sets is most of the acceleration here. It also could matter if this functions as a compute subsidy to scientific research, lowering cost barriers that could often serve as high effective barriers. Giving anyone who wants to Do Science To It access to this should be a highly efficient subsidy.
On the name, I admire commitment to the Star Trek bit but also wish more research was done on the actual movies, technology and consequences in question to avoid unfortunate implications. Existential risk and offense-defense balance issues, much? A Medium article reverse engineered 200 AI startups and found The trouble comes when companies are lying about what they are doing. If you’re a wrapper company, that is fine and probably makes sense, but don’t pretend otherwise. Where this is also bad news is for Gemini, for Grok and for open models. In the marketplace of useful applications, paying for the good stuff has proven worthwhile, and we have learned which models have so far been the good stuff.
Show Me the Money
WSJ’s Katherine Blunt covers ‘
Are TPUs bad for Nvidia? Quiet Speculations
‘Russia has top AI executives?’ you might ask. I strongly agree with David Manheim that this is misguided on multiple levels. Rolling your own LLM from scratch does not get you alignment or trust or meaningful ownership and it rarely will make sense to ‘roll your own’ even for vital functions. There are some functions where one might want to find a ‘known safe’ lesser model to avoid potential backdoors or other security issues, but that’s it, and given what we know about data poisoning it is not obvious that ‘roll your own’ is the safer choice in that context either. Said in response to Opus 4.5, also I mean
Bubble, Bubble, Toil and Trouble
Here are the arguments in favor of a bubble. Level of spending is insane. Many of these companies are not for real. Productivity gains might be illusory. AI companies are using circular funding schemes. Look at all this financial trickery like taking things off balance sheets. AI companies are starting to use leverage and make low margin investments.
Only argument #3 argues that AI isn’t offering a worthwhile product. Argument #2 is a hybrid, since it is saying some AI companies don’t offer a worthwhile product. True. But the existence of productless companies, or companies without a sustainable product, is well-explained and fully predicted whether or not we have a bubble. I don’t see a surprisingly large frequency of this happening. The other four arguments are all about levels and methods of spending. To me, the strongest leg of this is #1, and the other features are well-explained by the level of spending. If there is indeed too much spending, number will go down at some point, and then people can talk about that having been a ‘bubble.’ The thing is, number go down all the time. If there wasn’t a good chance of number go down, then you should buy, because number go up. If a bubble means ‘at some point in the future number go down’ then calling it a bubble is not useful. I don’t think this is a complete list, and you have to add three categories of argument: AI will ‘hit a wall’ or is ‘slowing down’ or will ‘become a commodity.’ AI will face diffusion bottlenecks. AI is deeply unpopular and the public and government will turn against it.
I do think all three of these possibilities should meaningfully lower current valuations, versus the world where they were not true. They may or may not be priced in, but there are many positive things that clearly are not priced in.
The Quest for Sane Regulations
Dean Ball has offered an actual, concrete proposal for a national preemption proposal. To my knowledge, no one else has done this, and most advocating for preemption, including the White House, have yet to give us even a
I did indeed RTFB (read) I have concerns with the bill as written in several places, as would be true for any first draft of such a bill. Preventing laws requiring disclosure that something is an AI system or that content was AI generated, without any Federal such requirement, might be a mistake. I do think that it is likely wise to have some form of mandate to distinguish AI vs. non-AI content. I worry that preventing mental health requirements, while still allowing states to prevent models from ‘practicing medicine,’ raises the danger that states will attempt to prevent models from practicing medicine, or similar. States might de facto be in an all-or-nothing situation and destructively choose all. I actually wouldn’t mind language that explicitly prevented states from doing this, since I very much think it’s good that they haven’t done it. I do not love the implications of Section 4 or the incentives it creates to reduce liability via reducing developer control. The ‘primarily for children’ requirement may not reliably hit the target it wants to hit, while simultaneously having no minimum size and risking being a meaningful barrier for impacted small startups. If the FTC ‘may’ enforce violations, then we risk preempting transparency requirements and then having the current FTC choose not to enforce. Also the FTC is a slow enforcement process that typically takes ~2 years or more, and the consequences even then remain civil plus a consent decree, so in a fast moving situation companies may be inclined to risk it. This draft has looser reporting requirements in some places than SB 53, and I don’t see any reason to weaken those requirements. I worry that this effectively weakens whistleblower protections from SB 53 since they are linked to requirements that would be preempted, and given everyone basically agrees the whistleblower protections are good I’d like to see them included in this bill.
I would challenge details but I think from the industry side Adams has the right idea.
This ranks AI’s salience above climate change, the environment or abortion. Huge if true, and huge if true. That still is well behind the Current Things like health care and cost of living, and the increase here is relatively modest. If it only increases at this rate then there is still some time. It is also not a surprise that trust on this issue is moving towards Democrats. I would expect public trust to follow the broadly ‘anti-AI’ party, for better and for worse.
I notice the precise wording here.
That’s distinct from safety concerns, or policy related to potential emergence of powerful AI (AGI/ASI), which raise a unique set of issues and where past or current performance is not indicative of future success.
The approach seems rather out of touch to me? They go full ‘beat China,’ pointing out that AI threatens to replace American workers, manipulate our children and steal American intellectual property (10/10 I maybe wouldn’t be reminding Americans that AI is by default going to take their jobs and manipulate our children, then call for a Federal framework that presumably addresses neither of these problems? Or equate this with IP theft when trying to sell the public on that? I’d predict this actively backfires. a16z and several high level people at OpenAI created the $100+ million In response, Their first target of Leading the Future is Alex Bores, who was instrumental in the RAISE Act and is now running in NY12.
For full credit, one must point out that this constitutes two problems. Whether or not highly capable AI should (legally speaking) be harder, opening a nail salon or getting your hair braided needs to become much easier. Oh, how those like Sacks and Andreessen are going to miss the good old days when the opponents were a fundamentally libertarian faction that wanted to pass the lightest touch regulations that would address their concerns about existential risks. The future debate is going to involve a lot of people who actively want to arm a wrecking ball, in ways that don’t help anyone, and it’s going to be terrible. You’re going to get politicians like James Fishback, who is running for Governor of Florida on a platform of ‘I’ll stop the H-1B scam, tell Blackstone they can’t buy our homes, cancel AI Data Centers, and abolish property taxes.’ There’s a bunch of ‘who wants to tell him?’ in that platform, but that’s the point. As noted above by Dean Ball, those who opposed the Genesis Executive Order are a central illustration of this issue, opposing the best kind of AI initiative. Chip City
Nvidia’s goal, despite reliably selling out its chips, seems to be to spend its political capital to sell maximally powerful AI chips to China. They tried to sell H20s and got a yes. Then they tried to sell what were de facto fully frontier chips with the B30A, and got a no.
Nvidia is not going to stop trying to sell China as much compute as possible. It will say and do whatever it has to in order to achieve this. Don’t let them. Water Water EverywhereThose from other political contexts will be familiar with the zombie lie, the multiple order of magnitude willful confusion, the causation story that simply refuses to die.
Technically, do data centers ‘worsen a water pollution problem’ and increase water use? Yes, absolutely, the same as everything else. Is it a meaningful impact? No. The Week in Audio
You can, if you want to do so,
Helen Toner’s excellent talk on AI’s Jagged Frontier from The Curve (I was there):
One would certainly hope so. One also cautions there is a long history of saying things one would never permit and then going back on it when the AI actually exists. Rhetorical InnovationIt is not in my strategic interest to advise such people as Marc Andreessen and Peter Thiel on strategy given their current beliefs and goals. Despite this, the gamer code of honor requires me to point out that going straight after Pope Leo XIV, who whether or not he is the Lord’s representative on Earth is very clearly a well-meaning guy who mostly suggests we all be nice to each other for a change in the most universalizing ways possible? Not a good move. I do admire the honesty here from Thiel. If he says he thinks Pope Leo XIV is ‘a tool of the Antichrist’ then I believe that Thiel thinks Pope Leo XIV is a tool of the Antichrist. I do want people to tell us what they believe in.
The next step, to be maximally helpful, is to state exactly which moral guidance from Leo XIV is acting as tool of the Antichrist, and what one believes instead. For all those who talk about ‘humanity’ presenting a united front against AI if the situation were to call for it (also see above, or the whole world all the time):
I continue to be extremely frustrated by those like Vie, I think it’s fine to say ‘p(doom) is confused, here’s my number for p(extinction)’ but then people like Vie turn around and think full extinction is some sort of extraordinary outcome when creating minds universally more competitive and capable than ours that can be freely copied seems to be at best quite dense? This seems like the obvious default outcome when creating these new more competitive minds? To say it is a Can’t Happen is totally absurd. I also flag that I strongly disagree that current models are ‘really quite aligned’ in the ways that will matter down the line, I mean have you met Gemini 3 Pro. I also flag that you don’t generally get to go to a probability of ~0 for [X] based on ‘not seeing evidence of [X],’ even if we agreed on the not seeing evidence. You need to make the case that this absence of evidence is an overwhelming evidence of absence, which it sometimes is but in this case isn’t. Certainly p(new architecture) is not so close to zero and it seems absurd to think that it is?
If your standard for ‘rate of AI progress’ is going from zero to suddenly ChatGPT and GPT-3.5, then yes everything after that is going to look like ‘slowing down.’ This is then combined with updates happening more rapidly so there aren’t huge one-time jumps, and that AI is already ‘good enough’ for many purposes, and improvements in speed and cost being invisible to many, and it doesn’t seem like there’s that much progress.
|