---
subject: "LLMs and Communicating in More Dimensions"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <byrne@thediff.co>"
to: ""
date: 2023-11-06 13:58:37
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
|
In this issue: - LLMs and Communicating in More Dimensions—LLMs increase the surface area of documents you can read and ideas you can interact with, allowing you to summarize the verbose and to expand on the brief and cryptic. That will have profound downstream effects on what people learn, who they talk to, even how they communicate.
- Cruise's Asymptotes—Cruise's rush to get to market with self-driving cars has been met with safety and economic difficulties, but the company and industry have pushed back against some of the negative narrative. That said, the economics may work for autonomous driving generally without working for specific companies.
- Shrinkage—A look at shrinkage from the perspective of people stopping theft and the people committing it shows that there's a surprising macro driver of higher shrinkage.
- Open Source Economics—Open source economic models work by commoditizing a complement, but they run the risk that someone else will choose what gets commoditized.
- Derivatives and the Underlying—Derivatives and ETFs tracking indices can provide investors with exposure to hard-to-own assets, but this carries risks, as evidenced by S&P Dow Jones setting the value of Nigeria to zero in an index of frontier markets
- Shorting—South Korea has temporarily banned short selling until June 2024, resulting in a 5.6% stock market rally, particularly in tech companies which are often targeted by short sellers.
- Diff Jobs—A selection of interesting roles from companies in the Diff network.
Today's newsletter is brought to you by LLMs and Communicating in More DimensionsSome documents are hard to read solo: an academic paper in a field you don't know especially well, a prospectus for a hard tech company where you're unfamiliar with the underlying technology, or just an email from a busy professional in a different field who knows more acronyms than you and isn't afraid to use them. There used to be two ways to do this: struggle a lot on your own, or ask someone for help. LLM chats are a new kind of "someone," with infinite knowledge, near-infinite patience, and, yes, a tendency to tell you what they think you want to hear. One way to think of them is that they're an implementation of the old " This works in both directions; a newly-standard use case for LLMs is, more or less, "Explain it like I'm not five," i.e. stripping as much extraneous verbiage as possible from a text to get at the fundamental point. Some of this can be done programmatically; there's a ritual on quarterly conference calls where the call starts with a sort of opening benediction, in which the company informs investors that it will contain forward-looking statements that may or may not come to pass, and sometimes enumerates the magical verbs (like "can," "should," "may," "plans to,") that should be understood to immunize the executives from accusations of securities fraud. The information content of this section of the call is zero, and it's easy to strip out of a transcript. But there are other parts of quarterly calls that also carry minimal information, but they're more situational. Summarizing an earnings call, or uploading a bunch of them to a vector database in order to interrogate them, is a way to convert reading and memorization into a search problem. AI is also improving our resolution of history. This was something The Diff discussed a bit What this ultimately means is that more of your asynchronous information consumption will happen at your preferred resolution. In-person, things will still be tricky; you can't live-compress a five-minute monologue into a fifteen-second summary (or a two hour long lecture into a 5 minute podcast episode) without waiting for it to end. You can imagine other instances of this. For example, if an essay seems like it's making an interesting point, but the author has wildly different premises than you—they're a Marxist, an Evangelical Christian, whatever—translating the main essay into something disconnected from these points can be a useful exercise. We already do this implicitly when we read anything sufficiently old; the worldviews of people even eighty years ago are sometimes alien. Of course, this is a tricky exercise, especially when the LLM has been optimized to be inoffensive in the context of the modern US (or This creates a more profound change, too: it’s the slow death of incomprehensibility. Sometimes, a conversation will involve jargon, or the application of some domain-specific concept in a new area. And sometimes, this completely flummoxes people who are less familiar with the jargon. So understanding it is binary; if someone talking about politics says "this is just like 1994" or someone talking about macroeconomics says "it's 1997 all over again," the listener would get it or they wouldn’t. But LLM chatbots mean that instead of a boolean, the datatype in question is time: jargon speeds up communication for people who share it, but now, for people who don’t, it just means asking ChatGPT what this could possibly mean. The net result of this is that more obscure interests are accessible to more people. It's safer to pick up an obscure book on an esoteric topic. It's less risky to read an intimidating paper. And it's less of a waste of time to email the paper's author with follow-up questions—for both of you. LLMs expand the surface area of all human knowledge, and, conveniently, represent a map of that same surface. We've barely started exploring. Facial recognition is a naturally controversial topic, but it's unclear how much of this controversy is from a combination of users not thinking statistically and journalists doing the same thing. Models can be set with different accuracy rates, and if you are a police department in a city of 100,000 people and your model identifies a murder suspect with 99% accuracy, you have simultaneously reduced your potential suspect count by two orders of magnitude and ensured that if you actually arrest the person who matches, your odds of getting the wrong person are 99.9%. In general, the UI for a statistical process that isn't being used by professional statisticians treats these probabilities as binary; Gmail does not have a p(spam) tag next to every email, just an inbox for p(spam) below a certain threshold and a spam folder for p(spam) above it. The way you know they've gotten the interface right for a given accuracy level is that you have false positives and false negatives. Of course, it's better to have a higher accuracy level, but for whatever reason this is harder than it seems like it should be. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/97ae67d8?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)This will have significant social effects, but with a long lag, because the changes will be downstream from the behavior of people who like to nerd out. And that nerding out takes time. A more prosaic near-term effect will be a smaller valuation gap between companies that don't publish financial statements and investor communications in English and the ones that do. And one can imagine other kinds of AI-based machine translation, like creating truly comparable valuations for companies that use GAAP and IFRS, or looking at how insurers would be valued under different accounting regimes. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/072fe0fa?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)One of the downstream effects of this may be that heavy AI users will be more rude in person. You can see a bit of this when interacting with other people whose job performance hinges on the transmission of as many timely bytes as possible in as few syllables as necessary. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/eac86e12?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
You're on the free subscriber list for The Diff. This week, paying subscribers read about A Word From Our SponsorsManual search and data collection means time you’re NOT spending drawing insights, gaining perspective and making bold investment decisions. Let Tegus do the busy work for you. Powerful AI and machine learning algorithms summarize each expert transcript to put key questions and themes front and center. And you get deep-dives into a single company, industry, or trend with auto-tagging across transcripts.Get better insights — faster — with Tegus’ latest innovations in AI. ElsewhereCruise's AsymptotesThe NYT has a There are some pushbacks against the article. For example, Of course, that doesn't necessarily speak to Cruise's ability to do so. Their CEO argues that ShrinkageVox has a The piece raises an interesting possibility: higher shrink is downstream from higher wages at the bottom of the wage distribution. Everyone in the piece agrees that having more people walk the floor of the store will at least discourage theft, and sometimes prevent it. If retailers experience faster inflation in labor costs than in inventory costs, shrinkage will increase unless some other force offsets it. Open Source EconomicsIn July, Red Hat changed its licensing to make it more difficult for other organizations to create Red Hat-compatible distributions. In response, Derivatives and the UnderlyingIf there's an asset that's hard to own directly, but that investors want to bet on, one option is to get exposure synthetically through a derivative that tracks some index that includes, or is made of, the asset. But this has risks. For example: ShortingSouth Korea has Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. A sampling of current open roles: - A company building ML-powered tools to accelerate developer productivity is looking for software engineers. (Washington DC area)
- A crypto proprietary trading firm is actively seeking systematic-oriented traders with crypto experience—ideally someone with experience across a variety of exchanges and tokens. (Remote)Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up.
- A concentrated crossover fund is looking for an intellectually curious data scientist with demonstrated mastery in analytics. Experience with alt data, web scraping, and financial modeling preferred. (SF)
- A well funded seed stage startup founded by former SpaceX engineers is building software tools for hardware engineering. They're looking for a full stack engineer interested in developing highly scalable mission-critical tools for satellites, rockets, and other complex machines. (Los Angeles)
- A new health startup that gives customers affordable access to preventative care and lifestyle interventions seeks a founding engineer. 7+ years of JavaScript experience preferred (TypeScript is ideal), and payments experience is a plus. A great opportunity for anyone excited to make healthcare better by treating problems cost-effectively before they're catastrophic. (US, remote; Austin preferred)
If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. |
||
|
|
|
|||
|