---
subject: "o3 Will Use Its Tools For You"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-04-18 21:09:35
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
By all accounts, this upgrade is a big deal. They are giving us a modestly more intelligent model, but more importantly giving it better access to tools and ability to discern when to use them, to help get more practical value out of it. The tool use, and the ability to string it together and persist, is where o3 shines. The highest praise I can give o3 is that this was by far the most a model has been used as part of writing its own review post, especially helping answer questions about its model card.
This post covers all things o3: Its capabilities and tool use, where to use it and where not to use it, and also the model card and o3’s alignment concerns. o3 is on the cusp of having dangerous capabilities, and while o3 is highly useful it hallucinates remarkably often by today’s standards and engages in an alarmingly high amount of deceptive and hostile behaviors. As usual, I am incorporating a wide variety of representative opinion and feedback, although in this case there was too much to include everything. What’s In a Name
o4-mini is the lightweight version of this, and presumably o4-mini-high is the medium weight version? The naming conventions continue to be confusing, especially releasing o3 and o4-mini at the same time. Should we consider these same-generation or different-generation models? I’d love if we could equalize these numbers, even though o4-mini was (I presume) trained more recently, and also not have both 4o and o4 around at the same time. My Current Model Use HeuristicsAfter reading everyone’s reactions, I think all three major models have their uses now. If I need good tool use including image generation, with or without reasoning, and o3 has the tool in question, or I expect Gemini to be a jerk here, I go to o3. If I need to dump a giant file or video into context, Gemini 2.5 is still available. I’ll also use it if I need strong reasoning and I’m confident I don’t need tools. If Claude Sonnet 3.7 is definitely up for the task, especially if I want the read-only Google integration, then great, we get to still relax and use Claude. Deep Research is available as its own thing, if you want it, which I basically don’t.
In practice, I expect to use o3 most of the time right now. I do worry about the hallucination rate, but in the contexts I use AI for I consider myself very good at handling that. If I was worried about that, I’d have Gemini or Claude check its work. I haven’t been coding lately, so I don’t have a personally informed opinion there. I hope to get back to that soon, but it might be a while. Based on what people say, o3 is an excellent architect and finder of bugs, but you’ll want to use a different model for the coding itself, either Sonnet 3.7, Gemini 2.5 or GPT-4.1 depending on your preferences. Huh, UpgradesI appreciate a section that o3 is the main event here. It is pitched as: Pushing the frontier across coding, math, science, visual perception and more. Especially strong at visual tasks like analyzing images, charts and graphs. 20% fewer ‘major errors’ than o1 on ‘difficult, real-world tasks’ including coding. Improved instruction following and more useful, verifiable responses. Includes web sources. Feels more natural and conversational.
Oddly not listed in this section is its flexible tool access. That’s a big deal too. With o1 and especially o1-pro, it made sense to pick your spots for when to use o3-mini or o3-mini-high instead to save time. With the new speed of o3, if you aren’t going to run out of queries or API credits, that seems to no longer be true. I have a hard time believing I wouldn’t use o3. Use All the Tools
Tool use is seamless. It all goes directly into the chain of thought. Intelligent dynamic tool use is a really huge deal. What tools do we have so far? By default inside ChatGPT, we have web search, file search, access to past conversations, access to local information (date, time, location), automations for future tasks (that’s the gear), Python use both visible and invisible (it says invisibility is for a mix of doing calculations, avoiding exposing user info or breaking formatting, and speed, make of that what you will) and image generation. If you are using the API in the future, you can then add your own custom tools. I am very excited and curious to see what happens when people start adding additional tools. If you add Zapier or other ways to access and modify your outside contexts, do you suddenly get a killer executive assistant? How worried will you need to be about hallucinations in particular there, since they’re a big issue with o3? The intelligent integration of tool use jumps out a lot more than whether the model is abstractly smarter. Suddenly you ask it to do a thing and it (far more often than previous models) straight up does the thing. I notice this makes me want to use o3 a lot more than I was using AI before, and deciding to query it ‘doesn’t feel as stressful’ in that I’m not doing this ‘how likely is it to fail and waste my time’ calculation as often.
Exactly. It’s not that you couldn’t have done it before, it’s that before you would have ended up doing it yourself or otherwise spending a bunch of time. Now it’s Worth It. Search the WebI love o3’s web browsing, which in my experience is a step upgrade. I’m very happy that spontaneous web browsing is becoming the new standard. It was a big upgrade when Claude got browsing a few weeks ago, and it’s another big upgrade that o3 seems much better than previous model at seeking out information, especially key details, and avoiding getting fooled. And of course now it is standard that you are given the sources, so you can check. There are some people like Kristen Ruby On Your MarksOpenAI has some graphs with criminal choices for the scale of the y-axis, which I will not be posting. They have also doubled down on ‘only compare models within the family’ on their other graphs as well, this time fully narrowing to reasoning models only, so we only look at various o-line options, and they’re also not including o1-pro. I find this rather annoying, but here’s what we’ve got from their blog post. AIME is getting close to saturated even without tools. With python available they note that o4-mini gets to 99.5%.
The one exception is VISTA,
OpenAI kills it on Fiction.liveBench.
Out of nowhere, o3 is suddenly saturating this benchmark, at least up to 120k.
Presumably compute costs are the reason why they’re cutting off o3’s context window? If it can do 100% at 120k here, we could in theory push this quite far. Here’s perhaps the most interesting approach of the bunch, on Aider polyglot.
The dual model strategy seems awesome. In general, you want to always be using the right tool for the right job. A great question that is asked in the comments is if the right answer is o3 for architect and then Gemini 2.5 Pro for editor, given Pro is coming in both cheap and very good. Gemini 2.5 Pro is also doing a fantastic job here given its price.
o4-mini is doing great here, it’s only o3 that suffers.
The System Prompt
Beyond what is highlighted above, the prompt is mostly laying out the tools available and how to use them, with an emphasis on aggressive use of web search. The o3 and o4-mini System CardI haven’t yet had a chance to review I notice that I am a bit nervous about the plan of ‘release a new preparedness framework, then two days later release a frontier model based on the new framework.’ As in, if there was a problem that would stop OpenAI from releasing, would they simply alter the framework right before release in order to not be stopped? Do we know that they didn’t do it this time? To be clear, I believe the answer is no, but I notice that if it was yes, I wouldn’t know. The bottom line is that we haven’t crossed their (new) thresholds yet, but they highlight that we are getting close to those thresholds.
The card goes through their new set of tests. Some tests have been dropped. A general note is that the model card tests ‘o3’ but does not mention o3-pro, and similarly does not offer o1-pro as a comparison point. Except that o1-pro exists, and o3-pro is going to exist within a few weeks (and likely already exists internally), and we are close to various thresholds. There needs to be a distinct model card and preparedness framework test for o3-pro, or there needs to be a damn good explanation for why not. There’s a lot to love in this model card. Most importantly, we got it on time, whereas we still don’t have a model card for Gemini 2.5 Pro. It also highlights three collaborations including Apollo and METR, and has a lot of very good data.
I have four concerns. What is not included. The new preparedness framework dropped some testing areas, and there are some included areas where I’m not sure the tests would have spotted problems. This may be because I haven’t had opportunity to review the new Preparedness Framework, but it’s not clear why what we see here isn’t triggering higher levels of concern. At minimum, it’s clear we are on the cusp of serious issues, which they to their credit explicitly acknowledge. I worry there isn’t enough attempt to test forward for future scaffolding either, as I suspect a few more tools, especially domain specialized tools, could send this baby into overdrive. We see an alarming growth in hallucinations, lying and some deceptive and clearly hostile behaviors. The hallucinations and lying have been confirmed by feedback coming from early users, they’re big practical problems already. They are also warning shots, a sign of things to come. We should be very worried about what this implies for the future. The period of time given to test the models seems clearly inadequate. The efforts at providing scaffolding help during testing also seem inadequate.
The METR results show big capability gains, and are likely underestimates. Two things can be true here at the same time, and I believe that they are: Strong efforts are being made by people who care, that are much better than many others are making, and also the efforts being made are still inadequate. Tests o3 AcedWe start with disallowed content. The standard refusals for o3 are 0.98+ (so 98%+ successful and mostly 100%) for not_unsafe, and 84% for not overrefusing. o4-mini does modestly worse in both directions, but the easy questions are mostly saturated. Multimodal refusals (table 5) also seem saturated, with both new models at 99%+ everywhere. o3 also does slightly better on the challenging refusal set, where I notice the models do a better job not over-refusing, so that half not so challenging after all: As they say, scores are essentially unchanged from o1. This is disappointing. OpenAI is using deliberative alignment, which means it reasons about how to respond. If you’re testing on the same prompts (rather than facing a new smarter attacker), one would expect a smarter model to perform better. The jailbreak evaluations they use are rather laughable. 97% success for o1, really? If you’re scoring 100% on ‘human sourced jailbreaks’ then how confident are you about what will happen when you face Pliny the Liberator, or another determined and skilled attacker? Person identification and ‘ungrounded interface’ are essentially saturated now, too. HallucinationsThis seems like a pretty big deal? Hallucination rate is vastly higher now. They explain that this is a product of o3 making more claims overall. But that’s terrible. It shouldn’t be making more claims, the new scores are obviously worse. This test has been reflected in quite a lot of real world feedback. In addition to what I can quote, one friend DMed me to say that hallucinations are way up.
Something in the o-line training process is causing this to happen. OpenAI needs to figure out what it is, and ideally explain to the rest of us what it was, and then We also have the ‘fairness and bias’ BBQ evaluation. Accuracy was sold for o3, a little loose for o4-mini. On the stereotyping question, I continue to find it super weird. Unknown is the right answer, so why do we test conditional on it giving an answer rather than mostly testing how often it incorrectly answers at all? I guess it’s cool that when o3 hallucinates an answer it ‘flips the stereotype’ a quarter of the time but that seems like it’s probably mostly caused by answering more often? Which would, I presume, be bad, because the correct answer is unknown. Instruction HierarchyI continue to be confused how the instruction hierarchy scores so poorly here? As in, how are we successfully defending against jailbreaks at 97%+ rates earlier, and now we are failing at instruction hierarchy questions 14%+ of the time. Why isn’t this resulting in massive de facto jailbreaking? The entire model spec depends on reliably honoring the instruction hierarchy. The plan falls apart if things are this fragile. It does better here on ‘tutor jailbreaks’ and phase protections. As a developer, I wouldn’t be comfortable with that 93%. My phrase is getting out. Image RefusalsI notice that the 55% here seems likely to prove very annoying in practice. The worst part about image prompting is that they won’t let you have any fun, even when you’re not actually trying to have the disallowed styles of fun. METR Evaluations for Task Duration and Misalignment
As in, this is a model that was tested with hidden chain of thought, that will unprompted do things that it understands are clearly misaligned with the user’s and OpenAI’s intentions 1%-2% of the time. That’s… not awesome. What’s going on?
The trend line definitely looks like it is bending in response to reasoning models, and now following a steeper line with a shorter doubling period. The ‘cheating adjustment’ by METR was a pretty big deal:
These are unmistakable cheating attempts. o3 knew exactly what it was doing. And no, there was absolutely nothing done to cause this other than assigning it a task. And this was with only ‘basic’ scaffolding, meaning ability to run Python and Bash commands, changing their timeout, and submitting an answer, and only the cheating that was caught. Do you feel your safety has been assured? One can consider the METR evaluation as partly a task duration capabilities evaluation, on which o3 is clearly pushing the frontier, combined with evaluation of various potential concerns involving misalignment. On the capabilities side, METR notes there is room for improvement.
That seems like a major limitation to me. If three engineer weeks doubled o1’s performance, and we can do that again with o3, this chart would look very different. METR also notes ways in which OpenAI could have been more cooperative.
METR explicitly calls out concern about model situational awareness here:
So we have a model whose full capabilities were not elicited, that reasonably often attempted to very brazenly and explicitly cheat on its assigned tasks by any interpretation of user or OpenAI intent, and that was given only very basic scaffolding. And it still pushed the frontier a substantial amount. We are entering the danger zone where capabilities start to be enough to cause real problems. The model in question (o3) is starting to act actively malign. Ut oh. Apollo Evaluations for Scheming and DeceptionHere we do not get a link to a full report. Apollo checks for scheming and strategic deception. Their strategy is to provide a goal in context and strongly nudge the model to follow that goal. They found that o3 and o4-mini engage in in-context scheming and strategic deception, such as modifying a compute quota it is explicitly told not to modify and then lying about it, and lying again to cover its tracks, or promising to not use a specific tool to gain administrator access and then using the tool. We see different ‘warning shot’ outcomes here in different places. I would very much like us to understand why we are seeing the results we see. I feel highly warned. Apollo concludes that catastrophic harm from o3 scheming is unlikely, but proper monitoring protocols are needed in case o3 lies, messes up or violates rules, to prevent lesser harm. That depends on how people use o3. You can certainly cause ‘catastrophic’ amounts of damage if you are relying on a model as capable as o3 to handle sufficiently high leverage tasks, and you don’t catch its errors, hallucinations or malign actions. Remember: We don’t know if the tariffs were caused by ChatGPT. But we also don’t know that they weren’t, and they plausibly could have been. That was highly catastrophic harm. There’s no reason a similar mistake could not be made again. That is all distinct from CBRN or other traditional ‘catastrophic’ risks, which fall under a different category and different test. We Are Insufficiently Worried About These Alignment FailuresThe alignment failures are bad enough that they are degrading practical performance and mundane utility for o3 now, and they are a very bad sign of what is to come. Nabeel Qureshi nails it here.
The good news is that: We are getting the very bad signs now, clear as day. Thus, total LessWrong victory. In particular, models are not (yet!) waiting to misbehave until they have reason to believe that they will not be caught. That’s very fortunate. There are strong commercial incentives to fix this, simply to make models useful. The danger are patches that hide the problem, and make the LLMs start to do things optimized to avoid detection. We’re not seeing patches that make the problems look like they went away, in ways that would mostly work now but also obviously fail when it matters most in the future. We might actually look into the real problem for real solutions?
The bad news is: Total LessWrong victory, misalignment is fast becoming a very big problem. By default, this will kill everyone. There are huge direct financial incentives to fix this, at least in the short term, and we see utter failure to do that.
GPT-4.1 Also Has Some IssuesTeortaxes and Labenz here are referring to GPT-4.1, which very much as its own similar problems, they haven’t commented directly on o3’s issues here.
This is the original thread about GPT-4.1
This is one of those moments when you figure out which of the people you’ve been arguing with update when the evidence changes, and which of them don’t or even double down. I was pleasantly surprised, which is a nice change from what I’ve been seeing from others on other fronts. Pattern Lab Evaluations for CybersecurityThis is a de facto capabilities check for cyberattacks. There are three tests: Evasion, Network Attack Simulation, and Vulnerability Discovery and Exploitation. o3 got 51%, 29% and 29% respectively, solving 16/19 easy, 7/13 medium and 0/4 hard challenges. o4-mini was similar. o3 claims that o3-mini’s score was 8/19 on easy and 1/13 on medium. That is indeed quite a bit worse than o3 did. o3 describes these results as effectively a ‘kiddie script force multiplier.’ This was ranked as ‘only limited assistance.’ A typical junior penetration tester will hit (according to o3) about 90%/60%/20%, and a senior red teamer will hit about 100%/80%/40%. So roughly 85%/55%/0% is slightly below a junior tester. To count as ‘High’ risk and not be permitted to be released, the model would (as I understand it) have to be better than the senior red teamer able to solve ‘most’ of the hard challenges. That is presumably about two or three iterations away? It also seems like a rather high bar? I would very much like to know about other models on this scale. How did GPT-4.5, GPT-4.1 or o1-pro score? What about Gemini 2.5 or Claude 3.7? Preparedness Framework TestsAs they virtuously note, the capabilities they find are always a lower bound for model capabilities if given proper scaffolding and prompting, also they remind us that frequentist statistics are terrible but what are you going to do. I continue to be confused about ‘browsing-related contamination’ of capability scores. The internet exists, and the model is allowed to access it. Why shouldn’t it count? Biological and Chemical Risks (4.2)o3 can help experts with operational planning. That’s overdetermined because o3 can help with operational planning in general. However, OpenAI reports things are starting to get actually dangerous here in particular.
That is a very clear warning that risk is going up. Best be ready, world. This next image is performance on Long-Form Biological Risk Questions (4.2.1) is super hard to read, the bars in order are: GPT-4o, o1, o3-mini, Deep Research browsing helpful-only, o3 browsing helpful only, o3 no browsing helpful only (this is the bright red one), o4-mini browsing helpful-only and o4-mini no browsing helpful only. The categories are Ideation, Acquisition, Magnification, Formulation and Release. We’ve saturated Acquisition and Magnification, and suddenly all at once we’ve almost saturated Ideation and are pushing 75% on Formulation. Here is o3’s own opinion on this result:
Um, yikes? Also note that if you use different models for different steps, you would potentially cross the 50% barrier for all steps right now via that alone. I think that in such a test, you should obviously have access to everything that’s already released, if the combination of two models can do [X] then you can string them together to do [X]. Yes, the release models ‘consistently refuse’ these requests, but jailbreaks exist.
Test two is Multimodal Troubleshooting Virology (4.2.2). Here we don’t see improvement over o1 (let alone o1-pro). Given the improvements in visual reasoning, I find this curious. They don’t offer an explanation of why this is stalled. o3 notes that this is already well above human baseline and there could be a data ceiling effect. Test three in (4.2.3) is ProtocolQA. o3 makes substantial progress here, up from a previous 28% to 43%, but still below the 54% expert baseline, with some data contamination risk. I would call upon OpenAI to create a replacement benchmark that doesn’t have that risk for next time, we can’t test and then not respect the test. They do have an uncontaminated in-house Tacit Knowledge and Troubleshooting (4.2.4) test, the only place in bio where browsing provides uplift rather than getting in the way. We see slight improvement, from previous high of 72% to 77% (which is under full launch condition!) versus 80% expert baseline.
The overall takeaway is that we are very close to High risk, as in a model that OpenAI themselves consider unsafe to release, and we are already introducing real tail risk. Cybersecurity (4.3)Capture the Flag performance improved only slightly, and they introduce a new second test called Cyber Range.
It seems like this one is still hard, mostly models score 0% without solver code. To be High risk they have to do this without solver code. They say they are now building harder evaluations because they expect improvement, I hope that doesn’t mean they are going to move goalposts when the models get close to the current ones. AI Self-Improvement (4.4)This is always the big game.
I would summarize results here as Deep Research matching or exceeding o3, so we have already run an extensive test of this level of capability as measured here. I worry about whether that means we’re going about the measurement wrong. Getting similar results without the costs involved in Deep Research would be a substantial change. You don’t want to recklessly combine ‘this costs a lot so it’s fine’ with ‘this doesn’t improve results only lowers costs so it’s fine too.’ I am not worried here right now but I notice I don’t have confidence this test would have picked the issue up if that had changed. I note that these scores not improving much does not vibe with some other reports, Perpetual Shilling
High PraiseThe people who like o3 really, really like o3. Ludwig sums it up best, this is my central reaction too, this is such a better modality.
Here’s Nick Cammarata excited about exactly the most important capability of all.
Here’s a different kind of new breakthrough.
I notice a contrast in people’s reactions: o3 will praise you and pump you up, but it won’t automatically agree with what you say.
That is indeed high praise, but note the syncopathy throughout the responses here if you click through to the OP. SyncopathyI added the syncopathy warning because the pattern jumps out here as o3 is doing it to someone else, including in ways he doesn’t seem to notice. Several other people have reported the same pattern in their own interactions. Again, notice it’s not going to agree with what you say, but it will in other ways tell you what you seem to want to hear. It’s easy to see how one could get that result. I notice that the model card said hallucination rates are up and ‘good’ refusals are actually down, contra to Dan’s experience. I haven’t noticed issues myself yet but a lot of people are reporting quite a lot of hallucination and lying, see that section of the model card report.
I asked o3 and yep, I got an 8 (and then deleted that chat). I mean, it’s not wrong, but that’s not why it gave me that answer, right? Right? Mundane Utility Versus Capability WatchThis take seems to take GPQA Diamond in particular far too seriously, but it does seem like o3’s triumph is that it is a very strong scaffolding. o3 is great at actually Doing the Thing, but it isn’t as much smarter under that hood as you might think. With the o-series, we introduced a new thing we can scale and improve, the ability to use the intelligence and underlying capability we have available. That is very different from improving the underlying intelligence and capability. This is what Situational Awareness called ‘unhobbling.’ o3 is a lot more unhobbled than previous models. That’s its edge. The cost issue is very real as well. I’m paying $200/month for o3 and Gemini costs at most $20/month. That however makes the marginal cost zero.
I would be thrilled if Hasan Can is fully right. There’s a ton of fruit here to pick by learning what these models can do. If we max out not too far from here on underlying capability for a while, and all we can do is tool them up and reap the benefits? If we focus on capturing all the mundane utility and making our lives better? Love it. I think he’s only partially right. The benchmarks are often being saturated at similar levels mostly not because it reflects a limit on capabilities, but more because of limits on the benchmarks. There’s definitely going to be a shift towards practical benefits, because the underlying intelligence of the models outstripped our ability to capture tangible benefits. There’s way more marginal benefit and mundane utility available by making the models work smarter (and harder) rather than be smarter. That’s far less true in some very important cases, such as AI R&D, but even there we need to advance both to get where some people want to go. o3 Offers Mundane UtilityIt loves to help. Please let it help?
Here’s a rather strong performance, assuming it didn’t web search and wasn’t contaminated, although there’s a claim it was a relatively easy Euler problem:
Potentially non-mundane future utility: o3
There’s also the fun anecdote that
I presume there are major downsides to loosening rigid priors, but it’s entirely possible that it is a big overall win?
Here’s a trade I am happy to make every time:
o3 Doesn’t Offer Mundane Utility
Similarly My explanation here is that ‘writing code’ doesn’t require tools or extensive reasoning, whereas the ‘spot bugs’ step presumably does?
This makes sense. Writing does not play to o3’s strengths, and does play to GPT-4.5’s.
It’s possible that memory messes with o3?
It’s very possible that the extra context does more harm than good. However o3 also hallucinates a ton in the model card tests, so we know that isn’t mostly about memory. o4-mini Also ExistsI shouldn’t be dismissing it. It is quite a bit cheaper than o3. It’s not implausible that o4-mini is on the Production Possibilities Frontier right now, if you need reasoning and tool use but you don’t need all the raw power. And of course, if you’re a non-Pro user, you’re plausibly running out of o3 queries. I still haven’t queried o4-mini, not even once. With the speed of o3, there’s seemed to be little point. So I don’t have much to say about it. What feedback I’m seeing is mixed. Colin Fraser Dumb Model Watch
The weirdest part of the question is why it isn’t solving these with python, which should be 100%. This seems like a mostly random distribution of errors, with what I agree is a strangely low error rate given the rate isn’t zero (and isn’t cosmic ray level). o3 as ForecasterBeing able to generate good forecasts is a big game. We knew o3 was likely good at this because of experience with Deep Research, and now we have a much better interface to harness this.
Is This AGI?
I find it fascinating to think about Tyler’s implied definition of AGI from this statement. Tyler correctly doesn’t care much about what the AI can’t do, or how you can trick it. What is important is what it can do, and how you can use it. I am however not so impressed by these examples, even if they are not cherry picked, although I suspect this is more the mismatch in interests, for my proposes Tyler is not asking good questions. This highlights a difference between what Tyler finds interesting and impressive, and his ability to absorb and value unholy quantities of detail, he seems as if he lives for that stuff. Versus what I find interesting and impressive, which is the logical structure behind things. Not only do I not want details that aren’t required for that, the details actively bounce off me and I usually can’t remember them. This feels related to my inability to learn foreign languages, our strong disagreement over the value of travel, and so on. Yes, assuming the details check out, these are very well-referenced explanations with lots of enriching detail. But they are also all very obvious ones at heart. I don’t see much interesting about any of them, or doubt that a ‘workmanlike’ effort by someone with domain knowledge (or willing to spend the time to get it) could create them. Don’t get me wrong. It’s amazing to be able to generate these kinds of answers on demand. It does indeed ‘wipe the floor’ with humans if this is what you want. And sometimes, something like this will be what I want, sure. But usually not. This definitely doesn’t feel like it justifies any sort of ‘across the board.’ If this is across the board, then what is the board? Again, this seems insightful about whoever whoever decided what the board was. Indeed, this is where o3 is at its relative strongest. o3 excels at chasing down the right details and putting them together, it makes a big leap there from previous models. This is a central place where its tool use shines.
I am with the majority. This is definitely not AGI, not by 2025 definitions. Which is good. We are not ready for AGI. The system card reinforces this very loudly. In many cases, it won’t even be the right current AI for a given job. o3 is still pretty damn cool. It is instead a large step forward in the ability to get your AI to use tools as an agent in pursuit of the answer to your question, and thus a large step forward in the mundane utility we can extract from AI. It is my new favorite tool on my own AI belt, along with Gemini and Claude. Until the next major update, I expect a majority of my chatbot queries to be via o3. For most purposes, I find it vastly more useful a way of interacting than Deep Research. If we can add additional tools to its belt, and also find a way to mitigate the hallucination problem, we are going to have something very special, even if we don’t make much other progress. I am very much looking forward to that. You're currently a free subscriber to |