---
subject: "On GPT-4.5"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-03-03 13:30:14
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
It’s happening. The question is, what is the it that is happening? An impressive progression of intelligence? An expensive, slow disappointment? Something else? The evals we have available don’t help us that much here, even more than usual. My tentative conclusion is it’s Secret Third Thing. It’s a different form factor, with unique advantages, that is hard to describe precisely in words. It appears so far that GPT-4.5 has advantages in places like verbal intelligence, contextual adaptation, detailed knowledge, and a kind of abstract writing skill. It has better taste and aesthetics. It is the first model I asked to help edit its own review, and it was (slightly) helpful. It’s a different way to use a lot of compute to get more intelligence. When you need a reasoning model, or you need code written, do not call on GPT-4.5. You need to carve out a new ‘place in your rotation’ for it. Table of ContentsIntroducing GPT-4.5Altman tells us up front: It’s a different kind of intelligence.
The System CardWe get to be brief on this one. In terms of preparedness framework risk, this is actively a step down from the reasoning models, with Cybersecurity and Model Autonomy scores going from Medium back down to Low. The safety assessment was that there were no new risks in the room. I buy it. The one thing I have a problem with is This is despite saying it was ‘really at the frontier of unsupervised learning’ in their livestream, and it having obviously new capabilities. They then removed the sentence. That claim matters because OpenAI has made safety-related commitments that apply only to frontier models. Thus, I would like to see an official statement from OpenAI affirming that: GPT-4.5 is a frontier model. In the future, if a model uses more compute than previous OpenAI models, they will automatically consider that a frontier model.
Otherwise, yeah, all seems straightforward enough. The Apollo evaluation, where they say ‘pursue the goal at all costs’ did trigger some exfiltration attempts,
Yes, as I discuss at that link, you should worry about a 2% exfiltration rate, even if it only happens via an extreme instruction.
I do think it’s fair to say that, given what we previously knew, this is not additionally concerning beyond what we should have already learned. There are some signs in the tests of potential over-refusals, perhaps? But that’s it. Hallucinations are relatively rare. It’s easy to jailbreak, but that’s fully expected.
New supervision techniques and alignment techniques, eh? I’m very curious. GPT-4.5 did show noticeable steps up in persuasion, but nothing too worrisome. In the hard capability areas that create danger, GPT-4.5 is a step down from Deep Research and o3. The question is what this would mean if you incorporated GPT-4.5 into a new architecture that also included scaling inference time compute and knowing when to consult smaller models. That’s what they plan on calling (no this isn’t confusing at all! what are you talking about?) GPT-5.
Our Price Not CheapThis is a big model. It is priced accordingly. Indeed, it is so expensive to serve OpenAI mentions
I mean sure that’s relatively a lot but also it’s eleven bucks. So it depends on use case. Seriously, please, let us pay for the good stuff. If I don’t want it, I won’t pay. Fine.
The cost to serve the model plausibly means GPT-4.5 is actually rather old. There’s Pay Up You CheapskateStraight talk. Stop whining about the relative price. The absolute price is dirt cheap. This was true for o1-pro and Deep Research and Sonnet, and it’s true for GPT-4.5. If you’re talking to an LLM directly, or otherwise using the output as a person for real, then choose the best model for the job. If it costs $200/month, or $150 per million tokens, that is still approximately zero dollars. Consider what you get. Consider what it would cost to get this amount of intelligence from a human. Pay up. GPT-4.5 will often be the wrong tool for the job. It’s not a reasoning model. It’s not a coding model. It’s definitely not Deep Research. And no, it’s not the quantum leap you might have hoped for here. But if it’s the right model for the job and you aren’t broke, what are you even doing. While Supplies LastOpenAI’s announcement of GPT-4.5 said they were considering not offering it in the API going forward. So it makes sense that a lot of people tried to prevent this.
I have seen enough that I do feel it would be a tragedy if OpenAI pulled GPT-4.5 without replacing it with another model that did similar things. But yes, fandom has long taught us that if you offer something cool and then threaten to take it away, there will be those stepping up to try and stop you. BenchmarksSam Altman warned that GPT-4.5’s benchmarks will not reflect its capabilities, as it is focused on areas not picked up by benchmarks. I want to be clear up front: This was not cope from Altman. He’s right. Benchmarks most definitely don’t tell the story here.
Despite that, it’s still worth noting the benchmarks. SimpleQA is 62.5% vs. 47% for o1, 38.2% for 4o and 15% (!) for o3-mini. Hallucination rate on SimpleQA is 37.1%, lower than the others. GPT-4.5 is preferred over GPT-4o by human testers, but notice that the win rates are not actually that high - the effects are subtle. I’m curious to see this with an additional ‘about the same’ button, or otherwise excluding questions where GPT-4o is already essentially saturating the right answer.
The story they’re telling is that GPT-4.5 has higher EQ. That helps, but it does not consistently help. Many queries don’t care about EQ, and sometimes people are weird. GPT-4.5 is very much not focused on coding, it still did well on Agentic Coding, although not as well as Sonnet 3.7.
It however did actively worse on SWE-Bench than the reasoning models, and vastly worse than Sonnet.
GPT-4.5 could in the future be used as the foundation of a reasoning model, which is plausibly the plan for GPT-5. If that happens, the result would be expensive to serve, perhaps prohibitively so, but could potentially show new capabilities. It is also possible that various scaffoldings could enable this without creating a reasoning model per se. If one were to make a model like GPT-4.5 open weights, those would be big worries. Since GPT-4.5 is closed, we can count on OpenAI to take precautions in such cases.
On the Being Zvi Mowshowitz benchmark, neither did as well, and I’m not sure which response was better, and I feel like I now better understand when I want 4.5 vs. 3.7.
We Need Better EvaluationsSo what do we do about the eval situation?
If you want an approximation, we can still get that. Beyond that, it’s getting harder. Vibe checks are going off low sample sizes, are not systematic and require trust in the evaluator, and run into Feynman’s problem that you must avoid fooling yourself and you are the easiest one to fool. Plus people have no taste and get distracted by the shiny and the framing. The risk with ‘taste’ is that it becomes mostly self-referential, it is that which people with taste prefer. That doesn’t help. Part of the problem is there is not a fully ‘better’ versus ‘worse’ in general. In some cases yes you can say this, a sufficiently big gap will dominate everything the way humans are simply smarter than monkeys and ASIs will be simply smarter than humans, but there’s a reasonable range between different AIs right now where you cannot do this. I can sort of think about how to do an eval to capture GPT-4.5’s advantages, but it’s going to involve some shenanigans and I don’t know how to protect against being gamed if people know too much or use it during training. This seems really hard. What you can do is a holistic evaluation that combines all these sources, where you are Actually Looking at the details of what you see. Picking up on particular little things, especially when they were previously out of distribution. Tricky. This type of automatic solution seems doomed:
Things are moving too fast. Benchmarks get saturated, different capabilities show up. Any systematic evaluation is going to lose relevance quickly. Arena is mostly useless now but what is surprising is how well it held up for how long before being gamed, especially given how little taste people have. Positive Reactions
He then lists examples, where 4.5’s is clearly better than 4’s, but it’s not like 4.5’s answer was actively good or anything.
I mostly don’t think this is cope. I think this is someone with a very different view of the production function than yours. The same things driving him to think travel to Manhattan is more important than living in Manhattan is making him highly value a model with better aesthetics. Where I definitely disagree with him is in the idea that the model is only attempting to improve on the aesthetic dimension. I have no doubt OpenAI had much higher hopes for what GPT-4.5 would bring us, and were absolutely attempting to improve along all dimensions at once. That doesn’t take away the value of the aesthetics.
The ones who are high on 4.5 are mostly very confident they are right.
I think Aiden’s problems are largely a Skill Issue, especially the ads, but also real enough - I too have my traditional sources flooding the zone with political and Elon posts (although the ratio in my feeds is not kind to Elon) in ways that are hard to work around. I note that while I think GPT-4.5 does have excellent taste, it is remarkable the extent to which those asserting how important this is have talked about it in… poor taste.
I am willing to believe that 4.5 has writing taste in a way other models don’t, for whatever that is worth.
He then illustrates outputs of 4 vs. 4.5 across five prompts.
Seriously, people have no taste, but then maybe neither do I and I checked with Claude, asking it to guess who wrote what, what it expected the public preferred, and also what it thought was better. And it was all pretty random on all counts. So yeah, this is actually a super disappointing result.
How good is GPT-4.5 at writing?
That’s too many 9s at the end, but the 99th percentile claim is not crazy. Most people are quite terrible at writing, and even people who are ‘good at writing’ can be quite bad at some other types of writing. Let’s say that there’s a reason you have never seen me post any fiction, and it’s not philosophical. There is consensus that 4.5 has a lot of ‘big model smell.’
Another feature is that as a huge model, GPT-4.5 knows more things.
Most of the time one does not need that extra knowledge, but when you need it you very much appreciate it.
Negative ReactionsDoes it count as a reaction if it’s made before having actually looked at the outputs?
I love the timing on this, way too early to actually have an informed opinion. The benchmarks, and general performance on non-aesthetic tasks,
Perhaps. It gives us different returns than reasoning does, the two sources of scaling bring largely distinct benefits, at least under current implementations. It could also be the case that OpenAI didn’t do such a great job here. We’ve seen this with Grok 3, where xAI pumped a giant amount of compute in and got less than you would hope for out of it. Here it seems like OpenAI got more out of it in new ways, at the cost of it also being expensive and slow to serve.
I don’t think GPT-4.5 is undercooked so much as GPT-4o is overbaked? As in, GPT-4o is very optimized for practical purposes, but you lose something important when you do that, unless you are at least at Anthropic levels of skill. I like GPT-4.5 the way it is.
So, a funny story from one early conversation I had with 4.5:
So I put that into my custom instructions, we’ll see how much things change. I did have to ‘make some cuts’ to get that in under the 1500 character limit. Those are all also a way of saying we should be very curious what Claude 4.0 brings.
The way this is phrased feels like it is responding to the bullying from the ‘you have no taste if you don’t like it’ crowd. There’s definitely something there but it’s not easy to make it work. Dominik Lukes charts the evolution of his takes.
I definitely agree that the preview system does OpenAI no favors. Every time, there’s some slow boring video I can’t bring myself to watch. I tried this time and it was painful. Then a lot of people compared this to the Next Big Thing, because it’s GPT-4.5, and got disappointed. Then there are those who are simply unimpressed.
Predictions
The Lighter SideI will not be explaining.
You're currently a free subscriber to |