---
subject: "Origins and persistence of the Mafia in the United States"
from: "Marginal REVOLUTION <donotreply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-12-13 08:36:22
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tyler Cowen", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2466199532210586699", "UNREAD"]
---
This paper provides evidence of the institutional continuity between the ``old world" Sicilian mafia and the mafia in America. We examine the migration to the United States of mafiosi expelled from Sicily in the 1920s following Fascist repression lead by Cesare Mori, the so-called ``Iron Prefect''. Using historical US administrative records and FBI reports from decades later, we provide evidence that expelled mafiosi settled in pre-existing Sicilian immigrant enclaves, contributing to the rise of the American La Cosa Nostra (LCN). Our analysis reveals that a significant share of future mafia leaders in the US originated from neighborhoods that had hosted immigrant communities originating in the 32 Sicilian municipalities targeted by anti-mafia Fascist raids decades earlier. Future mafia activity is also disproportionately concentrated in these same neighborhoods. We then explore the socio-economic impact of organized crime on these communities. In the short term, we observe increased violence in adjacent neighborhoods, heightened incarceration rates, and redlining practices that restricted access to the formal financial sector. However, in the long run, these same neighborhoods exhibited higher levels of education, employment, and social mobility, challenging prevailing narratives about the purely detrimental effects of organized crime. Our findings contribute to debates on the persistence of criminal organizations and their broader economic and social consequences.
That is a new paper in the works by Zachary Porreca, Paolo Pinotti, and Masismo Anelli, here is [the abstract online](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=1dce5b58ad914222e03820e91c0149ac935991b54c36b9d8b280c95682f8fe72&blog_id=42693868&post_id=92026&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=78c9caf8a14e2b13eabe587cdd7436d0&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYWVhd2ViLm9yZy9jb25mZXJlbmNlLzIwMjYvcHJlbGltaW5hcnkvMjM1MD9xPWVOcXJWaXBPTFM3T3pNOExxU3hJVmJLcWhuR1ZySlFNbFdwMWxKSVRTMUxUODRzcWdYd2xIYVhFNHVMOFpBaXpKTFVvRjhKS1NRVEpHdXFhZ2tRemMxTWhvbVdacWVVZzg0b0tDb0FDcGdaS3RiVmNNRVhBSURj&email_id=ba9dba260dc0e4a392d22da77bcd2ac2).