---
subject: "Emergent Expression"
from: "\"River Kenna from In•Star\" <riverkenna@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-08-14 11:16:00
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "River Kenna"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3010718370428876194"]
---
It’s been a It started with voice. At first, it was other people’s voices; they started becoming more salient to me in their speed, pitch, timbre, their origins in the body. Were they speaking from their chest, from their nasal cavity, or from a place about 2 inches above and in front of their head? Were the words coming out in a natural ordered flow, or a tinny rush of forking paths? The mind-, heart-, and body-states that the voice emerged from were clearer and clearer if I decided to look for them. Then came the flip: I realized I could sense all of this in my own voice as well (and that others could hear it too). More so, I could use my voice as a cue to drop into myself, find the place my words were coming from, and guide myself into another state by also using my voice to navigate there. When I noticed my voice was feeling a bit high and fast, for example, a bit more nasal than I’d like, that correlated strongly to a version of me that was lost in concepts, in spinning out ideas, in escaping from the present moment by abstracting from it. My immediate reflex, on noticing this, was to drop my awareness (and my voice) deep into my body, into the core of me beneath the heart center. This felt very pleasant… but also made me pretty slow. My thoughts got slower, my processing time for listening to others slowed down. It wasn’t a great mode to drop into while interacting with other people. So I started playing around, finding where my voice naturally wanted to come from while talking, a place that would keep me centered, present, and aware, while also letting me stay sharp and focused. It feels like a kind of wayfinding, moving into the dynamic flow where the current wants me to be. When I can stay with it, it feels natural, open, and very intuitive. Words come when they need to, they come out how they need to, and listening seems a bit more natural somehow, less effortful. Then I forget what I’m doing, I wipe out, and my voice starts going all over the place, taking my awareness with it. Which is no big deal. As with any practice, I just notice that I’ve fallen out of it, and take that as an opportunity to find my way back. Again. Again. Again. It started with voice, but it didn’t stay there. My face came next. It started becoming more and more directly salient to me; I had less and less space to avoid the fact that so many of my facial expressions don’t actually reflect what I’m feeling at a given moment. I’ve had to start dropping my face entirely, trying to Not Do Anything with my facial muscles, just to avoid Doing Inauthentic Things with them. I haven’t made it very far in this exploration, but some possibilities have shown up that I’ve begun chasing down. One thing that feels important is re-sensitizing the connection between my face and my inner world. When I drop my face into neutral, I find that it only responds to fairly strong emotions. Big happiness shines through, big surprise or delight come through. But not so much with the more subtle currents running through me. I’d like to have those express themselves more clearly, on my face as well as in my voice — I’m pretty actively pursuing that line of inquiry. One curiosity I have, a question I’d like to answer, is this: What does my authentic face look like? The ways we use our facial muscles changes how our faces look. By chewing tougher things more often, you can emphasize your jaw; by holding your tongue certain ways as a habit, you can alter your chin; the way you smile strengthens some muscles and neglects others, subtly changing the way your face looks at rest; how tense or relaxed the muscles around your eyes are can affect how people perceive your mood. All these and a hundred other things change the way your face looks. So how then might I look if I used my face only with authenticity for an extended period of time? Which muscles would fall into disuse, since I only use them for phony smiles, or for ingrained expressions thattry to make myself appear safe and unthreatening? How might subtler or stranger patterns emerge as my face learns a more authentic expression of my thoughts and feelings? Honestly, I’m hoping to find out what that face looks like. Over the past couple weeks, a couple more obvious contenders have shown up, wanting to be incorporated. My gait and movement patterns, my eyes, my posture at rest… as far as I can tell, now that the engine is up and running, my system is trying to do a full overhaul of the connection between my inner world and my outward expression. (Note to [mostly] self: There might be an About a year ago, my friend Cheryl and I were discussing ways that we both felt pulled to acting as an adjunct to soul-making practice. I haven’t done a whole lot to chase that thread since then, but at this point it feels like it’s chasing me. If anyone’s got any good resources that sound relevant based on what I’ve said here, please do let me know in the comments. Until then, I’ll be here, continuing to freestyle with the ways my body, heart, and mind want to weave more closely together. Wish me luck out there. Infra is free and will stay free, but if you get something out of my work, consider giving something back. Share my writing with friends & followers, pick up my |