---
subject: "The Cyranoid Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-07-22 14:06:36
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Jason is the editorial lead at Jason here. More than 40 years ago, a woman answered a newspaper ad to participate in a psychology study. Then, instead of a personality quiz or ink blot interpretation, she was asked to interview a 16-year-old boy and share her impressions. During the session, their long conversation became strangely intimate, and the woman ended up confessing her marital woes to this complete stranger. “He was very likable,” she recalled, describing how they bonded. “He showed a great deal of maturity. I think he was very sincere.” Once the woman had delivered her feedback, the distressing truth was revealed: the teenager had simply been reciting lines fed to him through a radio transmitter in his ear, all his responses scripted by Stanley Milgram, the controversial social psychologist who showed how ordinary people could turn into torturers during Milgram called these shadow actors “cyranoids,” meant to test how we perceive our fellow human beings. “They are only relaying speech word-for-word that is beamed to them from a distal source,” Milgram explained in Why is this interesting? 21-year-old Roy Lee turned himself into a digital cyranoid earlier this year, receiving his thoughts from an AI model rather than a social psychologist. Lee designed an app that fed him live answers to coding questions during virtual job interviews, and then posted a video of the tool working during a real job interview. Facing disciplinary action, he To bring the cyranoid comparison full circle, At some point in the last year or so, we stumbled across a threshold. Sam Altman brags that college kids use ChatGPT “ Milgram made plenty of headlines with his bombastic research, but also faced criticism for his problematic ethics and Roy Lee thinks everything is going to turn out just fine: “In reality, if we do have a superintelligence and AI that can do everything that a human can do but better, this will inevitably result in faster scientific progress. Cancer is no longer a thing. Alzheimer's is no longer a thing. You and I don't die at 80 years old, we die at 800-years-old, and our lives are infinitely expanded,” he said in I kept rewinding that section of the video, watching his eyes rove around the room. I felt like a character in a 1970s conspiracy thriller, trying to decode the meaning of a cryptic film reel. Was I watching the earnest musings of a college kid? Or was he reciting a recruitment speech from our robot overlords that blended a Bill Hicks monologue and a TED Talk? I thought about that poor woman in Milgram’s experiment, recording her impressions of a cyranoid teenager with a phrase that will soon be impossible to say with any degree of certainty: “I think he was very sincere.” (JB) Quick links: 19th Century Actor of the Day: [Constant Coquelin](https://substack.com/redirect/05d8faae-ccd0-46dc-8fc4-4184078e5a2b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)first played the role of Cyrano de Bergerac in 1897, and would perform it more than 410 times as the hit play toured the world.
Michel de Montaigne is the immortal French writer who retired to his tower in 1571 to let his thoughts “run free and ramble,” inventing the essay and inspiring everybody from William Shakespeare to Virginia Woolf. Reading his work at [HyperEssay](https://substack.com/redirect/cb775a33-568c-4c6a-986e-b1644aacd76a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)is a great cure for cyranoid-induced anxiety.I never realized how inspiring Montaigne’s writing could be until I read Sarah Bakewell’s book, “ [How to Live: Or A Life of Montaigne in One Question and Twenty Attempts at an Answer](https://substack.com/redirect/9a3b9533-1926-4bb2-b713-07658a3a556b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).”Thanks to the amazing Los Angeles Public Library, my wife and I have been digging through the deep foreign film selection at [Kanopy](https://substack.com/redirect/fd6adb1f-7e14-4c4a-8627-89d24b64bc07?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). If your library system has a subscription, you need to try it.
You're currently a free subscriber to |