---
subject: "Startup Roundup #2"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-08-06 13:19:56
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
This is my periodic grab bag coverage of various issues surrounding startups, especially but not exclusively tech-and-VC style startups, that apply over the longer term. I always want to emphasize up front that startups are good and you should do one. Equity and skin in the game are where it is at. Building something people want is where it is at. This is true both for a startup that raises venture capital, and also creating an ordinary business. The expected value is all around off the charts. That does not mean it is the best thing to do. One must go in with eyes open to facts such as these: It is hard. There are many reasons it might not be for you. There are also lots of other things also worth doing. If you care largely about existential risk and lowering the probability of everyone dying from AI, a startup is not the obvious natural fit for that cause. The ecosystem is in large part a hive of scum and villainy and horrible epistemics.
I warn of a lot of things. The bottom line still remains that if you are debating between a conventional approach of going to school or getting a regular job, versus starting a business? If it is at all close? I would start the business every time. An Entrepreneur Immigration Program
Times are Tough Outside of AIIf you are in AI, it’s time to build. Everyone wants to invest in you. If you are not, times are tough for startups.
VCs always talk like this. Always it is a good time to start a new company, the great ones will make it, whatever we are offering you will work out, and so on. Times Otherwise Not So ToughStartups (overally, not specifically in tech or backed by VC), meaning firms less than one year old,
The reconciliation is that venture capital is not that important as a share of new firms. Venture capitalists talk as if they are the source of all new firms, yet they fund companies responsible for only (Claude’s estimate) 5%-10% of new jobs at firms less than a year old. The venture capital response is those firms are the ones that grow to be giants, that change the world. And that is indeed disproportionally true. Yet one should not neglect the possibility of creating other types of firms. With AI in play, you can more easily raise venture capital for AI projects, but also consider whether it means you are in less need of such funding as well. WarningNo matter how tough, yes Esther Crawford made it work,
Also,
The weirdness is that founders also, by the Graham theory, need to be overconfident, and it would be good for more people starting out to not appreciate how hard it is going to get. Red Flags
These are real red flags. As in they are things founders should be avoiding whether or not anyone will find out about them. They do not bode well. They are partly causal. I strongly endorse that you want to be building things first and foremost, that you should avoid a bloated founding team or a lopsided equity distribution, and that you should not be in the ‘maybe business school’ mindset. I do also notice this advice favors YC and VC. Learning the startup side later is underrated, but also is what a venture capitalist would want you to do, for their own business. VCs are always telling you not to worry about such things, except when they are explaining the importance of a particular detail. Which often happen exactly when it is too late to fix the problem this go around. Free Advice is Seldom Cheap
I do think a lot of people offering advice purely want to give back and help people, and make the world a better place with more wealth and nice things and cool toys. That is totally a thing. I would be precise with the self-interest argument. The VC does not want you to get rich so they can invest in you. They want to invest in you now, on favorable terms, and for you to then make them and ideally also yourself rich after. If you are literally (or at least approximately) Paul Graham, sure, you can plausibly rise the tide enough and benefit enough from the rising tide can lifting your boat that this makes sense. That is a very small club. What is largely going on instead is that the VCs are trying to compete for deal flow, and they are trying to shape investor attitudes in ways that benefit themselves and other VCs. If you are known for giving great advice, founders will think of and think well of you, and you will get more opportunities. Getting the best opportunities is key, perhaps the most important key, to success in VC. The other half is promoting techniques that make founders do what VCs want in general, which raises your status and valuable connections with other VCs. You want the founder to build a useful product and a great company that you can get a lot of for not that much. You do not want the founder to care about positioning themselves to get a good deal from VCs or taking advantage of the flaws in the system. If you give advice that makes founders give VCs good opportunities, you are well-poised to capture exactly the customers you generate. And other VCs will notice you helping VC interests and cooperate with you. There is still lots of very good advice on how to found and run startups. Mostly what the VCs want you to do is a good idea for you as well. You can do well mostly following the standard advice playbook, and you will probably do quite poorly if you are unaware of the contents of that playbook. To do the best, you need to recognize how the playbook was crafted, and where it is a trap. Short WorkIf you are tall, you can hope to be allowed to run someone else’s company.
But also, notice that women have their own cheat code,
Correlation is not causation, the decision to change one’s hair color is indicative of various other things as might be having that hair color naturally. But yes, if you are looking to be a female CEO or politician or do anything similar, you want to choose to have blonde hair. The Founder
That certainly is an asset. But what I found most illustrative here is the extreme faith by many venture capitalists that the right founder will win, no matter what else is happening, even this late in the game. I do think it’s easy to underestimate such impacts, but there are a lot of things going on and indeed do many things come to pass. DoorDash seems ahead, and I think Caviar, which they own, is the best option in NYC by a lot if you’re not going low end on your order. But I don’t think anyone ever ‘has to’ anything, and in many ways the original DoorDash actually has substantial issues that I would have thought a detail oriented founder would deal with. Venture Capital IncentivesIt’s not the incentives, it’s you,
Yes. Unfortunately, this means most VCs cannot get you a lead or first investor to recruit the rest. It took very little direct experience advising a venture capital firm to see these dynamics in action, even if everyone involved was doing their best to avoid them. It is very hard to deploy the strategy ‘do what maximizes returns’ or to go outside of the social consensus. There are huge gains for venture capital willing to play to win. Remember that even Paul Graham, who I am sure is doing great anyway, has said that he knows he could get even better returns by changing his investment heuristics away from consensus, yet in practice he can’t execute on that. Given that, why would one claim that VCs must be acting efficiently?
It would be nice if people responded to incentives this way. The discrimination literature makes clear that they do not, and also some amount of discrimination (in this sense) makes sense for founders socially and also financially, because those around them are doing the same, and also they are messing up. If one takes this story at face value, it is saying that VCs update too strongly on recent outcomes, and pattern match to prior successful companies without understanding what matters. They are in the overcorrection business, in the ‘what’s hot’ business and the pattern matching business. If you are in the overcorrection business, you are discriminating against most groups most of the time. You are looking for a set of patterns, and woe to anyone lacking those patterns. Which is indeed how I believe VCs operate. And also that is what discrimination means here. Why do they do this? Because VCs are largely concerned with how they look to other VCs and socially justifying their decisions. And also VCs who invest are and should be very concerned about who will invest in subsequent rounds, and how easy it will be to raise.
Paul’s statement here is not credible. Of course things other than revenue growth matter. You would be crazy to ignore all other factors. Even if all other VCs only care about revenue growth, in which case you would mostly also have to only care about it, you would still be wise to look at other things.
Price always matters. Every good gambler knows. Every trader knows. A VC is both. That which is a good deal at $1X is often a bad deal at $2X. True, it will probably either pay out $100X or $0, but so what? You don’t know which is which yet, you only know your guess on the odds. The key is getting a good price, which gives you good odds. What counts as a good price is different with startups, since they are all growing rapidly. The best ones really are worth a lot more relative to their baseline numbers, and you should pay that extra amount. What Paul is actually saying here, as I understand it, is that the most valuable startups are indeed underpriced. That they are the value. And I think this is actually true. Relatively unpromising startups find winner’s curse investors who give them a reasonable price, and they hold out for that solid price because if you take a bad price your chances of success drop enough you might as well go home. Whereas if you have an amazing startup, what do you do? You go after the best investors that can offer strategic help and will reliably follow in future rounds, and you do not need to worry so much about the exact price, whereas you do have to worry about a potential down round or other strangeness if you leverage your position now and then things go badly. And all those top VCs are of course telling you to price ‘only’ 5x what the unpromising companies charge, when we all know you are 10x or 20x as valuable. But that’s because people are making the wrong comparisons. What is an underrated good sign to look for as a VC? How about
As with many similar Paul Graham observations, it is wise, and the consideration underrated, yet it is overstated. The question is why Graham and also other VCs are unable to properly update based on such factors. Another Graham observation is that you want to let startups be themselves rather than telling them to copy others. To what extent does practice follow this principle?
The Margin of DifficultyThe key is ‘when faced with a choice’:
Easy is better than hard. You knew that. It is when the choice is tricky that the hard path likely creates value. Especially beware when things are hard that should be easy. In particular, when raising funds or getting customers is hard, that is not a sign that pushing harder will create value. It might, but the sign is that you likely are going down a wrong path. Thus:
One key is that when you get a yes, it’s usually much faster than a no. Raising funds is likely either easy or impossible. If you fail to get a quick yes when you ask, you can interpret this as likely nos. The nos not being quick is better news than them being quick, but does more damage. Thus, with the latest company I considered founding, we asked a few people, noticed fundraising wasn’t easy, and decided fine we will go do something else. The obsession with growth rate that Graham observes is dumb, and of course there are many other elements in play. VCs are not that simple minded. What is missing here is the impetus to think backwards. If you can only raise under some conditions, are you backchaining to ensure you get those conditions? Paul Graham would say no, that’s doing it wrong, you should build something people want, do the right things, and let the VCs take care of themselves. That is what a VC wants you to do, but any gamer knows how dumb it is not to check your victory conditions or what gets you past the checkpoints. When pitching your seed stage startup, Another thing he says up front is that founders hold a special place of hatred for investors who reject them. That was not my experience. I hold a special place for those investors who strung us along. Who made us think they would invest, then didn’t. Or, especially, for those who did that, then announced they were altering the deal, and told us to prey that they would not alter it any further. They can go ahead and rot in hell. If you heard the pitch, and you said no, not interested? I had zero problem with that. On the few cases they also explained why, they have my sincere thanks. On a similar note: Cold Outreach
Except, this number might be a hint something is odd. To state the obvious, no one converts to a phone call at 70%. That’s why he calls it a ‘shots-on-goal’ situation. To the extent that email is working reasonably often it is because people know who he is or what his prior companies are. This is the opposite of a traditional cold email scenario, where no one has any reputational reason to listen to you. I mean, sure, if Taylor Swift ‘cold emailed’ me I would take the meeting. Associates at VC Firms Don’t MatterYour periodic reminder, here from Patrick McKenzie, that
Lean Versus Fast
I worry about selection effects here as well. A large portion of startups I have seen attempt to do too many different things at once, and would have been wise instead to focus. If there are multiple steps that are part of the right focus, then by all means work in parallel. But this in sharp contrasts to staying lean, shipping quicky and so on. Build Something People Want
I do think Paul Graham takes it too far, trying to convince founders to be fully genuine and build things people want without caring about investors, because that is what is best for the investors. You do need to do the actual building. Focusing only on fundraising won’t work. But also acting like you don’t also need to invoke Goodhart’s Law or target what gets you funded won’t work either. Get Them Early
If you are measuring determination and resourcefulness, that doesn’t seem like such a bad admissions policy? Except of course that it means it eats your entire childhood. But that is not the school’s problem. Replit has a course called 100 days of code.
This is ‘Emergents TCG user retention’ levels of not retaining users. How should we think about it?
There are not literally zero stupid questions,
It is essentially impossible to ask a stupid question in math if you indeed are curious and do not know the answer. In other areas it is easier, but it is still hard. Especially if you also note you are asking a kind of a stupid question, and even better if you have even checked with an LLM? Very hard. Learn to Code
My experience is that it is a serious handicap if you cannot code well enough to contribute. Do your best to fix that. Even if you do not directly contribute, if you do not know how to code at all you will not understand what is going on or make good decisions. You need to learn enough to be able to discuss problems and solutions, at least on the architect level, no matter what. AI is going to change the equation. There is increasingly little excuse for not knowing how to code. You could instead say you will no longer need to know how to code. I disagree. My experience is that AI coding goes dramatically better if you understand what is going on. The Goal
Seemed like a lesser work to me, an attempt to deliver the message (that I mostly agree with) in a new way that didn’t really work. But then, the whole point is to take risks that aren’t actually risks. Working Hard
A fun story about the kinds of things startups do when they have to, such as Yes, it’s illegal discrimination, but is it wise?
I had one job that very explicitly said to me during the hiring process that they prefer to hire people without families. And indeed I can see why. I worked very long hours, lived and breathed the work for years, and this was highly profitable for all concerned. If I’d had other demands on my time, I would have been less effective. Yes, life requires that we all indeed do have other demands on my time, and I did indeed pick those up later. Also having a family and especially children is a great inspiration and motivator. But whatever the law might say, we should not kid ourselves that some jobs greatly benefit from a lack of commitments. At one point, after many years of competitions, it was observed that no (at the time) parent had ever made the top 8 of a Magic Pro Tour. I do not know if that is still true. The good news is that most other jobs are not like all this. He said, working a lot more than forty hours. Revenue
I would have been impressed if that list was for the 2024 YC class. Instead, it is a list that draws from all of YC’s history, so it includes firms like AirBnB. At that point, I am not sure it makes that much difference. Why are you told to focus so much on revenue? There are three distinct reasons. It is important to understand all three and know which ones matter to your business. Revenue gives you money. That money means you have to raise less funds, perhaps even zero funds, and do it less soon. Revenue is a proxy metric. If you seek revenue you will be forced to learn how to sell, you will encounter real customers, you will build something people want. Revenue determines investability and valuation. You can raise more, easier and at higher valuations, often dramatically more than the actual revenues involved.
Beware also that these can backfire. You can try to bootstrap or focus on small revenues. This can distract you from understanding your actual business model, and dramatically slow you down. All the usual Goodhart’s Law problems apply. Often this is not a good proxy, or it is but you can easily lean on it too hard. Having revenue can shift VCs into ‘revenue mode’ where they start doing different calculations, and dismiss you as a failure or as worth less than if you had kept that angle mysterious for longer. Or you might get revenue too early that makes it hard to ‘show growth.’
My startup MetaMed experienced forms of all three of these failure modes. The Place to Be
To be fair to San Francisco, he is actively trying to overthrow the city government and would have tech people running the place, calling the current regime the height of incompetence and self-sabotage that has ruined a city capable of greatness. To be fair to Garry Tan, he is actively trying to overthrow the city government and would have tech people running the place because the current regime is the height of incompetence and self-sabotage that has ruined a city capable of greatness. San Francisco does seem like the right choice over Mountain View. The city is where the AI action is, so that is where YC should be as well. If you base in Mountain View, you are not close to the action, and you are still paying infinity dollars to be there. Yeah, the city proper is quite the dump at the moment, but if you care about that so much then YC is presumably not for you anyway. Startups are constantly told they absolutely must be in San Francisco. That this is the only place to raise money, if you are not here you are not serious, and so on. There is no doubt greater imbalance specifically in technology and especially in AI. Also there are far more sources of funding than one startup can attempt to tap, and planes exist. The bigger story here is of course the big overall decline from the 2021 peak. YC Remains a Great DealWhen you enable the fundraising, and also when you build better stuff, and when your connections make everything easier,
YC changes your circumstances in ways that allow you to build something people love, and where you get rewarded based on your ability to demonstrate progress in terms of what you build and who is using it, while having a rocket that helps you find those early users, exactly because it takes care of the things that would otherwise distract you from building and shipping. Hardware StartupsHardware is a hard business, also a chance to do something great. Always also ask, would it be something good? Most of the time the answer will be yes, but in the age of AI there are important exceptions. If you are making hardware that enables frontier AI, perhaps that is not a good idea.
How to Hire Well
I have seen it happen. I do agree it is rare. The thing is, if you are an A-player and looking to hire, that’s an easy problem, you take care to hire A-players. What about if you are an A-player looking for work? How hard should you work to ensure only an A-player gets to hire you? How much should that be your priority? I do not buy that A-players are always in such high demand that they always have A-players chasing them. If you do believe that, then your definition of A-player is different from mine. Also note that there are people who are superstars in some ways, but who should absolutely not be doing the hiring. How to Check References
If they say someone else is top 1%, the suggestion is to go try and steal them. Dishonorable scum. So if they are calling you for the reference, maybe don’t tell the guy that part. You’re Fired
Two examples raised in reply were Steve Jobs and Sam Altman, so yes, technically some people have importantly regretted firing someone. And as Eliezer notes, if you should with full information regret the firing, that does not mean you know that information. Still, I believe it is true that, once you actually works up the nerve to fire someone without anything forcing you to fire someone, it is usually highly overdetermined that they had to go. You will make the occasional mistake, or turn out to be wrong, but this error mostly goes in one direction. Dealing With the Press
Emotional Runway
Running out of money or willpower is often a sign that things are not working and you should give up, but not always. One must know when to quit, and when not to. What you do not want to to do is quiet quit on a start-up where you are emotionally bankrupt, and prolong the agony. You do not owe anyone that, you should fold. He Who Has the Gold
Selling Out
Patrick warns, essentially, that if you hire ex-Googlers especially at high positions, they will be very talented, but also they will then attempt to turn their new company into an echo of Google, which likely will not be what your company needs or you want.
You're currently a free subscriber to |