---
subject: "The Electric Motorbikes in Kenya Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-01-10 13:36:07
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Colin here. Spend any time in Africa and you will see how motorbikes are essential to daily life. People use them to commute, for deliveries, for errands, and more. They generally serve as a low-cost connective tissue for society. But they are also estimated to be ten times more polluting than an average car or light passenger vehicle, let alone the level of noise pollution. When you extrapolate the population and urban density of many cities on the continent, this adds up to a problem for health (respiratory disease) as well as the environment. Electric vehicle pilots have been attempted in Africa, but have been hampered by various factors: price, and also the challenge of finding charging. The move to electric is indeed a noble idea that was quickly hijacked by daily realities. A recent solve has been popping up. As
Why is this interesting? It is interesting that this swappable battery approach brings to mind the ill-fated EV startup This iteration of technology solves a lot of things: charging time and range anxiety. The next logical step will be the rollout of more battery swapping stations in Nairobi, coupled with a necessary brand and awareness campaign that a clearer, cheaper option could be viable for a lot of the economic spectrum. Other players in the market are WITI Classifieds: We are experimenting with running some weekly classifieds in WITI. If you’re interested in running an ad, Supercharge your lifelong learning. Upnext lets you save any content, and actually get to it later. Supports articles, podcasts and video! BrXnd is a new project at the intersection of brands and AI. Have a play with the first experiment: AI brand collabs. Stat Significant is a weekly newsletter featuring data-centric essays about culture, economics, sports, statistics, and more. Now on The Intermodal Spirit: The St. Agnes Journal—one man’s dispatches from 8 months on a 70-person, mile-wide island. January is a great month to begin working with a coach to meet your goals. Gain insight, accountability, and support. |