---
subject: "The Monday Media Diet with Esha Chhabra"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-02-13 11:07:56
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Tell us about yourself. I’m a Describe your media diet. I tend to read stories mostly on sustainability. Rather than sticking to a particular publication, I have alerts set up on keywords that help me track environmental stories. Plus, I use Apple News’ Climate vertical to track coverage of the space, and listen to longer format pieces. I think Bloomberg Green also does a fantastic job of covering sustainability with some depth, and much needed constructive criticism. Aside from that I like listening to podcasts and interviews. I’ve been enjoying Rangan Chatterjee’s podcast that’s focused on health lately (perhaps the result of aging? lol). And Diary of CEO which has featured business leaders, scientists, thinkers from around the world. What’s the last great book you read? Pico Iyer, What are you reading now? To be honest, I’ve spent the last few months reading my own manuscript for editorial reasons. But I’ve just recently picked up a book on bread baking: What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication? I’m typically allured in by pretty images. So if it’s a magazine that has beautiful photography, I’m often more enticed by it. I feel like we’re losing those visuals because of cost. But I’ve loved more niche magazines that celebrate slow living, the outdoors, nature, and a simple life. I’ll skim through the whole magazine first and then go back to the pieces that interest me, and read it in parts, not in one-go. Who should everyone be reading that they’re not? Going back to Iyer’s What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone? Most of the apps on my phone are for banks, credit cards, investment portfolios, booking plane/train tickets and really boring things. I rarely seek out new apps on my phone; in fact, I try not to use my phone and laptop on the weekends, beyond what’s needed, to have some less screen time. WITI Classifieds: We are experimenting with running some weekly classifieds in WITI. If you’re interested in running an ad, Noah here. I've got a new newsletter about brands and AI called BrXnd Dispatch. If you're in marketing, creative, or just interested in understanding what's up with AI, check it out. My Next Electric is a hella-fun online crash course about how to move from gas to electric cars and stoves. Tempo Rubato is a live classical music venue in an old factory shell in the backstreets of inner city Melbourne. Plane or train? Train, for sure! There is something so beautiful and romantic about train rides, especially longer train journeys. If I have the time, and there is a viable route, I’d much rather take the train. I’ve had the good fortune of doing a train journey across the US, across parts of Europe, and in Asia. I love all types of trains from the super clean and timely Swiss trains to the more “rugged” trains, shall we say, of India. I would really love it if California got a train between LA and SF in the near future that works; I’ve wanted to do that so many times, but the current route takes longer than driving. What is one place everyone should visit? I’m not sure how I feel about everyone going here but my favorite travel experience has been Bhutan. It’s a beautiful Himalayan kingdom with stunning scenery, warm hospitality, and some thoughtful practices on how to live in harmony with nature. Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into. Shortly before the pandemic I discovered the TV show, — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Esha (EC) —
|