---
subject: "Sexism Promoted Lifelong Monogamy?"
from: "Robin Hanson from Overcoming Bias <overcomingbias@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-06-22 18:09:04
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Overcoming Bias", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8616244883382228708", "UNREAD"]
---
Compared to farmers, foragers were In contrast, the farming world had higher fertility and life-long pair-bonds, enforced in part by stronger pro-monogamy social norms and more distinct gender roles, and less social sharing of food and child-rearing. But as these causes seem insufficient to the huge effect, we should still wonder how exactly the farming world managed to successfully promoted lifelong monogamy. Especially as that seems to be unraveling in our world today. Today, women seem to initiate breakups about twice as often as men. And the largest proximate cause of those breakups, as far as I can tell, seems to be respect. Compared to male attraction, which seems to be more about looks and intimacy, female attraction seems to be more about respect. Women today seem to lose respect for their male partners, and to gain more respect for potential new partners. A few decades ago poorer US women would Why does female respect for their men decline so fast today? One obvious cause is that respect is often based on illusions that can’t be sustained over long durations of close contact. Another is that attachment, the process by people come to need each other more over time, makes men more attached to their women and want to stay with them longer, but that attachment also makes men seem weak to women. How did the farming world prevent such respect decline? Stronger pro-monogamy social norms shamed and punished women who left men, and stronger gender roles also limited their exit options, but just making women stay with men they don’t respect doesn’t seem enough for healthy long-term bonds. What sustained respect? The main thing I can think of is role and status sexism. Farming society greatly limited the social roles that men and women could take, and then said that the status markers limited to men counted for more than those limited to women. Furthermore, the status markers of older men counted for more than those of younger men. Which induced women to see their aging men as deserving more respect than they themselves did. Which might have been enough to keep them respecting their men. Plausibly the farming world also similarly shaped men, telling them to value beauty and intimacy, but denying those features to male roles, so that they’d value it more in their women, and for much longer than a few years. You're currently a free subscriber to |