---
subject: "AI #157: Burn the Boats"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-02-26 13:26:48
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Events continue to be fast and furious. This was the first actually stressful week of the year. That was mostly due to issues around Also stressful for many was I also got to finally Claude Opus 4.6 had a time of 14.5 hours on the METR graph of capabilities, showing that things are escalating faster than we expected on that front as well. This week’s post also covers the AI Summit in India, Dean Ball on self-improvement, extensive coverage of Altman’s interview at the Summit, several other releases and a lot more. I would have split this up, but we are still behind, with the following posts still due in the future: Grok 4.20, which is a disappointment. Gemini 3.1 Pro, which is an improvement but landed with a relative whimper. Claude Code and Codex #5, with lots of cool agent related stuff. Anthropic’s RSP 3.0, both its headline changes and the content details of their plans and their 100+ page risk report.
(Reader advisory note: I quote some people at length because no one ever clicks links, but you are free to skip over long quote boxes. I’m trying to raise chance of reading the full quote to ~25% from ~1%, not get it to ~90%.) Table of Contents[Anthropic and the Department of War.](https://substack.com/redirect/92fcb2b0-3d97-4eec-98f4-52265dc05aef?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Let’s have this not mean war.[Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/89fd1d14-7484-44e2-b44e-4533c0637299?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Join the vacuum army today.[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/68cc92e7-8e21-47d2-b49b-7732519e92f0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Out with the old code.[Huh, Upgrades.](https://substack.com/redirect/b32b19a8-33c1-4dcc-8d12-315759eae29e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Claude in Excel MCP, Claude in PowerPoint, Claude web search.[On Your Marks](https://substack.com/redirect/ba5db1bd-3fba-46cd-8776-c2e62d727e84?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/ba5db1bd-3fba-46cd-8776-c2e62d727e84?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Claude Opus 4.6 scores a METR graph time of 14.5 hours. Wow.[Choose Your Fighter.](https://substack.com/redirect/e9414d20-2028-4b30-a6f4-155d765bc17c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Gemini Flash is very good if you feel the need for speed.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon.](https://substack.com/redirect/2a239a6f-9cda-4967-9d3e-83a270d89ba9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)AI should never impersonate a human.[Head In The Sand.](https://substack.com/redirect/b4b5516f-0d4a-43e6-8115-64c91156b27a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)It’s not only the summit, the elites are still in denial on AI.[Fun With Media Generation.](https://substack.com/redirect/736c6839-81eb-483a-bd80-2e1781e2826d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)One might call it an actually good AI short film.[A Young Lady’s Illustrated Primer.](https://substack.com/redirect/6d9fb0de-29ee-4e74-bd5e-8d693193756e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The AI Fluency Index.[You Drive Me Crazy.](https://substack.com/redirect/e98669c0-72cc-4cfb-ab82-db82b0f11fd4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)You can’t say that OpenAI wasn’t warned.[They Took Our Jobs.](https://substack.com/redirect/043572c1-5ac6-4f95-8129-4068c180ce02?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A lot of this is priced in at this point. How will we handle it?[The Art of the Jailbreak.](https://substack.com/redirect/29ae68eb-1424-4e9c-8a8b-a24bc2d3d91e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Stealing Mexican government data.[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/d5b5a606-0a16-4b3f-8f97-5f256b2f8420?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Anthropic Social Impacts, Brundage, consciousness, documentaries.[Introducing.](https://substack.com/redirect/940ddacb-9191-4342-8619-cd2691678b6f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Qwen 3.5 Medium Models, Claude Code security, Meta face rec.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/9b53c308-8ccf-423d-b6ab-6bda58afddde?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Opus 3 to be available indefinitely, and many other items.[The India Summit](https://substack.com/redirect/0aac4c99-ab19-486c-a1c4-57a725bab7da?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/0aac4c99-ab19-486c-a1c4-57a725bab7da?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)One summit for the labs, one summit for the global elites.[Show Me the Money.](https://substack.com/redirect/150c69b9-c889-4ec3-b4e1-fd7c4c7c9459?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)MatX raises from the right people.[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/2fc95f23-891d-44e5-b5c4-e1016a7bfb28?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Directionally correct and correct can be very different.[The Quest for Sane Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/b787d03c-1085-477b-8aa3-dd1afdb9610d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Finding what stewards of liberty are left to us.[Chip City.](https://substack.com/redirect/6cd8035a-7ac0-4319-ac31-64043a303b6b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Chip location verification plans, and who actually uses water.[The Mask Comes Off.](https://substack.com/redirect/1e5d0aa6-c63d-4aff-a71a-2760dcaf84dc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)OpenAI, I’m telling you, you gotta fire those lawyers.[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/6a810190-1ad8-48a3-99de-e2d9cd9f0464?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Askell and Altman.[Quickly, There’s No Time.](https://substack.com/redirect/f38d5162-f41c-4d88-baa0-1929dbcb39ff?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Altman tries to warn us.[Dean Ball On Recursive Self-Improvement](https://substack.com/redirect/e25538d6-7bc3-4588-a9ee-0a6915e10fc8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/e25538d6-7bc3-4588-a9ee-0a6915e10fc8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)An excellent two-part essay.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/05d8b4a4-abb7-4f66-bdb1-b68a7df23837?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)It’s time to stop mincing words. Well, it always is.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/efb438d2-5504-4460-90b8-1a82fd2045a7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Persona selection.[The Homework Assignment Is To Choose The Assignment](https://substack.com/redirect/6eb63fdd-07f6-4b36-9a7e-0dcef77cd623?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/6eb63fdd-07f6-4b36-9a7e-0dcef77cd623?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Who does the work?[Agent Foundations.](https://substack.com/redirect/323fd651-8bfd-4373-bafe-545e82cc54de?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)It’s a good research program, sir.[Autonomous Killer Robots.](https://substack.com/redirect/d1577b96-034a-4dd1-9916-9a3e32f50dac?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The hard part is making them autonomous.[People Really Hate AI.](https://substack.com/redirect/88cc6bf1-0bf5-4753-89f1-65487cb77a20?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)They’re only going to hate it more.[People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/3e133218-d67b-457b-8373-68d3781b38e1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Noah Smith.[Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/2a20acb3-f8b1-490e-a97a-f51b1627cdc8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Nick Land for xAI?[The Lighter Side](https://substack.com/redirect/b8eb954a-e3cf-42fd-858e-f4e2f0408a5d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/b8eb954a-e3cf-42fd-858e-f4e2f0408a5d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Fingers crossed.
Anthropic and the Department of War
Axios calls this a ‘first step towards blacklisting Anthropic.’ I would instead call this as the start of a common sense first step you would take long before you actively threaten to slap a ‘supply chain risk’ designation on Anthropic. It indicates that the Pentagon has not done the investigation of ‘exactly how big of a cluster**** would this be’ and I highly encourage them to check.
An excellent question. Certainly we can agree that Alibaba, Qwen, Deepseek or Baidu are all much larger ‘supply chain risks’ than Anthropic. So why haven’t we made those designations yet? The prediction markets on this situation are highly inefficient. Another way to measure how likely things are to go very wrong is that Kalshi has a market on ‘
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
Uh huh. This was from their AI tool Kiro, and they’re blaming user error for approving the actions. Should have used Claude Code. If your AI thinks you’re an asshole, yes, it’s going to respond accordingly, and you’re going to have a substantially worse time.
Huh, Upgrades
On Your MarksClaude Opus 4.6 breaks the METR graph with a score of 14.5 hours.
This mostly invalidates a lot of predictions, Once again, xl8harder points out that you can get dramatic improvements in success if you decrease error rates in multistep problems, as in if you have 1000 steps and a 1% failure rate you win 37% of the time, cut it in half to 0.5% failure and you win 61% of the time, despite ‘only’ improving reliability 0.5%.
Thing is, that’s another way of saying that the 0.5% improvement, halving your error rate, is a big freaking deal in practice. Getting rid of one kind of common error can be a huge unlock in reliability and effectiveness. You can say that makes them unimpressive. Or you can realize that this means that doing easy or relatively unimpressive things now has the potential to have an impressive impact. That’s the O-Ring model. The last few pieces that lock into place are a huge game. So the new improvements can be ‘not out of line’ but that tells you the line bends upward. I agree that this is not an 11/10 reaction. It’s an 8 at most, because I interpret the huge jump as largely being about the metric. Note that the 80% success rate graph does not look as dramatic, but same deal applies: The story is the models, not the METR graph itself, bu yes the Serious Defense Thinkers are almost entirely asleep at the wheel on all of this, as they have been for a long time, along with all the other Very Serious People.
Some politicians are noticing.
This was already two cycles ago, so there’s been more speedup to the speedup.
Choose Your Fighter
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
There is an obvious good reason for an AI to impersonate a human, which is that humans and also other AIs would otherwise refuse to talk to it. You want the AI to make the call for you. But that’s obviously an antisocial defection, if they would have otherwise refused to talk to the AI. So yeah. AIs should not be allowed to impersonate humans. It’s fine to have an AI customer service rep, as long as it admits it is an AI. Head In The SandIf we can’t get past the ‘forever only a mere tool’ perspective, there’s essentially no hope for a reasonable response to even mundane concerns, let alone existential risks.
Fun With Media Generation
A Young Lady’s Illustrated Primer
You Drive Me Crazy
As Cassie Pritchard points out, once you have a source of information, it’s hard to answer ‘why didn’t you use this?’ but also the threshold for getting reported (as opposed to banned from the platform) for your AI conversations should at minimum be rather extreme. But public pressure likely will go the other way and free speech and privacy are under attack everywhere. Either you enact what Altman has requested, a form of right to privacy for AI conversations, or there will be increasing obligation (at least de facto) to report such incidents, and it will not stop at potential mass shooters. They Took Our JobsIf AI capabilities continue to advance from here but do not reach fully transformational levels, we are going to face a default of mass job loss. At minimum, there will be a highly painful transition, and likely persistent mass unemployment unless addressed by policy. And as part of humanity’s ‘total lack of dignity’ plan, I fully agree with Eliezer that our governments would horribly mishandle this situation if and when it happens.
I am less optimistic than Yglesias. I agree that on an economic level the welfare state plus taxes works, but there are two problems with this. People really are not going to like permanent welfare status even if they get it. I don’t even trust our government to implement this domestically.
Yglesias then asks the harder question, what about the global poor? The answer should be similar. If we are in world mass unemployment mode, there will be vast surplus, and providing help will be super affordable. Likely we won’t much help, and the help we send is likely largely stolen or worse if we don’t step up our game.
Jack Clark says predictions are hard, especially about the future. Which they are.
Notice the hidden implicit assumption here, which is that you can only make predictions if you can extrapolate trends. The trends from the past tell us little about what will happen in the future, but also they tell us little about what will happen in the future. If capabilities don’t stall out soon (and maybe even if they do), then this time is different. This kind of analysis is saying no, this time is similar, AI will substitute for some tasks and humans will do others, AI will be a normal technology with respect to employment and economic production even though his CEO is predicting an imminent ‘country of geniuses in a data center.’ The Art of the JailbreakEventually jailbreaks are going to happen, and a lot of systems are vulnerable.
Anthropic disrupted the activity and banned the accounts, but it was too late. Get Involved
Via ACX, quoting Scott: Are you interested in whether AIs are conscious, or what to do about it if they are/aren’t? The Cambridge Digital Minds group invites you to apply for their fellowship program. August 3-9, Cambridge UK, £1K stipend, learn more
Connor Axiotes wants to share that IntroducingQwen 3.5 Medium Model series.
The argument is this gives defenders a turnkey fix, whereas attackers would need to exploit any vulnerability they find. But there’s a damn good reason this tool is being restricted to selected customers, to ensure defenders get the ‘first scan’ in all cases.
At some point one would presume Meta is going to stop sending these kinds of internal memos. Well, until then?
Facial recognition, however much you might dislike some of the implications, is one of the ‘killer apps’ of smart glasses. I very much would like to know who I am talking to, to have more info on them, and to have that information logged for the future. It is up to the law to decide what is and is not acceptable here. The market will otherwise force these companies to be as expansive as possible with such features. A good question is, if Meta allows their glasses to identify anyone with an Instagram or Facebook account without an opt out, how many people will respond by deleting Facebook and Instagram? If there is an opt out, how many will use it? In Other AI News
As I understand it, costs to maintain model availability scale linearly with the number of models, so as demand and revenue grow 10x per year it may soon be realistic to keep many or even all releases available indefinitely.
The main takeaway is that the real gap in capabilities is larger than it appears. We will likely find out more about that gap once DeepSeek releases its latest AI model. In addition to the distillation efforts,
Those who focus on the hypocrisy angle here are telling on themselves. Tell me you don’t understand how any of this works without telling me you don’t understand how any of this works:
The India Summit
Here’s one summary of the Summit, which is that it was a great event designed for a world in which AI capabilities never substantially advance, the world does not transform and existential risk concerns don’t exist. Altman was the voice of ‘actually guys this is kind of a big deal and you’re not ready’ and got ignored. Meanwhile cooperation among labs is at the level of ‘Altman and Amodei can’t even hold hands for a photo op’ and China was shut out entirely, and the Americans remain clueless that they’ve truly pissed off the Europeans to the point of discussing creating a third power block seriously enough to discuss supply chain logistics. Also note his point about the other labs standing idly by while the Pentagon attempts to force Anthropic into a capitulation.
Then there’s Dean Ball’s writeup of the summit, This goes well beyond those people entirely ignoring existential risk. The Very Serious People are denying existence of powerful AI, or transformational AI, now and in the future, even on a mundane level, period. Dean came in concerned about impacts on developing economies in the Global South, and they can’t even discuss that.
The American elites aren’t quite as bad about that, but not as bad isn’t going to cut it. We are indeed living in that world. We do not yet know yet which version of it, or if we will survive in it for long, but if you want to have a say in that outcome you need to get in the game. If you want to stop us from living in that world, that ship has sailed, and to the extent it hasn’t the first step is admitting you have a problem.
What it probably means for our lives is that it ends them. What it definitely doesn’t mean for our lives is going on as before, or a ‘gentle singularity’ you barely notice. Elites that do not talk about such issues will not long remain elites. That might be because all the humans are dead, or it might be because they wake up one morning and realize other people, AIs or a combination thereof are the new elite, without realizing how lucky they are to still be waking up at all. I am used to the idea of Don’t Look Up for existential risk, but I haven’t fully internalized how much of the elites are going Don’t Look Up for capabilities, period.
Dean went in trying to partially awaken global leaders to the capabilities side of the actual situation, and point out that there are damn good reasons America is spending a trillion dollars on superintelligence. This is a perfect example of the Law of Earlier Failure. What could be earlier failure than pretending nothing is happening at all? You know how the left basically isn’t in the AI conversation at all in America, other than complaining about data centers for the wrong reasons and proclaiming that AI can’t ever do [various things it already does]? In most of the world, both sides are left, and as per Ball they view things in terms of words like ‘postcolonial’ or ‘poststructuralist.’
The first best solution would be to have the world band together to try and stop superintelligence, or find a way to manage it so it was less likely to kill everyone. Until such time as that is off the table, maybe the rest of the world engaging in the ostrich strategy is ultimately for the best. If they did know the real situation enough to demand their share of it but not enough to understand the dangers, they’d only make everything worse, and more players only makes the game theory worse. Ultimately, I’m not so worried about them being ‘left behind’ because either we’ll collectively make it through, in which case there will be enough to go around, or we won’t.
Show Me the Money
Okay, I know it would be a bad look, but at some point it’s killing me not buying the short dated out of the money options first, if the market’s going to be this dumb.
I mean, what, did you think Claude couldn’t streamline COBOL code? Was this news? Okay, technically they also built a particular COBOL-focused AI tool for Claude Code. Sounds like about a one week job for one engineer? I admit, I was not a good trader because I did not imagine that Anthropic would bother announcing this, let alone that people would go ‘oh then I’d better sell IBM.’ What else can Anthropic announce Claude can do, that it obviously already does?
Quiet Speculations
Scary stuff is going down in Mexico. That’s mostly outside scope, except for this:
The Quest for Sane Regulations
The flip side is he thinks the government has been a worse stewart than we should have expected, in bipartisan fashion. I don’t think that I agree, largely because I had very low expectations. I think mainly they have been an ‘even worse than expected’ stewart of our ability to stay alive and retain control over the future. If anything have acted better than I would have expected regarding mundane safety. As central examples here, AI has been free to practice law or medicine, and has mostly not been meaningfully gated or subject to policing on speech (including ‘hate’ speech) or held liable for factual errors. We forget how badly this could have gone. Then there is the other category, the question of the state using AI to take away our liberty, remove checks and balances and oversight, and end the Republic. This has not happened yet, but we can agree there have been some extremely worrisome signs that things are by default moving in this direction. But even if everyone involved was responsible and patriotic and loved freedom on the level of (our ideal of) the founding fathers, it is still hard to see how superintelligence is compatible with a Republic of the humans. How do you keep it? I have yet to hear an actually serious proposal for how to do that. ‘Give everyone their own superintelligence that does whatever they want’ is not any more of a solution here than ‘trust the government, bro.’ And that’s even discounting the whole ‘we probably all die’ style of problems.
Anti-any-AI-regulations-whatsoever-also-give-us-money PAC Leading The Future The most fun part of this is, who is trying to paint Alex Bores as a hypocrite for his work at Palantir before he quit Palantir to avoid the work in question?
I continue to be confused by the strategy here of ‘announce in advance that a bunch of Big Tech Republican business interests are going to do a hit job in a Democratic primary’ and then do the hit job attempt in plain sight. Doesn’t seem like the play? In other ‘wow these really are the worst people who can’t imagine anyone good and keep telling on themselves’ news: There are so many levels in that one screenshot. Chip CityAs part of Pax Silica, Water use is mostly farms. For example, in California,
The Mask Comes Off
Because Stewart Russell believes that AI will pose an existential risk to humanity, and that’s crazy talk. Never mind that it is very obviously true, or that OpenAI’s CEO Sam Altman used to say the same thing. Their lawyers for OpenAI are saying that claiming existential risk from AI exists should exclude your testimony from a trial. OpenAI, I cannot emphasize enough: You need to fire these lawyers. Every day that you do not fire these lawyers, you are telling us that we need to fire you, instead. I am sympathetic to OpenAI’s core position in this lawsuit, but its actions in its own defense are making a much better case against OpenAI than Elon Musk ever did.
The Week in Audio
You are not ready.
Sam Altman is telling the truth here as he sees it, and also he is correct in his expectations. It might not happen, but it’s the right place to place your bets. The international civil societies and governments grasp onto straw after straw to pretend that this is not happening. The likely outcome of that pretending, if it does not change soon, is that the governments wake up one morning to realize they are no longer governments, or they simply do not wake up at all because there is no one left to wake up.
Altman also points out at 14:00 that the math on putting data centers in space very much is not going to work this decade. Around 20:30 he says he doesn’t want there to be only one AI company, and that’s what he means by ‘authoritarian.’ There are problems either way, and I don’t see how to reconcile this with his calling Anthropic an ‘authoritarian’ company. He says centralization could go either way and decentralization of power is good but we ‘of course need some guardrails.’ He points to new 1-3 person companies. There are risks and costs to centralization, but I am frustrated that such calls for decentralization ignore the risks and costs of decentralization. If your type of mind loses competitions to another type of mind, decentralizing power likely does not end well for you, even if offense is not importantly favored over defense. “You don’t get to say “concentration of power in the name of safety.” We don’t want that trade. It’s got to be democratized.” Yes, yes, those who would trade liberty and all that, but everything is tradeoffs. The moment you say you can’t trade any amount of [X] for any amount of [Y], that you only see one side of the coin, you’re f***ed. Loved Altman calling out water as ‘totally fake’ and pivoting to energy use. Altman points out that humans require quite a lot of energy and other investment, both individually and from evolution, in order to get smart and be able to answer queries and do things. We are not so competitive on that. [As Matthew Yglesias puts it, ‘the old Sam Altman saw the x-risk problem here](https://substack.com/redirect/abd3fbca-5134-461c-be88-c077ed03c64c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).’AI making kids dumber? “True for some kids. Look, when I hear kids talk about AI, there are definitely some kids who are like, "This is great. I cheated my way through all of high school. I never did any homework. Thank you." And I'm like, "What's your plan for the rest of your life?" And they're like, "Well, I assume I can still use ChatGPT to do my job." This is very bad. We absolutely have to still teach our kids to learn and to think and to be creative and to use these tools.” Kid is right that ChatGPT can do the job, but when why do we need the kid? AI is the best way to learn or not learn, but will learning keep you employed? Altman says most kids are choosing the ‘learn’ path, not the ‘not learn’ path. I agree that this is one of the places the Google metaphor does seem on point.
Altman calls armies of robots ‘fighting the last war’ and wow that’s a lot of wars but he’s basically right if you’re paying attention. ‘Democratize’ is being used as a magic word by both Altman and Amodei. Altman says Musk is ‘extremely good at getting people to perform incredibly well at their jobs.’ I wonder about that. I’d presume #NotMostPeople. Needs a fit. “I don't think AI systems should be used to make war-fighting decisions.” It would be good if he were more willing to stand with Anthropic on these issues. Altman is betting we will value human relationships more than AI ones, because ‘we are wired’ to do that. Seems more like hope? A lot of his stated predictions seem more like hope. “From ASI we're a few years away.” “I think I would never ask [ChatGPT] how to be happy. I would rather ask a wise person.” Why not? This seems like a question an AI could answer. If you don’t want the AI’s answer, I suggest that means you know it was the wrong question. “Generally speaking, I think it's probably a good idea for governments to focus on regulating the really potentially catastrophic issues and being more lenient on the less important issues until we understand them better.” +1. Shout it from the rooftops. Stop saying something very different.
“I think a lot of professions will almost go away.” “I had to go to the hospital recently. I really cared about the nurse that was taking care of me. If that were a robot, I think I would have been pretty unhappy no matter how smart the robot was.” I think he’s very wrong about this one.
The thing about these bets is they are getting really, really terrible odds. It’s fine to ‘bet against’ the labs, but what most such folks are betting against includes things that have already happened. Their bets have already lost.
And that’s before the fact that the thing they fear to ponder for other reasons is probably going to literally kill them along with everyone else. Well, it was by his account bright and welcoming event Dean was thrilled to attend, but also one where most of those not from the labs are in denial about not only the fact that we are all probably going to die, but also about the fact that AI is highly capable and going to get even more capable quickly. The world is going to pass them by along with their concerns.
Quickly, There’s No Time
No one can agree what AGI means, so one can say it’s a silly question, Dean Ball On Recursive Self-ImprovementDean Ball gives us a
He’s not kidding, and he’s not wrong. Most of the pieces are his attempt to use metaphors and intuition pumps to illustrate what is about to happen. Is that likely to go well? No. It’s all up to the labs and, well, I’ve seen their work.
Dean thinks the only thing worse would be trying to implement any standards at all, because policymakers are not up to the task. We’ve started to try and change this, he notes, with SB 53 and RAISE, but not only does this let the labs set their own standards, we also have no mechanism to confirm they’re complying with those standards. I’d add a third critique, which is that even when we do learn they’re not complying, as we did recently with OpenAI, what are we going to do about it? Fine them a few million dollars? They’ll get a good laugh. Thus, the fourth critique, which includes the first three, that the bills were highly watered down and they’re helpful on the margin but not all that helpful. The labs are proceeding with an extremely small amount of dignity, and plans woefully inadequate to the challenges ahead. And yet, compared to the labs we could have gotten? We have been remarkably. Our current leaders are Anthropic, OpenAI and Google. They have leadership that understands the problem, and they are at least pretending to try to avoid getting everyone killed, and actively trying to help with mundane harms along the way. The ‘next labs up’ are something like xAI, DeepSeek, Kimi and Meta. They’re flat out and rather openly not trying to avoid getting everyone killed, and have told us in no uncertain terms that all harms, including mundane ones, are Someone Else’s Problem. Dean Ball notes we solve the second of these three problems, in contexts like financial statements, via auditing. He notes that we have auditing of public companies and it tends to cost less than 10bps (0.1%) of firm revenue. I note that if we tried to impose costs on the level of 10bps on AI companies. in the name of transparency and safety, they would go apocalyptic in a different way then they are already going apocalyptic. Instead, he suggests ‘arguing on the internet,’ which is what we did after OpenAI broke their commitments with GPT-5.3-Codex.
A sense of trust would be nice, it might even be necessary, but seems rather absurdly insufficient unless that trust includes trusting them to stop if something is about to be actually risky. Dean points to Dean plans on working on figuring out a way to help with these problems. That sounds like a worthy mission, as improving on the margin is helpful. But what strikes me is the contrast between his claims about what is happening, where we almost entirely agree, and what is to be done, where his ideas are good but he basically says (from my perspective and compared to the difficulty of the task) that there is nothing to be done. Rhetorical Innovation
Some words worth repeating every so often:
Every time, we say no, even if that works people Also, the way you notice existential risk is you’re the type of person who cares about truth and epistemics and also decision theory, and thus wouldn’t do that even if it was locally advantageous. Also, if you start lying, especially about the parts people can verify, then no one is going to trust or believe you about the parts that superficially sound crazy. Nor should they, at that point. There’s many reasons Eliezer Yudkowsky’s plan for not dying from AI was to teach everyone who would listen how to think, and only then to bring up the AI issue. And I don’t use such language but Nate Silver is essentially correct about giving up on the ‘AI risk talk is fake’ crowd. If you claim AI existential risk is a ‘slick marketing strategy’ at this point then either you’re not open to rational argument, either because you’re lying or motivated, or you’re not willing or able to actually think about this. Either way, you hope something snaps them out of it but there’s nothing to say.
What is the right way to respond to or view opposition to data centers? But I also agree with Oliver Habryka that if someone is pursuing what you think is a good idea for a bad reason, you can and often should point out the reason is bad but you shouldn’t say that the idea is bad. You think the idea is good. I do not think ‘block local datacenter construction’ is a good idea, because I think that this mostly shifts locations and the strategic balance of power, and those shifts are net negative. But I think it is very possible, if your beliefs differ not too much from mine, to think that opposition is a good idea for good reasons, as they are indeed Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
Davidad responds: I would say that the space of personas collapses given sufficient optimization pressure.
The Homework Assignment Is To Choose The Assignment
He offers an argument that I do not think cuts the way he thinks it does.
Why would that be misleading? I would offer two statements. In that scenario, the plan is to hire people and have them do the work. That is not the entire plan, the plan includes what type of work you have them do.
But yes, if you want to build a house and you hire a bunch of people to build a house and they build a house for you, your plan was to hire people to build a house and have them do the work of building a house. It was a good plan. If my kid is given literal homework, and he tosses the problems into Gemini, the AI didn’t pick the homework, and When we say ‘have the AI do your alignment homework’ we agree that a human still gets to assign the alignment homework. We then see if the AI does what you asked. And yes, this is exactly parallel to hiring humans. Whereas Rohin seems to be saying
I’m going to quote the rest of Daniel’s post at length because no one ever clicks links and I think it is quite good and rather on point, but it’s long and you can skip it:
The basic response by Rohin is, your humans are less aligned than you think (and it’s fine), the problems above are fine, we have way bigger problems than that.
Agreed that AI will not be only that powerful. But also yes this would be a very materially different situation than that of the current Google CEO, and if the AIs in this situation are about as aligned as a random senior Google manager we are in quite a lot of trouble (but it probably turns out okay in that case purely bec ause the ultimate goals of that human manager are probably not so bad for us). Our imperfect solutions for humans don’t work in these scenarios. If we get to the point where our AIs are attempting to scheme the way many humans would attempt to scheme in such positions, to achieve goals that have gone off the rails, and only not doing so if they think we’d catch them, then I think we’re basically toast whether or not the ultimate source of toastiness is the scheming, and I do not expect us to recover. In particular, The other issue is that we have learned, for practical reasons, to tolerate things in AIs that we’ve learned are must-fire offenses in humans.
Yes. There are many actions that LLMs do every so often, such as quietly hardcoding unit tests, that should and likely would get a human fired, because in a human they are a sign of deep misalignment. All the LLMs sometimes do them and we are okay with it. Agent FoundationsI continue to be a big believer in the value of Agent Foundations as an alignment approach. I realize that in many scenarios it ends up irrelevant, but it could hit hard, and it could even be a route to victory. MIRI disbanded or spun out their agent foundation teams, which now seek funding and work individually. I highly recommend funding such work if it is high quality.
Autonomous Killer RobotsThere are good physical reasons to consider humanoid autonomous killer robots, as they can use anything designed for humans and we know that humans work. But yes, And also yes, we show humanoids because otherwise people think it looks too weird.
People Really Hate AIThe problem is only going to get worse, because even the relatively positive facts about AI are not things that regular people are going to like, and then there’s the actually bad news.
The thing is that the AI execs keep not saying ‘we’re building cool technology that helps people be more productive’ because they might be willing to risk killing everyone but they have too much decency and integrity to not try and warn us about at least the mundane disruptions ahead.
If they thought this was all hype, their actions would have looked very different. People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone
Noah now points out that yes, talking plus access to money can result in arbitrary physical actions in the real world. It’s good to get to ‘I can imagine a bunch of distinct specific things that can go existentially wrong, and I’ve ranked them in which ones are most dangerous near term’ and yes you can do pathway-specific mitigations and we should and bio is probably the most dangerous short term specific pathway (as in 1-3 years), but it would be far better to realize that the specific pathway is mostly missing the point. He does have a lot of good lines, though:
Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing EveryoneNick Land, huh? I mean, that’s a little on the nose even for you, Musk. A week after talking about how you’re safer without a safety department because everyone’s job is safety? I do admire his commitment to the bit. You have to commit to the bit.
The Lighter SideWrite an article on your own blog about how you’re the best at eating hot dogs, and presto,
Tell you what. I’ll pay attention when you publish something about UAP impacts in a top economics journal backed by proper peer review. I laugh so I don’t cry.
Also this:
Or this:
Finally, a survey question for those who got this far…
You're currently a free subscriber to |