---
subject: "Magnus Carlsen, David Deutsch and the \"Fun Criterion\""
from: "Trung Phan <trungphan@workweek.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-03-01 05:58:14
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Trung Phan", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_7971156048460647958", "UNREAD"]
---
Norwegian chess legend Magnus Carlsen recently went on the Joe Rogan podcast and the chat is well worth the [2-hour listen](https://link.workweek.com/click/38819027.61840/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cueW91dHViZS5jb20vd2F0Y2g_dj15YnVKX25JWHdHRSZoYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Bde0679d6).
Carlsen shares a lot about the mindset that made him one of the greatest chess players ever (who provides so many highlights that people make short videos of his checkmate moves that regularly[ get 10m+ views](https://link.workweek.com/click/38819027.61840/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cueW91dHViZS5jb20vc2hvcnRzL191OE9EeGhRSzVrP2hhc2hlZF91c2VyPTBlYmVmMTJjNDI5MTE4NDU2MmRhYzA5OTY1YmNlODA4/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Bc1387d87)).
A running theme in the podcast is how [Carlsen prioritizes fun and enjoyment while playing chess](https://link.workweek.com/click/38819027.61840/aHR0cHM6Ly94LmNvbS9UcnVuZ1RQaGFuL3N0YXR1cy8xODkzMzkyNzcyMDMzNTg1MzU5P2hhc2hlZF91c2VyPTBlYmVmMTJjNDI5MTE4NDU2MmRhYzA5OTY1YmNlODA4/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B1ce5a2f0). He doesn’t treat it like a job at all. In fact, some in the chess community think Carlsen’s training routine is “lazy” compared to best practices:
“The thing is that chess has always been a bit of a hobby for me…once it starts to feel like work, then it's harder for me.”
“I had a chess coach when I was little. I went to sessions once a week, which I loved. Then, he started giving me homework and I told him quickly I don't like homework. But I would still spend a lot of time reading books [and] playing online. Things that I still do but I would do them for fun and that was [the] difference between me and the other kids…they would go to chess practice, they would maybe even do their homework but they weren't living and breathing the game in the way that I was. I think about it all the time.”
“I'm thinking about the game while I'm sitting on this chair [doing this podcast]. I'm still analyzing a game that I played today. It never goes completely out of my mind.”
“I don't necessarily study. I don't deliberately practice all the time. [But] I still process the information.”
“I've always sort of gone my own way [and not followed strict Soviet training methods], tried to have as much fun. Everything has to be about enjoyment.”
“My main motivation for playing chess is that I love to play. I don’t have concrete goals of what I wanted to do, things I want to achieve.”
Rogan commented that Carlsen’s approach shows the difference between obsession and discipline. To be sure, obsession and discipline aren’t mutually exclusive. But Carlsen’s story is about how obsession — and the fun and enjoyment that comes from it — can lead to better results than a more discipline-driven method.
The podcast kicked off an interesting conversation on X with user @FallibleMusings posting a clip of Carlsen and adding this [note](https://link.workweek.com/click/38819027.61840/aHR0cHM6Ly94LmNvbS9mYWxsaWJsZW11c2luZ3Mvc3RhdHVzLzE4OTI5NzA4Mzg1ODE3NjAzNTI_cz0xMCZoYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B924af809):
Magnus Carlsen gives a great explanation of the extraordinary power of what David Deutsch has coined the “fun criterion”…and the perils of its negation.
Now, before digging into the “fun criterion”, here is some quick background on Deutsch: he is a British physicist and pioneer in quantum computation. He has also written a number of widely-read books in the tech and science communities ([“The Fabric of Reality”](https://link.workweek.com/click/38819027.61840/aHR0cHM6Ly9hLmNvL2QvNXRLbkdENj9oYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B60812b06), [“The Beginning of Infinity”](https://link.workweek.com/click/38819027.61840/aHR0cHM6Ly9hLmNvL2QvZE42S1VLbj9oYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B6f904690)) which dive into the topic of epistemology, the field of study about the nature, origin, and limits of knowledge (or the “theory of knowledge” as popularized by philosopher Karl Popper).
Epistemology is an important concept here because Deutsch isn’t thinking of “fun” the way most people see the word. Quick game: if I asked you do some word association with “fun”, what comes to mind? Hanging out with friends? Partying? Watching TV? Dropping molly before a rave at Hakkasan? Playing pick-up hoops? Building LEGO with your kid? Absolutely destroying the competition on the Rainbow Road course in Mario Kart 64?
These examples are certainly “fun” but they are also fleeting. Too much of any of these activities will turn pleasure or enjoyment into disgust.
Deutsch’s “fun criterion” frames “fun” as more of an emergent property that provides information for decision-making, problem-solving, the creative process and knowledge attainment.
Don’t worry, I will unpack this idea more. But just be warned that the concept is way above my pay grade and even Deutsch admits that we don’t have the language and terms to fully explain the “fun criterion”. It’s a powerful idea, though, and worth exploring.
The analysis is based on two podcasts that Deutsch has done his co-host Lulie Tannett ([here](https://link.workweek.com/click/38819027.61840/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cueW91dHViZS5jb20vd2F0Y2g_dj1pZHZHbHIwYVQzYyZ0PTkycyZoYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97C7c4d7a8f) and [here](https://link.workweek.com/click/38819027.61840/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cueW91dHViZS5jb20vd2F0Y2g_dj01ZTJMV3hhcVFVUSZoYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97D0a0cdf15)).
Let’s begin with two statements:
With that context, Deutsch uses the example of a [tennis match](https://link.workweek.com/click/38819027.61840/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cueW91dHViZS5jb20vd2F0Y2g_dj1pZHZHbHIwYVQzYyZ0PTkycyZoYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97E7c4d7a8f) to explain the difference between the three types of ideas. He doesn’t fully flesh out the comparison but I get the point:
An explicit idea may be when you start a serve and think to yourself “I’m going to put this ball in the back corner of the court” before hitting the ball.
An in-explicit idea may be when your opponent hits the ball back towards you and it looks like it is going out, so you let it pass. However, you don’t actually verbalize “oh, this ball is going to go out” in your mind before taking action. You just let the ball pass you based on instinct and later rationalize the move.
Unconscious ideas are the countless cognitive and physical decisions your body makes without you even realizing. Think about the last time you played tennis or any sport. Can you explain in words what every single muscle fiber or sensory organ was doing at all times? Of course not. But we do know these processes are happening (and praying that we don’t somehow roll our ankles on a random pebble).
According to Deutsch, an important takeaway is that explicit ideas always have large in-explicit and unconscious components. Hitting a tennis ball is never just about the explicit idea of “hey, I’m going to hit this tennis ball”. It is everything happening underneath the surface of what we can actually verbalize and think of in real-time.
Also, what your conscious mind tells you may contradict what your unconscious muscle-memory wants you to do (eg. listen to an interview with any top-tier athlete and it’s clear that many of their actions are drilled into them from 1000s of hours of practice and the actions are instinctive rather than conscious; they hate “overthinking it”).
“A common criterion [for decision-making],” says Deutsch, “is to try to disregard everything but your explicit [ideas].”
In other words: people are over-indexing on explicit ideas — things they can verbalize, write down or rationalize — relative to in-explicit ideas or unconscious ideas.
This is where “fun” comes into play. It’s a feeling that helps to resolve potential contradictions between explicit, in-explicit and unconscious ideas. You may not be able to put words on why or how but that feeling is telling you something. It can be a factor to inform your decision-making or the spark of creativity to help solve a problem.
In Deutsch’s view, “fun” is an emergent property that a person experiences from doing an activity. It is a type of information or knowledge. The lack of “fun” can also be as informative as the presence of “fun”.
“If something you are doing or proposed to do isn't fun,” says [Deutsch](https://link.workweek.com/click/38819027.61840/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cueW91dHViZS5jb20vd2F0Y2g_dj01ZTJMV3hhcVFVUSZoYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97F0a0cdf15). “Then there's something unsolved. There is something that has to be answered.”
That answer can better help put our actions into alignment with what we actually want to achieve.
But why should we listen to our in-explicit or unconscious ideas? The great American writer Cormac McCarthy has one potential answer and it has to do with evolution. In a mind-bending essay for Nautilus in 2017 ([“The Kekulé Problem”](https://link.workweek.com/click/38819027.61840/aHR0cHM6Ly9uYXV0aWwudXMvdGhlLWtla3VsLXByb2JsZW0tMjM2NTc0Lz9oYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Bf4777b0a)), McCarthy makes the argument that the unconscious mind is much more developed and innate to humans than language (which is comparable to Deutsch “explicit ideas” concept).
The earliest form of language (graphics in South African caves) is maybe 100,000 years old. Meanwhile, homo sapiens are part of the hominid species and that lineage goes back 2 millions years. The unconscious mind — which McCarthy pithily describes as “a machine for operating an animal” — has been there since the beginning:
One hundred thousand years is pretty much an eyeblink [in history]. But two million years is not. This is, rather loosely, the length of time in which our unconscious has been organizing and directing our lives. And without language you will note. At least for all but that recent blink. How does it tell us where and when to scratch? We don’t know. We just know that it’s good at it. But the fact that the unconscious prefers avoiding verbal instructions pretty much altogether—even where they would appear to be quite useful—suggests rather strongly that it doesn’t much like language and even that it doesn’t trust it. And why is that? How about for the good and sufficient reason that it has been getting along quite well without it for a couple of million years?
McCarthy then talks about the development of language:
The invention of language was understood at once to be incredibly useful.
Again, it seems to have spread through the species almost instantaneously. The immediate problem would seem to have been that there were more things to name than sounds to name them with. Language appears to have originated in southwestern Africa and it may even be that the clicks in the Khoisan languages—to include Sandawe and Hadza—are an atavistic remnant of addressing this need for a greater variety of sounds. The vocal problems were eventually handled evolutionarily—and apparently in fairly short order—by turning our throat over largely to the manufacture of speech. Not without cost, as it turns out. The larynx has moved down in the throat in such a way as to make us as a species highly vulnerable to choking on our food—a not uncommon cause of death. It’s also left us as the only mammal incapable of swallowing and vocalizing at the same time.
The sort of isolation that gave us tall and short and light and dark and other variations in our species was no protection against the advance of language. It crossed mountains and oceans as if they weren’t there. Did it meet some need? No. The other five thousand plus mammals among us do fine without it. But useful? Oh yes.
Evolutionarily, we didn’t need language to survive. This isn’t to say that it served no purpose. It seems pretty necessary to co-ordinate large groups and build knowledge to sustain large populations. But purely for individual survival: did we ever need it? Thousands of other mammals have persisted without it.
Conversely, the unconscious mind was clearly needed from the get-go. It has helped the homo species survive and adapt for millions of years. How does it work? We don’t fully know but McCarthy points to dreams as one pathway for the unconscious mind to operate.
OK, so I’m way over my skis right now but let me tie McCarthy’s article to Deutsch’s “fun criterion”. If the emergence of “fun” is due to our explicit ideas interacting with our in-explicit and unconscious processes, we should be much more attuned to those feelings. “Fun” is information to help us solve problems or make decisions. The emergent feeling of “fun” is telling us that our different sense-making processes are aligned. The existence of this feeling means a person doesn’t have to rely as much on “discipline” or external coercion to keep going down a chosen path because there’s less tension between the explicit, in-explicit and unconscious. This situation also means that one can pursue such an activity for a long time and obsess over it to yield the benefits of compounding. It’s the difference of Carlsen thinking of chess all the time vs. another successful player just studying the game in pre-defined blocks of time.
Deutsch’s “fun” seems related to idea of flow, the feeling of being dialled in on a single task. Being in the zone when time flies. The feeling of flow is also information. It isn’t the only information you consider, though. A person can be in flow writing a novel, running a marathon, coding up a storm or playing slots for 10 hours. However, the feeling after each of these activities won’t all be the same. You’ll probably be happy with the first three examples of flow but deeply regret the double-digit hour gambling sessions.
As with “fun”, flow is information to help you decide if this is the right activity. Drinking may be enjoyable in the moment but feel awful the next morning. The decision to do it next time needs to take all of that into account.
At this point, you’re probably thinking one of 4 things:
- “Wow, Trung just spent 500 words to say ‘trust your gut!’”
-
“Holy cow, Trung discovered that fun and enjoyment help people do good work and are important for hobbies.”
- “Trung just discovered the difference between intrinsic motivation and extrinsic motivation.”
- “Bro, sounds like Ikigai to me.”
The reason I know you’re thinking this is because those were some of the comments in the @FallibleMusing post that I highlighted earlier.
Deutsch himself replied to one troll: