---
subject: "Best of Europe/On Writing Well/Cellar Door"
from: "Recomendo <recomendo@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-09-29 09:01:38
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Recomendo", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8455078693589186571", "UNREAD"]
---
Best Europe guidesMy chief go-to guide for Europe is Rick Steves, who has made yearly trips to Europe over 40 years, and personally updates his guides. I trust his advice for anywhere in Europe and found him incredibly reliable in his details. He’ll not only tell you where to go, but also what window to get the ticket the fastest, and when is the best time of day to visit, etc. Most important, he will guide you to the best experiences – the evensong choir at the church, the cheesemaking place with samples, the back entrance to the museum, etc. Standard guides like Lonely Planet or Fodors are obliged to cover the whole country, while Steves smartly just directs you to the selected best. I have all the Rick Steves’ guides, and keep them updated. I find it very worthwhile to optimize my travel by buying the latest edition for a relatively small price compared to the cost of the trip. For a good example try A guide to writing wellWilliam Zinsser's book Find the most beautiful word
Long technical interviewsI am enjoying another new podcast doing very long interviews on fairly technical topics. Dwarkesh Patel’s superpower is asking unusual questions that no one has asked the guest before. His The Art of Saying NoFound on Reddit, here is Free calligraphy classes from MontblancMy dad gave my daughter his Montblanc fountain pen that’s 50 years old. She went to a Montblanc store nearby, and they cleaned out the dried ink for free. They also mentioned the Recomendo is an authentic, hand-crafted, human-written weekly newsletter that is free, but not cheap. Consider supporting our work with a paid option, now at the low price of $45 per year. Paid subs enable us to keep making it free for others. Recomendo is published by Cool Tools Lab, a small company of three people. We also run the Recomendo Unclassified Ads work! UNCLASSIFIEDS
Be an everyday genius. Learning a little every day can have a huge impact—especially if you're learning on Brilliant. Explore thousands of bite-sized, interactive lessons on everything from math and data analysis to programming, AI, and beyond. Mark Your Calendars - Amazon Just Announced The Dates of October Prime Day 2024! This highly anticipated event is sure to be the first big kickoff to the holiday shopping season. Seasonspree is a cozy time-nudging game where you play as a cheerful little tanuki walking around a tiny planet full of other animals. Help your friends as you control the direction of time with simple controls and low-stress. Want to get more clients from your content? Recomendo is copyrighted by Cool Tools Lab, LLC. Commissions may be earned from the links above. |