---
subject: "“Gender without Children”"
from: "Marginal REVOLUTION <donotreply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-11-01 05:09:48
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tyler Cowen", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2466199532210586699", "UNREAD"]
---
What would the lives of women look like if they knew from an early age that they would not have children? Would they make different choices about human capital or early career investments? Would they behave differently in the marriage market? Would they fare better in the labor market? In this paper, we follow 152 women diagnosed with the Mayer-Rokitanski-Kuster-Hauser (MRKH) type I syndrome. This congenital condition, diagnosed at puberty, is characterised by the absence of the uterus in otherwise phenotypically normal 46, XX females. Using granular health registries matched with administrative data from Sweden, we confirm that MRKH is not associated with worse health, nor with differential pre-diagnosis characteristics, and that it has a large negative impact on the probability to ever live with a child. Relative to women from the general population, women with the condition have better educational outcomes, tend to marry and divorce at the same rate, but mate with older men, and hold significantly more progressive beliefs regarding gender roles. The condition has also very large positive effects on earnings and employment. Dynamics reveal that most of this positive effect emerges around the arrival of children in women in the general population, with little difference before. We also find that women with MRKH perform as well as men in the labor market in the long run. Results confirm that "child penalties" on the labor market trajectories of women are large and persistent and that they explain the bulk of the remaining gender gap.
That is from [recent work by Tatiana Pazem](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=d8e33b63383896fd82d42f8f94df547d4921b53ba44821a9c53a04cf1014cba4&blog_id=42693868&post_id=91769&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=c8e92bfe8e3fe43bbdabc56149ea2351&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly9zaXRlcy5nb29nbGUuY29tL3ZpZXcvdGF0aWFuYXBhemVtL2hvbWU&email_id=c28aaf83ae8467c353555d61fdd171ed), with co-authors Camille Landais, Peter Lundberg, Erik Plug & Johan Vikstrom. Tatiana is on the job market from LSE, with her main job market paper being "Pension Reforms and Consumption in Retirement: Evidence from French Transactions and Bank Data."