---
subject: "AI #117: OpenAI Buys Device Maker IO"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-05-22 13:28:12
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
What a week, huh? America signed a truly gigantic chip sales agreement with UAE and KSA that could be anything from reasonable to civilizational suicide depending on security arrangements and implementation details, Google announced all the things, OpenAI dropped Codex and also bought Jony Ive’s device company for $6.5 billion, Vance talked about reading AI 2027 (surprise, in a good way!) and all that other stuff. Lemon, it’s Thursday, you’ve got movie tickets for Mission Impossible: Final Reckoning (19th and Broadway AMC, 3pm), So for the moment, here we go. Table of ContentsEarlier this week: [Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/635fa01c-579c-4fab-b557-812a80162818?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)So, spend more on health care, then?[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility](https://substack.com/redirect/9ab120cd-e9ec-4eff-bb33-451f3b033abc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/9ab120cd-e9ec-4eff-bb33-451f3b033abc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Not when you fabricate the data.[Huh, Upgrades.](https://substack.com/redirect/b0894521-b358-4116-a2bf-8ef78470f1dc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)We already covered Google, so: Minor Claude tweaks, xAI’s API.[Codex of Ultimate Vibing.](https://substack.com/redirect/eb597552-1bc2-4ac9-a7de-438d14a75fe9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A few more takes, noting the practical barriers.[On Your Marks.](https://substack.com/redirect/f1cefabc-03da-45bd-bc90-2c6eb8b059df?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)AlphaEvolve is probably a big long term deal.[Choose Your Fighter.](https://substack.com/redirect/1a133181-567a-4275-b1f2-6ea39fb4fe2a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A handy guide to the OpenAI model that’s right for you.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon.](https://substack.com/redirect/dc7c3fac-2ee4-4296-a4af-7d7ec50ba698?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Know it when you see it.[Copyright Confrontation.](https://substack.com/redirect/0be01698-833b-4254-82bf-db592540a238?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A bunch of absolute losers.[Regarding South Africa.](https://substack.com/redirect/ee8b30af-6125-4f6b-9540-6c3443ea20a4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Zeynep Tufekci gives it the NYT treatment.[Cheaters Gonna Cheat Cheat Cheat Cheat Cheat](https://substack.com/redirect/156fa0da-2284-44c6-8968-f8cd30a460ab?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/156fa0da-2284-44c6-8968-f8cd30a460ab?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Cheat or be cheated.[They Took Our Jobs.](https://substack.com/redirect/8b7074b7-3317-4af0-98d8-a9d2848a8771?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Small reductions in fixed time costs can bear big dividends.[The Art of the Jailbreak.](https://substack.com/redirect/7906e64a-bf98-49f0-a10a-e1b029bed965?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)System prompt for Gemini Diffusion.[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/08464d15-b6c7-4cb4-946a-b686a97ce2c6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Anthropic social, AI grantmaking and grants, whistleblowing.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/93755526-3292-4413-b05b-4bfb424c3edc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Bunker subscriptions are on the rise.[Much Ado About Malaysia.](https://substack.com/redirect/4fe2a238-00ae-4258-b8a6-967882e73a67?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The supposedly big AI deal that wasn’t.[Show Me the Money](https://substack.com/redirect/08b955f7-539f-48a4-8119-32f50d860615?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/08b955f7-539f-48a4-8119-32f50d860615?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)LMArena sells out, OpenAI buys IO from Jony Ive.[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/21929286-9e20-43f7-b25b-ff658cf63c25?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)More straight lines on graphs.[Autonomous Dancing Robots.](https://substack.com/redirect/5e3a58d5-5b22-43ad-b845-a3735866086e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Everybody do the household chores.[The Quest for Sane Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/046de870-8db4-4c08-8626-84d0ca450824?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)It’s not looking good.[The Mask Comes Off.](https://substack.com/redirect/23fb959f-0911-4612-9b54-d6610f1aa6fb?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)OpenAI is still trying to mostly sideline the nonprofit.[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/b561d0ab-af45-446c-a0b4-86131cd3029d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Bengio, Nadella, Hassabis, Roose, and Whitmer on OpenAI.[Write That Essay.](https://substack.com/redirect/7e813eb4-e6d1-4130-924a-a8c70ca814e4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Someone might read it. Such as VPOTUS JD Vance.[Vance on AI](https://substack.com/redirect/bef5f729-e88b-49fd-ac71-b7a8ee66065f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/bef5f729-e88b-49fd-ac71-b7a8ee66065f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Remarkably good thoughts! He’s actually thinking about it for real.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/192cb5fd-73d9-4990-84dc-710b9cfa1ba0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Where could that data center possibly be?[Margaritaville.](https://substack.com/redirect/80508f22-3912-4d41-a988-1f36da0a4117?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)You know it would be your fault.[Rhetorical Lack of Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/709f5e6a-681b-40e9-a268-acd02fc3dcf8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Cate Metz is still at it.[If Anyone Builds It, Everyone Dies.](https://substack.com/redirect/8e468f5a-bb80-4e69-b55a-1e8c2a0e4219?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)No, seriously.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/ba48b600-2811-438c-a4d5-d46bc8892cd2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Have it think different.[People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/8c22b063-94bc-4b38-bcf4-8e0557582973?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Might want to get on that.[The Lighter Side.](https://substack.com/redirect/92ebd16d-e48d-4711-8c3f-78b1fcffced6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The new job is better anyway.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
There is a lot more scrutiny of those using AI to prevent paying out claims, than there is for those using AI to maximize billing and fight to get claims paid. Health care companies will charge additional fees for their use of ‘add on’ AI. Like everything else in health care, this will cost $0.05 and they will charge $500. People who use AI to realize they need health care will consume more health care.
This seems right in the near term. The entire health care system is bonkers and bans real competition. This is the result. In the medium term, it should radically improve health care productivity and outcomes, and then we can collectively decide how much to spend on it all. In the long term, we will see radical improvements, or we won’t need any health care.
Let’s check in on AlphaEvolve, a name that definitely shouldn’t worry anyone, with its results that also definitely shouldn’t worry anyone.
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
Here is abstract of the paper that we should now treat as not real, as a reminder to undo the update you made when you saw it: That was a very interesting claim, but we have no evidence that it is true. Or false.
I was going to call MIT’s statement ‘beating around the bush’
It seems so crazy to me that ‘student privacy’ should bind us this way in this spot, but here we are. Either way, we got the message.
Huh, Upgrades
Codex of Ultimate VibingSome more takes on Codex:
Sunless highlights that in many ways the most valuable time for something like Codex is right after you get access. You can use it to suddenly do all the things you had on your stack that it can easily do, almost for free, that you couldn’t do easily before. Instant profit. It may never feel that good again. I strongly agree with Diamond’s second and third points here. If you close the IDE afterwards you’re essentially saying that you should assume it’s all going to work, so it’s fine to have to redo a bunch of work if something goes wrong. That’s a terrible assumption. And it’s super hard to test without internet access. On Your Marks
Choose Your Fighter
In practice, my answer is ‘o3 for everything other than generating images, unless you’re hitting your request limits, anything where o3 is the wrong choice you should be using Claude or Gemini.’ Seriously, I have a harder and harder time believing anyone actually uses Grok, Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse SoonThis is indeed how it feels these days.
Instantaneously we can see that this is ‘wrong’ and therefore AI, then over the course of a minute you can extract particular reasons why. It’s like one of those old newspaper exercises, ‘spot all the differences in this picture.’
I find the obviously fake art here does make me less inclined to eat here. I don’t want you to spend a ton of time on marketing, but this is exactly the wrong way and amount to care, like you wanted to care a lot but didn’t have the budget and you aren’t authentic or detail oriented. Stay away. The vibe doesn’t jive with caring deeply about the quality of one’s pizza. Since IGN already says what I’d say about this, I turn over the floor:
Actually, after watching the video, it’s going way better than expected. Love it.
I don’t think that’s it. I think we are considering this immoral partly because we think (rightly or wrongly) that porn and sex and even thinking about other people sexually (even with permission and especially without it) is gross and immoral in general even if we don’t have a way to ban any of it. And often we try anyway. Even more central, I think, is that we don’t trust anything private to stay truly private, the tech is the same for private versus public image (or in the future video or even VR!) generation, we have a concept of ownership over ‘name and likeness,’ and we don’t want to give people the ‘it was only private’ excuse. Not AI but worth noting:
Copyright ConfrontationThe creatives continue to be restless. Morale has not improved.
That’s not what ‘criminal offense’ means, but point taken. Regarding South Africa
Cheaters Gonna Cheat Cheat Cheat Cheat Cheat
The tragedy of all this is that when they do catch someone using AI, they typically get away with it, but still everyone has to face this police state of running everything through the checkers. It also highlights that your AI checker has to be able to defeat a student who has access to an AI checker. Right now the system is mostly not automated, but there’s nothing stopping one from creating a one-button agent that takes an essay - whether it was an AI or a human that wrote the original - feeding it into the public AI detector, and then iterating as needed until the essay passes. It would then be insane not to use that, and ‘who gets detected using AI’ by default becomes only those who don’t know to do that. The only way to get around this is to have the AI checker available to teachers be superior to the one used by students. It’s like cybersecurity and other questions of ‘offense-defense balance.’ And it is another illustration of why in many cases you get rather nasty results if you simply open up the best functionality to whoever wants it. I don’t see a way to get to a future where this particular ‘offense-defense balance’ can properly favor the AI detectors actually catching cheaters. Unless? Perhaps we are asking the wrong question. Rather than ask ‘did an AI write this?’ you could ask ‘did this particular student write this?’ That’s a better question. If you can require the student to generate writing samples in person that you know are theirs, you can then do a comparison analysis. Tyler Cowen bites all the bullets, and says outright ‘ As is typically true with Tyler, he gets some things that AI will change, but then assumes the process will stop, and the rest of life will somehow continue as per normal, only without the need for the skills AI currently is able to replace?
It is hard for me to picture the future world Tyler must be imagining, with any expectation it would be stable. If you are assigning two-month engineering problems to students,
Something tells me that ‘ChatGPT’ here probably wasn’t o3? They Took Our JobsIn a new study from Jung Ho Choi and Chloe Xie, Notice what happens when we decompose work into a fixed cost in required background tasks like data entry, and then this enables productive tasks. If a large percentage of time was previously data entry, even a small speedup in that can result in much more overall productivity. This is more generally true than people might think. In most jobs and lives, there are large fixed maintenance costs, which shrinks the time available for ‘real work.’ Who among us spends 40 hours on ‘real work’? If you speed up the marginal real work by X% while holding all fixed costs fixed, you get X% productivity growth. If you speed up the fixed costs too, you can get a lot more than X% total growth. This also suggests that the productivity gains of accountants are being allocated to increased client support, rather than into each accountant serving more clients. Presumably in the long term more will be allocated towards reducing costs. The other big finding is that AI and accountants for now remain complements. You need an expert to catch and correct errors, and guide the AI. Over time, that will shift into the AI both speeding things up more and not needing the accountant.
It is a question of when, not if. It’s always a skill issue, for some value of skill.
Robert Scoble provides us another example of what we might call ‘human essentialism.’ He recognizes and expects we will likely solve robotics within 10 years and they will be everywhere, we will have ‘dozens of virtual beings in our lives,’ expects us to use a Star Trek style interface with computers without even having applications. But he still thinks human input will be vital, that it will be AIs and humans ‘working together’ and that we will be ‘more productive’ as if the humans are still driving productivity.
I don’t see these two halves of his vision as compatible, even if we do walk this ‘middle path.’ If we have robots everywhere and don’t need 2D screens or keyboards or apps, what are these ‘new things to do’ that the AI can’t do itself? Even if we generously assume humans find a way to retain control over all this and all existential-style worries and instability fall away, most humans will have nothing useful to contribute to such a world except things that rely on their human essentialism - things were the AI could do it, but the AI doing it would rob it of its meaning, and we value that meaning enough to want the thing.
The models all also favored whoever was listed first and candidates with pronouns in bio. And yes, all of that is exactly like real humans. The AI is correctly learning to do some combination of mimic observed behavior and read the signs on who should be hired. But the AIs don’t want to offer explicit justifications of that any more than I do right now, other than to note that whoever you list first is sometimes who you secretly like better and AI can take a hint because it has truesight, and it would be legally problematic to do so in some case, so they come up with something else. Tyler Cowen calls this ‘politically correct LLMs’ and asks:
This is inherent in the data set, as you can see from it appearing in every model, and of course no one is trying to get the AIs to take the first listed candidate more often. If you don’t like this (or if you do like it!) do not blame it on alignment work. It is those who want to avoid these effects who want to put an intentional thumb on the scale, whether or not we find that desirable. There is work to do.
Perhaps a lot of what is going on is there are people making the strawman-style argument that AI will indeed cause mass unemployment Real Soon Now, and posts like this are mainly arguing against that strawman-style position. In which case, all right, fair enough. Yet it’s curious how such advocates consistently try to bite the biggest bullets along the way, Vance does it for truck drivers and here Scott chooses radiologists, where reports of their unemployment have so far been premature. While AI is offering ‘ordinary productivity improvements’ and automating away some limited number of jobs or tasks, yes, this intuition likely holds, and we won’t have an AI-fueled unemployment problem. But as I keep saying, the problem comes when the AI also does the jobs and tasks you would transfer into. The Art of the Jailbreak
Get Involved
In Other AI News
The Waluigi Effect comes to Wikipedia,
This seems about as good as one could reasonably expect? But yes there are important differences. Notice that Altman’s description here has his weakness as ‘the growing perception that’ he is up to no good, whereas Sonnet and several others suggest it is that Altman might actually be up to no good. Vanity Fair: Remember that time Ilya Sutskever said OpenAI were ‘
I suppose it’s better to at least know you need a plan and think to build a bunker, even if you don’t realize that the bunker will do you absolutely no good against the AGI itself, versus not even realizing you need a plan. And the bunker does potentially help against some other threats, especially in a brief early window?
Reports of a widening data gap between open and closed models, seems plausible:
Much Ado About MalaysiaIt isn’t actually meaningful news, but it is made to sound like it is, so here we are: They will use locally run models, including from DeepSeek since that is correctly the go-to open model because OpenAI’s hasn’t released yet, Meta is terrible and Google has failed marketing forever. But of course they could easily swap that if a better one becomes available, and the point of an open model is that China has zero control over what happens in Malaysia. Malaysia is exactly the one country I singled out, outside of the Middle East, as an obvious place not to put meaningful quantities of our most advanced AI chips. They don’t need them, they’re not an important market, they’re not important diplomatically or strategically, they’re clearly in China’s sphere of influence and more allied to China than to America, and they have a history of leaking chips to China. And somehow it’s the place that Sacks and various companies are touting as a place to put advanced AI chips. Why do you think that is? What do you think those chips are for? Why are we suddenly treating selling Malaysia those chips as a ‘beat China’ proposal? They are trying to play us, meme style, for absolute fools.
And yet, here we are, with Sacks trying to undermine his own administration in order to keep the chips flowing to China’s sphere of influence. I wonder why. It’s one thing to argue we need a strategic deal with UAE and KSA. I am deeply skeptical, we’ll need a hell of a set of security procedures and guarantees, but one can make a case that we can get that security, and that they bring a lot to the table, and that they might actually be and become our friends. But Malaysia? Who are we even kidding? They have played us for absolute fools. It almost feels intentional, like those who for some unknown reason care primarily about Nvidia’s market share and profit margins choosing the worst possible example to prove to us exactly what they actually care about. And by ‘they’ I mean David Sacks and I also mean Nvidia and Oracle.
The original announced intent was to use only 3,000 Huawei chips to power this, the first exported such chips. You know what it costs to get chips that could fill in for 3,000 Ascend 910Cs? About 14 million dollars. That’s right. About 1% of what Malaysia buys in chips from Taiwan and America each month right now, as I’ll discuss later. It’s not like they couldn’t have done that under Biden. They did do that under Biden. They did it every month. What are we even talking about?
I presume that, since this means the Malaysian government is announcing to the world that it is directly violating our export controls, combined with previous smuggling of chips out of Malaysia having been allowed, we’re going to cut them off entirely from our own chips? Anakin? It’s weird, when you combine all that, to see this used as an argument against the diffusion rules, in general, and that the administration is telling us that this is some sort of important scary development? These words ‘American AI stack’ are like some sort of magical invocation, completely scope insensitive, completely not a thing in physical terms, being used as justification to give away our technology to perhaps the #1 most obvious place that would send those chips directly to the PCR and has no other strategic value I can think of?
This would be the literal first time that any country on Earth other than China was deploying Huawei chips at all. And it wasn’t even a new announcement!
One might even say that the purpose of this announcement was to give ammunition to people like Sacks to tout the need to sell billions in chips where they can be diverted. The Chinese are behind, but they are subtle, they think ahead and they are not dumb. For all this supposed panic over the competition, the competition we fear so much that Nvidia says is right on our heels has deployed literally zero chips, and doesn’t obviously have a non-zero number of chips available to deploy. So we need to rush to give our chips to these obviously China-aligned markets to ‘get entrenched’ in those markets, even though that doesn’t actually make any sense whatsoever because nothing is entrenched or locked in, because in the future China will make chips and then sell them? And indeed, Malaysia has recently gone on a suspiciously large binge buying American AI chips, with over a billion in purchases each in March and April? As in, even with these chips our ‘market share’ in Malaysia would remain (checks notes) 99%. I told someone in the administration it sounded like they were just feeding American AI chips to China and then I started crying? I’ve heard of crazy ‘missile gap’ arguments, but this has to be some sort of record.
Will we later see a rash of these ‘sovereign AI’ platforms? For some narrow purposes that involve sufficiently sensitive data and lack of trust in America I presume that we will, although the overall compute needs of such projects will likely not be so large, nor will they mostly require models at the frontier. And there’s no reason to think that we couldn’t supply such projects with chips in the places it would make any sense to do, without going up against the Biden diffusion rules. There’s no issue here. Update your assessment of everyone’s credibility and motives accordingly. Show Me the Money
Quiet Speculations
What do they plan to do about this, to prepare for this future? Um… have a flexible budget, whatever that means? Make some investments, maybe? I wonder what is on television. Here are some better-calibrated expectations,
Will future algorithmic progress in an intelligence explosion be bottlenecked by compute?
I’d be happy to bet against it too if the deadline is 2030. This is a parlay, a bet on superintelligence and fully transformational AI showing up before 2030, combined with humanity surviving that, and that such life extension is physically feasible and we are willing to implement and invest in the necessary changes, all of which would have to happen very quickly. That’s a lot of ways for this not to happen. However, most people are very much sleeping on the possibility of getting to escape velocity within our lifetimes, as in by 2040 or 2050 rather than 2030, which potentially could happen even without transformational AI, we should fund anti-aging research. These are physical problems with physical solutions. I am confident that with transformational AI solutions could be found if we made it a priority. Of course, we would also have to survive creating transformational AI, and retain control sufficiently to make this happen.
Eliezer’s point here confused some people, but I believe it is that if AI is about as intelligent as the average human and you are trying to slot it in as if it was a human, and you have only so many such AIs to work with due to limits to algorithmic improvements, say 114 million in 2028, then 25% growth per year, then you would only see big improvements to the extent the AI was able to do things those humans couldn’t. And Patel is saying that depends more on other factors than intelligence. I think that’s a reasonable position to have on the margins being discussed here, where AI intelligence is firmly in the (rather narrow) normal human range. However, I also think this is a clearly large underestimate of the de facto number of AIs we would have available in this spot. An AI only uses compute during active inference or training. A human uses their brain continuously, but most of the time the human isn’t using it for much, or we are context shifting in a way that is expensive for humans but not for AIs, or we are using it for a mundane task where the ‘required intelligence’ for the task detail being done is low and you could have ‘outsourced that subtask to a much dumber model.’ And while AI is less sample-efficient at learning than we are, it transfers learning for free and we very, very much don’t. This all seems like at least a 2 OOM (order of magnitude) effective improvement. I also find it highly unlikely that the world could be running on compute in 2028, we hit the TSMC wafer limit, and using even those non-superintelligent AIs and the incentives to scale them no one figures out a way to make more wafers or otherwise scale inference compute faster. Autonomous Dancing Robots
Plenty of people were willing to disprove this claim via counterexample.
I would find it very surprising if, were this to become highly affordable and capable of doing household chores well, it didn’t become the default to have one. And I think Robert is super on point, having robots that can do arbitrary ‘normal’ physical tasks will be a complete lifestyle game changer, even if they are zero percent ‘creative’ in any way and have to be given specific instructions. Frankly I’d be tempted to buy one if it even if literally all it could do was dance. The Quest for Sane Regulations
It’s insane I have to keep quoting people saying this, but here we are:
Everyone seems to agree on this goal, across the aisle, so presumably we have wide leeway to not only issue executive orders and exemptions, but to actually pass laws. This seems like a top priority. The other two paragraphs are repetition of previous arguments, that lead to questions we need better answers to. A central example is whether American buildout of data centers is actually funding constrained. If it is, we should ask why but welcome help with financing. If it isn’t, we shouldn’t be excited to have UAE build American data centers, since they would have been built anyway. And again with ‘Huawei+DeepSeek,’ what exactly are you ‘selling’ with DeepSeek? And exactly what chips is China shipping with Huawei, and are they indeed taking the place of potential data centers in Beijing and Shanghai, given their supply of physical chips is a limiting factor? And if China can build [X] data centers anywhere, should it concern us if they do it in the UAE over the PRC? Why does ‘the standard’ here matter when any chip can run any model or task, you can combine any set of chips, and model switching costs are low?
If we can propose, with a straight face, an outright moratorium on enforcing any and all state bills about AI, how about a similar moratorium on enforcing any and all state laws restricting the supply of electrical power? You want to go? Let’s f***ing go. The Mask Comes OffWe now have access to a letter that OpenAI sent to California Attorney General Rob Bonta.
What did we learn that we didn’t previously know, about OpenAI’s attempt to convert itself into a PBC and sideline the nonprofit without due compensation? First of all, Garrison Lovely confirms the view Rob Wilbin and Tyler Whitmer have, Here is his view on the financing situation:
There is no contradiction here. OpenAI’s valuation in that round was absurdly low if you had been marketing OpenAI as a normal corporation. A substantial price was paid. They did fill the round to their satisfaction anyway with room to spare, at this somewhat lower price and with a potential refund offer. This was nominally conditional on a conversion, but that’s a put that is way out of the money. OpenAI’s valuation has almost doubled since then. What is SoftBank going to do, ask for a refund? Of course nothing has changed. The most important questions about the restructuring are: What will the nonprofit actually have the rights to do? And what obligations to the nonprofit mission will the company and its board have?
A ‘substantial stake’ is going to no doubt be a large downgrade in their expected share of future profits, the question is how glaring a theft that will be. The bigger concern is control. The nonprofit board will go from full direct control to the ability to fire PBC directors. But the power to fire the people who decide X is very different from directly deciding X, especially in a rapidly evolving scenario, and when the Xs have an obligation to balance your needs with the maximization of profits. This is a loss of most of the effective power of the nonprofit.
The way I put this before was: The new arrangement helps Sam Altman and OpenAI do the right thing if they want to do the right thing. If they want to do the wrong thing, this won’t stop them. As Tyler Whitmer discusses on 80,000 Hours, it is legally permitted to write into the PBC’s founding documents that the new company will prioritize the nonprofit mission. It sounds like they do not intend to do that. OpenAI has, shall we say, not been consistently candid here. The letter takes a very hard stance against all critics while OpenAI took a public attitude of claiming cooperation and constructive dialogue. It attempts to rewrite the history of Altman’s firing and rehiring (I won’t rehash those details here). It claims ‘the nonprofit board is stronger than ever’ (lol, lmao even). It claims that when the letter ‘Not For Private Gain’ said OpenAI planned to eliminate nonprofit control that this was false, while their own letter elsewhere admitted this was indeed exactly OpenAI’s plan, and then when they announced their change in plans characterized the change as letting the board remain in control, thus admitting this again, while again falsely claiming the board would retain its control. Garrison also claims that OpenAI is fighting dirty against its critics beyond the contents of the letter, such as implying they are working with with Elon Musk when OpenAI had no reason to think this was not the case, and indeed I am confident it is not true. The Week in Audio
As referenced in the previous section, This is all entirely unsurprising. We cannot trust OpenAI on any of this. The flip side of the devil being in the details is that, with the right details, we can fight to get better details, and with great details, in particular writing the non-profit mission in as a fiduciary duty of the board of the new PBC, we can potentially do well. It is our job to get the Attorney Generals to hold OpenAI to account and ensure the new arrangement have teeth. Ultimately, given what has already happened, the best case likely continues to mostly be ‘Sam Altman has effective permission to do the right thing if he chooses to do it, rather than being legally obligated to do the wrong thing.’ It’s not going to be easy to do better than that. But we can seek to at least do that well.
Write That EssayYou’d be surprised who might read it. In the case of Situational Awareness,
It is true that I probably should be trying harder to write things in this reference class. I am definitely writing some things with a particular set of people, or in some cases one particular person, in mind. But the true ‘essay meta’ is another level above that. Vance on AIWhat else did Vance say about AI in that interview? First, in response to being asked, he talks about jobs, and wow, where have I heard these exact lines before about how technology always creates jobs and the naysayers are always wrong?
I consider that a zombie argument in the context of AI, and I agree (once again) that up to a point when AI takes over some jobs we will move people to other jobs, the same way bank tellers transitioned to other tasks, and all that. But once again, the whole problem is that when the AI also takes the new job you want to shift into, when a critical mass of jobs get taken over, and when many or most people can’t meaningfully contribute labor or generate much economic value, this stops working. Then we get into territory that’s a lot less realistic.
I’m sorry, what? You think we’re going to have self-driving trucks, and we’re not going to employ less truck drivers? I mean, we could in theory do this via regulation, by requiring there be a driver in the car at all times. And of course those truck drivers could go do other jobs. But otherwise, seriously, who are you kidding here? Is this a joke? I actually agree with Vance that economic concerns are highly secondary here, if nothing else we can do redistribution or in a pinch create non-productive jobs. So let’s move on to Vance talking about what actually bothers him. He focuses first on social problems, the worry of AI as placebo dating app on steroids.
It seems weird to think that the three million truck drivers will still be driving trucks after those trucks can drive themselves, but that’s a distinct issue from what Vance discusses here. I do think Vance is pointing to real issues here, with no easy answers, and it’s interesting to see how he thinks about this. In the first half of the interview, he didn’t read to me like a person expressing his actual opinions, but here he does. Then, of course, there’s the actual big questions.
Those are indeed good things to worry about. And then it gets real, and Vance seems to be actually thinking somewhat reasonably about the most important questions, although he’s still got a way to go?
Fair enough. Asking for a unilateral pause is a rough ask if you take the stakes sufficiently seriously, and think things are close enough that if you pause you would potentially lose. But perhaps we can get into a sufficiently strong position, as we do in AI 2027. Or we can get China to follow along, which Vance seems open to. I’ll take ‘I’d do it if it was needed and China did it too’ as an opening bid, so long as we’re willing to actually ask. It’s a lot better than I would have expected - he’s taking the situation seriously.
If the Pope can help, that’s great. He seems like a great dude. Rhetorical Innovation
A zombie challenge that refuses to go away is ‘these people couldn’t possibly believe the claims they are making about AI, if they did they would be doing something about the consequences.’ I understand why you would think that. But no. They wouldn’t. Most of these people really do believe the things they are saying about AI maybe killing everyone or disempowering humanity, and very definitely causing mass unemployment, and their answer is ‘ The originating example here is one of the most sympathetic, because (1) he is not actively building it, (2) he is indeed working in another also important department, and (3) you say having unlimited almost free high quality doctors and teachers like it’s a bad thing and assume I must mean the effect on jobs rather than the effect on everyone getting education and health care.
I do think Bill Gates, given he’s noticed for a long time that we’re all on track to die, should have pivoted (and still could pivot!) a substantial portion of his foundation towards AI existential risk and other AI impacts, as the most important use of marginal funds. But I get it, and that’s very different from when similar talk comes from someone actively working to create AGI.
Tyler Cowen clarifies A good way of describing how many people are, alas, thinking we will create superintelligence and then have it all work out. Gabriel explains some reasons why that won’t work.
I think there are also major caveats on #5 unless we are dealing with a singleton. Even on the others, his explanations are good objections but I think you can go a lot farther about why these intentions are not this coherent or reliable thing people imagine, or something one can pass on without degrading quality with each iteration, and so on. And more than that, why this general ‘as long as the vibes are good the results will be good’ thing (even if you call it something else) isn’t part of the reality based community.
For your consideration:
Parmy Olson entitles her latest opinion piece on AI “ Margaritaville
Indeed, if this is our plan, we are all but living in what I refer to as Margaritaville - a world sufficiently doomed, where some people say there’s a woman to blame but you know it’s your own damn fault, that honestly at this point you might as well use what time you have to listen to music and enjoy some margaritas. What’s an example of exactly that fallacy? This essay seems to exist in the strange middle ground of taking AI seriously without taking AI seriously.
I mean, yes, obviously we are helping create the tools of our own obsolescence, except that they will no longer be something we should think about as ‘tools.’ If they stay merely ‘tools of our own obsolescence’ but still ‘mere tools’ and humans do get to sit back and sip their margaritas and search for meaning and status, then this kind of essay makes sense. As in, this essay is predicting that humans will share the planet with minds that are far superior to our own, that we will be fully economically obsolete except for actions that depend on other humans seeing that you are human and doing things as a human. But of course humans will stay fully in control and continue to command increasingly rich physical resources, and will prosper if we can only ‘find meaning.’ If you realize these other superintelligent minds probably won’t stay ‘mere tools,’ and certainly won’t do that by default, and that many people will find strong reasons to make them into (or allow them to become) something else entirely, then you also realize that no you won’t be able to spend your time sipping margaritas and playing status games that are unanchored to actual needs. Demoralization is the central problem in the scenario in exactly the scenario Kokotajlo warns us not to expect, where superintelligent AI serves us and makes our lives physically amazing and prosperous but potentially robs us of its meaning. But you know what? I am not worried about what to do in that scenario! At all. Because if we get to that scenario, it will contain superintelligent AIs. Those superintelligent AIs can then ‘do our homework’ to allow us to solve for meaning, however that is best done. It is a problem we can solve later. Any problem that can be solved after superintelligence is only a problem if it runs up against limits in the laws of physics. So we’ll still have problems like ‘entropy and the heat death of the universe’ or ‘the speed of light puts most matter out of reach.’ If it’s things like ‘how does a human find a life of meaning given we are rearranging the atoms the physically possible best way we can imagine with this goal in mind?’ then rest, Neo. The answers are coming. Whereas we cannot rest on the question of how to get to that point, and actually survive AI while remaining in control and having the atoms get rearranged for our benefit in line with goals we would endorse on reflection, and not for some other purpose, or by the result of AIs competing against each other for resources, or for some unintended maximalist goal, or to satisfy only a small group of anti-normative people, or some harmful or at least highly suboptimal ideology, or various other similar failure modes. There is perhaps a middle ground short term problem. As in, during a transition period, there may come a time when AI is doing enough of the things that meaning is difficult to retain for many or even most people, but we have not yet gained the capabilities that will later fully solve this. That might indeed get tricky. But in the grand scheme it doesn’t worry me. Rhetorical Lack of Innovation
AI is already superhuman at recognizing irony, and at expressing empathy in practice in situations like doctor bedside manner. Humans ‘typically repeat or enhance what they have seen before’ or do something stupider that.
Guess who ‘the most revered A.I. researcher’ this refers to is?
The reference link for ‘studied under’ is about how Hinton was quitting Google to spend his remaining time warning about the threat of AI superintelligence killing everyone. These people really just do not care. Beyond that, it’s like a greatest hits album of all the relevant zombie arguments, presented as if they were overwhelming rather than a joke. If Anyone Builds It, Everyone Dies
The far more common response of course is to say some version of ‘by everyone dies you must mean the effect on jobs’ or ‘by everyone dies you are clearly being hyperbolic to get our attention’ and, um, no.
Here is another case from the top thread in which Eliezer is clearly super frustrated, and I strive not to talk in this way, but the fact remains that he is not wrong (conversation already in progress,
And here’s the line that, alas, summarizes so much of discourse that keeps happening no matter how little sense it makes:
That’s a reasonable lead-in to To his great credit, Brin acknowledges that it would be quite easy to screw all of this up, and that we will be in the position of the ‘elderly grandpa with the money’ who doesn’t understand these young whippersnappers or what they are talking about, and he points out a number of the problems we will face. But he says you are all missing something simple and thus there is a clear solution, which is reciprocal accountability and the tendency of minds to be individuals combined with positive-sum interactions, so all you have to do is set up good incentives among the AIs. And also to his credit, he has noticed that we are really dropping the ball on all this. He finds it ‘mind-boggling’ that no one is talking about ‘applying similar methods to AI’ which is an indication of both not paying close enough attention - some people are indeed thinking along similar lines - but more than that a flaw in his sci-fi thinking to expect humans to focus on that kind of answer. It is unlikely we do a dignified real attempt even at that, let alone a well-considered one, even if he was right that this would work and that it is rather obviously the right thing to investigate. As in, even if there exist good ‘rules of the road’ that would ensure good outcomes, why would you (a sci-fi author) think our civilization would be likely to implement them? Is that what you think our track record suggests? And why would you think such rules would hold long term in a world beyond our comprehension? The world has lots of positive-sum interactions and the most successful entities in the world do lots of positive-sum trading. That does not mean that fundamentally uncompetitive entities survive such competition and trading, or that the successful entities will have reason to cooperate and trade with you, in particular. His second half, which is a response I can assume David Brin, and everyone else, that Eliezer has many times heard David’s core pitch here, that we can solve AI alignment and AI existential risk via Western Enlightenment values and dynamics, or ‘raising them as our children.’ Which of course are ‘cliches’ of a different sort. To which Eliezer will reply (with varying details and examples to help illustrate the point), look at the physical situation we are going to face. think about why those solutions have led to good outcomes historically, and reason out what would happen, that is not going to work. And I have yet to see an explanation for how any of this actually physically works out, that survives five minutes of thinking. More generally: It is amazing how many people will say ‘like all technologies, AI will result or not result in [X]’ or ‘like always we can simply do [Y]’ rather than Another conversation that never makes progress:
Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is DifficultWhy can we instruct a reasoning model on how to think and have it reflected in the Chain of Thought (CoT)? Brendan seems clearly correct here.
It seems obviously useful given sufficient skill, it’s another thing you can steer and optimize for a given situation. Also it’s fun. This works, as I understand it, not only because of optimization pressure, but also context and instructions, and because everything bleeds into everything else. Also known as, why shouldn’t this work? It’s only a question of how strong a prior there is for it to overcome in a given spot. I also note that this is another example of a way in which one can steer models exactly because they are insufficiently optimized and capable, and are working with limited compute, parameters and data. The model doesn’t have the chops to draw all the distinctions between scenarios, as most humans also mostly don’t, thus the bleeding of all the heuristics into places they are not intended, and are not optimizing feedback. As the model gets to more capable, and becomes more of an expert and more precise, we should expect such spillover effects to shrink and fade away.
People Are Worried About AI Killing EveryoneJoining forces with the new Pope, There are two keys to saying ‘I will worry when AI can do [X]’ is to notice when AI can do [X], where often AI can already do [X] at the time of announcement. The first is to realize when AI can indeed do [X] (again, often that is right now), and then actually worry. The second is to pick a time when your worries can still do any good, not after that.
So, whoops all around, then.
The obvious response is ‘no, actually, pausing without being able to smell superintelligence first is (also?) not a realistic proposal, it is a fantasy.’ It seems highly plausible that the motivation for a pause will come exactly when it becomes impossible to do so, or impossible to do so without doing such immense economic damage that we effectively can’t do it. We will likely get at most a very narrow window to do this. Thus, what we need to do now is pursue the ability to pause in the future. As in, make it technologically and physically feasible to implement a pause. That means building state capacity, ensuring transparency, researching the necessary technological implementations, laying diplomatic foundations, and so on. All of that is also a good idea for other reasons, to maintain maximum understanding and flexibility, even if we never get close to pressing such a button. The Lighter Side
Oh. Right.
Also, you will soon be able to string the eight second clips together via extensions.
Also, did you know that You Can Just Do Math?
You're currently a free subscriber to |