---
subject: "K-drama 2.0/Messages for Life/Sudoku with boats"
from: "Recomendo <recomendo@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-10-27 09:01:46
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Recomendo", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8455078693589186571", "UNREAD"]
---
K-drama 2.0For a riveting multi-cultural experience, watch Daily Uplifting Messages
Sudoku with boatsRemember how awful the Battleship board game was? This Barberries: tiny tart treatsI discovered barberries through a friend who praised their nutritional benefits, especially their berberine content. Suggestions to make your life easierI recently came across a Reddit thread that asked, “ I have a keyboard shortcut on all my devices where @@ automatically enters my email address. When you're cleaning up "goopy" stuff that can't be absorbed, use two flat stiff things like the edge of two pieces of cardboard and literally scoop it up. I am shocked at the number of people that don’t put their sheet sets in the matching pillow case for storage until use. It keeps it all together! Clean out your fridge before grocery shopping! Eliminates mystery Tupperware and always reminds you of something you need to pick up. When tech stops working and you need to “turn it off and back on again”, turn it off, and ALWAYS wait 10-15 seconds or more before turning it back on. This allows the capacitors inside holding the memory bits to fully discharge, and it allows the device to fully reset fresh. 2 colour matched £10 flower bouquets combined are normally more varied and bigger than a £20 bouquet.
Check out the entire thread here. — CD Color walksI am working on a new book of my photography that has all the images arranged by color. That arrangement is surprisingly compelling and unleashes all kinds of new joys. This has made me very attentive to the idea of following a color. Rob Walker publishes a fantastic newsletter devoted to noticing things, called Recomendo is an authentic, hand-crafted, human-written weekly newsletter that is free, but not cheap. Consider supporting our work with a paid option, now at the low price of $45 per year. Paid subs enable us to keep making it free for others. Recomendo is published by Cool Tools Lab, a small company of three people. We also run the Recomendo Unclassified Ads work! UNCLASSIFIEDS The opposite of mindless scrolling. Make the smartest use of your time with Brilliant. Thousands of bite-sized, interactive lessons make it easy to sharpen your mind while building real knowledge in everything from math and data analysis to programming, AI, and beyond. Your Longevity Supplement, fatty15. The world’s first C15:0 supplement that supports long-term health & wellness. Learn more about fatty15, and Safekeeping Stories helps you create a short, shareable family memoir about your parents and grandparents. Our At Jack Archer, we believe clothing should elevate your game, so we designed all our clothes with magical fabrics that keep their shape, mold around your body, and make Ultralight Nanobag Daypack: Full-size backpack that fits in your pocket! 1.15oz, holds 66lbs. Diamond ripstop fabric, YKK zipper. Eco-friendly alternative to plastic bags. Perfect for daily use, travel, shopping. Free shipping on 3+. Limited time 30-62% off. Recomendo is copyrighted by Cool Tools Lab, LLC. Commissions may be earned from the links above. |