---
subject: "Google founder returns 🧍, Reddit takes over subreddits 📱, desktop apps in PHP 👨‍💻"
from: "TLDR <dan@tldrnewsletter.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-07-24 10:17:57
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "TLDR", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_795315172960844453", "UNREAD"]
---
[Sergey Brin is back at Google to help advance its AI efforts (2 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.androidpolice.com%2Fsergey-brin-back-google-help-advance-ai-efforts%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001898767db0b-c8b09b0a-c34d-460f-a869-ee4923a286da-000000/bDqKeKO5vLo8p4zM031gpfAJwvzQHs0gZC9OB1ujaEc=310)
Google co-founder Sergey Brin has reportedly been showing up at Google offices much more often recently to help the company advance its AI endeavors. Brin has been working with the AI team to build Google’s next-generation AI model Gemini, mostly using his role to support the hiring process. Alphabet CEO Sundar Pichai seems to welcome Brin's involvement. Brin had brushed aside AI for years and ignored many of the early developments from Google Brain that are now the basis of many cutting-edge AI technologies. |
[Reddit takes over one of the biggest protesting subreddits (2 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.theverge.com%2F2023%2F7%2F20%2F23802370%2Freddit-over-reopens-subreddit-protest-male-fashion-advice%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001898767db0b-c8b09b0a-c34d-460f-a869-ee4923a286da-000000/MGgWK22UMwqhZnjoC8pXeeKUekuwdYUPNQYAqN7TT_w=310)
Reddit has removed the moderators of r/malefashionadvice, a subreddit with more than 5 million subscribers. The subreddit was the largest subreddit still closed in protest of Reddit's API pricing changes. It had gone private while directing its users towards the r/malefashionadvice Discord and Substack. The subreddit is still in restricted status, meaning only certain users can make new posts. |
Science & Futuristic Technology |
[Amazon is getting ready to launch a lot of broadband satellites (10 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Farstechnica.com%2Fspace%2F2023%2F07%2Famazon-is-getting-ready-to-launch-a-lot-of-broadband-satellites%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001898767db0b-c8b09b0a-c34d-460f-a869-ee4923a286da-000000/NGzjESqL9qDphBPZ41SV7dbFcDJhac-3HLoZqdtmJyI=310)
Amazon hopes to be building and launching up to 80 satellites per month within a few years to populate its Kuiper constellation. The Kuiper network aims to provide Internet connectivity around the world. Amazon will begin production of the satellites in the next six months. It has invested around $120 million into a production facility that can accommodate up to three simultaneous launch campaigns. |
[Computer chip with built-in human brain tissue gets military funding (2 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fnewatlas.com%2Fcomputers%2Fhuman-brain-chip-ai%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001898767db0b-c8b09b0a-c34d-460f-a869-ee4923a286da-000000/MXB78UnEgJxRnpPzCw_44FIuWCt9bevIHxjxCGa8x6Y=310)
DishBrain is a semi-biological computer chip with human and mouse brains lab-grown into its electrodes created by Monash University scientists. The project attracted a $407,000 grant from Australia's National Intelligence and Security Discovery Research Grants program after the chips demonstrated the ability to learn to play the game Pong within five minutes. These types of chips may eventually become a new form of machine intelligence. The funds from the grant will be used to scale up the hardware and methods used to create the chips to the point where they become a viable replacement for silicon computing. |
Programming, Design & Data Science |
[NativePHP (Website)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fnativephp.com%2Fdocs%2F1%2Fgetting-started%2Fintroduction%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001898767db0b-c8b09b0a-c34d-460f-a869-ee4923a286da-000000/UzshnWmsywuR8ok8kF26BVGo-ldq4XskO4vUy1VajB8=310)
NativePHP is a framework for building desktop applications using PHP. It allows PHP developers to create cross-platform, native apps using familiar tools and technologies. NativePHP features a collection of easy-to-use classes, a set of tools for building and bundling applications, and a static cross-platform PHP runtime. |
[Putting the “You” in CPU (Article series)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fcpu.land%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001898767db0b-c8b09b0a-c34d-460f-a869-ee4923a286da-000000/WtZ_rcJHKWmC-LwwqIA_YN-ZGnHu0GZrKCBmg2iuZRs=310)
This series of articles explains what happens when you run a program on your computer. It covers how multiprocessing works, what system calls are, how computers manage memory with hardware interrupts, and how Linux loads executables. Computers are surprisingly simple and there is much less complexity or abstraction than one might expect. |
[FTX lobbyist tried to buy Pacific island of Nauru to create a new superspecies, lawsuit says (2 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.cnbc.com%2F2023%2F07%2F21%2Fftx-lobbyist-tried-to-buy-island-nauru-create-superspecies-lawsuit.html%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001898767db0b-c8b09b0a-c34d-460f-a869-ee4923a286da-000000/ez4PnfwgGupLCGzr4WtZVoQHswxkF5HYkufcgEhgcJo=310)
Sam Bankman-Fried's younger brother considered purchasing Nauru to create a fortified apocalypse bunker-state, according to a lawsuit filed in a Delaware bankruptcy court. Gabe Bankman-Fried had planned to buy the island nation to protect his allies and create a genetically enhanced human species in the event of a mass human extinction event. A representative from Nauru says that the island was not - and has never been - for sale. |
[No apologies as Reddit halfheartedly tries to repair ties with moderators (8 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Farstechnica.com%2Fgadgets%2F2023%2F07%2Freddit-makes-no-apologies-but-offers-disgruntled-mods-feedback-sessions%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001898767db0b-c8b09b0a-c34d-460f-a869-ee4923a286da-000000/R25vzx6bj1f8_R0X4m22CZgqk9jIpcXZNdL74PZjQS4=310)
Reddit has announced new outreach efforts to help repair ties with its users and volunteer moderators that it relies on. The efforts include weekly feedback sessions for pre-vetted users. Moderators have low expectations of Reddit's efforts as the company has refused to give way to virtually any of the mod's demands. Reddit's removal of protesting mods has further destroyed trust in the company. |
[TLDR Talent](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fdanni763618.typeform.com%2Fto%2FrSL4lOH3/1/010001898767db0b-c8b09b0a-c34d-460f-a869-ee4923a286da-000000/9m0al_PuMN0B-C5JWyXPU336f9H9QNGqWaa0N4QYzTs=310) is our exclusive community where we help world-class tech talent and get intros to companies of their choice, along with a number of exciting startups and tech companies curated by TLDR.
We give you full control of the process, you can specify if you’re actively searching or passively interested only if something amazing comes along. Set your preferred compensation, seniority/title/role, specific companies (or types of companies) you’d like to work for and more. [Click here to apply](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fdanni763618.typeform.com%2Fto%2FrSL4lOH3/2/010001898767db0b-c8b09b0a-c34d-460f-a869-ee4923a286da-000000/35cbLj91OXGRFbEshwVS5opGf5W2agZ3jwzp_VLZScs=310). |
If your company is interested in reaching an audience of tech executives, decision-makers and engineers, you may want to [advertise with us](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fshare.hsforms.com%2F1OxvmrkcFS4qsxKpNXCi76wee466%3Futm_source=tldr%26utm_medium=newsletter/2/010001898767db0b-c8b09b0a-c34d-460f-a869-ee4923a286da-000000/5gStRIVcPFUbpMqtkkfXud7vIQ3WNn-H62EGhR3bJBs=310).
If you have any comments or feedback, just respond to this email!
Thanks for reading,
[Dan Ni](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2Ftldrdan/1/010001898767db0b-c8b09b0a-c34d-460f-a869-ee4923a286da-000000/aneZhBz25OUaG-l9XUIhP1d-4AERzrpMeKU_3vkbZB8=310) and [Stephen Flanders](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2FSteveFlanders22/1/010001898767db0b-c8b09b0a-c34d-460f-a869-ee4923a286da-000000/8NIhO9d-veneFwbuDWoRho-JzxFGJkfjkJ41QJ8yeAs=310)
|
|
| |