---
subject: "AI #65: I Spy With My AI"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-05-23 12:33:12
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
In terms of things that go in AI updates, this has been the busiest two week period so far. Every day ends with more open tabs than it started, even within AI. As a result, some important topics are getting pushed to whenever I can give them proper attention. Triage is the watchword. In particular, this post will NOT attempt to cover: [Schumer’s AI report and proposal.](https://substack.com/redirect/9d4bba96-5bb2-4378-87a0-a6f4d05f31bd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)This is definitely RTFB. Don’t assume anything until then.
[Tyler Cowen’s rather bold claim that AI Safety died in May 2024 (?)](https://substack.com/redirect/5856a24e-b32a-4d86-8174-22fb9b09a5e8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).Rarely has timing of attempted inception of such a claim been worse. Would otherwise be ready with this but want to do Schumer first if possible. [He clarified or walked it back a bit](https://substack.com/redirect/278f7b69-f307-430a-8863-f555857e579a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)this morning[via Arnaud Schenk](https://substack.com/redirect/ff62650b-0e2e-44b2-9af5-2d65f16724be?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). The new claim may be something more akin to ‘AI Safety as a movement has peaked.’
The AI Summit in Seoul. Remarkably quiet all around, [here is one thing that happened](https://substack.com/redirect/8c7ff106-f6ae-47bc-9bfb-3f516454434f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).
[Anthropic’s new interpretability paper](https://substack.com/redirect/c2cc7a57-13f3-4616-9f87-485d5150378a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).Potentially a big deal in a good way, but no time to read it yet.
DeepMind’s [new scaling policy](https://substack.com/redirect/5e127d93-b300-4a1c-ae15-3f52fd06bd1b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).[Initial reports](https://substack.com/redirect/9dfca91c-e470-4b47-90fc-a683025b7b58?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)are it is unambitious. I am reserving judgment.
OpenAI’s [new model spec](https://substack.com/redirect/94988553-ffef-443a-afac-5e72f54ec5a6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).It looks solid as a first step, but pausing until we have bandwidth.
Most ongoing issues with recent fallout for Sam Altman and OpenAI. [It doesn’t look good](https://substack.com/redirect/cab9815d-07b1-4ec3-9c65-2b9b63d7bd81?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), on many fronts.While the story develops further, if you are a former employee or have a tip about OpenAI or its leadership team, [you can contact Kelsey Piper at kelsey.piper@vox.com or on Signal at 303-261-2769](https://substack.com/redirect/3be31199-59c5-4a76-bc0c-c1d723e1dafb?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).
Also: A few miscellaneous papers and reports I haven’t had time for yet.
My guess is at least six of these eight get their own posts (everything but #3 and #8). So here is the middle third: The topics I can cover here, and are still making the cut. Still has a lot of important stuff in there. Table of ContentsFrom this week: Introduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. People getting used to practical stuff. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. Google Search, Copilot ads. OpenAI versus Google. Similar new offerings. Who presented it better? OpenAI. GPT-4o My. Still fast and cheap, otherwise people are less impressed so far. Responsible Scaling Policies. Anthropic offers an update on their thinking. Copyright Confrontation. Sony joins the action, AI-funded lawyers write columns. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. How bad will it get? They Took Our Jobs. If these are the last years of work, leave it all on the field. Get Involved. UK AI Safety Institute is hiring and offering fast grants. Introducing. Claude use tool, Google Maps AI features. Reddit and Weep. They signed with OpenAI. Curiously quiet reaction from users. In Other AI News. Newscorp also signs with OpenAI, we can disable TSMC. I Spy With My AI. Who wouldn’t want their computer recording everything? Quiet Speculations. How long will current trends hold up? Politico is at it Again. Framing the debate as if all safety is completely irrelevant. Beating China. A little something from the Schumer report on immigration. The Quest for Sane Regulation. UK’s Labour is in on AI frontier model regulation. SB 1047 Update. Passes California Senate, Weiner offers open letter. That’s Not a Good Idea. Some other proposals out there are really quite bad. The Week in Audio. Dwarkesh as a guest, me on Cognitive Revolution. Rhetorical Innovation. Some elegant encapsulations. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone. The Lighter Side.
Language Models Offer Mundane UtilityIf at first you don’t succeed, Claim that GPT-4o gets greatly improved performance on text documents
Why not both? I predict both. If AIs are recording and analyzing everything we do, then people will obviously start optimizing their choices to get the results they want from the AIs. I would not presume this will mean that a ‘be shallower’ strategy is the way to go, for example LLMs are great and sensing the vibe that you’re being shallow, and also their analysis should get less shallow over time and larger context windows. But yeah, obviously this is one of those paths that leads to the dark side.
Or someone else’s data, too. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
Seriously, Google, if I want to use Gemini (and often I do) I will use Gemini.
The good news is they have gotten a bit better about this. I did a check after I saw this, and suddenly there is a logic behind whether the AI answer appears. If I ask for something straightforward, I get a normal result. If I ask for something using English grammar, and imply I have something more complex, then the AI comes out. That’s not an entirely unreasonable default. The other good news is there is a broader fix.
OpenAI versus Google
Whereas here’s my view on that. As in, they are two companies trying very hard to be cool and hip, in a way that makes it very obvious that this is what they are doing. Who is ‘right’ versus ‘wrong’? I have no idea. It is plausible both were ‘right’ given their goals and limitations. It is also plausible that this is part of Google being horribly bad at presentations. Perhaps next time they should ask Gemini for help. I do think ‘OpenAI won’ the presentation war, in the sense that they got the hype and talk they wanted, and as far as I can tell Google got a lot less, far in excess of the magnitude of any difference in the underlying announcements and offerings. Well played, OpenAI. But I don’t think this is because of the background of their set. I also think that if this is what sticks in Altman’s mind, and illustrates where his head is at, that could help explain some other events from the past week. I would not go as far as Teortaxes here, but directionally they have a point.
GPT-4o My
I am suspicious. I am especially suspicious, as I continue to use it, that GPT-4o in text only mode is not so great aside from its speed, that it made other sacrifices (such as probably size) to get that speed and that it ‘wins in the Arena’ because the post-training aimed at winning in the Arena. That still gives it a potentially big edge once the multi-modal abilities come properly online, and I’m excited to see where that goes. One way you can make people prefer your model’s outputs
That is a rather dramatic chart. In terms of the direct consequences of users entering queries, I am fine with GPT-4o being easily jailbroken. You can still jailbreak Claude Opus if you care enough and there’s nothing that dangerous to be done once you do. I still look to such questions as canaries in the coal mine. The first job of your safety department is to get the models that exist today to not do, today, the things you have explicitly decided you do not want your models to do. Ideally that would be a fully robust regime where no one can jailbreak you, but I for now will settle for ‘we decided on purpose to made this a reasonable amount of hard to do, and we succeeded.’ If OpenAI had announced something like ‘after watching GPT-4-level models for a year, we have decided that robust jailbreak protections degrade performance while not providing much safety, so we scaled back our efforts on purpose’ then I do not love that, and I worry about that philosophy and your current lack of ability to do safety efficiently at all, but as a deployment decision, okay, fine. I have not heard such a statement. There are definitely a decent number of people who think GPT-4o is a step down from GPT-4-Turbo in the ways they care about.
The phantom pattern matching is impossible to miss, and a cause of many of the stupidest mistakes.
Responsable Scaling Policies
They note that with things changing so quickly they do not wish to make binding commitments lightly. I get that. The solution is presumably to word the commitments carefully, to allow for the right forms of modification. Here is how they summarize their actual commitments:
One issue is that experts disagree on which potential capabilities are dangerous, and it is difficult to know what future abilities will manifest, and all testing methods have their flaws. Q&A datasets are easy but don’t reflect real world risk so well. This may be sufficiently cheap that it is essentially free defense in depth, but ultimately it is worth little. Ultimately I wouldn’t count on these. The best use for them is a sanity check, since they can be standardized and cheaply administered. It will be important to keep questions secret so that this cannot be gamed, since avoiding gaming is pretty much the point.
Human trials are time-intensive, require excellent process including proper baselines, and large size. They are working on scaling up the necessary infrastructure to run more of these. This seems like a good leg of a testing strategy. But you need to test across all the humans who may try to misuse the system. And you have to test while they have access to everything they will have later.
Automated test evaluations are potentially useful to test autonomous actions. However, scaling the tasks while keeping them sufficiently accurate is difficult and engineering-intensive. Again, this seems like a good leg of a testing strategy. I do think there is no alternative to some form of this. You need to be very cautious interpreting the results, and take into account what things could be refined or fixed later, and all that.
Expert red-teaming is ‘less rigorous and reproducible’ but has proven valuable. When done properly this does seem most informative. Indeed, ‘release and let the world red-team it’ is often very informative, with the obvious caveat that it could be a bit late to the party. If you are not doing some version of this, you’re not testing for real.
Then we get to their central focus, which has been on setting their ASL-3 standard. What would be sufficient defenses and mitigations for a model where even a low rate of misuse could be catastrophic? For human misuse they expect a defense-in-depth approach, using a combination of RLHF, CAI, classifiers of misuse at multiple stages, incident reports and jailbreak patching. And they intend to red team extensively. This makes me sigh and frown. I am not saying it could never work. I am however saying that there is no record of anyone making such a system work, and if it would work later it seems like it should be workable now? Whereas all the major LLMs, including Claude Opus, currently have well-known, fully effective and fully unpatched jailbreaks, that allow the user to do anything they want. An obvious proposal, if this is the plan, is to ask us to pick one particular behavior that Claude Opus should never, ever do, which is not vulnerable to a pure logical filter like a regular expression. Then let’s have a prediction market in how long it takes to break that, run a prize competition, and repeat a few times. For assurance structures they mention the excellent idea of their My summary would be that most of this is good on the margin, although I wish they had a superior ASL-3 plan to defense in depth using currently failing techniques that I do not expect to scale well. Hopefully good testing will mean that they realize that plan is bad once they try it, if it comes to that, or even better I hope to be wrong. The main And they need to get moving.
There is quite a lot to do before ASL-3 is something that can be handled under the existing RSP. ASL-4 is not yet defined. ASL-3 protocols have not been identified let alone implemented. Even if the ASL-3 protocol is what they here sadly hint it is going to be, and is essentially ‘more cybersecurity and other defenses in depth and cross our fingers,’ Then there’s ASL-4, where if the plan is ‘the same thing only more of it’ I am terrified. Overall, though, I want to emphasize positive reinforcement for keeping us informed. Copyright ConfrontationMusic and general training departments, not the Scarlett Johansson department.
The central demands here are explicit permission to use songs as training data, and a full explanation within a month of all ways Sony’s songs have been used.
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse SoonNoah Smith writes The eternal September and death of the early internet. The enshittification (technical term) of social media platforms over time. The shift from curation-based feeds to algorithmic feeds. The rise of Chinese and Russian efforts to sow dissention polluting everything. The rise of AI slop supercharging the Internet being no fun anymore.
I am mostly with him on the first three, and even more strongly in favor of the need to curate one’s feeds. I do think algorithmic feeds could be positive with new AI capabilities, but only if you have and use tools that customize that experience, both generally and in the moment. The problem is that most people will never (or rarely) use those tools even if offered. Rarely are they even offered. Where on Twitter are the ‘more of this’ and ‘less of this’ buttons, in any form, that aren’t public actions? Where is your ability to tell Grok what you want to see? Yep. For the Chinese and Russian efforts, aside from TikTok’s algorithm I think this is greatly exaggerated. Noah says it is constantly in his feeds and replies but I almost never see it and when I do it is background noise that I block on sight. For AI, the question continues to be what we can do in response, presumably a combination of trusted sources and whitelisting plus AI for detection and filtering. From what we have seen so far, I continue to be optimistic that technical solutions will be viable for some time, to the extent that the slop is actually undesired. The question is, will some combination of platforms and users implement the solutions? They Took Our JobsAvital Balwit of Anthropic writes about what is potentially That seems like a highly implausible world to me. If you can automate all knowledge work, you can presumably also automate figuring out how to automate the plumber. Whereas if you cannot do this, then there should be enough tasks out there and enough additional wealth to stimulate demand that those who still want gainful employment should be able to find it. I would expect the technological optimist perspective to carry the day within that zone. Most of her post asks about the psychological impact of this future world. She asks good questions such as: What will happen to the unemployed in her scenario? How would people fill their time? Would unemployment be mostly fine for people’s mental health if it wasn’t connected to shame? The proposed world has contradictions in it that make it hard for me to model what happens, but my basic answer is that the humans would find various physical work and and status games and social interactions (including ‘social’ work where you play various roles for others, and also raising a family) and experiential options and educational opportunities and so on to keep people engaged if they want that. There would however be a substantial number of people who by default fall into inactivity and despair, and we’d need to help with that quite a lot.
Get Involved
Introducing
In my earlier experiments, Google Maps integration into Gemini was a promising feature that worked great when it worked, but it was extremely error prone and frustrating to use, to the point I gave up. Presumably this will improve over time. Reddit and Weep
For OpenAI, as long as the price was reasonable this seems like a big win. It looks like a good deal for Reddit based on the market’s reaction. I would presume the key risks to Reddit are whether the user base responds in hostile fashion, and potentially having sold out cheap. Or they may be missing an opportunity to do something even better.
In Other AI NewsOpenAI has also signed a deal with Newscorp for access to their content, which gives them the Wall Street Journal and many others. A source tells me that OpenAI informed its employees that they will indeed update their documents regarding employee exit and vested equity. The message says no vested equity has ever actually been confiscated for failure to sign documents and it never will be.
At 168 likes, we now have one employee from DeepMind, and one from Anthropic. Jimmy Apples
Did you know Nvidia
Not necessarily the news department: Then finally there’s this:
Hahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahaha. That does not mean that mundane safety concerns are a small thing. I Spy With My AI (or Total Recall)Why let the AI out of the box when you can
Microsoft also announced live caption translations, auto super resolution upscaling on apps (yes with a toggle for each app, wait those are programs, wtf), AI in paint and automatic blurring (do not want). This is all part of the new ‘Copilot+’ offering for select new PCs, including their new Microsoft Surface machines. You will need a Snapdragon X Elite and X Plus, 40 TOPs, 225 GB of storage and 16 GB RAM. Intel and AMD chips can’t cut it (yet) but they are working on that. (Consumer feedback report: I have a Microsoft Surface from a few years ago, it was not worth the price and the charger is so finicky it makes me want to throw things. Would not buy again.) I would hope this would at least be opt-in.
I would also not trust a Windows update to not silently turn it back on.
In case it was not obvious, you should either: Opt in for the mundane utility, and embrace that your computer has recorded everything you have ever done and that anyone with access to your system or your files, potentially including a crook, Microsoft, the NSA or FBI, China or your spouse now fully owns you, and also that an AI knows literal everything you do. Rely on a combination of security through obscurity, defense in depth and luck. To the extent you can, keep activities and info you would not want exposed this way off of your PC, or ensure they are never typed or displayed onscreen [using your best Randy Waterhouse impression](https://substack.com/redirect/296c8da0-d582-4d28-8688-76dfe9a0b8dd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).Actually for real accept that the computer in question is presumed compromised, use it only for activities where you don’t mind, never enter any passwords there, and presumably have a second computer for activities that need to be secure, or perhaps confine them to a phone or tablet. Opt out and ensure that for the love of God your machine cannot use this feature.
I am not here to tell you which of those is the play. I only claim that it seems that soon you must choose. If the feature is useful, a large number of people are going to choose option one. I presume almost no one will pick option two, except perhaps for gaming PCs. Option three is viable. If there is one thing we have learned during the rise of AI, and indeed during the rise of computers and the internet, it is that almost all people will sign away their privacy and technological vulnerability for a little mundane utility, such as easier access to cute pictures of cats. Yelling at them that they are being complete idiots is a known ineffective response. And who is to say they even are being idiots? Security through obscurity is, for many people, a viable strategy up to a point. Also, I predict your phone is going to do a version of this for you by default within a few years, once the compute and other resources are available for it. In any case, how much mundane utility is available? Quite a bit. You would essentially be able to remember everything, ask the AI about everything, have it take care of increasingly complex tasks with full context, and this will improve steadily over time, and it will customize to what you care about. If you ignore all the obvious horrendous downsides of giving an AI this level of access to your computer, and the AI behind it is good, this is very clearly The Way. There are of course some people who will not do this. How long before they are under increasing pressure to do it? How long until it becomes highly suspicious, as if they have something to hide? How long until it becomes a legal requirement, at best in certain industries like finance?
Quiet Speculations
Politico is at it Again
A fight between ‘Big Tech’ and ‘Silicon Valley’ over who gets regulatory capture and thus Washington’s regulatory help against the other side. An alliance of ‘Big Tech’ and ‘Silicon Valley’ against Washington to head off any regulations that would interfere with both of them.
That’s it. Those are the issues and stakes in play. Nothing else. How dismissive is this of safety? Here are the two times ‘safety’ is mentioned:
Testing standards are ‘easy things to find agreement on’? Fact check: Lol, lmao. That’s it. The word ‘risk’ appears twice and neither has anything to do with safety. Other words like ‘capability,’ ‘existential’ or any form of ‘catastrophic’ do not appear. It is all treated as obviously irrelevant. The progress is here they stopped trying to bulk up people worried about safety as boogeymen (perhaps because this is written by Matthew Kaminski, not Brendon Bordelon), and instead point to actual corporations that are indeed pursuing actual profits, with Silicon Valley taking on Big Tech. And I very much appreciate that ‘open source advocates’ has now been properly identified as Silicon Valley pursuing its business interests.
Notice the escalation. This is not ‘Big Tech wants regulatory capture to actively enshrine its advantages, and safety is a Big Tech plot.’ This is ‘Silicon Valley wants to actively use regulatory action to prevent Big Tech from winning,’ with warnings that attempts to not have a proper arms race to ever more capable systems will cause intervention from regulators. By ‘more open market’ they mean ‘government intervention in the market,’ government’s favorite kind of new freer market. As I have said previously, we desperately need to ensure that there are targeted antitrust exemptions available so that when AI labs can legally collaborate around safety issues they are not accused of collusion. It would be completely insane to not do this. And as I keep saying, open source advocates are not asking for a level playing field or a lack of government oppression. They are asking for special treatment, to be exempt from the rules of society and the consequences of their actions, and also for the government to directly cripple their opponents for them. Are they against regulatory capture? Only if they don’t get to do the capturing. Then there is the second track, the question of guardrails that might spoil the ‘libertarian sandbox,’ which neither ‘side’ of tech wants here. Here is the two mentions of ‘risk’:
I once again have been roped into extensively covering a Politico article, because it is genuinely a different form of inception than the previous Politico inception attempts. But let us continue to update that Politico is extraordinarily disingenuous and hostilely motivated on the subject of AI regulation. This is de facto enemy action.
Or perhaps the idea is to illustrate that all the major players in Tech are aligned in being motivated by profit and in dismissing all safety concerns as fake? And a warning that Washington is in danger of being convinced? I would love that to be true. I do not think a place like Politico works that subtle these days, nor do I expect those who need to hear that message to figure out that it is there. Beating ChinaIf we care about beating China, by far the most valuable thing we can do is allow more high-skilled immigration. Many of their best and brightest want to become Americans. This is true across the board, for all aspects of our great power competition. It also applies to AI. From his thread about the Schumer report:
I suspect the numbers are even more lopsided than this graph suggests. To what extent is being in America a key element of being a top-tier AI researcher? How many of these same people would have been great if they had stayed at home? If they had stayed at home, would others have taken their place here in America? We do not know. I do know it is essentially impossible that this extent is so large we would not want to bring such people here. Do we need to worry about those immigrants being a security risk, if they come from certain nations like China and we were to put them into OpenAI, Anthropic or DeepMind? Yes, that does seem like a problem. But there are plenty of other places they could go, where it is much less of a problem. The Quest for Sane Regulations
Unless something very unexpected happens, they will win the next election, which is currently scheduled for July 4.
SB 1047 Update
This seems worth noting given the OpenAI situation last week:
This very explicitly clarifies the intent of the bill across multiple misconceptions and objections, all in line with my previous understanding. They actively continue to solicit feedback and are considering changes. If you are concerned about the impact of this bill, and feel it is badly designed or has flaws, the best thing you can do is offer specific critiques and proposed changes. I strongly agree with Weiner that this bill is light touch relative to alternative options. I see Pareto improvements we could make, but I do not see any fundamentally different lighter touch proposals that accomplish what this bill sets out to do. I will sometimes say of a safety bill, sometimes in detail: It’s a good bill, sir. Other times, I will say: It’s a potentially good bill, sir, if they fix this issue. That is where I am at with SB 1047. Most of the bill seems very good, an attempt to act with as light a touch as possible. There are still a few issues with it. The derivative model definition as it currently exists is the potential showstopper bug. To summarize the issue once more: As written, if interpreted literally and as I understand it, it allows developers to define themselves as derivative of an existing model. This, again if interpreted literally, lets them evade all responsibilities, and move those onto essentially any covered open model of the same size. That means both that any unsafe actor goes unrestricted (whether they be open or closed), and releasing the weights of a covered model creates liability no matter how responsible you were, since they can effectively start the training over from scratch. Scott Weiner says he is working on a fix. I believe the correct fix is a compute threshold for additional training, over which a model is no longer derivative, and the responsibilities under SB 1047 would then pass to the new developer or fine-tuner. Some open model advocates demand that responsibility for derivative models be removed entirely, but that would transparently defeat the purpose of preventing catastrophic harm. Who cares if your model is safe untuned, if you can fine-tune it to be unsafe in an hour with $100? Then at other times, I will look at a safety or other regulatory bill or proposal, and say… That’s Not a Good IdeaSo it seems only fair to highlight some not good ideas, and say: Not a good idea. One toy example would be the periodic complaints about Section 230. Adam Thierer reports
Another example would be Colorado passing I would be less concerned with the ambiguity, and more concerned about much of the actual intent and the various proactive requirements. I could make a strong case that some of the stuff here is kind of insane, and also seems like a generic GPDR-style ‘you have to notify everyone that AI was involved in every meaningful decision ever.’ The requirements apply regardless of size, and worry about impacts that are the kind of thing society can mitigate as we go. The good news is that there are also some good provisions like IDing AIs, and also full enforcement of the bad parts seems impossible? I am very frustrated that a bill that isn’t trying to address catastrophic risks, but seems far harder to comply with, and seems far worse to me than SB 1047, seems to mostly get a pass. Then again, it’s only Colorado. I do worry about Gell-Mann amnesia. I have seen so many hyperbolic statements, and outright false statements, about AI bills, often from the same people that point out what seem like obviously horrible other proposed regulatory bills and policies. How can one trust their statements about the other bills, short of reading the actual bills (RTFB)? If it turned out they were wrong, and this time the bill was actually reasonable, who would point this out? So far, when I have dug deeper, the bills do indeed almost always turn out to be terrible, but the ‘rumors of the death of the internet’ or similar potential consequences are often greatly exaggerated. The bills are indeed reliably terrible, but not as terrible as claimed. Alas, I must repeat my lament that I know of no RTFB person I can turn to on other topics, and my cup doth overflow. The Week in Audio
Around 51:45 Dwarkesh notes there is no ‘Matt Levine for AI’ and that picking up that mantle would be a good thing to do. I suppose I still have my work cut out. A lot of talk about EA and 80k Hours ways of thinking about how to choose paths in life, that I think illustrates well both the ways it is good (actively making choices rather than sleepwalking, having priorities) and not as good (heavily favoring the legible). Some key factors in giving career advice they point out are that from a global perspective power laws apply and the biggest impacts are a huge share of what matters, and that much advice (such as ‘don’t start a company in college’) is only good advice because the people to whom it is horribly bad advice will predictably ignore it. Rhetorical InnovationWhy does this section exist?
For the record: The usual suspects, including Bengio, Hinton, Yao and 22 others, write the usual arguments in the hopes of finally getting it right, this time as
Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is DifficultIt is even more difficult when you don’t know what ‘alignment’ means.
That does not express a strong opinion on whether we currently know of a better plan. And it is exceedingly difficult when you do not attempt to solve the problem.
There are three reasons this viewpoint seems highly implausible to me. The Superalignment team was indeed tasked with basic research. Solving the problem is going to require quite a lot of basic research, or at least work that is not incremental progress on current incremental commercial products. This is not about ensuring that each marginal rocket does not blow up, or the plant does not melt down this month. It is a different kind of problem, preparing for a very different kind of failure mode. It does not make sense to embed these people into product teams. This is not a reallocation of resources from a safety team to diffused safety work. This is a reallocation of resources, many of which were promised and never delivered, away from safety towards capabilities, as Dean himself notes. This is in addition to losing the two most senior safety researchers and a lot of others too. Mundane safety, making current models do what you want in ways that as Leike notes will not scale to when they matter most, does not count as safety towards the goals of the superalignment team or of us all not dying. No points.
Thus the biggest disagreement here, in my view, which is when he says this:
Yes, it is bigger than a technical problem, and that is important. OpenAI has not made ‘meaningful progress.’ Certainly we are not on track to solve such problems, and we should not presume they will essentially solve themselves with an ordinary effort, as is implied here. Indeed, with that attitude, it’s Margaritaville (as in, we might as well start drinking Margaritas.¹) Whereas with the attitude of Leike and Sutskever, I disagreed with their approach, but I could have been wrong or they could have course corrected, if they had been given the resources to try. Nor is the second phase problem that we also must solve well-described by ‘basically politics’ of a type we are used to, because there will be entities involved that are not human. Our classical liberal political solutions work better than known alternatives, and well enough for humans to flourish, by assuming various properties of humans and the affordances available to them. AIs with far greater intelligence, capabilities and efficiency, that can be freely copied, and so on, would break those assumptions. I do greatly appreciate the self-awareness and honesty in this section:
It is notable how many AI safety advocates, when discussing almost any topic except transformational AI, are also classical liberals. If this confuses you, The Lighter Side
1 Also, ‘some people say that there’s a woman to blame, but I know it’s my own damn fault.’ You're currently a free subscriber to |