---
subject: "Highlights From The Comments On Kidney Donation"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-11-07 02:26:16
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
[original post: 1: Comments From People Who Are Against This Sort Of Thing 1: Comments From People Who Are Against This Sort Of ThingStephen Pimental
Sorry, I’m going to do the jerk thing here and accuse Stephen of being wrong about his own internal processes. How did Stephen come to value bodily integrity, as opposed to all the other possible things you can value like wearing green clothes, or having a prime number of dollars in your bank account? Surely the answer is something like “most violations of bodily integrity are bad”. Getting stabbed is bad. Having someone forcibly sterilize you is bad. Getting a disease that makes your internal organs rot away is bad. “Value bodily integrity” is a useful heuristic for avoiding bad things. And Stephen admits there are “a thousand and one exceptions”. Later in the thread, he lists some of these: blood donations, haircuts, laser eye surgery. I predict he would also consider vaccination, pacemaker-implantation, and contact lenses to be valid exceptions. How come I, an outsider without access to his moral reasoning, can predict what exceptions he’ll allow? Probably because he allows as an exception anywhere benefits > costs. If he holds a rule “preserve bodily integrity” because he notices that helps him avoid bad things - and if he makes exceptions whenever there are cases where preserving bodily integrity imposes costs, or prevents a benefit - then I propose he’s using it as a heuristic for what he really wants, which is something like trying to stay healthy and safe while balancing that out with satisfying his other values. People tend to So rather than give up and say “the heuristic has been crystallized here, we’ve got a unsolvable moral difference”, I’d rather say that kidney donation still emotionally feels really scary and not beneficial to Stephen, he prefers not to do it, he can’t come up with a great utilitarian case for not doing it, so he falls back on a semi-crystallized heuristic, which he wouldn’t crystallize as hard in other cases. I run into this problem myself a lot, but I solve it by saying “I don’t have a great argument against doing X, but it feels scary and I can’t quite make myself viscerally appreciate the benefits, so I’m not going to do it”. That is: a lot of people insist on defining the moral law such that they are following it maximally at all times. Nobody really follows the moral law maximally at all times, so this means people end up endorsing completely crazy moral principles like “it’s morally wrong to donate your kidney”. I think it’s easier to just relax that constraint, have a flexible and reasonable view of the moral law, and admit you don’t follow it perfectly. …really you don’t even have to do that. I find I donated my kidney, but I’m probably not going to donate a lobe of my liver (even though this is also mostly safe and also helps people in need). This isn’t because there’s a real distinction about which parts of my body are vs. aren’t sacred, it’s just that I guess I’m ethical enough to do something moderately hard and painful, but not to do something very hard and painful. If anyone gives you grief about admitting this, ask them how much of the axiological law they’re following. The Lone Ranger
…or maybe I’m being unfair to Stephen. Here Lone Ranger demonstrates a different reason to stick with coarse-grained heuristics even when there’s evidence that they fail in your specific case: you don’t believe the evidence, you don’t trust the people presenting the evidence, and you suspect the whole thing is an op. This is I find this helpful in thinking about one of the other topics I brought up: evaluating charitable interventions. If you’re very mistrustful and want to stick close to your heuristics, you might suspect any charity that seems to be having too easy a time of shirking its duty. The more I think about this, the more it explains. I think a lot of people have a heuristic of something like “if you’re making a profit, you’re probably screwing someone over”. Thus for example being against building housing, because developers make a profit, so they must be screwing someone over, so the only reason anyone supports housing must be because they’re in the pocket of Big Developer. I’d always heard people say stuff like this, but I’m trying to really put myself in the shoes of someone who can’t evaluate any arguments, refuses to try, relies entirely on heuristics, and the main heuristic they know is “if you do well, you’re probably screwing someone over.” Me, I’m the opposite. I find it almost funny to violate heuristics. It’s like bungee jumping. You have a heuristic that jumping off a cliff is generally bad for you. But you’ve found a special case where it’s actually fine. That’s what makes it exhilarating! But I think this is also part of what I mean about normalizing something. One heuristic everyone shares is that new, untested things are dangerous. Once you know five or ten people who have done a thing and seem to be doing well, it doesn’t seem as scary anymore. The first person who bungee jumped must have had a lot of trust in the physics. Now, however many decades later, I can bungee jump without knowing the physics at all. Kronopath
Michael Watts
I resent being treated as the dupe of an ideology that I helped form. I don’t get actual credit for inventing EA, but I was there at approximately the time they were inventing it, I supported the invention, and (like a lot of other people who were there) I considered it a formalization of things I had believed since long before I was old enough to verbalize them properly. You don’t kill your cattle on the full moon while chanting unless you’ve heard of other people doing that, but it might occur to someone to try to figure out how to do the most good even if they haven’t been brainwashed into trying. I’m more surprised that so few people find it to be an intuitively obvious goal. George (
If I’m getting anything wrong, obviously you should correct me on the general principle of promoting truth. Otherwise, I find it interesting that so many people feel protective of potential kidney donors and want to protect them from self-sacrifice. This isn’t selfish (they’re trying to protect someone else). It’s not exactly altruistic (it’s protecting an act of altruism which I think everyone agrees is probably net positive). So what’s the psychological motive here? This isn’t mysterious at all to me intuitively (I can imagine doing the same thing in some circumstances) but it sure is hard for me to explicitly model. Gary Mindlin Miguel (
Thanks, I hadn’t seen that. The study doesn’t have a control group, which makes it vulnerable to the problem where some percent of people will always have chronic pain, and if it’s after something else, either they or an outside observer can spin it as “chronic pain after X”. Main predictors of pain include previous abdominal surgeries, previous pain, and psychological conditions. And I don’t want to dismiss this, and it might be the strongest argument against donating I’ve seen. Maybe I wouldn’t have donated if I’d seen it first (luckily, I don’t seem to be experiencing any pain). But I do wonder if it’s one of those things 2: Comments From Other People Who Have Donated KidneysIvan Fyodorovich
toolate
Tyler
I endorse all of this. Jeremiah Johnson (
Floris Wolswijk Awesome to see you've done this! I did the same about 11 months ago and feel awesome about it. Also partially motivated by the Vox article. Ancient Sunset
3: Comments From People Who Have Received KidneysTugrul Irmak
Gemma Jack
4: Comments About Opt-Out Organ DonationPaula Amato
I’d heard this claim too, but it doesn’t seem very well-supported. Here’s
This isn’t an RCT and you would want to supplement it with studies about what happens when a country shifts from one system to the other. But they say:
How is this possible? (this seems dysfunctional to me; it seems to rely on their being no clear way in the US system to opt yourself out so vocally that family members can’t override you, and vice versa in the opt-out system. I don’t know if I’m understanding this right) But also, if you die of old age, your organs are too old and dysfunctional to be useful. The only posthumous organs people want are from people who die suddenly when young - but not too suddenly, or they won’t be able to collect the organs. The usual cadaveric donor is a motorcycle crash victim who was rushed to the hospital, put on life support, it proved fruitless, and then eventually doctors pulled the plug. There aren’t enough of those people to provide organs for everyone even if 100% of them opt-in, so the opt-in/opt-out distinction can only go a small part of the way to solving the problem in any case. I still feel confused about this and would welcome someone looking into it further. 5: Comments On Radiation RiskBhavin Jankharia (
People really need to read the footnotes before commenting. “LDNT” stands for “linear dose no threshold”. It’s the assumption that 1 mSv radiation causes 1/1000th the amount of cancer as 1000 mSv of radiation (ie cancer risk is linear with radiation dose). This is important because it’s easy to measure how much cancer 1000 mSv causes (a lot), and we mostly assume 1 mSv doses cause cancer by extrapolation. If you can’t do linear extrapolation, 1 mSv might not cause any cancer. And in fact, many people claim that your body has a certain amount of DNA repair ability, such that low doses of radiation carry zero or very low cancer risk. Many scientists have come out against LDNT, and many ACX commenters came out against it too, often in very strong terms. On the other hand, most official agencies, for example the National Institute of Health, still endorse calculating radiation dose risks with LDNT. Two thoughts: first of all, I feel like this is the point at which we should be deploying our natural heuristics, like “getting exposed to radiation is probably bad”. There’s lots of widely-agreed-upon evidence that donating a kidney is pretty safe, but LDNT is still controversial and I would err on the side of caution. But more important: Bhavin says there’s evidence that x-rays (0.1 mSv of radiation) are too low a dose to increase cancer risk. Fine. But there’s other evidence that doses of 100 mSv or above do increase cancer risk. So even if Bhavin is right that there’s a threshold, it’s somewhere between 0.1 mSv and 100 mSv. The multiphase abdominal CT used in kidney donation screening is 30 mSv. As far as I can tell, this is the most radiation-intensive medical test in common use. So even if you believe there’s some threshold below which radiation stops mattering, there is no reason at all to think multiphase abdominal CTs are below that threshold. If you have a uniform geometric prior on the threshold being somewhere in the space between 0.1 and 100 mSv, 30 mSv is 80% of the way (geometrically) through that space, so you should be pretty concerned it’s above the threshold. Nothing you believe about LDNT being true or false is an excuse to negate that risk. smopecakes
This is the only post here that updated me even a little, since it included evidence that 30 mSV might be sub-threshold. But it seems borderline enough that I’m still sticking with my heuristic of “IDK irradiating my body seems high risk of being bad”. 6: Comments About RejectionsSeth Schoen
Kristin (
Procrastinating Prepper writes:
That’s pretty bad, but I think I can beat it - I got an email from someone telling a story (won’t reveal details) about someone they knew. They got cleared and everything. Then on the day of the surgery, the nurses/doctors asked how she was feeling. She said anxious (about the upcoming surgery). They immediately cancelled everything and demanded she get six months of therapy to deal with her anxiety before they would consider letting her donate. I hate lying and am against it. I’m aware that I’m a media public intellectual type person, which means I have a higher-than-usual duty not to lie. And I’m involved with effective altruism, which everyone seems to constantly suspect of lying, and I try to fight that reputation by being scrupulously honest and recommending others do the same. I hate ever recommending lying. But I also can’t in good conscience recommend telling the truth to these people. They seem to have totally disqualified themselves as decent citizens who deserve the benefits of the social contract. I do psych evals for surgery sometimes, and I’ve read the papers on how to do them, and the official criteria all seem pretty reasonable, so I have no idea where these people are getting this from or, how they possibly go so wrong. Still, transplant evaluation psychiatrists are now right there alongside Gestapo officers at your door on my very very short list of people who it seems probably ethical to lie to. I don’t know how it came to this (I assume it involves lawyers and bioethicists somehow) but it doesn’t seem satisfactory. I received an email from a group called 7: Comments On Polls About Who Would DonateBRetty
Here’s a sort of daydream: some charity gets the list of the 40,000 people who are predicted to die next year for lack of a kidney. Then it chooses 40,000 random Americans in a 1:1 correspondence with the kidney patients. Then it sends each of those random Americans a letter, saying “Dear John, you have been paired with Bob Smith of Topeka, Kansas. He will die of kidney failure next year unless someone donates a kidney. We have randomly selected you as a potential donor. If you say no, we will not randomly select anyone else, and Bob will probably die. If you’re willing, please call this phone number.” There’s some sense in which this charity would be doing zero work - just choosing random names from the phone book! - but it sure would be an interesting experiment. Would 25 - 50% of the people involved really go for it? I don’t know. People would probably get very angry at this charity. Would the anger be justifiable? I can feel the urge to get angry with them. But all they’re doing is taking a background fact of existence and bringing it to the foreground. The main challenges to doing this in real life are HIPAA (you can’t actually get a list of people who need transplants) and probably nobody would believe you if they just got a letter. If you think you have a way around these challenges, I’m not exactly urging you to apply for an ACX Grant, but any such application would certainly catch my interest! Shaked Koplewitz (
You can click demost_
8: Comments On Artificial Organs
Tugrul Irmak
9: Other CommentsBobaFloutist on HackerNews
Oh man, do I have opinions on this (mostly written up at Suppose you think you’re a good person who is right about everything, and you want to improve the world. It seems like your first step should be to gather power. After all, the more power you have, the more world-improving you can do. And one species of power is optics, ie having people like you and want to cooperate with you. So it seems like you should maximize for good optics. On the most spherical-cow-technical level, this is a great argument which is obviously correct. In the real world, I tend to notice that a lot of times when people deploy this argument, it goes wrong. Sometimes they spend all their time gaining more and more power and popularity, and never get around to using it for good. Sometimes the process of constantly optimizing for popularity changes them, and by the time they have it, they’re no longer a good person who should be trusted with it. Sometimes we discover they were never that good a person at all, and if they had started out trying to do object-level good, they couldn’t have done much damage, but when they start out trying to gain power and popularity, their misalignment gets worse and worse and ends in disaster. Most people settle on a compromise solution. Something like: although you shouldn’t try to maximize being powerful and beloved, you should avoid giant pitfalls that make you totally ineffective or make everyone hate you. I think this compromise is basically okay. But it’s harder than it sounds to figure out where common-sense-reputation-protecting ends and power-seeking begins. If you try to do good in the world, there will come a time when you have to choose between Intervention #1 which saves 50 lives, and Intervention #2 which saves 100 lives but decreases your approval rating 1%, potentially harming your ability to succeed at future altruistic projects. There’s no hard-and-fast philosophical principle which will tell you what to do here. You’ll decide based on who you are as a person. I try not to be too judgmental of anyone in this situation unless they go way way way outside the bounds of common sense. I am sometimes judgmental of the people (not necessarily the commenter cited here, more Guardian-style people who are snider about it) who look at those people and say “Haha, you did a bad optics, guess that means you’re not very rational, doesn’t it!” (part of the point I tried to flail at in the original post is that one non-generalizable solution here is to donate an organ, get a +1% approval rating boost, then do the thing that saves 100 lives, and break even) Daniel Bottger
This was another thing that moved me to donate: I am proud to be an American, where I have freedom of speech, freedom to take melatonin whenever I want, and freedom to donate a kidney. You’ve got to keep exercising rights if you want to keep them, and I’m proud my country has defeated the evil bioethicists on this one and kept this option open for me. (The UK, Canada, Australia, and I think most other European countries also allow altruistic donation; Germany is a rare holdout here. Still, the US was one of the first, and I’m still proud of it.) You're currently a free subscriber to |