---
subject: "The King’s Quarry"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-08-27 10:50:28
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
One of the most famous diary entries of all time consists of a single word: rien, which is French for “nothing.” It’s what King Louis XVI recorded on July 14, 1789, the day the Bastille was stormed. This entry (or lack thereof) is often cited as evidence of the king’s disinterest in the brewing revolution. The standard narrative about Louis is that he was simply not up to the task of dealing with the forces that threatened his throne. As a second son, he wasn’t initially raised to be king; it was only when his older brother died that he became the heir. The story goes like this. Louis was smart but incompetent. His deep introversion made him reluctant to perform the ceremonial roles of the monarchy. He was indecisive at key moments and mostly tried to avoid dealing with the issues that put his throne and life at risk. He greatly preferred messing around with locks and other little gadgets over dealing with the mounting debt and social unrest that surrounded him. So it’s fitting that he didn’t even register the pivotal moment at the beginning of the French Revolution. Well, yes and no. Louis’ diary wasn’t a normal diary in which he logged all of the important events in French politics, or even in his personal life. Instead, his diary had one purpose: to record the animals he killed. So, if you look at it one way, Louis shouldn’t be blamed for ignoring the revolution in his hunting journal. The fact that he didn’t hunt that day actually means that he was attending to affairs of state on July 14. But, if we look at Louis’ obsession with hunting from another angle, we can learn a lot about why the people of France eventually hunted him down and ended his life. The “
Of all the monarchies that obsessed over the hunt, perhaps the most enthusiastic was the French monarchy. Several French palaces, including Versailles, which started out as a hunting lodge, were purposefully located near forests filled with game French royal hunts were huge affairs, involving hundreds of people and even more animals. Louis XIV But this paled in comparison to the amount of hunting Louis XVI undertook a century later. Even before he had become king, hunting was a central activity in his life. One story from his early years, of the “ In 1773, the year before he became king, Louis was out hunting with his retinue. The party chased a stag for miles; the animal eventually entered the village of Acheres and found itself trapped. Crazed, the stag attacked and gored a villager. The man’s wife saw the blood and passed out, thinking her husband was dead. But Marie Antoinette revived her, informed her that her husband would live, and gave her a generous amount of money. The story was cited as evidence of Marie Antoinette’s generosity toward the commoners, but it’s also evidence of the way the royal hunt (and the desires of the monarchs more generally) ran roughshod over everything else (in some versions of the Acheres story, the man is not wounded by a deer but by a horse in the royal retinue). Whatever the truth, it’s telling that Marie Antoinette’s act of basic human decency was considered in the royal court to be an unusual sign of kindness; it was the least the royals could do after invading this town and causing havoc in the pursuit of a little fun. Louis tallied his kills in his Louis must have felt very proud of his hunting accomplishments. But I doubt his subjects were very impressed. While Louis and his companions were marauding through the forests, which were preserved and maintained for his exclusive use, the French economy was entering free-fall. The people of France were impoverished in the 1780s by a set of interlocking problems. The country was losing ground to English manufacturing as it began to experience the Industrial Revolution. The French government, which had long struggled with unsustainable levels of debt, had spent too much money supporting the American Revolution and found itself in deep trouble. And bad weather ruined crops, causing the price of bread to soar. Starvation stalked the people of France. So I doubt it charmed the French people that their king and his fancy retainers bagged over 17,000 animals in 1786 as they suffered through an unusually cold winter without enough to eat. When, a couple of years later, the price of bread soared so high that it Once the revolution was underway, one of the first acts of the new National Assembly was to end the feudal system, including the system of hunting rights. Less than a month after Louis wrote “nothing” in his journal during the storming of the Bastille, he
This was good news for the citizens of France, but very bad news for the animals in its forests. Newly free to hunt, the starving people of France It’s fitting, I suppose, that Louis’ reign ended with a sort of hunt. As the revolutionaries gained more power, Louis and his family became desperate. They felt trapped in their palace; a crowd had prevented the royals from heading to their palace at Saint-Cloud for Easter. Rather than remain in Paris, where they might have become constitutional monarchs, the royals resolved to escape. Panicked, the king and his family were sloppy and reckless in their escape, not so different from the stag that Louis and Marie Antoinette had pursued to Acheres 18 years before. The plan was that the royals would flee in the middle of the night, disguised as bourgeois merchants. But it was a mess from the start. Marie Antoinette got lost, which delayed their departure. Their carriage cracked a wheel against a bridge post, which required repairs. Meanwhile, Parisians realized that the king was gone, and fast riders spread the word to look out for their royal quarry. Within 24 hours of his escape, the National Guard had cornered the king in Varennes; he and his family would be escorted back to Paris. The procession moved at a walking pace; it took three days for the king to make it back to the capital. The “Flight to Varennes” was the breaking point in relations between the National Assembly and Louis. The new government would eventually dissolve the monarchy and execute Louis and Marie Antoinette. After being returned to Paris, Louis, in the unaccustomed role of prey rather than predator, made a journal entry. It was, like so many of them, pretty short. It This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are three ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: You can share the newsletter with others: You can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week! You're currently a free subscriber to |