---
subject: "Housing Roundup #10"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-10-29 13:41:59
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
There’s more campaign talk about housing. The talk of needing more housing is highly welcome, as one prominent person after another (including Jerome Powell!) talking like a YIMBY. A lot of the concrete proposals are of course terrible, but not all of them. I’ll start off covering all that along with everyone’s favorite awful policy, which is rent control, then the other proposals. Then I’ll cover other general happenings. Rent Control
Oh, it’s worse. Rent control does not only impact future building, where if you already made all future building irreversibly illegal then I suppose you can’t do any more damage. It also impacts the current supply. What, you say? How could that be? Several ways. Rent control directly means landlords will not maintain the current housing stock. It will be allowed to decay, or be actively sabotaged, eventually abandoned. Why invest if the price will remain fixed no matter what? Rent control means that you withdraw housing from the rental market every chance you can get. If you rent out the property, you have effectively sold it. How do you think people are going to react to that? Rent control begets more rent control. Landlords rightfully presume that they should anticipate further restrictions and unreasonable rules, so even if they are not directly impacted, why put yourself into such a position? Remember your functional decision theory. If you choose to be the type of person or government that imposes rent control because the buildings already exist, then that is correlated with a lot of things. One of those things is the past decisions of people deciding whether to build on the basis of what government might do in the future. That generalizes beyond housing. If we establish we are willing to confiscate private property retroactively because we feel like it, people will notice. And indeed, people likely have also already noticed in the past, and are adjusting.
It would be a world of hurt on renters if there was a common expectation of a high chance of future meaningful rent controls being imposed.
Several of these claims are rather absurd, but yes, this does help explain public support for rent control. Hallucinations all over the place. The government still is not entirely responsible. Even the properly built versions of NYC and SF and so on would be rather expensive. Not anything like today, but living where the action is would remain valuable.
From the post, what is happening is that because no new contracts can be signed that do not effectively sign over the property permanently at a well below-market cost, landlords are withdrawing properties from the rental market en masse, and selling them instead.
Despite everything, rent control remains absurdly popular. Increasingly, as I understand how the public thinks about economics, it is remarkable how we even get to have a civilization at all.
The Administration Has a Plan
The plan is a mix of things. The headline proposals like the $25k are not great. If you dig into proposals and details, there’s other things that are a lot better.
There’s also Obama’s now-famous YIMBY endorsement, which is quite good, although if I never hear the preamble used (‘we can’t rely on ideas of the past’ etc) that would be awesome.
Matt Yglesias notes this is great, Yes, the headline actions proposing imposing ‘temporary’ rent controls are terrible, and the proposals to subsidize demand via handing out public funds to homebuyers are if anything even stupider than they sound, They are spending $100 million in grants to help
Offering another $250 million in Section 108 loan guarantees for retooling and complementary infrastructure (e.g. water and sewer pipes). Small, but sure, why not.
As Alex Armlovich notes, the spending elsewhere doesn’t much matter, that’s more vibe markers, but changing HUD codes like this could be a really big positive deal. Expediting housing permitting, again you’d have had me at expediting permitting, and mostly had me at expediting. The central theme is ‘we cannot talk about building more housing, only more affordable housing’ despite the fact that what makes housing affordable is not ‘we set aside some of it to have an artificially low price and be allocated by favoritism’ but rather ‘build enough housing to force down market prices.’ The good news is a lot of this should indeed spill over into more housing in general.
In addition to correctly pointing out the obviously good parts of the Harris housing plan, Let’s you provide a subsidy of $35k. Let’s say the price rises by $35k, since everyone is either collecting the $35k subsidy or selling their own home for an additional $35k when they buy a new one. So the initial wealth effect is a flat $35k to everyone who owns a home and everyone who has never owned a home, on a per-household basis. Homeowners and home buyers get richer, those who still can’t afford to buy, or who bought previously and then sold to rent again, get poorer. Not great. This is on a per-household basis, so the bigger your household the worse off you are. Discourages marriage until you’ve both used your credits, effectively taxes kids, and so on. Not great. It is a flat size transfer, so it is progressive redistribution in that sense, if a highly inefficient way of doing that.
So no, I don’t think that works at all. It’s not a good version of this. If I had to make a case for it, I would make this case instead: The main barrier to buying your first home is often the down payment. The down payment has to be a fixed percentage of the value of the house, to ensure you do not walk away too easily, you have skin in the game. By letting you stake your $35k subsidy, you can far more easily get a down payment that lets you buy, or lets you get a lower interest rate. The net money it costs to buy stays the same otherwise, but that’s fine.
I mean, I guess, a little, maybe? The government pays so that the payment can be staked back to the government so the government can (through a bank) issue you the subsidized mortgage to buy the house, and you have something to lose. That also raises the danger that this tempts people to buy a house they cannot afford. If you use the $35k to buy a house you could not have otherwise bought, and then you can’t pay your mortgage and you lose the house, you are completely screwed. Your $35k credit is used up permanently, and all houses cost an extra $35k.
Trump Has a PlanTrump has gone full NIMBY regarding hallucinated plans to ‘destroy the suburbs,’ similar to how Project 2025 says localities must have final say in zoning laws and regulations, and a conservative Administration should oppose any efforts to weaken single-family zoning. Which is one of the low-key most destructive ‘normal’ policies available.
Yes, this is indeed a great idea. We should do that. If we do it at sufficient scale, and think truly big, then that can make up for quite a lot. You’d have to put in a lot of effort on many levels to make it impactful rather than a marginal win, but we should do that too.
Build More Houses Where People Want to Live
Only on one policy would she dare give us the rasberry.
Prices
Obviously, they want their particular home to go up in price (if they own it), but they want lower prices everywhere else. Let’s do this.
I do see that prices crashing too low too fast might in theory cause real issues, but mostly I think this is a confusion of prices and paper wealth with actual wealth. You will always need a place to live. If all home prices go up, yes you are ‘wealthier’ but if you sell then you need to buy or at least pay rent going forward. And it is more common to want to step up to a bigger house, than step down to a smaller one. Most people are either short housing because they rent, are short housing because they want to upgrade, or are about flat housing. Only a handful who have active real estate investments, or are looking to step down in order to retire or to go into elder care, are in any real sense long. Yes, you can borrow against the house, but that’s liquidity not solvency, and mostly gets people into trouble. People mostly understand that. They’ll fight for higher local house prices, but not higher house prices overall. So you can have a grand bargain if you act big. Average Value
I say no, this is a civilizational skill issue, as in NIMBY, full stop. The outflow is a mechanical result of there not being sufficient houses where people want to live. If the cities worth living in, like NYC and SF but also other majors, had more housing, people would move to that housing. They can’t build them, so people bid up housing and price people out. Simple story. Tyler similarly speaks of the surplus from cars, and yes most people get large surplus from their car, of course they do, but exactly because they lack alternatives. They are priced out of places cars are unneeded and we don’t supply mass transit. If you can’t go anywhere without a car, because the suburb was designed that way, you need a car. Zoning Rules
Zoning Reveals ValueEvery so often we see someone In this first case, we learn it in Toronto. A house costs what it costs to buy the land with permission to build, plus the cost of building. Solve for the cost of permission. I do think this is a tad too harsh, because land and location would still cost money no matter the zoning requirements, but:
In a second more fun case, Scott Sumner shows us the auction for The Chet Holifield Federal Building, also known as the Ziggurat.
Can you imagine what would happen if we auctioned off, with actual no zoning restrictions you can build however you want, a large plot of land in New York or San Francisco? We should try it. High Rise
Who is building them? Toronto, New York City, Vancouver and Miami. New York is large enough that its 207 are not impressive on a per capita basis. It is still in sharp contrast to places like San Francisco. “Historic Preservation”The very concept increasingly fills one with rage. I get the original concept. Yes, there are a handful of buildings that are indeed historical landmarks, that we don’t want people tearing down willy-nilly. But let’s face it. There aren’t that many. Also, zero of them are parking lots people want to turn into food banks.
I prefer the line that you should be transformed into a pillar of salt, but I lost that link. Also this illustrates how we obviously need to get rid of CEQA, a building replacing a Berkley parking lot does not require ‘environmental review.’ Rather than ban on tearing down landmarks, of course, we should tax doing so - attach a price to each building that represents how much we care. We could even do it organically, where anyone can contribute money to the city to put that money towards preservation of a potential landmark, then if the developer values it more than that they can match the funds. Whereas if no one cares enough to put down a deposit, then why should we? Speed Kills
So yes, even if the ultimate decisions don’t change, this is a huge deal. And if housing supply is this elastic purely in the face of less delays, that means that other changes should also have huge impacts on supply. Or at least, that such changes would do that up to the limit of the supply chain. At some point, if we accelerated construction enough in enough places at once, we would start to run out of various components including construction labor, until we adjusted. Procedure
For ordinary projects like an apartment building, the answer is simple. You build the building. It is none of anyone’s business. For things that would involve demolishing neighborhoods or planets to build bypasses, well, I do agree you have to build bypasses but yes you need to do a proper cost-benefit analysis. That continues to be my proposal - mandatory developer-pays third party audit of costs to stakeholders, followed by a proposal including distributional effects, and a panel that makes a go or no go decision. You can sue for damages, but not for an injunction. Why would you force people to buy more space (or other features),
Quite the contrary. When you tell the poor that they must spend their money on something they do not want, you are declaring that you know better than them, and that they should instead give up other things and work harder. You are taking away their ability to live, and waging war on them. Location and price often matter far more than size. The best way to be upwardly mobile is to move to where opportunity knocks, and not spend your money. I’ve lived in studio apartments. It was totally fine. If they had been substantially smaller, it would have impacted my life very little. I also lived in college dorms, and that too was totally fine. The main problem with even a very tiny dorm room is you don’t have a (private) kitchen, but with the rent savings you can eat out (and go out) every day and still come out way ahead, at least in places like New York City. Renting that space 24/7 makes very little economic sense.
San Francisco
I always find it curious why projects proposed in such spots are so modest. The people opposed to you are going to oppose you the same amount either way.
By default, rental markets are highly inefficient. Some places set prices too low, and get snapped up or find many applicants quickly. Others overcharge without realizing, and sit empty for months until people realize. That means that renters need to be active and do their homework, constantly refreshing for new deals and going to place after place that stuck on the market with a rent that is too damn high. Otherwise research and search costs go up, vacancy times increase reducing effective supply and matches are relatively poor. As usual, I’d prefer to let better information and more efficient markets work their magic. A story in remarkably many acts:
Oh, right, they do have Golden Gate Park, a bigger park than NYC’s central park, except they put it in a place where there’s no one near it and there’s no BART that gets you there either.
Then again, better to tax something than to restrict it. I wouldn’t be taxing candles or cash registers or tables and chairs, but if those are things the city wants to see less of, or at least doesn’t care about enough to mind if that is the result, there are certainly worse taxes. CaliforniaDensity bonuses sound like invitations to game the system, because they are. And That’s Good, mostly,
I am of course all in favor of this. There should not be a cap on density in most cases, if the project makes economic sense. If the costs per unit are indeed much lower with higher density, presumably because it reduces land costs plus some economies of scale, then sure, why not? Yes, first best would be something more consistent and straightforward, but I’ll take it.
California also in 2020 had environmental review lawsuits Seattle
PhiladelphiaDon’t threaten me with a good time: Which of course is being reported as bad news. BostonThe first step in getting more housing is to The rule triggers on 50k square feet of floor space, has been in place for three years, and only been triggered three times.
That is essentially damn near a proposal to ban large housing projects outright. New York City
The shared housing mandate is slightly underwater at -7%, parking mandate elimination is ‘only’ +15%, complex expansion only +18%. Office conversations are +70% (!). Other provisions are around +50%. It seems New Yorkers are broadly highly supportive of building new housing, and would be up for going substantially beyond even this proposal.
I mean, lol, no. That would require there to be enough housing units for everyone who wants to live in the city. Otherwise, you need to price some people out, also known as being unaffordable to those people. Claude estimates that if NYC was truly ‘affordable,’ as in its housing prices declined to the national average, then about 10 million Americans would want to move here. I think that’s way low. Whereas if you add 500k units, you’d likely get a price decline on the order of 10%. Which is a lot, and would help a lot, but no NYC and especially Manhattan is not suddenly going to have abundant affordable housing unless we build The Cube.
Reading a document like that one makes clear that we have so many needless barriers to new construction. Making things dramatically easier would, in turn, be rather easy.
Then they say that NYC rents have also continued to outpace the national average, with rent up 2.4% versus a decline of -0.8% nationwide and above ‘other major cities,’ although this is still below inflation. They say NYC hotel rates have risen 7.4% versus 2.1% nationwide. That’s actually not a big deal? It instead shows that AirBnB wasn’t doing that much to lower prices. And if you consider that rents are +3% compared to nationwide, that could explain the majority of the disparity. Also a lot of it could be that NYC has been legally forced to use a substantial percentage of its hotel rooms to house immigrants, reducing supply. They say NYC vacancy rates are unchanged, but they were already very low at 3.3%, and some of those ‘occupied’ apartments were de facto hotel rooms and thus it is likely the true vacancy rate did decline. I do understand that AirBnB was highly useful as a form of regulatory arbitrage, and now this is unavailable. And yes, I would prefer to allow AirBnB to come back. But I don’t think losing it did all that much damage. Another Pete Buttigieg project is a new rapid transit rail line for NYC… in Brooklyn and Queens?
Turns out this is nothing, only $20 million for planning, which is chump change compared to the cost of actually building anything like this. It’s certainly worth building, almost any new rail line in NYC is worth building. My guess is this is still a lot less valuable than expanding capacity to existing lines especially within Manhattan, or facilitating the Second Avenue Subway for real. On the plus side, Let’s Go Mets with a much better route to the game from Brooklyn? St. Paul
Seems rather conclusive to me. That’s not a coincidence. Florida
I consider it a substantial cost when various things like mortgages require one to buy such insurance. What you get is worth a lot less than the amount you pay for it. Michigan
The UKWatch out, Labour’s forces are out there with a dastardly plan to build houses.
Underutilization
My understanding is that
Thus, in order to maintain the fiction - with the knowledge and approval of the bank as well - that the building hasn’t lost value, prices become massively sticky downwards, and large amounts of space stay vacant. This is rather flagrant bad design. A contract was designed that predictably does a very stupid thing if the market clearing rent goes down. The bank either would like to ‘extend and pretend’ and let the owner muddle through as best they can, or else would want to take the property now before things get worse. Now it doesn’t get to do either. Perhaps we can fix the banking regulations so that they choose better terms? The alternative is to tax extended vacancy. Or it might be sufficient merely to end the tax benefits of staying vacant. A lot of the attraction of staying vacant is that you effectively get to bank the loss. There would be massive lobbying against this, but what if the rule was that if a commercial property was vacant longer than 6 months or a year, that the profits of the building would be taxed as if the property was occupied at the last known rental price, or at a market value assessment, or similar? I bet they start filling up a lot faster. Get on the Bus
Or at least it was seen as a business opportunity. Why not integrate the shuttle with the app? Yes, the Q70 exists to get you to the subway, but a lot of people don’t know that, or they want to go one place and stop worrying about it rather than transfer into the subway system. Indeed, for some reason I’ve never taken the Q70, even though it is a clear win once the route is pointed out. Now we need to do something about JFK - yes you have trains available, and I do take them, but they’re both terribly slow. Title InsuranceAs an aside, your periodic reminder that the whole Title Insurance Industry is a scam. Yes, they technically provide a service, but they pay out pennies on the dollar. Somehow you have to buy it, and they manage to price fix by a factor of about five to ten. So it is no surprise that
How do we get a politics where ‘end title insurance’ is a good part of someone’s platform? Have the state take over tracking titles. Perspective
Five million homes plus 2-4 million per year would indeed be more than enough… if and only if we put those units where people want to live, largely in the top cities. You're currently a free subscriber to |