---
subject: "Chromebook Plus 💻, inside Flexport's CEO ousting 🚢, understanding unicode 👨‍💻"
from: "TLDR <dan@tldrnewsletter.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-10-03 10:17:52
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "TLDR", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_795315172960844453", "UNREAD"]
---
[Satya Nadella tells a court that Bing is worse than Google — and Apple could fix it (9 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.theverge.com%2F2023%2F10%2F2%2F23900233%2Fmicrosoft-ceo-satya-nadella-us-google-antitrust-trial-testimony%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018af50b4a41-714a7122-2a71-4fcb-8a30-90ba2da7afae-000000/zQohOatSiLktxs-Cga-7XyWzc4oDyYXUGO_0yctumZQ=321)
Microsoft's Satya Nadella says that a deal to be the exclusive search provider on Apple devices would be a game-changer for Bing. The company was prepared to give Apple all of the economic upside of a deal if Apple were to switch to Bing. It was willing to hide the Bing brand and respect any of the company's privacy wishes. Microsoft was willing to make the deal at any cost due to the data it would gain access to if it became the default search engine for Apple devices. |
[Chromebook Plus is Google’s new certification for premium Chromebooks (4 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.theverge.com%2F2023%2F10%2F2%2F23897416%2Fgoogle-chromebook-plus-certification-announcement%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018af50b4a41-714a7122-2a71-4fcb-8a30-90ba2da7afae-000000/1H9AS1c9BTdmSTxqdQaPhYpOtlgeTyoe-vBS3uT5m-g=321)
Chromebook Plus is a new certification to help shoppers identify high-quality Chromebooks. It will be awarded to laptops that have an Intel Core i3 or higher or AMD Ryzen 7000 CPU, an iPS panel with at least 1080p resolution, a 1080p webcam, 8GB of RAM, and 128GB of storage. Chromebook Plus-certified devices will have access to several AI-powered features such as a magic eraser tool in Google Photos, improvements to lighting and noise cancellation in video conferencing, and Offline File Sync. |
Science & Futuristic Technology
|
[How open-source software could finally get the world’s microscopes speaking the same language (15 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.nature.com%2Farticles%2Fd41586-023-03064-9%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018af50b4a41-714a7122-2a71-4fcb-8a30-90ba2da7afae-000000/OnzIOi9HKYBgwMpM_ayDkaGnh3V79IQa75wZI8nUHqk=321)
Scientists have been working to standardize image formats for biological microscopy data for two decades. There are now around 160 standard file formats. A new project aims to shrink that number of formats down to a small handful. Having a common format would make it much easier for scientists to do their work - many are currently dealing with formatting issues by relabeling data by hand. There are several cultural and technical barriers to overcome before the project can become successful. |
Programming, Design & Data Science
|
[Rethinking reactivity (10 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fnuejs.org%2Fblog%2Frethinking-reactivity%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018af50b4a41-714a7122-2a71-4fcb-8a30-90ba2da7afae-000000/7hiRErgMBVBwhHxQBP5wi9rgegZc0cC7354RkK9xNBI=321)
Nue is a library for building user interfaces. It is a user-friendly alternative to frameworks like Next.js, Vite, and Sveltekit. Nue uses an HTML-based template syntax perfect for UX developers focusing on interaction design, accessibility, and user experience. Examples of Nue components are available in the article. |
[The inside story of Dave Clark’s tumultuous last days at Flexport: Standoffs, politics, and spin (17 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.cnbc.com%2F2023%2F10%2F02%2Fthe-inside-story-of-dave-clarks-tumultuous-last-days-at-flexport.html%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018af50b4a41-714a7122-2a71-4fcb-8a30-90ba2da7afae-000000/XwMeXdtf6SeN3VjaVVsS8GjGJ845BbqT0rSodU-a61g=321)
Mixed messages from Flexport founder Ryan Petersen during an on-stage interview a week after Petersen forced Clark out as CEO underscored the dysfunction surrounding the sudden firing of Dave Clark, who was previously one of Jeff Bezos' top deputies. Petersen had publicly criticized Clark for his decisions just days earlier, yet he praised Clark's work and expressed admiration for his achievements during the interview. This article tells an account of Clark's last few days at the company based on conversations with people close to Clark and Petersen. |
[The Sphere’s first show looks like it was a mind-blowing spectacle (1 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.theverge.com%2F2023%2F9%2F30%2F23897156%2Fthe-sphere-las-vegas-u2-concert-achtung-baby-live%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018af50b4a41-714a7122-2a71-4fcb-8a30-90ba2da7afae-000000/RR5dJNQQf78oO6VTLm2E2EHxZ5r2TOP_1KO5zGowKo0=321)
U2 played the first-ever show at the Las Vegas Sphere on September 29. The band will play in a series of performances at the venue through the end of December, with the cheapest tickets going for around $400. Videos posted to social media show how breathtaking shows in The Sphere can be. Videos taken by concertgoers from inside The Sphere are available in the article. |
[Want to be part of TLDR? (TLDR Job)](mailto:jobs@tldr.tech)
Hey everyone, TLDR is hiring an Advertising Sales Director with experience in software or media sales to join our fully remote team of seven to lead the next phase of our revenue growth.We are growing at a rate of 10% month over month and we're looking for someone who is highly entrepreneurial and thrives in a fast-paced environment. Responsibilities include building relationships with advertising partners and marketing agencies and handling complex sales. Total compensation ranges from $150,000 - $225,000. If you know someone who would be a good fit, please refer them to us and we will send you $2000 if we hire them. To apply, please send your resume or LinkedIn profile to [jobs@tldr.tech](mailto:jobs@tldr.tech) along with a few sentences on why you would be a good fit. |
[daktilo (GitHub Repo)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Forhun%2Fdaktilo%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018af50b4a41-714a7122-2a71-4fcb-8a30-90ba2da7afae-000000/-XxTiiwBkBj2FbqYjZfwtlXrmTMAvqo0ruGF5DmN8kQ=321)
daktilo is a command-line program that plays typewriter sounds every time you press a key. |
[Generative Interfaces (2 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fmatt-rickard.com%2Fgenerative-interfaces%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018af50b4a41-714a7122-2a71-4fcb-8a30-90ba2da7afae-000000/O0NR_UXavSL4VmWPWHSr91Efm8pEc_thOfh_fYPvWLw=321)
Generative interfaces, which need to be designed individually for every task, could be compiled just in time with generative AI, enabling a much more customized experience. |
We help cutting edge companies hire world class technical talent through our job listings. If you're hiring software engineers, AI/ML engineers, product managers, designers or other tech talent, [click here to learn more](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fshare.hsforms.com%2F1hmOFVmqOTrON_SRvaRqEbQee466%3Futm_source=tldr%26utm_medium=newsletter/2/0100018af50b4a41-714a7122-2a71-4fcb-8a30-90ba2da7afae-000000/4c3GV_fqCIqvIQ1CCEQlX2FG7-nF7MVs5xr8OWHIQTc=321).
|
If your company is interested in reaching an audience of tech executives, decision-makers and engineers, you may want to [advertise with us](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fshare.hsforms.com%2F1OxvmrkcFS4qsxKpNXCi76wee466%3Futm_source=tldr%26utm_medium=newsletter/2/0100018af50b4a41-714a7122-2a71-4fcb-8a30-90ba2da7afae-000000/TwddkuP3ihwWhyYI1OJw5An-EjopEUINuMuCe70GlS0=321).
If you have any comments or feedback, just respond to this email!
Thanks for reading,
[Dan Ni](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2Ftldrdan/1/0100018af50b4a41-714a7122-2a71-4fcb-8a30-90ba2da7afae-000000/qNcXdpU3pcjOdCji8qtCVx6WPjzAk5KvfIXImjA3KTc=321) and [Stephen Flanders](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2FSteveFlanders22/1/0100018af50b4a41-714a7122-2a71-4fcb-8a30-90ba2da7afae-000000/st1cd4OhQdcxtQeXG93q-C3qdnn-TXX-GjZM8sHNvEE=321)
|
|
| |