---
subject: "Who gets into the best colleges and why?"
from: "Marginal REVOLUTION <donotreply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-08-23 16:32:55
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tyler Cowen", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2466199532210586699", "UNREAD"]
---
We use anonymized admissions data from several colleges linked to income tax records and SAT and ACT test scores to study the determinants and causal effects of attending Ivy-Plus colleges (Ivy League, Stanford, MIT, Duke, and Chicago). Children from families in the top 1% are more than twice as likely to attend an Ivy-Plus college as those from middle-class families with comparable SAT/ACT scores. Two-thirds of this gap is due to higher admissions rates for students with comparable test scores from high-income families; the remaining third is due to differences in rates of application and matriculation. In contrast, children from high-income families have no admissions advantage at flagship public colleges. The high-income admissions advantage at Ivy-Plus colleges is driven by three factors: (1) preferences for children of alumni, (2) weight placed on non-academic credentials, and (3) athletic recruitment. Using a new research design that isolates idiosyncratic variation in admissions decisions for waitlisted applicants, we show that attending an Ivy-Plus college instead of the average flagship public college increases students’ chances of reaching the top 1% of the earnings distribution by 50%, nearly doubles their chances of attending an elite graduate school, and almost triples their chances of working at a prestigious firm. The three factors that give children from high-income families an admissions advantage are uncorrelated or negatively correlated with post-college outcomes, whereas academic credentials such as SAT/ACT scores are highly predictive of post-college success.
That is from [a new paper](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=ceba1312b0fe19fbae732fb5d6e206eb0b15bbeba9e80cf5b18c9eeaf56d013b&blog_id=42693868&post_id=91353&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=b61975013ece60572fb8c03b9dbe73c8&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly9vcHBvcnR1bml0eWluc2lnaHRzLm9yZy93cC1jb250ZW50L3VwbG9hZHMvMjAyMy8wNy9Db2xsZWdlQWRtaXNzaW9uc19QYXBlci5wZGY&email_id=be4731741c8cc4a30d76e90dbe431e49) by Raj Chetty, David J. Deming, and John N. Friedman. One immediate conclusion is that standardized test scores help lower-income groups get into the best schools, compared to the alternatives.