---
subject: "Verbatim search/Home battery/Ad-free Boing Boing"
from: "Recomendo <recomendo@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-11-03 10:01:33
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Recomendo", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8455078693589186571", "UNREAD"]
---
Verbatim search resultsIf you're finding that using quotation marks no longer returns exact phrase matches on Google, here's a workaround: After conducting your search, click on "Tools" under the search bar, then click on “All Results” and choose “Verbatim”. This will display search results that match the exact phrase you entered. — CD Home batteryThe next big step after installing solar panels on your roof is to install big batteries in your garage. That way you can manage your power better and have plenty on hand during power outages. The slickest off-the-shelf solution is a Tesla Powerwall. The non-Tesla alternative we went with is about the same price ($12,000 per 13 kwh) and capacity, but with a slightly longer warranty. We installed two Boing Boing goes ad-freeIn 1987, my wife Carla and I launched Boing Boing, a zine exploring cyberpunk sci-fi, indie comics, and fascinating oddballs. It evolved into a blog with contributions from our journalist friends, covering technology, culture, politics, and wonderfully weird discoveries. After 20 years of increasing ad dependence, we're excited to offer an ad-free premium version that's so much cleaner. Worldwide package trackingThis Animation artAn artist I follow on Instagram is Mini quick-release that actually worksThis Recomendo is an authentic, hand-crafted, human-written weekly newsletter that is free, but not cheap. Consider supporting our work with a paid option, now at the low price of $45 per year. Paid subs enable us to keep making it free for others. Recomendo is published by Cool Tools Lab, a small company of three people. We also run the Recomendo Unclassified Ads work! UNCLASSIFIEDS One Pair of Glasses. Endless Style. Get Yours at Pair Eyewear! Personalize your look with hundreds of magnetic toppers, including a new Holiday collection! Starting at $60. Where to Find the Best Deals on Hoka Shoes Finding Hoka shoes on sale can be tricky, so we’ve rounded up the top 8 stores to
The Workaround is a weekly newsletter of business stories that share shortcuts to success and traps to avoid. Want to stop procrastinating on the creative goals you “say” are most important to you? Don’t let your ideas die inside your mind. Use this Recomendo is copyrighted by Cool Tools Lab, LLC. Commissions may be earned from the links above. |