---
subject: "Boring Company tunnel network 🚇, Google revamps AI search 🔎, patterns for LLM engineering 👨‍💻"
from: "TLDR <dan@tldrnewsletter.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-08-03 10:17:53
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "TLDR", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_795315172960844453", "UNREAD"]
---
[Musk’s Boring Company gets OK to dig 68 miles of tunnels under Las Vegas (2 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Farstechnica.com%2Fcars%2F2023%2F08%2Fmusks-boring-company-gets-ok-to-dig-68-miles-of-tunnels-under-las-vegas%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000189bae760f4-cb56bf53-50d2-42e1-9550-8fde25b942c4-000000/eQUEkCcnbuDtw8sNJ4lQqyob_XqlqVniWlF569T4fWY=312)
The Las Vegas City Council voted last month to approve the Boring Company's plans to dig more tunnels under the city. The project will create 68 miles of tunnels and 81 stations served by Tesla vehicles able to carry three passengers at a time. Mayor Carolyn Goldman says that while there are concerns about the plan, hotels are begging for transportation options. The Boring Company claims it has transported 1.15 million passengers since its Las Vegas Convention Center Loop opened in 2021, with a peak capacity of 4,500 people per hour. |
[Google’s AI search is getting more video and better links (2 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.theverge.com%2F2023%2F8%2F2%2F23817107%2Fgoogle-ai-search-generative-experience-videos-links%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000189bae760f4-cb56bf53-50d2-42e1-9550-8fde25b942c4-000000/Kx6SeW0sQZ0plcjVWCYnhE0am3Ql9mptYCYK4ZlHHgY=312)
Users will start seeing more multimedia in the summary box on top of their search results when using Google's AI-powered Search Generative Experience (SGE). While SGE is still an experimental product, it's likely the future of Google Search. With SGE, Google is no longer just trying to find relevant links - it's trying to generate true, relevant, and helpful information. Users have reported being impressed with how useful SGE is, but complain that the service is still too slow. |
Science & Futuristic Technology
|
[Scramble to Validate Superconductor Breakthrough Confirms Zero Resistance, With a Catch (5 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.tomshardware.com%2Fnews%2Fscramble-to-validate-superconductor-breakthrough-confirms-zero-resistance-with-a-catch%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000189bae760f4-cb56bf53-50d2-42e1-9550-8fde25b942c4-000000/M2ucTc3vJHkPgOHhAQ_zR9HO63rbi7dEHw5hLG7O7UY=312)
This article covers recent developments in the race to validate a recent claim about a major breakthrough in material physics and discusses some of the reasons why the finding still hasn't been confirmed. It's only a matter of time before LK-99's superconductivity claims are fully confirmed or denied. Independent research teams have already synthesized the material and have found some interesting properties. No team has completely confirmed the findings yet. |
[Meta releases open source AI audio tools, AudioCraft (3 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Farstechnica.com%2Finformation-technology%2F2023%2F08%2Fopen-source-audiocraft-can-make-dogs-bark-and-symphonies-soar-from-text-using-ai%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000189bae760f4-cb56bf53-50d2-42e1-9550-8fde25b942c4-000000/i0rBisxfviXML3T0rBTwxxitI5uJOoWl4VBHklbmM8o=312)
AudioCraft is a suite of generative AI tools from Meta for creating music and audio from text prompts. It allows content creators to generate complex audio landscapes, compose melodies, and simulate entire virtual orchestras by inputting simple text descriptions. AudioCraft uses AudioGen for audio effects and soundscapes, MusicGen for musical compositions, and a neural network-based audio compression codec. A link to Meta's blog post about AudioCraft, which contains several samples generated with the tools, is available in the article. |
Programming, Design & Data Science
|
[Design Patterns for LLM Systems & Products (65 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Feugeneyan.com%2Fwriting%2Fllm-patterns%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000189bae760f4-cb56bf53-50d2-42e1-9550-8fde25b942c4-000000/4hW-ao1lu04vO3VDCT_Le-qhMR53LffFiGCmiTCx-MU=312)
This post discusses practical patterns for integrating large language models into systems and products. It draws from academic research, industry resources, and practitioner know-how. The post looks at seven key patterns that cover a spectrum of improving performance vs reducing cost/risk and closer to the data vs closer to the user. |
[I'm betting on HTML (4 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fcatskull.net%2Fhtml.html%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000189bae760f4-cb56bf53-50d2-42e1-9550-8fde25b942c4-000000/18Qmq77Km8dNdczkwqjzGV8_SSnhOG5okpoU6lwSzgo=312)
HTML is more important now than ever. The language is now able to display content aesthetically without the heavy use of CSS and it allows developers to properly tag data in a machine-readable format. This article presents several examples of novel but useful HTML UI elements without any styling. Links to the MDN documentation for the elements are provided. |
[Cultivating a state of mind where new ideas are born (19 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.lesswrong.com%2Fposts%2FR5yL6oZxqJfmqnuje%2Fcultivating-a-state-of-mind-where-new-ideas-are-born%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000189bae760f4-cb56bf53-50d2-42e1-9550-8fde25b942c4-000000/UHvKKRe87v-AvkmFNUxTk0YUmGbB0hkNta8fMsFZiLA=312)
Many founders in the early 2010s thought that working within a thriving social scene of peers would help them percolate ideas as they built their startup, but there are no famous success stories from people who tried. Working in solitude allows for serious work to be done. Being in an environment where the opinions of others matter can kill ideas quickly. This essay analyzes the working notes of several highly creative individuals to distill different approaches to developing a creative state. |
[Worldcoin says will allow companies, governments to use its ID system (3 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.reuters.com%2Ftechnology%2Fworldcoin-says-will-allow-companies-governments-use-its-id-system-2023-08-02%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000189bae760f4-cb56bf53-50d2-42e1-9550-8fde25b942c4-000000/Bfl20R-RmVJKs2KoXTrhA-n81x3U_27l7mj-2ZwqtVo=312)
Worldcoin will let other organizations use its iris-scanning and identity-verifying technology. Its digital identity system can be used by companies to provide services without the need for gathering personal data. Regulators from several countries are looking into whether Worldcoin's system is safe and stable. One of Worldcoin's possible applications is for use as infrastructure for governments or other entities to provide universal basic income. |
[DotDict (GitHub Repo)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fnick-at-dave%2FDotDict%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000189bae760f4-cb56bf53-50d2-42e1-9550-8fde25b942c4-000000/vJrqPN7kCUgoJ4aV2WsP0BBBvN-Ou3VGh_sG8GDtN9k=312)
DotDict is a Python library that makes chained attributes possible without having to explicitly define new levels. |
[TLDR Talent](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fdanni763618.typeform.com%2Fto%2FrSL4lOH3/1/01000189bae760f4-cb56bf53-50d2-42e1-9550-8fde25b942c4-000000/AQSBAQnQ3qMHnCcyqPrSJcoo8ABF57eSaxehu70ITII=312) is our exclusive community where we help world-class tech talent and get intros to companies of their choice, along with a number of exciting startups and tech companies curated by TLDR.
We give you full control of the process, you can specify if you’re actively searching or passively interested only if something amazing comes along. Set your preferred compensation, seniority/title/role, specific companies (or types of companies) you’d like to work for and more. [Click here to apply](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fdanni763618.typeform.com%2Fto%2FrSL4lOH3/2/01000189bae760f4-cb56bf53-50d2-42e1-9550-8fde25b942c4-000000/w1jfHgzo3P8Cimufb8QSRku3QDtydKeYFggTfAlS54E=312).
|
If your company is interested in reaching an audience of tech executives, decision-makers and engineers, you may want to [advertise with us](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fshare.hsforms.com%2F1OxvmrkcFS4qsxKpNXCi76wee466%3Futm_source=tldr%26utm_medium=newsletter/2/01000189bae760f4-cb56bf53-50d2-42e1-9550-8fde25b942c4-000000/cfoZ0x4VSWvGleXM9VetSKAS52qxsBvbkZNhpIz3318=312).
If you have any comments or feedback, just respond to this email!
Thanks for reading,
[Dan Ni](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2Ftldrdan/1/01000189bae760f4-cb56bf53-50d2-42e1-9550-8fde25b942c4-000000/LjY6xmrRLIqgFJX-YNhQtFdlsO8Nm2lKVg8woywB0Xg=312) and [Stephen Flanders](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2FSteveFlanders22/1/01000189bae760f4-cb56bf53-50d2-42e1-9550-8fde25b942c4-000000/6fUlM4x9SASL0WfkuDxSWKqbaS5LxxCUl7bSXlypAck=312)
|
|
|
|