---
subject: "Links For February 2024"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-02-29 13:48:11
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX"]
---
[I haven’t independently verified each link. On average, commenters will end up spotting evidence that around two or three of the links in each links post are wrong or misleading. I correct these as I see them, and will highlight important corrections later, but I can’t guarantee I will have caught them all by the time you read this.] 1: Claim (h/t 2: Italy’s 3: A surprising puzzle from @finmoorhouse: “Imagine you begin a journey in Seattle WA, facing exactly due east. Then start traveling forward, in a straight line along the Earth's surface. You will travel across North America, and onto the Atlantic Ocean. Eventually, you will hit another country. What is the first country you hit?” 4: Polypharmacy blog has some good psychiatry content. I especially liked 5: 6: 7: Related: Awais Aftab has 8: 9: @BoyanSlat reads “every page of OurWorldInData” and Almost all countries in Africa have higher death rates from obesity than in Western Europe and the USA Fertility rates in China and Taiwan have reduced at similar rates over the past 50 years, suggesting that China’s one-child policy didn’t have a significant effect on curbing its population growth. The median age in Niger is 14.9. In the UK, more than half of crimes are estimated to be caused by alcohol consumption. …and [26 more](https://substack.com/redirect/3be36fa7-93c8-429b-be26-7eb2c7a601da?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)
10: Claim: 11: 12: Did you know: by a 52-48 margin, 13: Claim: venture capital firm A16Z testified to the British House of Lords that AI interpretability has been “resolved” and the logic behind AI decisions is now fully transparent. No AI researcher would support this claim (despite 14: 15: A story about Khruschev (h/t
16: Max Progress: 17: There’s a verse in Chesterton’s 18: Thomas Piketty (plus coauthors) is the most famous historians of inequality, and says it has increased dramatically in recent decades. Now 19: Claim: nine people in a family in Scotland have 20: Related: 21 22: Congrats to ACX commenter TracingWoodgrains, who has made a significant contribution to a national news story by 23: Related: There was a lot of discussion a few years ago about charts showing frequency of “woke” words in the NYT. David Rozado investigates 24: 25: 26: Did you know: lots of religions have their own version of LEGO, usually with sets depicting their mythology or temples. Islam has (also, no offense to Islam, but 27: Tatu Ahponen 28: 29: Two great essays on organ donation laws recently, The Fitzwilliam’s 30: …I said it was pretty obvious, like it’s a law of nature, but maybe that’s not true? Republicans thought they were winning as recently as 2020; Democrats were very close to thinking it in 2016. So you could also make an argument that whichever side doesn’t have the President thinks they’re losing, up until the Biden administration, when Democrats decided they were losing even though they had Biden. But Republicans thought they were losing until halfway into the Trump administration, then changed their minds, even though the Dems won the House that year. Why? 31: If you read my post a few weeks ago on 32: 33: Works in Progress: 34: 35: 36: Claim: a study finds that completely anonymous comments sections are bad for discourse, real-name comments sections are better, and consistent-pseudonym comments sections (like Substack) X: Eric Drexler’s 2019 report 37: Did you know: 38: Vaticidal Prophet responds to my 39: Claim (h/t @NiohBerg, @eigenrobot): Iranians in the comments chiming in to say this matches their experience. Also, notice the 7.7% Zoroastrian! Official Iranian numbers say there are 40: Related: 41: How bad is it to marry a cousin? 42: A while ago I discussed the “scientific search engine” Compare this to
I think the Mayo Clinic summary is much better. I’m still not at a point where I would use Consensus without checking its answers carefully. 43: New meta-analysis claims that exercise is at least as effective as SSRIs against depression ( 44: You’ve probably heard of Jeanne Calment, oldest person ever. Maybe you’ve 45: You’ve probably seen this, but: Nat Friedman announces that 46: Did you know: 47: 48:
49: Which branches of psychology are becoming more or less popular over time? (h/t Experimental psychology (and psychoanalysis) going way down, cognitive neuroscience going way up. 50: 51: Sotonye Jack, along with his 52: According to NYT, during his time in prison Sam Bankman-Fried 53: 54: …and if these aren’t enough links for you, you can find another seventy-odd links at You're currently a free subscriber to |