---
subject: "decentralize AI or only big tech wins; ETP vs. ETF; defend, play, trust"
from: "web3 letter from a16zcrypto <a16zcrypto@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-09-21 15:01:07
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "a16zcrypto"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_2535365729249697677"]
---
✨Spotlight: AI x cryptowith Dan Boneh, Ali Yahya, Ben Fielding, Harry Grieve; Sonal Chokshi and Jason Rosenthal This week we’re highlighting a popular — and more relevant than ever — theme: how crypto can benefit AI, and how AI can benefit crypto. Building AI systems requires ever-larger deployments of computational power for training today’s largest and most powerful models. But privileged access to computing power, and the economies of scale for large data centers, gives big tech companies an advantage over startups. To level the playing field, startups and other companies need affordable access to large-scale computing power. So in this just-released (and final) talk in our This week, the web3 with a16z podcast also resurfaces the AI x crypto theme, threading the tension between centralization vs. decentralization. The discussion covers everything from deepfakes, bots, and the need for proof-of-humanity in a world of AI; to large language models like ChatGPT; user control, privacy and security; zero-knowledge machine learning (zkML); to media, art, and more. see also: [Forget antitrust, regulate to let tech disrupt itself](https://substack.com/redirect/2e91076d-1054-453b-817c-6e305494ee9e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o): on reining in intermediaries, and how interoperability is the best antidote to someone standing in the middle[GPT@home: Why the future of training is decentralized](https://substack.com/redirect/0a0d7c2a-085e-4046-9869-5a053512a124?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o): on the current state of frontier model training; history of distributed computing from SETI to Folding@Home; challenges, recent breakthroughs, and the road ahead[On AI & personhood credentials](https://substack.com/redirect/c45e4ca5-7922-4593-84cd-05de4bf1b028?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)— paper about the need for privacy-preserving ways to distinguish who is real online (with OpenAI, Microsoft, Harvard Society of Fellows, University of Oxford, a16z crypto, MIT, and several others)
❓Why Ethereum ETPs (vs. ETFs) are so significant, plus answers to other FAQsA couple months ago, U.S. stock exchanges made available exchange-traded products (ETPs) based on Ether, the asset native to the Ethereum blockchain, for the first time — following the listing of Bitcoin ETPs earlier this year. While much has been said about all these as investment products, what do ETPs mean for crypto as an asset class? Why do they matter to the industry: for Ethereum specifically, and Solana and others potentially? And while we’re at it, what even is an ETP? What’s the difference between that and the commonly (but mistakenly) referred to “ETF”? Plus, what are some advantages and disadvantages of BTC and ETH exchange-traded products? In this explainer, Scott Walker — chief compliance officer at a16z and former senior specialist, special counsel, and attorney-advisor for the SEC — provides answers to both basic and industry-specific frequently asked questions. 🛡️News you can use: A legal defense fund for creators using cryptoArtists and creators have long been early adopters of blockchain technology — including But well-meaning artists should not have to be intimidated by government agencies when experimenting with new technologies that may better serve their fans and livelihoods. So several organizations, including a16z crypto, partnered to help offer legal services and consultations to artists and creators facing potential government action — or who simply want to ensure they’re pursuing their NFT projects in a legal and compliant manner. 🌌Application to play (test): On games as realityThis recent episode of the web3 with a16z podcast covers game design, philosophy, and gaming mechanics — with the maker of one of the world’s iconic massively multiplayer online role-playing games: EVE Online. Hilmar Pétursson, CEO of CCP Games (makers of EVE Online), shares CCP’s unique worldview as well as the studio’s next act: a blockchain-based overhaul of the sci-fi game that’s currently inviting people to apply as playtesters before launching widely to the world. In discussion with a16z crypto CTO Eddy Lazzarin, the two also dig deep into the technology and economic design of the sci-fi simulation. Their conversation also touches on how niche cults can break into mainstream culture; how slow databases can make for fun gameplay; and more. 🔐Trend: Trusted execution environments (TEEs)Simply On TEEs for blockchain applications by Ari Juels (a16z crypto research seminar presentation, 2023) Trusted Execution Environments (TEEs) are a powerful security tool, and their functionality in principle subsumes a gamut of cryptographic primitives. Cornell University’s Juels discusses the use of TEEs in blockchain infrastructure — focusing on block-building (one of the first specific applications where hardware-based TEEs took hold). He discusses leveraging TEEs to enforce fair ordering of user transactions. He also suggests an approach to addressing security concerns in TEEs, and privacy-preserving systems more generally. Confidential computing proofs: An alternative to cryptographic zero-knowledge by Mark Russinovich, Cédric Fournet, Greg Zaverucha, Josh Benaloh, Brandon Murdoch, Manuel Costa (ACM Queue, September 2024) This article attempts to relate -- a16z crypto editorial team
subscribe to our podcast ' |