---
subject: "How Guantanamo Became a Black Hole"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-05 14:01:01
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Thanks for reading! To support my work, please click the button below: If you want to help keep this project going, please consider purchasing a paid subscription. Paid subscribers — it’s only about 75 cents a week! — get access to the archives, the satisfaction of supporting work they enjoy, and my undying gratitude. You may have missed it amidst the chaos of the first couple of weeks of the new Trump administration, but Guantanamo Bay is back in the news. As part of his crusade against illegal immigration, the president If Trump follows through on his announcement, Guantanamo will become a massive detention facility, housing up to 30,000 people in a state of legal limbo. This is the president’s first move in a But Guantanamo is, as Ruth Bader Ginsburg once From Columbus to CastroFor a place long associated with tension and cruelty, Guantanamo Bay seems like it was once a beautiful place. It’s a large natural harbor near the southeastern corner of Cuba encircled by vertiginous hills. Christopher Columbus immediately recognized its significance; he named it Puerto Grande when he landed there in 1494. Though the Spanish never really developed the area into an active harbor, it was seen as a valuable piece of geography. The British captured the bay in 1741 as part of the War of Jenkins’ Ear, renaming it first Walthenham Harbor and then Cumberland Bay. The Spanish soon marched back in and recaptured the area. For the rest of the century, the bay served as an occasional hideout for privateers but was mostly a remote backwater and minor sugar port. Guantanamo began to assume historical importance during the American attack on Cuba in the Spanish-American War. Soon after the war was launched under murky pretenses (American accusations that Spain had destroyed the USS Maine) and unconvincing rationales (the Americans claimed that they were fighting in support of Cuban and Filipino independence), the U.S. military descended on the bay. Guantanamo was seen as a strategically important site, both a harbor that could protect naval vessels against hurricanes and the gateway to the major city of Santiago a few dozen miles to the west. American naval vessels attacked the bay in June 1898, forcing out Spanish gunboats and cutting the telegraph wires that connected it to the rest of Cuba. Marines — — the first American troops to set foot in Cuba — soon captured Guantanamo, and Santiago surrendered a month later. This “splendid little war” soon came to an end, and it became clear that the American commitment to Cuban independence was not particularly sincere. The United States, through the 1903 Platt Amendment, reserved a special role in Cuban affairs. The document
Part of the deal was that the United States would retain Guantanamo Bay as a useful refueling station and naval base in the middle of the Caribbean, a body of water that policymakers This was the beginning of an era in which the United States government would mangle the English language and its own legal values to do whatever it wanted in Guantanamo. To protect Cuban independence, the United States would limit its freedom of action and take some prime territory for itself. None of it made much sense, but it seems supremely logical compared to what came next. Revolution and Cold WarIn Navy photographs from the early 20th century, the place looks like a colonial-era delight. Not a bad place to be stationed at all: Up to the middle of the 20th century, the situation in Guantanamo was unremarkable given the state of the world. A colonial power imposed its will on a country subject to its influence, signed a disingenuous treaty, appropriated some valuable land for itself, and established a military base on that land. It was a story with many parallels in the history of the last couple of centuries. But things got strange in Guantanamo after the Cuban Revolution. When Fidel Castro took over in 1959, he was not yet a communist, but he knew that one of his biggest problems was the American presence on his island. Over the first half of the century, Americans had owned much of Cuba’s land, dominated its industries, and dictated its policies. Castro had to chart a different course. The new Cuban leader squabbled with the Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations; the conflicts drove Castro further left. Washington responded by trying to overthrow or assassinate Castro. Three years after Castro’s ascent to power, Cuba became the center of a crisis that brought the world closer to nuclear war than it’s ever been. All of this tension made the fact that the United States — whose leaders Fidel Castro Cuba stopped accepting the paltry lease payments of a few thousand dollars a year (though the Americans do “We didn’t have no rights”Though Guantanamo still serves as a significant military outpost, it’s more known today for its status as a place where the United States houses people it doesn’t otherwise know what to do with. This history began in the 1970s when Haitian migrants fleeing the chaos of the Duvalier dictatorship started sailing en masse to Florida. Many of the boats couldn’t make it — the route took them through the Windward Passage, a famously rough patch of the sea. Some refugee craft — The events at Guantanamo turned out to be an important moment in American immigration policy. When Ronald Reagan assumed the presidency, he tried to recreate what had happened at Guantanamo more broadly. His After chaos surrounding the election of Jean-Bertrand Aristide in 1990 and a military coup against him in 1991, a new wave of Haitian refugees tried to make it to the United States. The INS decided to take interdicted refugees to — where else? — Guantanamo, where they would await the results of the legal asylum process without entering America proper. More than
Because these people were hidden away in Guantanamo, Americans would not have to see these refugees’ conditions or think about their plight. They occupied a strange legal gray zone, were treated like criminals even though they’d committed no crime, and were Forever prisonersThough many Americans might have viewed the Haitian-migrant episode at Guantanamo as a cautionary tale, the George W. Bush administration seems to have seen it as a road map. After 9/11, as the U.S. government detained thousands of suspected terrorists and insurgents, it wanted a place to put them outside the normal legal system. What better place than this strange little outpost of America surrounded by razor wire and landmines? The Bush administration contorted the law and the English language to turn Guantanamo into the world’s most notorious detention camp. The president’s lawyers argued that Cuba has “ Anybody who isn’t motivated by money or politics to think differently would say those are the same thing, but the administration’s lawyers managed to turn them into a meaningful distinction. What these legal contortions meant in practice was grim: the detainees in Guantanamo weren’t subject to the laws of the United States or any international treaties. Guantanamo quickly became the most famous prison in the world. Hundreds of men from dozens of countries ended up there. Many were Though subsequent presidents promised to close the detention facility at Guantanamo, none of them completed the job. Upon taking office, Donald Trump inherited four “ You might think that the history of Guantanamo would deter Donald Trump from making it the centerpiece of his new deportation campaign. You’d imagine he would want to avoid having his efforts linked with an ugly history of imperialism and cruelty. You’d guess that he might not want to associate himself with a legacy of Americans ignoring American values and laws when they’re inconvenient or might be enjoyed by groups of people that the government considered troublesome. Or, maybe, this is exactly what attracts Trump to Guantanamo. Its history shows that it’s the perfect place to disappear people into a legal vortex where truth and rights don’t exist. This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: Or you can share the newsletter with others: Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week! A version of this post was also published You're currently a free subscriber to |