---
subject: "ACX Grants: Project Updates"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-11-04 21:05:15
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Thanks to everyone who got ACX Grants ( Below are short summaries of the updates everyone sent. If for some reason you want one of the full updates, which are longer and more technical, let me know and I‘ll see if I have permission to send them to you. I’ve also included each grantee’s assessment on a scale of 1-10 for how well they’re doing, where 5/10 is “about as well as expected”. A few grantees are asking for extra help - I’ve included those requests in italics at the end of the relevant updates, and I’ve collected all of them together below. Updates1: Discover Molecular Targets Of Antibiotics (8/10) 2: Ballot Proposition For Approval Voting In Seattle (?/10) 3: Software To Validate New FDA Drug Trial Designs (10/10) 4: Alice Evans’ Research On “The Great Gender Divergence” (?/10) 5: Develop Safer Immunosuppressants (7/10) 6: Promote Economically Literate Climate Policy In US States (4/10) 7: Repository / Search Engine For Forecasting Questions (8/10) 8: Help [Anonymous] Interview For A Professorship (8/10) 9: Mobile Slaughterhouses To Prevent African Swine Fever (7/10) 10: Hazard Labeling For Endocrine Disruptors (8/10) 11: Develop Oxfendazole As A New Deworming Medication (10/10) 12: Biosecurity And Existential Safety Lobbying In Australia (?/10) 13: A Gel That Can Heal The Brain After Strokes (7/10) 14: Survey To Understand Public Attitudes Around Human Challenge Trials (5/10) 15: Rapid Replications Of New Psychology Papers (6/10) 16: Research Neural Representation Of Precision Weighting (1/10) 17: Crowdfight - A Platform To Create Scientific Collaborations (4/10) 18: David Bahry Re-Orienting And Doing Further Research Before A PhD (6/10) 19: A Wiki On Forecasting (4/10) 20: Microbes From Beetles That Can Digest Plastics (5/10) 21: Support For ALLFED’s Disaster Modeling (?/10) 22: Creating Intelligent Tutoring Systems (5/10) 23: Start A Biosecurity Center At Stanford (10/10) 24: In Vitro Gametogenesis Startup (9/10) 25: Sue Factory Farms That Are Illegally Abusing Chickens (8/10) 26: M’s CRISPR Spellchecking Project (?/10) 27: Open Source Vaccines (6/10) 28: Platform For Psychiatric Drug Screening (4/10) 29: Citizen Surveillance Of Pathogens In Drinking Water (8/10) 30: Writing Forecasting Questions For EA Organizations (6/10) 31: Mass Appraisal Models To Promote A Georgist Land Value Tax (8/10) 32: A Robotic System For Automating Cell Culture Media Testing (7/10) 33: SD’s Neutrino Research (?/10) 35: Further S’s Political Career (?/10) 36: Seeds Of Science, A Journal Of Non-Traditional Research (6/10) 37: Good Science Project, Working To Improve Federal Science Funding (?/10) 38: Advising Developing Countries On How To Grow Their Economies (6/10) 39: Help Luca De Leo Get Started In AI Safety Research (8/10) 40: Typist For Saharon Shelah (7/10) Summary Of Everyone Looking For Further Help:Trevor Klee wants to talk to bloggers or reporters interested in covering his work to develop better immunosuppressants; contact him at trevor@highwaypharm.com. Mobile slaughterhouses to prevent African Swine Fever continues to look for more funding. Contact t.randolph@cgiar.org. Tatiana Segura’s stroke recovery lab is looking for staff support - if you want to help, contact tatiana.segura@duke.edu Luca is looking for help getting a US visa from Argentina - if you can help, contact me at scott@slatestarcodex.com and I’ll put you in touch with him. Legal Impact For Chickens is hiring another litigator - if interested, [see their job ad](https://substack.com/redirect/21ffc5c7-b1d8-4536-addc-c1ff054f2a5c?r=8o54n).Crowdfight - a platform for scientific collaborations continues to look for more funding. If interested, get in touch with them at [their webpage](https://substack.com/redirect/41822530-73be-4cdf-af40-bde79cec090a?r=8o54n).Michael Sklar’s project to speed up drug trial design is looking for more employees interested in drug trial design and statistics - contact research@confirmsol.org for more information. Oxfendazole Development Group is looking for more funding; contact them [here](https://substack.com/redirect/7ef154f9-1cf2-4d6c-bdaa-3837962b8218?r=8o54n)if interested.Siddhartha Roy’s citizen surveillance for pathogens in drinking water is seeking more funding. Contact sidroy@vt.edu if interested. Yoram Bauman’s Climate 24x7 is looking for state legislators and activists to support their work on pocketbook-friendly carbon taxes. People in Pennsylvania and South Dakota might be especially useful. Contact yoram@standupeconomist.com. Seeds of Science is looking for more funding; contact them at [Info@TheSeedsofScience.org](https://substack.com/redirect/5e8bc319-3711-4efa-9d1f-6f1506a97954?r=8o54n)James Koppel’s intelligent tutoring system project is looking for information on the future of large language models. If you know this, please tell me where to investcontact him at https://www.jameskoppel.com/Michael Todhunter’s automated cell culture system continues to look for more funding. Read more and find his contact details [here](https://substack.com/redirect/52725f9e-03b8-4c28-baf9-4d97c5620d9b?r=8o54n).Growth Teams continues to look for more funding. See their website [here](https://substack.com/redirect/18d29843-83f0-4207-962f-d73b0d701ec9?r=8o54n)or get in touch at[founders@growth-teams.org](https://substack.com/redirect/b88ea4e4-cfb2-4bca-8871-1ca12e76ac48?r=8o54n). They are planning to expand in Sub-Saharan Africa and India soon.
Lessons LearnedProbably I should be treating these updates as useful data to improve my grant-making skills for next round. In practice I’m not sure what I learned from reading them. Most projects take a long time and don’t have anything decisive to report yet. It’s been fascinating getting to see the different speeds at which projects move in different fields/cultures. I’m not blaming anyone; I’ve tried to do projects within academia before, I know it’s an unavoidably terrible experience, and by all accounts it sounds like politics is even worse. I appreciate everyone who found a field where they could move lightning-fast, and also everyone who is still slogging through all the approvals and stakeholder meetings their field requires. Better you than me! The average project rated their progress at 6.5/10, where 5 was “meets expectations” (this average includes some private projects I didn’t fully list here). So either people systematically underestimated their chances when applying, or they’re systematically inflating their progress now to look good, or things systematically went better than expected. One thing that may systematically have gone better than expected: just after my grants program, the rationalist/effective altruist community got a sudden influx of money as FTX Future Fund experimented with new ways to spend their billions of dollars. Several of the projects I gave grants to later got much bigger grants from FXTFF (plus one from Open Philanthropy) - I hope that my work signal-boosting and validating them was able to contribute to that in some way. This may have been the most important result of this grants program, since it moved more money than I did! Several people told me that the exposure they got from my blog was as important as the money, which surprised me - I didn’t do a very good job giving people exposure and I wasn’t optimizing for that. Still, several places got employees or expert consultants out of it. Thanks to all of you who must have been going over my original grants announcement with a fine-toothed comb looking for projects to proactively reach out to and support. ACX Grantees DiscordSeveral people reminded me that I had said I was going to create some group for grantees to talk to each other if for some reason they wanted to do that. Eleven months later, I’ve finally completed this ten-minute task and created the ACX Grantees Discord. If you’re a grantee, you should have already received an invitation; if not, email me at scott@slatestarcodex.com. By default I’m keeping this semi-private from randos, but if you’re someone with a good reason to want to be there - a potential funder, a charity analyst, or an expert in some relevant field - let me know and I’ll send you the invite too. Depending on how various impact-market-related people do, I’ll probably have a second round of ACX Grants sometime between now and mid-2023. You’re a free subscriber to |