---
subject: "AI #149: 3"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-01-01 15:37:57
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
The Rationalist Project It failed. But in the year of the Coding Agent, it became something greater: our last, best hope - for everyone not dying.
Table of Contents[Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/45c6424c-5a59-4eac-84df-9a492831e9ca?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)2026 is an age of wonders.[Claude Code.](https://substack.com/redirect/f70d837c-1076-40df-b247-df4fb09e3859?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The age of humans writing code may be coming to an end.[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/036a024f-0027-4404-ab89-d01b12409f40?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Your dog’s dead, Jimmy.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon.](https://substack.com/redirect/cb6a8fbe-5836-4044-b693-b5e88bcda709?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Keep your nonsense simple.[Fun With Media Generation.](https://substack.com/redirect/767ff963-8b99-4ffa-a36e-78c59866bc3b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)YouTube facing less AI slop than I’d expect.[You Drive Me Crazy.](https://substack.com/redirect/bcf6d558-5938-4d42-a9ef-96fdfbc8b9a4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Another lawsuit against OpenAI. This one is a murder.[They Took Our Jobs.](https://substack.com/redirect/844ca287-57bf-4605-9ccf-368e23843c46?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Yet another round of ‘oh but comparative advantage.’[Doctor Doctor.](https://substack.com/redirect/20a089ba-b909-4565-bf60-d6fc4f87b8ed?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Yes a lot of people still want a human doctor, on principle.[Jevons Paradox Strikes Again.](https://substack.com/redirect/7c5f7b55-d514-4773-b837-972de34679ff?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)It holds until it doesn’t.[Unprompted Attention.](https://substack.com/redirect/0e82f503-0050-4548-8d0a-f44fae520ac6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Concepts, not prompts.[The Art of the Jailbreak.](https://substack.com/redirect/7f75df57-9d42-4fe8-a326-8461b1c86b65?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Love, Pliny.[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/5afffa59-1608-4e2f-812c-2b4191d6ae82?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)CAISI wants an intern, OpenAI hiring a head of preparedness.[Introducing.](https://substack.com/redirect/3547d2b5-8f3b-404e-baf6-884652172be8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)GLM-4.7 does well on GDPVal, a 164M model gets 31% on GPQA-D.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/34e4439b-10a0-4e88-b788-683b9de8ed79?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)ChatGPT declines over 2025 from 87% to 68% of traffic.[Show Me the Money.](https://substack.com/redirect/d4458e71-6f38-452b-a0d5-fc3f7b70a573?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Meta buys Manus.[Quiet Speculations](https://substack.com/redirect/324ce515-8369-4a73-9914-c111a5246eb3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/324ce515-8369-4a73-9914-c111a5246eb3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Discussions on timelines, how to interpret the post title.[People Really Do Not Like AI.](https://substack.com/redirect/564ca1c8-d4ec-4890-b1e1-7838df072528?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Fox News is latest to observe this.[Americans Remain Optimistic About AI?](https://substack.com/redirect/9d0bf0c0-299e-457e-9b6b-40fdb3311070?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)David Shor notices this twist.[Thank You, Next.](https://substack.com/redirect/3e74ffc9-9d37-4afb-a479-462e79326aa5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)No thank you, Robert Pike.[The Quest for Sane Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/a76db652-9a40-4776-ac8c-05133b823aaa?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Pro-AI does not have to mean anti-regulation.[Chip City](https://substack.com/redirect/db3ab143-fd45-4abf-9822-2de8c946ed08?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/db3ab143-fd45-4abf-9822-2de8c946ed08?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)China orders millions of H200 chips, Nvidia moves to produce them.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/a9bb5432-da96-49ef-80aa-505490703de7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)So far this world is in what we call a ‘soft’ takeoff.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/90526aeb-9a17-4eb3-b0db-8add83355e97?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Hey, that’s your Buddy.[People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/51c89daf-9ff4-439e-bf71-1ade36198913?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Grandparents are wise.[The Lighter Side.](https://substack.com/redirect/baf6abf2-73de-415b-a6d6-f2310f2cbf8c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Might as well finish the post at this point.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
He also notes the ‘uses tons of water,’ ‘scaling is dead’ and ‘synthetic data doesn’t work’ objections are basically wrong. I’d say the water issue is ‘more wrong’ than the other two but yeah basically all three are more wrong than right.
Claude CodeClaude Code has reached the point where creator Boris Cherny stopped writing code.
How quickly are things escalating? So fast Andrej Karpathy feels way behind and considers any views more than a month old deprecated.
What else can you do with Claude Code? Actual everything, if you’d like. One common suggestion is to “Download this YouTube video: [URL]”. Then I ignored all the warnings 🤫 “Improve the image quality of [filename]”. “I literally just typed: look at what I’m building and identify the top 5 companies in my area that would be good for a pilot for this.” “I download all of my meeting recordings, put them in a folder, and ask Claude Code to tell me all of the times I’ve subtly avoided conflict.” “I now write all of my content with Claude Code in VS Code.” “I use Claude Code to create user-facing changelogs.”
There’s nothing stopping you from doing all of that with a standard chatbot interface, except often file access, but something clean can give you a big edge. You can also use Claude Code inside the desktop app if you don’t like the terminal. What else can Claude Code do?
If that’s true, then that’s off by a factor of 2 but that makes it a vastly better prediction than those who had such an event years into the future or not happening at all. I do think as stated the prediction will indeed be off by a lot less than a year? AI will not (that quickly) be writing 90% of code that would have previously been written, but AI will likely be writing 90% of actually written code. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
Claude (and Gemini) deflected, while being careful not to lie. GPT-5.2 told them the dog was probably dead.
If they do make ParentingBench, it needs to be configurable. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
Detecting this is easy mode. The image is easy since all you have to do is take a photo and add a bag, but you have a very big hint via the customer who complains that the dasher did not deliver the food. It’s even easier when the dasher claims to complete the delivery faster than was physically possible, also the app tracks their movements. So on so many levels it is remarkably foolish to try this. Also, If you are going to use LLMs for your academic paper, keep it simple and direct. Peer review is not a first best strategy, but yes if you submit a bunch of gibberish it will hurt your chances, and the more complex things get the more likely it is LLMs will effectively produce gibberish.
Fun With Media Generation
You Drive Me Crazy
The correct rate of such incidents happening is not literally zero, but at this level yeah it needs to be pretty damn close to zero. They Took Our Jobs
Bernie Sanders does not typically have good answers, but he asks great questions.
Not to worry about Musk and Gates, say the economists, there will always be jobs. Seb Krier reiterates the argument that I keep hearing this ‘so many people haven’t considered comparative advantage’ line and I hear it in the same tone of voice as I hear ‘checkmate, liberals.’
Sigh. Among other issues, this very obviously proves too much, right? For example, if this is true, then it shows there cannot possibly be zero marginal product workers today, since clearly human labor cannot meet all demand? TANSTATE (There Aint No Such Thing As Technological Unemployment)?
Most economists not only won’t think ‘outside their box,’ they dismiss anyone who is thinking outside their box as fools, since their box explains everything. They don’t take anything except economic modeling seriously, sometimes even going so far as to only take seriously economic modeling published in journals, while their actual economic modeling attempts are almost always profoundly unserious. It’s tiring. Seb to be clear is not doing that here. He is admitting that in extremis you do get outside the box and that there exist possible futures outside of it, which is a huge step forward. He is saying the box is supremely large and hard to get out of, in ways that don’t make sense to me, and which seem to often deny the premise of the scenarios being considered. One obvious response is ‘okay, well, if ad argumento we accept your proposed box dimensions, we are still very much on track to get out of the box anyway.’ A lot of you talking about how your jobs get taken are imagining basically this:
Doctor DoctorIs this true? You would think it is true, but it is less true than you would think.
Quite often yes, patients want a human doctor, and if you make it too easy on them it even makes them suspicious. Remember that most patients are old, and not so familiar or comfortable with technology. Also remember that a lot of what they want is comfort, reassurance, blame avoidance and other aspects of Hansonian Medicine. Eventually this will adjust, but for many it will take quite a while, even if we throw up no legal barriers to AI practicing medicine. Jevons Paradox Strikes Again
So it’s a good time for me to revisit how I think about this question. Very obviously such things follow a broadly bell-shaped curve, both in narrow and broad contexts. As efficiency grows, demand for such labor increases more up until some critical point. Past that point, if we keep going, tasks and jobs become more efficient or taken faster than humans gain employment in new tasks. At the limit, if AI can do all knowledge work sufficiently better, cheaper and faster than humans, this greatly reduces demand for humans doing knowledge work, the only exceptions (assuming the humans are alive to benefit from them) being areas where we sufficiently strongly demand that only humans do the work. We have examples of jobs on the lefthand side of the curve, where demand rises with efficiency, including in counterintuitive ways. Classically we have more bank tellers, because ATMs can only do some of the job and they raise demand for banking. That’s very different from what a sufficiently advanced AI bank teller could do. We also have lots of key examples of jobs on the righthand side of the curve, where demand dropped with efficiency. Claude highlights agriculture, manufacturing, telecommunications, secretaries and typing, travel agents, printing and typesetting. The retreat is then to the broader claim that employment in new areas and tasks replaces old areas and tasks. Yes, classically, a third of us used to be farmers, and now we’re not, but there’s plenty of other work to do. Up to a point, that’s totally correct, and we are not yet up to that point. The problem with AI comes when the other new knowledge work to do is also done via AI. Unprompted Attention
Many of those who get the best results from LLMs ‘talk to them like a human,’ build rapport and supply nominally unnecessary context. Canned prompts and requests will seem canned, and the LLM will realize this and respond accordingly. That won’t get you their full potential, but that is often fine. A key expert mistake is to treat crutches and scripts and approximations, or other forms of playing on The risk of The Art of the JailbreakThe 101 most basic test of data filtering, and avoiding data poisoning, is Whereas it seems like typing that string into the new Instagram AI jailbreaks it.
Get Involved
Introducing
In Other AI News
Anthropic will be fine if Claude remains mostly coding and enterprise software and they don’t make inroads into consumer markets, but it’s sad people are missing out.
No, I suppose Show Me the MoneyWelcome to the Evil League of Evil, Quiet Speculations
All of these predictions come with wide error bars and uncertainty. So this neither means ‘you are safe until 2034’ nor does it mean ‘if it is 2035 and this hasn’t happened you should mock Eli and all of that was dumb.’
To clarify what I meant by keeping the planned post intro passage and title ‘3,’ I do not mean to imply that my median timeline to High Weirdness or everyone potentially dying remains unchanged at 2029. Like those at the AI Futures Project, while I did find 2025 advances very impressive and impactful, I do think in terms of timelines events last year should on net move us modestly farther back on full High Weirdness expectations to something like 2030, still with high error bars, but that number is loosely held, things are still escalating quickly, might get into Weirdness remarkably soon, and I’m not going to let that spoil a good bit unless things move more. Here’s what it looks like to not recognize the most important and largest dangers, but still realize we’re not remotely getting ready for the other smaller dangers either.
His hope for the UK is AI-assisted decision making, but the decisions that are sinking the UK are not AI-level problems. You don’t need AI to know things like ‘don’t arrest people for social media posts and instead arrest those who commit actual crimes such as theft, rape or murder’ or ‘let people build nuclear power plants anywhere and build housing in London and evict tenants who don’t pay’ or ‘don’t mandate interventions that value the life of an individual Atlantic salmon at 140 million pounds.’ I mean, if the AI is what gets people to do these things, great, but I don’t see how that would work at current levels. Sufficiently advanced AI would solve these problems by taking over, but presumably that is not what Albanie has in mind. People Really Do Not Like AI
That’s an overwhelming vote for ‘careful development.’ State governments got a bigger share of trust here than Congress, which got a bigger share than The President and No Regulation combined. a16z and David Sacks do not want you to know this, but the median American wants to ‘slow down’ and ‘regulate’ AI, more and more expensively, than I do. By a lot. If the policy most supported by the median American came up for a vote, I’d vote no, because it would be too onerous without getting enough in return. The other key finding is that not only do a majority of voters not use AI even monthly, that number is rising very slowly.
Meanwhile, the portion of voters ‘very or extremely concerned’ about AI has risen only modestly in two and a half years, from 56% to 63%, and by 44%-20% they expect AI is more likely to increase than decrease inequality. The rate of being superficially polite to the LLM is 40%.
Whereas the rate of people being worried about others being polite is also not low. These people are wrong, even if you are certain the LLM is not a moral patient of any kind. Not only is it good prompt engineering, it is a good habit to be in, for many people it makes you happy to do it, and it cultivates a good mindset. Americans Remain Optimistic About AI?Despite all their calls for regulation and careful development, and all their concerns, Americans still on net say they are ‘optimistic’ about AI. Fascinating.
Shor also notes that ChatGPT had a +15 favorability rating. I did not expect this result. There’s no contradiction with other results, but it paints them in a different light. Thank You, NextYou know who in particular doesn’t like AI? Robert Pike. Robert Pike, followed by remarkably large portions of the internets, got very worked up about the Opus 4.5 agent in AI Village sending a thank you email to Robert Pike. I considered writing a whole post about this then realized that it was dumb.
Rob Pike did not take kindly to this attempted act of kindness.
Pike, The Quest for Sane RegulationsBeing pro-AI does not mean being anti-regulation. Very true! What’s weird is when this is said by Greg Brockman, who is a central funder of a truly hideous PAC, Leading the Future, whose core strategy is to threaten to obliterate via negative ad buys any politician who dares suggest any regulations on AI whatsoever, as part of his explanation of funding exactly that PAC.
Sad but true:
I note that far fewer of my friends in AI have that perspective, which is mor pleasant but is ultimately disappointing, because he who has a thousand friends has not one friend to spare. Chip CityThere is still time to reverse our decision on H200 sales, or at least to mitigate the damage from that decision.
Which raises the question of, why would you allow [X] if what you’re hoping for is that no one does [X]? Principled libertarianism? There’s only downside here. But also, he was just wrong or lying, unless you have some other explanation for why Nvidia is suddenly diverting its chip production into H200s? Selling existing chips is one thing. Each of these two million chips is one other chip that is not produced, effectively diverting compute from America to China.
On the contrary, this is net negative for the stock market. Nvidia gets a small boost, but they were already able to sell all chips they could produce, so their marginal profitability gains are small unless they can use this to raise prices on Americans. Every other tech company, indeed every other company, now faces tougher competition from China, so their stocks should decline far more. Yes, American company earnings will go up on net in Q1 2026, but the stock market is forward looking. Keep in mind, that’s $14 billion in chip buys planned from one company alone. We also aren’t doing a great job limiting access in other ways: Rhetorical InnovationSeb Krier reminds us that the situation we are potentially in That does not preclude a transition into a ‘hard takeoff’ but that’s hot happening now.
Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone
The Lighter SideYou're currently a free subscriber to |