---
subject: "Why Do Equities Build So Much Wealth?"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <byrne@thediff.co>"
to: ""
date: 2023-05-15 12:53:04
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
|
In this issue: - Why Do Equities Build So Much Wealth?
- Efficient Markets
- Logistics
- Markups
- The New Geography
- Marking to Market
- Diff Jobs
Why Do Equities Build So Much Wealth?Just about everyone knows that equities historically have higher returns than other asset classes, and that these higher returns are associated with higher risks. What’s slightly less well-known, but intuitively plausible, is the observation that this risk-reward relationship is pretty linear: at some level, investors can trade off between equities and bonds-levered-until-they're-as-volatile-as-equities, such that both categories get roughly the same return. This raises an interesting theoretical point. There are around $10tr in corporate bonds outstanding, $12tr in bank loans, $17tr in total consumer debt, $24tr in treasury bonds. The credit market is, in the aggregate, bigger than the stock market. And it generates a similar risk-adjusted return. And yet fixed income billionaires, whether they got that way by managing money for other people or compounding it themselves, are surprisingly rare. Meanwhile, not only are there many rich people who got that way by managing portfolios of equities, but the single most common source of net worth for the ultra rich is maintaining a highly concentrated equity portfolio consisting mostly of their shares in a company they founded. (This means we get to double-dip in a few cases: technically an equity hedge fund billionaire made their money from owning equities in a business also focused on owning equities.) There are, of course, bond fortunes: Citadel started out focused on convertible bonds, Bridgewater has done very well with fixed income, and Appaloosa had many of its early wins in distressed credit. But run down the Forbes 400 list's finance section and those investors are outnumbered by the equities-focused managers. And by the private equity fund managers, whose asset allocation is technically long equities and short bonds. And many of the funds that started out bond-focused have since diversified into equities (of course, some of the equity people diversify into bonds, too). Two asset classes, similar risk-adjusted returns over multiple generations, and it's easier to get rich owning one and shorting the other than focusing entirely on the wrong asset class. It's an interesting puzzle! One plausible explanation goes back to the list of fixed income asset sub-classes above. Many of these are most cost-effectively owned by banks and insurance companies, both of which trade a favorable cost of capital for strict regulation governing their growth. These institutions can do well for themselves over time, of course, but a prudent regulator should look at any regulated financial institution whose returns can lead to truly generational wealth as a potential source of systemic risk. There are a few factors that make equities a bigger source of true outlier wealth creation: - The private-to-public markup: Most people who get generational wealth from founding a company and taking it public will accrue most of their net worth after IPO. But as
[one such person](https://www.thediff.co/r/4f126a07?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)once put it, the first billion is the hardest; that later growth is partly easier because it's compounding at a lower rate off a larger base. It's very hard to come up with some kind of risk-adjusted return for entrepreneurial activity, since we can't easily measure the size of the investment (is it the dollars that go into a company or the opportunity cost of early employees' time—and how do you measure that opportunity cost other than by the value they created?), the value of the result (until the IPO), or the volatility. As a company evolves from scribbles on a whiteboard into a late-stage pre-IPO business, analyzing its risk-adjusted return becomes more tractable, and many investors do run the numbers on whether they should allocate more capital to nine-figure growth rounds or to similar already-public companies. - Persistence: There are great equity investors who have achieved sustained outperformance with low-turnover strategies. This can't be done in bonds, aside from a few edge cases which are themselves functionally equivalent to equity investing.
[[4]](#fn4)Someone who is compounding their money at 20%+ in fixed income is almost certainly trading in and out of different opportunities; a distressed debt investor who is making money on both interest and capital appreciation is eventually no longer a distressed debt investor because their assets have appreciated to the point that they're not distressed. But growth investors can and do sit on the same portfolio for years and years; once you've figured out how Transdigm, Fastenal, Danaher, Google, or MasterCard work, your job is to keep an eye out for what might make them stop working so well, not to trade in and out. - Liquidity and breadth: There are parts of the fixed income world that are liquid, and there are parts where it's plausible to identify long-lasting, repeatable sources of alpha. These largely do not interact; in treasury bonds, you have effectively infinite liquidity, so alpha comes from a) savvy systematic strategies, and b) macro calls; systematic strategies tend to decay over time, and a macro thesis is partly obsolete the moment it's right.
[[5]](#fn5)Corporate bonds trade in a more fragmented market, with wider bid/ask spreads, which means there are more opportunities for small-scale alpha from making a market but there's a drag on large-scale alpha; it's difficult to accumulate a large position quickly without accidentally informing just about everyone of what you're up to. - Favorable leverage characteristics: The core argument for why different asset classes should have similar risk/reward relationships is that leverage or holding on to cash can give any asset class the same volatility as any other asset class. T-bills are a lot less volatile than the S&P, but if you're willing to lever up enough, you can get the same volatility. But in a sense it's lower-quality volatility: if you own shares of a company, and that company ends up with assets worth less than its debts, your worst-case scenario is a zero, but with a levered portfolio you can be forced to sell when positions move against you. And even when a company is insolvent, shares still have option value, and can recover.
[This justifiably legendary tweetstorm](https://www.thediff.co/r/6941bccb?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)looks at the phenomenon from the perspective of a short seller, but from the viewpoint of a speculative buyer, the main point is that you'll get access to leverage on more favorable terms if the leverage you get is a limited-liability equity stake in a levered or otherwise high-risk entity.
There is a reason most personal finance advice does not target Forbes 400 membership: even the people who do everything right face long odds, because part of "doing everything right" means accepting high variance and the potential for failure. It's still a good way to look at which fields can create generational wealth in a fairly short time period, and we can invert the criteria above to describe what the process of converting a decent risk-adjusted return into a nonzero chance of massive success looks like: shy away from any activity where risk/reward can be easily quantified upfront; focus on a field where you can keep doing the same thing and continuously improve in it—even if specific skills have a short half-life, the meta skills have a long one; avoid domains where there's some kind of inefficiency that compounds faster than your own success (or, if you're not avoiding those fields, specialize in routing around the inefficiency; One objection you might have is that most investors do not sit down with a list of asset classes and determine their sharpe ratios in order to select exposure. True! But there are three arguments to bear in mind: First, opportunistic investors will end up overweight whichever asset class offers the best returns, even if they're looking deal by deal and never consciously think about their asset allocation; second, even if the median investor doesn't do this, bigger investors do; and third, the investors who are reasonable about their asset class allocation—the ones who, in 2021, started saying "I'm not sure there are all that many undiscovered startups that can't get funding, actually," will, over time, constitute more of the market since they'll be right. [↩︎](#fnref1)While those were the two asset classes I set out to compare before writing this, a look at the tables shows a wide range of performance for other kinds of fixed income. 0-3 month treasuries, for example, allegedly generate a sharpe ratio of 1.58, while 10+-year treasury bonds are at 0.22. The general point that the risk/reward tradeoff is in the same ballpark across different asset classes stands. And if you have two asset classes with similar risk-reward, one of which gets nonstop coverage online and in social media and has many dedicated apps, products, and books, you’d think that the exciting upside would be in the other asset class. [↩︎](#fnref2)Applying this criterion strictly would mean putting limits on Berkshire Hathaway, which would be unfortunate. On the other hand, it would have meant paying a lot more attention to subprime-focused commercial banks and the investment banks that worked with them in the mid-2000s, as well as Fannie and Freddie, which would have been nice. [↩︎](#fnref3)Suppose a company has $1bn of senior debt, $1bn of junior debt, and its assets are probably worth $1bn such that the junior debt gets basically zero. The junior debt will perform almost exactly the same way equity would perform if the junior debt slice did not exist, i.e. if the company adds $100m in value to its assets, the junior debt and the hypothetical equity are both worth a little bit more than $100m. The equity starts acting differently if the value goes way up, of course. [↩︎](#fnref4)"Partly" because someone who understands what caused a recession, or what caused growth to reaccelerate after one, is more likely than average to understand how things will play out later on. What typically offsets this is the psychological difficulty of trying to make money in exactly the opposite way you just made a lot of it; people who were temporary put option millionaires circa March 2020 can relate. [↩︎](#fnref5)
You're on the free list for The Diff—join founders, VCs, hedge fund managers, and more by getting full access to the newsletter. A Word From Our SponsorsThis newsletter is brought to you by Tegus, your modern research launchpad. Find your next bold investing perspective. Tegus simplifies your research workflow by uniting qualitative insights, quantitative data and public financials on one platform. With the largest transcript library of public and private market data, affordable expert calls – at a 70% cost savings compared to traditional expert networks – and actionable benchmarking, charting and comps tooling, you can move quickly on valuable insights to make smart decisions and seal the deal. Become the expert in the room with Tegus and make your workflows work for you. ElsewhereEfficient MarketsIs the end of a rate-hiking cycle good news or bad news? The historical verdict is clear: LogisticsAmazon has cut costs and increased delivery speeds by Disclosure: Long AMZN. MarkupsAngelList has some The New Geography
Marking to MarketTiger Global, which famously reshaped the venture market in the last few years with its rapid-fire dealmaking, is Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. A sampling of current open roles: - A hedge fund is looking for an experienced alternative data analyst who can help incorporate novel datasets into systematic strategies (NYC).
- A crypto proprietary trading firm is actively seeking systematic-oriented traders with crypto experience—ideally someone with experience across a variety of exchanges and tokens. (Remote)
- A company building zero-knowledge proof-based tools to enable novel financial arrangements is looking for a senior engineer with a research bent. Ideal experience includes demonstrations of extraordinary coding and/or math ability. (NYC or San Diego preferred, remote also a possibility.)
- A well funded seed stage startup founded by former SpaceX engineers is building software tools for hardware engineering. They're looking for a UX/frontend engineer interested in designing and developing software collaboratively with satellite, rocket, and other complex machine engineers. (Los Angeles)
- A company building ML-powered tools to accelerate developer productivity is looking for a mathematician. (Washington DC area)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. |
||
|
|
|
|||
|