---
subject: "Highlights From The Comments On Lynn And IQ"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-01-16 04:23:25
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX"]
---
Shaked Koplewitz
Yeah, this is the most important factor that I failed to cover in the post (I edited it in ten minutes later, but some of you got the email and didn’t see it). For the second effect mentioned in the post - the one where Malawians are obviously smarter than intellectually disabled people - you could attribute it to any of: Lynn’s data and analysis were bad. Lynn’s data and analysis were fine as far as they go, but the tests he based his work off of were trivially culturally biased - for example, they asked about English vocabulary in non-English speaking countries, or math problems to people who had never learned math. The tests weren’t trivially biased, but the concept of IQ itself breaks down once you try to extend it to extremely under-educated populations, and it no longer predicts things as well as you would expect. The concept of IQ is fine, but you are personally miscalibrated about what low IQ means because the only very-low-IQ people in your training set had developmental disorders.
I think these probably explain 5%, 5%, 40%, and 50% of the effect respectively, and I should have been more careful to emphasize (3), which I think explains 40% of the effect. The particular way I would flesh out 3 would be something like - if you’re illiterate and (somewhat) innumerate, you probably don’t have enough practice with symbols and complex mental operations to do even a “culture fair” IQ test like Raven’s Matrices. This doesn’t necessarily mean that your IQ is higher than the Raven’s Matrices says - the person who underperforms on Ravens for this reason will also underperform on a wide variety of other abstract/intellectual/symbolic tasks, and this is part of what IQ means. But it means that Raven’s IQ won’t predict concrete tasks as well as you would expect. Fujimura
Yeah, many people tried to gotcha me with claims that Lynn did this or that or the other thing wrong. Lynn tries to defend his methodology But continuing on this subject - if IQ has two components, why would World Bank education data and GDP track the abstract/symbolic component of IQ, rather than the practical component of IQ? Or, rather, it’s obvious why this would happen in education. But why would GDP track abstract/symbolic rather than practical? One possible answer is that the causal pathway is high GDP → lots of education → lots of practice with abstract reasoning → high abstract/symbolic IQ. I don’t think this can be the whole story, because some countries that “cheated” to get high GDP (eg oil sheikhdoms) can’t translate it into IQ points at the same rate as everyone else. I’m stuck with the boring basic explanation that maybe you need to do a lot of abstract reasoning tasks to get high GDP. Harzerkatze
Yeah, I didn’t want to get into all of this on the post, but I agree the way I phrased it was misleading. Lynn and other national IQ estimates find very low IQs for all sub-Saharan African countries - I mentioned Malawi at 60 in the post, but Nigeria, on the other side of Africa, is 69. Whatever is going on there is a pan-African problem. US blacks are mostly descended from people in west Africa, eg Nigeria. Some people also brought up that US blacks have significant white admixture. This is true but it’s still not enough to be relevant to this discussion. If we assumed everything was genetic and US blacks with their ~20% white admixture had genetic IQ of 85, we would still expect African blacks to have IQ in the low 80s. However you parse it, there’s got to be some kind of health/education/environment effect going on there. Africa is extremely genetically diverse, but I think most of the countries measured in the paper, including Malawi, are some variety of Niger-Congo speakers, who I don’t think are that much more diverse than white people or anyone else. The really interesting African ethnicities, like the Khoi-San, don’t show up as much at a national level. Andrew Clough
Yeah, salt iodization is great. I had always heard of iodine related problems being concentrated in central Asia and especially Afghanistan, but looking at the map… … sub-Saharan Africa is also a hot spot. I wonder what’s wrong in Cuba - this is exactly the sort of easily gameable metric I would usually expect them to be good at, or at least carefully faking. Bob Jacobs writes:
No contesting any of this. MM
Calvin
I was concerned to hear this - I have a little experience with the intellectually disabled, but it didn’t involve knowing people’s exact IQ, so I’m not very well-calibrated here. Looking for more information, I found
And gave some examples (slightly out of order for this list):
These people are obviously not going to win Nobels anytime soon. But even the guy with IQ 35 - 45 was still talking to people. I think this supports the thesis that intellectually disabled people without specific syndromes can seem pretty normal most of the time. (though keep in mind that anything from the court system should be treated with a grain of salt - defense attorneys have an incentive to exaggerate the intellectual disability of their clients in the hopes that it gets them a lighter sentence) Lyman Stone
We know that people with extremely low IQs must be capable of subsistence agriculture, because pre-Flynn Effect, most of the West had extremely low IQs, and they were all doing subsistence agriculture. How is this possible? Responding to Lyman’s comment, I wrote:
Maybe one way to look at it is to go back to the claim from the justice system document above, saying that people with IQ in the 60s are the mental equivalent of third-graders. The third-graders I know are very into Pokemon, and have all sorts of opinions on how if you add X bonus to a Y strength fire-type Pokemon and then play Z combo, it will [commence six weeks of droning on about different Pokemon cards]. Is this the sort of math/reasoning/strategizing that we don’t expect someone with IQ 60 to be able to do? Does the fact that third-graders can do it mean that we’re miscalibrated? I’m not sure. The part of Lyman’s comment that gives me the most pause is his observation that, if the mean IQ is 60, a decent fraction of people must be 45, and a non-negligible portion 30. At this point, even third-grader comparisons don’t save us. I guess this is where I bring in the claim that IQ breaks down as a guide to practical living skills below some point. In the same comment thread, Lyman also taught me two things I didn’t already know. First, he corrected my misconception about Reich on ancient European cognitive evolution. Reich had said that pre-agriculture Europeans were “2-3 standard deviations” below moderns. I had interpreted that as IQ deviations of 15 points, making them genetic IQ 55-70, which would have been pretty crazy. Stone tells me he actually meant PGS deviations, each of which was about 3-4 IQ points, so he’s claiming that pre-agriculture Europeans had genetic IQ of 90 (they probably also had lower IQ for environmental reasons)., Second, he [linked a post of his](https://substack.com/redirect/943e5792-a92d-48ad-82db-85ac2ab9b000?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)where he found that, although IQ accurately predicts GDP at each time point, changes in IQ don’t predict changes in GDP, suggesting something weird is happening. I think the weird thing is the improvement in the abstract/symbolic/”test-taking” aspect of IQ separate from the practical aspect, mentioned above.
Final Comments/Conclusion: I should have been more careful to highlight the possibility that the subcomponents of IQ come apart at the tails and that this explains some of the effect. I didn’t do that partly because I thought it was closely related to the developmental syndromes point (which is a specific example of how things can come apart at the tails), partly because I expected people to misinterpret it as “IQ is meaningless and nothing is correlated with anything”, and partly because I don’t understand the correlations of different subcomponents with each other and g and practical skills to have a good opinion here. Still, I could have at least said “Maybe academic and practical skills come apart”. Maybe I should have had a stronger opinion on whether Lynn’s exact studies were correct? Certainly lots of commenters had strong opinions that they weren’t. I had hoped that linking the Aporia article would be a sufficient pointer to my opinion that, while Lynn’s work was a first effort and far from perfect, the general thrust (including surprisingly low IQs in sub-Saharan African countries) has been confirmed by later research which is harder to bias. Maybe it would have been less controversial if I had just asked why sub-Saharan Africa has surprisingly low school test scores, but then nobody would have a good sense of what school test scores were normal vs. surprising and nobody would have cared. I’m interested in learning more about Lyman Stone’s claim that changes in IQ don’t predict changes in development level. This could mean that development causes IQ (through education), but that sometimes you can get IQ through other means (like an extreme pro-education push by a poor country), and this doesn’t itself cause development. Or it could mean that countries have a real (genetic?) IQ and a fake (educational?) IQ, and the GDP only depends on the real IQ (but then how come Africa, which everyone agrees is underperforming its genetics, is in the expected place on the IQ/GDP correlation?) Or it could mean that the changes are fake, and changes in fake data don’t affect real GDP. You're currently a free subscriber to |