---
subject: "Digital gold in regulatory no-man’s land…"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-11-27 01:33:36
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
Ka-Ching!
Thu, 27 Nov 25
A weekly newsletter about how finance is getting supercharged by tech in India, and how you can make money work for you.
Good Morning Ishan,
Over the years, 8 November has been a tumultuous date, marked by events like Modi’s demonetisation and Trump’s first-term election. This year, a [circular](https://www.sebi.gov.in/media-and-notifications/press-releases/nov-2025/caution-to-public-regarding-dealing-in-digital-gold-_97676.html) by the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Sebi) on this date effectively washed the market regulator’s hands of digital gold. It made it known in no uncertain terms that these products do not come under its purview and cautioned investors to be careful.
It is informed that such digital gold products are different from SEBI regulated gold products as they are neither notified as securities nor regulated as commodity derivatives. They operate entirely outside the purview of SEBI. Such digital gold products may entail significant risks for investors and may expose investors to counterparty and operational risks.
Additionally, the circular made it clear that the investor protection mechanisms available in the securities market do not extend to these digital gold or e-gold products. A few days later, Sebi chairman Tuhin Kanta Pandey [reinforced](https://www.livemint.com/market/commodities/sebi-clarifies-position-on-digital-gold-says-no-new-regulations-are-being-drafted-11763714706462.html) this stance, confirming that formal regulation for digital gold is not being considered. The regulator’s focus remains on gold-based investments through exchange-traded funds (ETFs) offered by mutual funds, electronic gold receipts tradeable on stock exchanges, and exchange traded commodity derivative contracts.
Safe to say Sebi’s hardline position would have made digital gold platforms like Safegold, Gullak, Jar, and MMTC-PAMP squirm. A vote of no-confidence by a regulator can be a game-changer in a not nice way, never mind their other positives.
The biggest selling point of these platforms that allow micro-investments in digital gold is the ease of investment and the smooth onboarding process on their apps.
As I wrote in my debut [story](https://the-ken.com/story/jar-and-its-digital-gold-peers-are-sparkling-until-regulators-come-knocking/) for The Ken in January:
Digital gold, as it stands, is a mass-market product, with no brokerage or demat account needed to get going. Many of these platforms target customers in tier-2 or -3 cities. “Platforms like Jar and Gullak depend on low-friction onboarding to grow their customer base,” said an expert from the gold sector, pointing to the ease and speed with which accounts can be opened.
Since its launch in India in 2017, digital gold has seen remarkable growth, attracting over 12o million buyers. As of July 2024, more than 40 million people were [holding](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/economy/policy/digital-gold-biz-wgc-asks-finmin-rbi-to-draft-guidelines/articleshow/111844591.cms?from=mdr) it.
This momentum has only intensified in recent months. So, the timing of the circular was not surprising, as digital gold has been flying off the shelves. Sales through the United Payments Interface (UPI) transactions have been [surging](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/economy/finance/upi-push-sparks-377-rise-in-digital-gold-in-16-months/articleshow/124031846.cms?from=mdr), with purchases in [October](https://www.moneycontrol.com/technology/dhanteras-brings-sparkle-to-digital-gold-sales-surge-by-62-in-october-article-13680993.html) alone exceeding Rs 2,000 crore, largely driven by festival buying on Dhanteras. Platforms facilitating these purchases serve a massive customer base; for instance, Gullak [reported](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/tech/funding/gold-savings-platform-gullak-raises-7-5-million-led-by-chiratae-ventures/articleshow/124074716.cms?from=mdr) at least three lakh active transacting customers during a recent fundraise.
The trouble is the “counterparty and operational” risks that Sebi’s circular pointed to. What if a major platform defaults? Is digital gold really backed by physical gold, like in the case of gold ETFs? Who certifies this, or should investors just take the platforms’ word on this? Are there enough checks and balances in how digital gold platforms run their ops? There are many ifs and buts, and much at stake going by Sebi’s sharp missive.
The subtext of Sebi’s circular: millions of Indians investing in digital gold with no formal regulatory safeguards is asking for trouble, sooner or later. And if and when trouble comes, don’t come to Sebi.
In 2021, Sebi had banned entities governed by it from offering unregulated products like digital gold. The subsequent years of silence led the World Gold Council (WGC) to [urge](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/economy/policy/digital-gold-biz-wgc-asks-finmin-rbi-to-draft-guidelines/articleshow/111844591.cms?from=mdr) the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) to draft guidelines for digital gold, which many gold industry sources expected to come in the January-March quarter. Just that nothing happened. And some industry players realise the risks of being unregulated.
Given the absence of a formal regulator, digital gold firms are now planning to take matters into their own hands by [teaming up](https://www.moneycontrol.com/news/business/startup/digital-gold-players-to-form-self-regulatory-organisation-by-nov-end-after-sebi-caution-13683719.html) to form a self-regulatory entity by the end of November.
However, such bodies risk becoming a club that looks out for its own interest more than those of its customers.
Amol Joshi, founder of Plan Rupee Investment Services, a financial services firm, points out that regulators have had the opportunity to step in, as the RBI did with peer-to-peer landing. In their absence, he advises that “investors have to protect their money, learn a little bit about risk, and also not get swayed by promises, even if they are made by the so-called self-regulated entity”.
Ideally, the growing popularity of digital gold calls for urgent formal regulation by either Sebi or the RBI. The alternative—though a bitter one—would be to stop the buying and selling of digital gold until proper regulation is in place.
Not surprisingly, digital gold’s regulated counterpart—Gold ETF—is pressing its advantage now. Investments in these funds touched Rs 7,743 crore in October, following a record inflow of Rs 8,363 crore in September, according to data from the Association of Mutual Funds in India (AMFI). The massive rally in gold prices over the past few years has meant that there is big investor demand—and gold ETFs have been cashing in on this. The other regulated product—sovereign gold bonds—are no longer being issued by the government.
Sebi’s warning about digital gold will likely add to gold ETF’s momentum. Its providers have already gone on a [marketing](https://www.livemint.com/market/digital-gold-sebi-warning-mutual-funds-pitch-gold-etfs-11763695604392.html) overdrive, with hard-to-miss front-page ads from the likes of Nippon India Mutual Fund, which has the largest gold ETF by assets under management (AUM) in the country.
That said, digital gold has not lost its shine, given the ease of investing and the general lack of awareness about its risks. But, the regulatory powers-that-be must step in before it’s too late. Allowing this popular avenue to linger in no-man’s land could spell trouble not only for customers but also regulators, who may later be forced to intervene to contain the damage. Prevention is better and brighter than cure.
What do you think? Write to [kaching@the-ken.com](mailto:kaching@the-ken.com) and let me know, or leave a comment on our website or app.
See you next Thursday!
Regards,
Archishma