---
subject: "Don't Get Addicted to Fantasy Economics"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <byrne@thediff.co>"
to: ""
date: 2023-07-24 12:51:03
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
|
In this issue: - Don't Get Addicted to Fantasy Economics
- Diff Jobs
- Exporting Clean Energy
- Reverse Turing Tests
- Syndicate Economics
- Integration
- Data
Don't Get Addicted to Fantasy EconomicsIn 2015, I spent about six months living and working in San Francisco, around the peak of when venture dollars were subsidizing the SF-tech-employee lifestyle. Uber and Lyft were cheap. Spoonrocket was charging so little for lunch that it was questionable that they could make the economics work even without the cost of delivery. Laundry apps were in land-grab mode. DTC mattresses were essentially free. Some companies had marketing incentives so aggressive that people were And, weirdly enough, it did. This period saw VC as an asset class achieve As it turns out, the model of subsidizing the early version of a product with VC dollars, then getting to critical mass before monetizing it better, was actually a decent one. Which makes sense, because if you shift around the mix of capex, opex, and COGS, this has always been the tech industry model, going back to software and even before that to chips. All of these products had a cost structure weighted towards fixed costs, mostly R&D, while the marginal cost of one more chip or one more CD-ROM, not to mention one more pageview, was minimal. The initial R&D cost for a ride-hailing, mattress-selling, or food-delivering company is minimal, but incremental costs are higher. Most high-margin companies have to take a leap of faith with their initial investment, betting that the unavoidable outlay will be recouped later on. Lower-margin companies have to make a different kind of bet: that their cost structure will improve with scale and experience, and that recurring customers will produce recurring contribution profits long after the initial cost of getting them on board. Of course, this does lead to variance in steady-state margins, but some of this is an artifact of what shows up on the company's P&L and what doesn't. Meta margins would look worse if they also included the costs of advertisers who are part of the extended Meta ecosystem. The extended ecosystem of pure software startups and their customers will tend to have a similar margin structure and return on capital to that of full-stack startups, but the former are structured so that the highest-margin slice of the business is contained in its own independent company. The temporary state where a company is underpricing its product in order to get market share can lead to a trap for customers—especially when the justification for that strategy is that switching costs are high or network effects are strong. The problem was not especially dire for SF startup employees in the mid-2010s. By and large, this group survived the transition from $8 Spoonrockets to $20 DoorDash lunches just fine. But restaurants haven't found it trivial to adjust to increases in delivery platform effective take rates, and any company that gets its customers from ads has increasingly ceded its economics to the ad-based platforms. Right now, there's a good case for AI companies to underprice their products, especially if the products are APIs. Usage data is training data, and it's differentiated training data that can give some companies a non-duplicable edge. That thumbs up/thumbs down icon in ChatGPT is constantly accruing valuable training data. A decent approach for companies using these tools is to try to make a guess as to what the long-term economics will look like, and try to operate as quickly as possible while staying in line with those economics. For a previous generation of companies whose growth was fueled by inefficiently-priced ads, that meant developing some kind of durable advantage that would persist and lead to profits even if the ads were priced appropriately—this is something that Expedia and Booking.com were able to accomplish in travel, for example, while many of their subscale competitors started flailing once AdWords clicks for searches like "hotels in NYC" were priced at close to the expected incremental margin from capturing such a click. For AI wrapper companies, it probably means some combination of in-house projects, clever prompt engineering, or using a marketable product to hone an advantage in, well, marketing. The goal for any AI-copywriting-as-a-service or natural-language-search-for-your-text-corpus startup should be to develop something that will be differentiated when both of those categories are commodities. This is a somewhat perverse strategy, because it means ignoring what is generally your most salient advantage. Jasper could sell API calls at a very nice markup, and prospered while doing so, but the company on the other side of that transaction knows that its economics will be better when there are more companies competing in every wrapper category: once they start competing on price, the usual supply and demand forces start to apply, so usage and thus API revenue goes up as a consequence of margins for the wrapper companies coming down. (This approach is one reason Amazon, which does now own some high-incremental-margin straightforward-growth kinds of properties, does not succumb to the usual bad habits such categories lead to. Their corporate culture jelled when they were mostly in retail, the Salusa Secundus of industries.) Paul Graham Habituating to this is annoying, but most kinds of realism are. A business can't survive in a steady state indefinitely based on some third party's irrational behavior. (Even the businesses that do depend on this, like gambling, addictive substances, many parts of education, and certain financial products end up with regulations that keep them from maximally exploiting this.) The only question is whether the company adapts in advance or if they don't start adjusting until their old model has been rendered non-viable by someone else. Disclosure: Long Meta, Amazon. Annoyingly, Cambridge Associates, the source for this information, has joined the "don't give it all away for free" trend, and now publishes much less detailed performance numbers. Earlier editions of this report have more details and break out vintages by year rather than by multi-year chunks, but since VC stated performance is noisy for the first few years, we have to compromise a bit. [↩︎](#fnref1)This kind of thing was happening elsewhere, too; Uber, for example, [got in trouble for violating iOS rules and deanonymizing some users in China](https://www.thediff.co/r/15791644?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)because at the time, their rider subsidies and driver subsidies were large enough that it was profitable to use a second phone to give rides to fake passengers.[↩︎](#fnref2)Amazon is a good case study in this. Their ads business would be worth a lot as a standalone company: trailing revenue is $29bn, growth last quarter was 23% YoY, more than 2x the consensus for Meta's growth over the next few years. And there's no platform risk! If Meta's worth 6.3x trailing sales, it's plausible that Amazon's business would be worth 10x or more, so at least $300bn as a standalone company. But all those wonderful economic traits that make it more defensible than comparatively thin layers like Meta and Google also mean that it doesn't make sense as an independent business, and works best if it's attached to the drearier, lower-margin business of hawking TVs and deodorant as cheaply as possible. [↩︎](#fnref3)Though what's probably more valuable right now is tracking what text users are selecting (presumably to copy and paste). If ChatGPT is doing your homework or your job, OpenAI knows about it, even if you're otherwise passing this informal Turing Test. [↩︎](#fnref4)
You're on the free list for The Diff. Upgrade to paid today to get full access. Last week, paying readers read about Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. A sampling of current open roles: - A company building ML-powered tools to accelerate developer productivity is looking for software engineers. (Washington DC)
- A company reinventing the way Americans build wealth for the long-run by enabling them to access "Universal Basic Capital" is looking for a product manager with fintech experience. (NYC)
- A proprietary trading firm is seeking systematic-oriented traders with ML experience—ideally someone who has displayed excellence in DS and ML, like a Kaggle Master. (Montreal)
- A new service that's trolling the dating market with a better product and better monetization is looking for a full-stack founding engineer. (Los Angeles)
- A startup building a new financial market within a multi-trillion dollar asset class is looking for generalists with banking and legal experience. (US, Remote)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. ElsewhereExporting Clean EnergyLast week's Capital Gains talked about the sometimes fuzzy line between tradable goods and non-tradables. Electricity is, in a literal sense, hard to trade: it requires expensive infrastructure to deliver over long distances, and most countries don't want to rely on someone else for essential infrastructure if they can help it. But it's also a ubiquitous input which makes it indirectly tradable: Reverse Turing TestsThe WSJ has a Syndicate EconomicsThe general problem the entire finance industry is trying to solve is the mismatch between who has money and who can put it to use. Venture syndicates are a fun addition to the mix, because there's a set of people who have the deal flow to make some interesting early-stage investments, but don't have the capital base to habitually write $50k checks. Syndicating deals partially solves this problem by outsourcing some of the capital needs and some of the paperwork (yes The Diff IntegrationIn 2010, Deutsche Bank acquired another German bank, Postbank. Over a frantic weekend earlier this month, DataNot for the first time, |
||
|
|
|
|||
|