---
subject: "Our Surprisingly Capital-Abundant World"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <the-diff@ghost.io>"
to: ""
date: 2024-08-12 14:49:51
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX"]
---
|
|
In this issue: - Our Surprisingly Capital-Abundant World—"Capital" is a broader concept than it gets credit for. This makes some things much harder to analyze, but also helps to illustrate that economic growth is not a purely transactional process.
- Audience Capture at Two Levels—Content creators are subject to a phenomenon called "audience capture," but it applies well to the decisions made by platforms.
- Does Crypto Add Value to Financial Markets?—A more purely speculative asset class can still be useful, until people figure out that kind of utility.
- Continuation Funds, Club Deals, and the New Equity Market—A single proposed transaction provides a nice summary of where private equity is heading.
- Implementation Details—It's easier for the US government to remove monetary constraints than institutional ones, but sometimes this illustrates how important the latter category is.
- Anti-Goldilocks Economy for Junk Loans—What happens to an asset class when bad news is correlated?
Today's issue of The Diff is brought to you by our sponsor, Our Surprisingly Capital-Abundant WorldWe all have an intuition about what capital is. Financial assets are clearly capital, as are things like factories, equipment, planes, and ships. It's a load-bearing concept—advocates for socialism It's fine to take them at their word on this, and it's an academic point; Jacobin-reading fanatics aren't going to seize control of the country any time soon, especially when the most appealing examples of socialism don't have top marginal tax rates very far off from what you'd pay in San Francisco or New York. For example, a bike is probably personal property. At least, it's hard to imagine a regime coming to power by arguing that it would seize everybody's bikes and give them to the bikeless. But combine a bike with a delivery app, and suddenly it's a complement to labor that increases the income that labor can extract—you may think you're a gig economy courier, but you are, in fact, a rapacious capitalist! As it turns out, there's a way of thinking about capital that simplifies the theory and wildly complicates the practice, albeit in useful ways: "capital" is just any way to defer consumption. A share of JPMorgan Chase is capital, because you can sell it to convert it into spending, or consume the dividends. A computer is capital, of course—not just when you're sending work emails, but when you're gaming, tweeting, or using Netflix, all of which turn your prior expense into present enjoyment. Home appliances are definitely capital, but so are your kitchen utensils—if you're on the receiving rather than delivering end of the gig economy transaction, it helps to have a fork. The first thing this model does is to tell us that a huge fraction of capital in the economy is going to be impossible to measure accurately, especially when it produces a consumer surplus: if you buy products because you'd rather have the product than the money spent, you're implicitly valuing that product at higher than its cost. How much higher, though? There are some products that end up being disappointing, and some with an absolutely insane ROI, like cheap mementos of fun experiences. There are some whose value shows up in the form of deferred opportunity cost: mechanizing "laundry day" into laundry hour, making it equally tedious but much briefer and less backbreaking work, has a massive return on investment. Households really are little firms, which like other firms are run with some combination of ruthless capitalist efficiency, bounded rationality, and preference functions that are a little more complex than the usual H. Economicus. They have balance sheets, and their economic balance sheets are not identical to the balance sheet an accountant would prepare for them. This view that we're surrounded by capital is not the first intuition you'd have, but it's actually undeniable based on widely-available statistical data. look at the S&P 500, which trades at ~4.3x times book value. Clearly, most of what makes a firm worth something is not that it owns lots of assets, though those assets still contribute to the firm's ability to make money, in combination with labor and other intangibles. When you really think about it, a TSMC fab is just an unusually large and complicated sort of fork: a fixed physical product that, when combined with raw materials and skilled labor, leads to a more valuable output. The other data-based way to argue this is through the Solow Model, a simplified view of economic growth that starts by noting that a society will have more output if it has more labor, more capital, or both. If you actually try to use that model to predict things, your numbers are roughly right, but start to lag the measured outputs, and after a while that lag is quite substantial. We label it Total Factor Productivity, not so much because it's a measure of productivity but because productivity is a good term for what we're seeing but not measuring. Over sufficiently long periods, productivity can double, and has done so many times. (A bit more in the US, Japan, and Western Europe than in other places, but just about everybody on earth is richer than they would have been a generation ago.) One way to look at this is that if there's a period where total factor productivity has doubled, most of the world's output by the end of that period consists of returns on intangible capital. Some of that capital is narrow tacit knowledge: type a lot, and you'll get better at typing more words per minute. Pitch the same product or service to dozens or hundreds of people, and you a) learn how to compress the pitch into something that really works, and b) can let your mind wander a little bit while you rattle off the spiel. Dropping your keys and wallet off in the same place every time you get home, instead of choosing somewhere each time and then hunting them down when you leave, is its own little contribution to your economic balance sheet. So, going back to our original question, we have a fun answer to the socialist debate on personal property and capital. As it turns out, there's more capital than we thought, and some of the most valuable capital assets—math, languages, social norms, units of weight and measurement—are already under common ownership. They do have more generous social safety nets, partly because of differences in state capacity and partly because they're benefiting from defense spending that's paid for by those same US taxpayers—though, to complicate the picture further, that defense spending contributes to the dollar's reserve currency status, which means that these Californians, New Yorkers, and other Americans can, in the aggregate, consume more than they produce in order to sate the world's appetite for America's top export, the dollar. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/d67105e7?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)Here you're getting returns not just in the sense of saved time, but of increased certainty, which is another kind of capital. If there are two streams of cash flow that average the same amount over time and bounce around randomly, the one that bounces less is worth more. Note that this is true if the moves are random, but not necessarily true otherwise: a volatile stream of income consisting of a small loss most years and a big gain any time the market crashes is worth more than a stream with equal variance and the opposite correlation to other assets. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/2faa022e?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)They're also under common management, and, in fact, can change their nature and expand their size based entirely on the collective will of the people. The English language is collectively owned by its workers, who are in charge of it, fr, no cap. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/880efda8?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
You're on the free list for The Diff. Last week, paying subscribers read about A Word From Our SponsorsCan this really be true?ElsewhereAudience Capture at Two Levels" Does Crypto Add Value to Financial Markets?Setting aside questions of real-world utility, and setting aside the tradeoff between actually-useful things (some categories of remittances), potentially-useful ones (smart contracts for purposes other than liquidity provision for crypto speculation), and illegal uses (gambling, money laundering), there's an argument that So in the long run, an asset that's most attractive because its price performance makes it a pure diversifier will end up correlating with whatever existing holders are diversifying from. What does make an asset a good diversifier is if its fundamentals are uncorrelated with whatever drives other asset prices. And in that case, diversifying into it isn't just nice for market participants—it's also a way to provide capital for activities that diversify the overall economy. Continuation Funds, Club Deals, and the New Equity MarketSoftware PE firm Vista is - The deal in question is a continuation fund: they'd raised a fund in 2014, which acquired several software companies that they've placed under the same holding company umbrella. Now that the 2014 fund is reaching the end of its life, they're raising a pool of capital to buy that asset so they don't have to sell it just yet.
- The company itself is not just a single business, but a collection of them, and they plan to expand it through acquisitions. PE used to be more of a composting and scavenging enterprise—take a big business, often one that grew through acquisitions, and sell off some parts of it to more strategic owners before taking the more-focused remainder public. But PE firms increasingly like to back companies that flip this model, rolling up numerous companies in a category and taking them all public (this has worked for
[car washes](https://www.thediff.co/r/eb0f8978?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)($, Diff),[bowling alleys](https://www.thediff.co/r/53ced53b?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)($, Diff), and others). - The holding company merged with also-PE-acquired Citrix, and paid with equity, so its cap table includes not just Vista but Elliott Associates.
- If this deal goes through, it means that some of the companies involved will spend even longer as private companies rather than public ones.
What all of these have in common is that they're making the substance of PE a lot closer to that of public equities: a public company typically has a broad investor base, may grow through cash- and stock-based acquisitions, and has an indefinite life. A PE portfolio company used to have one shareholder, was more likely to shrink than grow, and would spend a finite amount of time in that state before getting sold. Estimating the long-term risk-adjusted returns of PE relative to public equities in this environment is best left as an exercise for the reader. Implementation DetailsThe FT has found that Anti-Goldilocks Economy for Junk LoansA good way to think about asset classes is to look at which macro fundamentals they (approximately) respond to: if you're positive on growth, you buy stocks; if you're worried about inflation, you choose commodities; if you're concerned about a long deflationary period, you might have a balanced portfolio of quality consumer staples and long-duration treasury bonds. And assets themselves can be rearranged to change their sensitivities to these factors: one thing that originally made junk bonds so popular as an asset class is that they gave bond investors a way to prosper in a high-growth, rising-rates environment—yes, the present value of the bond's cash flows is lower if, all else equal, rates are up—but that's an economic scenario where growth is probably improving the probability of receiving those promised cash flows, in a way that offsets some of the decline in their present value. (In practice, that's only fully-offset when the bonds are very junky indeed, but relative performance helps.) Less creditworthy corporate borrowers have correctly responded to this dynamic by opting in to floating-rate products, but Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. See a sampling of current open roles below: - Growing edtech company with product/market fit is looking for an evangelist who is passionate about gifted and talented education and can tell data-driven stories online. (Remote)
- A new data startup that's seeing early traction bringing transparency to a $1.5tr asset class is looking for a frontend-focused generalist engineer. 1-3 years of experience, or compelling internships and side projects. (West Palm Beach, FL).
- A company building ML-powered tools to accelerate developer productivity is looking for ML researchers with a knack for converting research into Github repos. (Washington DC area)
- A well-funded company building AI-powered compliance tools is looking for legal analysts who can help build and refine AI models. 2+ years of experience in a highly regulated industry, with compliance exposure. (NYC)
- A company building the new pension of the 21st century and building universal basic capital is looking for an experienced frontend engineer with iOS, Android, or React Native experience. (NYC)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. |
||||||||||
|
|
|
||||||||||
|