---
subject: "AI #134: If Anyone Reads It"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-09-18 13:04:08
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
It is book week. As in the new book by Eliezer Yudkowsky and Nate Sores, The rest of the AI world cooperated by not overshadowing the book, while still doing plenty, such as releasing a GPT-5 variant specialized for Codex, acing another top programming competition, attempting to expropriate the OpenAI nonprofit in one of the largest thefts in human history and getting sued again for wrongful death. You know. The usual. Table of Contents[Language Models Offer Mundane Utility](https://substack.com/redirect/bbf28735-2fdc-4eab-a8b4-0142023b2e5a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/bbf28735-2fdc-4eab-a8b4-0142023b2e5a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)What are people using ChatGPT for?[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/d0504f35-34ca-45ca-a37d-308731c53387?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Anthropic finds three bugs.[Huh, Upgrades.](https://substack.com/redirect/86a552c2-8424-4625-a7d1-8b6bda3caabc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)OpenAI admits we all want fine tuned control over GPT-5.[On Your Marks.](https://substack.com/redirect/18d81686-f8c9-4d25-8d2f-132b437ac2e7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)OpenAI aces the 2025 ICPC and also blackjack basic strategy.[GPT-5 Codex](https://substack.com/redirect/6cbcd120-f881-4686-ac3b-368122a215a8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/6cbcd120-f881-4686-ac3b-368122a215a8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A specialized GPT-5 version now exists for Codex-style coding.[Choose Your Fighter.](https://substack.com/redirect/b388b189-c757-4d43-ac88-d1d1038e00b2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Analysis of a wide variety of AI productivity apps.[Get My Agent On The Line.](https://substack.com/redirect/a73608df-ae6f-43f6-be3b-8040a5cd8d7a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The prompt injection problem continues.[Claude Codes.](https://substack.com/redirect/5c012b13-ee4b-4763-9849-fd96cc128a67?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Claude code team writes 95% of their code in Claude Code.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon.](https://substack.com/redirect/f4131bed-ba6e-4e8f-a5ef-c49b35369ab7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Don’t fall for superficial indicators alone.[You Drive Me Crazy.](https://substack.com/redirect/065574bb-0fbc-49c6-b83d-f7159b277699?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Another wrongful death lawsuit, this one on shakier ground.[Not Another Teen Chatbot.](https://substack.com/redirect/a511ed5c-9b18-400c-a827-e4da6100a79d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Balancing privacy, freedom and the art of the snitch.[They Took Our Jobs.](https://substack.com/redirect/309669fc-b537-418b-856d-b08b37a0327c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Is that good, actually? Some sources say yes.[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/91b96ed6-57e5-4f66-bb08-029b1a36b617?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)SFF distributes whopping $34 million in grants.[Introducing.](https://substack.com/redirect/6ae130e9-fc88-4407-8c2d-471df626fb42?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Agent 3 from Replit, nothing to see here.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/130adea9-b987-430a-853e-de3b8a9a56ad?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)xAI Colossus 2, DeepSeek paper and tests, and more.[Show Me the Money.](https://substack.com/redirect/8d8b95c0-d0a0-4c30-b205-9919fb74392b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Groq, Microsoft, Stargate UK.[The Mask Comes Off.](https://substack.com/redirect/1b5abac5-281a-43f0-b6cc-b8de3db555e2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The attempted greatest theft in history continues.[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/546a1ffc-556d-4cc3-a830-8e0f11d619de?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The easy tasks are easier, still not actually that easy.[The Quest for Sane Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/f7673b7c-4910-4182-8904-99abdaca441f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)SB 53 heads to Newsom’s desk.[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/6585f261-ad3c-4b4e-8bd3-2b3ae435a547?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Demis Hassabis.[He Just Tweeted It Out](https://substack.com/redirect/c3f0f958-a986-4d6c-9428-ac6444cc4c75?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/c3f0f958-a986-4d6c-9428-ac6444cc4c75?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Yes, they literally care only about market share.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/c21491b5-7a59-4eb2-a4af-eb95842fe7ff?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Some remarkably good attempts at intuition pumps.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/e497d30e-d38a-4b00-b4a5-8d036de3c5f1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Time to bail?[Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/b664d416-4016-4975-b63b-f77e864aef56?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Ben Landau-Taylor.[The Lighter Side.](https://substack.com/redirect/1ad6fce4-f0a7-4514-ada6-c54a6114e1ea?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)That’s not even the real Jerry.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
I do not think ‘AI is evil,’ but it is strange how people think that showing AI having a good effect in one case is often considered a strong argument that AI is good, either current AI or even all future more capable AIs. As an example that also belongs here:
I think it is the most useful to talk about diminishing returns, and then talk about increasing value you can get from those diminishing returns. But the right frame to use depends heavily on context.
Anthropic offers The wealthier and more advanced a place is, the more it uses Claude. Washington D.C. uses Claude more per capita than any state, including California. Presumably San Francisco on its own would rank higher. America uses Claude frequently but the country with the highest Claude use per capita is Israel. Automation has now overtaken augmentation as the most common use mode, and directive interaction is growing to now almost 40% of all usage. Coding and administrative tasks dominate usage especially in the API.
They also tell us overall growth remains strong, on pace to saturate the market (as in: people) fully within a few years: There’s a lot of fun and useful detail in Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane UtilityAnthropic offers a postmortem on a temporary Claude performance regression.
Anthropic promises more sensitive evaluations, quality evaluations in more places and faster debugging tools. I see no reason to doubt their account of what happened. The obvious thing to notice is that if your investigation finds three distinct bugs, it seems likely there are bugs all the time that you are failing to notice? Huh, Upgrades
On Your Marks
My request is to next run this same test using a variation of blackjack that is slightly different so models can’t rely on memorized basic strategy. Let’s say for example that any number of 7s are always worth a combined 14, the new target is 24, and dealer stands on 20. GPT-5 CodexThere (actually) were not enough GPT-5 variants, so we now have an important new one, GPT-5-Codex.
This is presumably the future. In order to code well you do still need to understand the world, but there’s a lot you can do to make a better coder that will do real damage on non-coding tasks. It’s weird that it took this long to get a distinct variant. Codex is kind of an autorouter, choosing within the model how much thinking to do based on the task, and using the full range far more than GPT-5 normally does. Time spent can range from almost no time up to more than 7 hours.
They report only modest gains in SWE-bench, from 72.8% to 74.5%, but substantial gains in code refactoring tasks, from 33.9% to 51.3%. They claim comments got a lot better and more accurate. They now offer code review they say matches stated intent of a PR and that Codex is generally rebuilt and rapidly improving.
The ‘humans are still better at designing and managing for 50 years’ line is an interesting speculation but also seems mostly like cope at this point. The real questions are sitting there, only barely out of reach.
A true story:
Writing code is hard but yes the harder part was always figuring out what to do. Actually doing it can be a long hard slog, and can take up almost all of your time. If actually doing it is now easy and not taking up that time, now you have to think. Thinking is hard. People hate it. Choose Your Fighter
This is in addition to the two most important categories of AI use right now, which are the core LLM services that are the true generalists (ChatGPT, Claude and Gemini) and AI coding specialists (Claude Code, OpenAI Codex, Jules, Cursor, Windsurf).
There’s this whole world of specialized AI agents that, given sufficient context and setup, can do various business tasks for you. If you are comfortable with the associated risks, there is clearly some value here once you are used to using the products, have set up the appropriate permissions and precautions, and so on. If you are doing repetitive business tasks where you need the final product rather than to experience the process, I would definitely be checking out such tools. For the rest of us, there are three key questions: Is this tool good enough that it means I can trust the results and especially prioritizations, and not have to redo or check all the work myself? Below a certain threshold, you don’t actually save time. Is time spent here wasted because better future agents will render it obsolete, or does practice now help you be ready for the future better versions? How seriously do you take the security risks? Do you have to choose between the sandboxed version that’s too annoying to bother versus the unleashed version that should fill you with terror?
So far I haven’t loved my answers and thus haven’t been investigating such tools. The question is when this becomes a mistake. If you want me to try out your product, offering me free access and a brief pitch is probably an excellent idea. You could also pay for my time, if you want to do that.
Those ChatGPT retention numbers are crazy high. Gemini isn’t offering the goods regular people want, or wasn’t prior to Nana-Banana, at the same level. It’s not as fun or useful a tool for the newbie user. Google still has much work to do. Get My Agent On The LinePrompt injections via email remain an unsolved problem.
The only known solution is to not offer attack surface, which means Unfortunately, untrusted content includes any website with comments, your incoming messages and your incoming emails. So you lose a lot of productive value if you give up any one of the three legs here.
The good news is that for now prompt injection attempts are rare. This presumably stops being true shortly after substantial numbers of people make their systems vulnerable to generally available prompt injections. Best case even with supervisory filters is that then you’d then be looking at a cat-and-mouse game similar to previous spam or virus wars.
A lot of things true at the limit are false in practice. This is one of them, but it is true that the better the agents relative to the task, the more unified a solution you want. Claude CodesCareful with those calculations, the quote is even a month old by now.
Whoa, Garry. Those are two different things. If Claude Code writes 95% of the code, that does not mean that you still write the same amount of code as before, and Claude Code then writes the other 95%. It means you are now spending your time primarily supervising Claude Code. The amount of code you write yourself is going down quite a lot. In a similar contrast, contra to Dario Amodei’s predictions AI is not writing 90% of the code in general, but this could be true inside the AI frontier labs specifically?
Predictions that fail to account for diffusion rates are still bad predictions, but this suggests that We Have The Technology to be mainly coding with AI at this point, and that this level of adoption is baked in even if it takes time. I’m definitely excited to find the time to take the new generation for a spin.
That’s good and optimal if you think ‘generate AI takeoff as fast as possible’ is good and optimal, rather than something that probably leads to everyone dying or humans losing control over the future, and you don’t think that getting more other things doing better first would be beneficial in avoiding such negative outcomes. I think that a pure ‘coding first’ strategy that focuses first on the most dangerous thing possible, AI R&D, is the worst-case scenario in terms of ensuring we end up with good outcomes. We’re doubling down on the one deeply dangerous place. All the other potential applications that we’re making less progress on? Those things are great. We should (with notably rare exceptions) do more of those things faster, including because it puts us in better position to act wisely and sanely regarding potential takeoff. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse SoonRecent events have once again reinforced that our misinformation problems are mostly demand side rather than supply side. There has been a lot misinformation out there from various sides about those events, but all of it ‘old fashioned misinformation’ rather than involving AI or deepfakes. In the cases where we do see deepfakes shared, Detection of AI generated content is
I notice my own AI detector (as in, my instincts in my brain) says this very clearly is not AI. The em-dash construction is not the traditional this-that or modifier em-dash, it’s a strange non-standard transition off of an IMO. The list is in single dashes following a non-AI style pattern. The three dots and triple exclamation points are a combination of non-AI styles. GPT-5 Pro was less confident, but it isn’t trained for this and did still point in the direction of more likely than random to be human. You Drive Me Crazy
Yes, the AI, here called Hero, was encouraging Juliana to use the app, but seems to have very much been on the purely helpful side of things from what I see here?
The objection seems to be that the chatbot tried to be Juliana’s supportive friend and talk her out of it, and did not sufficiently aggressively push Juliana onto Responsible Authority Figures?
Juliana’s case is a tragedy, but the details are if anything exonerating. It seems wild to blame Character AI. If her friend had handled the situation the same way, I certainly hope we wouldn’t be suing her friend. There were also two other lawsuits filed the same day involving other children, and all three have potentially troubling allegations around sexual chats and addictive behaviors, but from what I see here the AIs are clearly being imperfect but net helpful in suicidal situations. This seems very different from the original case of Adam Raine that caused Character.ai to make changes. If these are the worst cases, things do not look so bad. The parents then moved on to Not Another Teen ChatbotEverything involving children creates awkward tradeoffs, and puts those offering AI and other tech products in a tough spot. People demand you both do and do not give them their privacy and their freedom, and demand you keep them safe but where people don’t agree on what safe means. It’s a rough spot. What is the right thing?
As I’ve said before I see the main worry here as OpenAI being too quick to escalate and intervene. I’d like to see a very high bar for breaking privacy unless there is a threat of large scale harm of a type that is enabled by access to highly capable AI.
Here we have full agreement. Adults should be able to get all of this, and ideally go far beyond flirtation if that is what they want and clearly request.
This is the standard problem that to implement any controls requires ID gating, and ID gating is terrible on many levels even when done responsibly.
To state the first obvious problem, in order to contact a user’s parents you have to verify who the parents are. Which is plausibly quite a large pain at best and a privacy or freedom nightmare rather often. The other problem is that, as I discussed early this week, I think running off to tell authority figures about suicidal ideation is often going to be a mistake. OpenAI says explicitly that if the teen is in distress and they can’t reach a parent, they might escalate directly to law enforcement. Users are going to interact very differently if they think you’re going to snitch on them, and telling your parents about suicidal ideation is going to be seen as existentially terrible by quite a lot of teen users. It destroys the power of the AI chat as a safe space. Combined, this makes the under 18 experience plausibly quite different and bad, in ways that simply limiting to age-appropriate content or discussion would not be bad. They say ‘when we identify a user is under 18’ they will default to the under 18 experience, and they will default to under 18 if they are ‘not confident.’ We will see how this plays out in practice. ChatGPT presumably has a lot of context to help decide what it thinks of a user, but it’s not clear that will be of much use, including the bootstrap problem of chatting enough to be confident they’re over 18 before you’re confident they’re over 18.
They Took Our Jobs
The French have a point. Jobs are primarily a cost, not a benefit. A lot of nasty things still come along with a large shortage of jobs, and a lot of much nastier things come with the AI capabilities that were involved in causing that job shortage.
I’m sure AI won’t do anything else more interesting than allow productivity growth. Roon points out correctly that Jason is confusing individual firm productivity and profits with general productivity and general profits. If Amazon and only Amazon gets to eliminate its drivers and factory works while still delivering as good or better products, then yes it will enjoy fantastic profits. That scenario seems extremely unlikely. If Amazon can do it, so can Amazon’s competitors, along with other factories and shippers and other employers across the board. Costs drop, but so (as Jason says to Xavi) do prices. There’s no reason to presume Amazon sustainably captures a lot of economic profits from automation. Jason is not outright predicting AGI in this particular quote, since you can have automated Amazon factories and self-driving delivery trucks well short of that. What he explicitly is predicting is that hours worked per week will drop dramatically, as these automations happen across the board. This means either government forcing people somehow to work dramatically reduced hours, or (far more likely) mass unemployment. The chart of course is a deeply embarrassing thing to be QTing. The S&P 500 is forward looking, the unemployment rate is backward looking. They cannot possibly be moving together in real time in a causal manner unless one is claiming The Efficient Market Hypothesis Is False to an extent that is Obvious Nonsense. Get Involved
My plan is to have a 2025 edition of The Big Nonprofits Post available some time in October or November. If you applied to SFF and do not wish to appear in that post, or want to provide updated information, please contact me. Introducing
In Other AI News
As in, it’s cool to have a Nature paper, and the transparency is very cool, but it’s also rather late for the paper.
Show Me the Money
The Mask Comes OffOpenAI and Microsoft
That one detail is ‘we remain focused on delivering the best AI tools for everyone.’ With a ‘shared commitment to safety’ which sounds like OpenAI is committed about as much as Microsoft is committed, which is ‘to the extent not doing so would hurt shareholder value.’ Notice that OpenAI and Microsoft have the same mission and no one thinks Microsoft is doing anything but maximizing profits. Does OpenAI’s statement here sound like their mission to ensure AGI benefits all humanity? Or does it sound like a traditional tech startup or Big Tech company? I do not begrudge Microsoft maximizing its profits, but the whole point of this was that OpenAI was supposed to pretend its governance and priorities would remain otherwise. They are not doing a good job of pretending. The $100 billion number is a joke. OpenAI is touting this big amount of value as if to say, oh what a deal, look how generous we are being. Except OpenAI is doing stock sales at $500 billion. So ‘over $100 billion’ means they intend to offer only 20% of the company, down from their current effective share of (checks notes) most of it. Notice how they are trying to play off like this is some super generous new grant of profits, rather than a strong candidate for the largest theft in human history.
OpenAI’s nonprofit already has a much larger equity stake currently, and much tighter and stronger control than we expect them to have in a PBC. Bret’s statement on equity is technically correct, but there’s no mistaking what Bret tried to do here. The way profit distribution works at OpenAI is that the nonprofit is at the end of the waterfall. Others collect their profits first, then the nonprofit gets the remaining upside. I’ve argued before, back when OpenAI was valued at $165 billion, that the nonprofit was in line for a majority of expected future profits, because OpenAI was a rocket to the moon even in the absence of AGI, which meant it was probably going to either never pay out substantial profits or earn trillions. Now that the value of OpenAI minus the nonprofit’s share has tripled to $500 billion, that is even more true. We are far closer to the end of the waterfall. The nonprofit’s net present value expected share of future profits has risen quite a lot. They must be compensated accordingly, as well as for the reduction in their control rights, and the attorneys general must ensure this. How much profit interest is the nonprofit entitled to in the PBC? Why not ask their own AI, GPT-5-Pro?
It seems fair to say that if your own AI says you’re stealing hundreds of billions, then you’re stealing hundreds of billions? And you should be prevented from doing that?
I understand that Silicon Valley does not work this way. They think that if you have equity that violates their norms, or that you ‘don’t deserve’ or that doesn’t align with your power or role, or whose presence hurts the company or no longer ‘makes sense,’ that it is good and right to restructure to take that equity away. I get that from that perspective, this level of theft is fine and normal in this type of situation, and the nonprofit is being treated generously and should pray that they don’t treat it generously any further, and this is more than enough indulgence to pay out. I say, respectfully, no. It does not work that way. That is not the law. Nor is it the equities. Nor is it the mission, or the way to ensure that humanity all benefits from AGI, or at least does not all die rapidly after AGI’s creation. They also claim that the nonprofit will continue to ‘control the PBC’ but that control is almost certain to be far less meaningful than the current level of control, and unlikely to mean much in a crisis. Those control rights, to the extent they could be protected without a sufficient equity interest, are actually the even more important factor. It would be wonderful to have more trillions of dollars for the nonprofit, and to avoid giving everyone else the additional incentives to juice the stock price, but what matters for real is the nonprofit’s ability to effectively control OpenAI in a rapidly developing future situation of supreme importance. Those are potentially,
The announcement of $50 million in grants highlights (very cheaply, given they intend to steal equity and control rights worth hundreds of billions of dollars) that they intend to pivot the nonprofit’s mission into a combination of generic AI-related philanthropy and OpenAI’s new marketing division, as opposed to ensuring that AGI is developed safely, does not kill us all and benefits all humanity. ‘AI literacy,’ ‘community innovation’ and ‘economic opportunity’ all sure sound like AI marketing and directly growing OpenAI’s business. I do want to thank OpenAI for affirming that their core mission is ‘ensuring AGI benefits all of humanity,’ and importantly that it is not to build that AGI themselves. This is in direct contradiction to what they wrote in their bad faith letter to Gavin Newsom trying to gut SB 53. Quiet Speculations
The assumption by Tyler here that we will be in an ‘economic normal’ world in which we do not meaningfully get superintelligence or other transformational effects is so ingrained it is not even stated, so I do think this counts as a form of AI progress pessimism, although it is still optimism relative to for example most economists, or those expressing strong pessimism that I was most pushing back against. Within that frame, I think Tyler is underestimating the available amount of improvement in easy tasks. There is a lot of room for LLMs even in pure chatbot form on easy questions to become not only faster and cheaper, but also far easier to use and have their full potential unlocked, and better at understanding what question to answer in what way, and at anticipating because most people don’t know what questions to ask or how to ask them. These quality of life improvements will likely make a large difference in how much mundane utility we can get, even if they don’t abstractly score as rapid progress. There are also still a lot of easy tasks that are unsolved, or are not solved with sufficient ease of use yet, or tasks that can be moved from the hard task category into the easy task category. So many agents tasks, or tasks requiring drawing upon context, should be easy but for now remain hard. AIs still are not doing much shopping and booking for us, or much handling of our inboxes or calendars, or making aligned customized recommendations, despite these seeming very easy, or doing other tasks that should be easy. Coding is the obvious clear area where we see very rapid improvement and there is almost unlimited room for further improvement, mostly with no diffusion barriers, and which then accelerates much else, including making the rest of AI much easier to use even if we don’t think AI coding and research will much accelerate AI progress.
The Quest for Sane Regulations
Meta hasn’t endorsed the bill,
OpenAI’s rhetoric against SB 53 was terrible and in bad faith,
They are concerned that the bill does not impact smaller developers? Really? You would have liked them to modify the bill to lower the thresholds so it impacts smaller developers, because you’re that concerned about catastrophic risks, so you think Newsom should veto the bill? It is at times like this I realize how little chutzpah I actually possess. White House’s
If AI rises sufficiently in public salience, money will stop working even if there isn’t similar money on the other side. Salience will absolutely rise steadily over time, but it likely takes a few years before nine figures stops being enough. That could be too late.
Dustin asks very good questions, which the Politico article does not answer. Is this a publicity stunt, a way of hiding who makes the decisions, or something real? How does it work, what tech and techniques are behind it? The world needs details. Mira Mutari, can you help us find out, perhaps?
Anthropic is reported to be annoying the White House However, we keep seeing reports that the White House is annoyed at Anthropic, so if I was Anthropic I would sit down (unofficially, via some channel) with the White House and figure out which actions are actually a problem to what extent and which ones aren’t real issues, and then make a decision which fights are worthwhile. Chip CityThere is some good news on the South Korean front, as after
It also seems NIH grantmaking
China is telling Chinese companies to cut off purchases of Nvidia chips,
Major damage has still been done.
Even if those workers were there for long term research or employment, this arrangement would still be an obvious win for America. When they’re here to train American workers, there is only pure upside. Here is David Cowan being the latest to
Here is some
There are no claims here that there was a strict Quid Pro Quo, or otherwise an outright illegal act. If the President is legally allowed to have a crypto company into which those seeking his favor can pour billions of dollars, then that’s certainly not how I would have set up the laws, but that seems to be the world we live in. Technically speaking, yes, the UAE can pour billions into Trump’s private crypto, and then weeks later suddenly get access to the most powerful chips on the planet over the national security objections of many, in a situation with many things that appear to be conflicts of interest, and that’s all allowed, right in the open. However. It doesn’t look good. It really, really, profoundly does not look good.
The objections that I have seen don’t claim the story isn’t true. The objections claim that This Is Fine. That this is how business is done in the Middle East, or in 2025. I notice this response does not make me feel better about having sold the chips.
The Week in Audio
The ‘5-10 years is a long timeline’ issue can lead to important miscommunications. As in, I bet that this happened: Demis Hassabis told someone important, such as a high government official, ‘oh we are not anywhere close to building AGI, we don’t know how to do that yet.’ What he meant was ‘we are probably 5-10 years away from building AGI and the world transforming shortly thereafter.’ What the person heard was ‘AGI is far away, we don’t have to worry about it.’
Whoops! That’s not at all what Demis Hassabis said. He Just Tweeted It OutWhich I appreciate, now there’s no pretending they aren’t literally saying this.
It’s not only market share, it is ‘market share of tokens generated.’ Which is an obviously terrible metric. Tokens generated is deeply different from value generated, or even from dollars spent or compute spent. Tokens means you treat tokens from GPT-5-Pro or Opus 4.1 the same as tokens from a tiny little thing that costs 0.1% as much to run and isn’t actually doing much of anything. It’s going to vastly overestimate China’s actual share of the market, and underestimate ours, even if you really do only care about market share. But no, literally, that’s what he thinks matters. Market share, measured in what chips people use. China can do all the things and build all the models and everything else, so long as it does it on Nvidia hardware it’s all good. This argument has never made any sense whatsoever.
We can start with that last statement. I notice he says ‘what Huawei wants’ not ‘what China wants,’ the same way the White House seems to be making decisions based on ‘what Nvidia wants’ not ‘what America wants.’ Yes, obviously, if your literal only metric is sales of chips, then in the short term you want to sell all the chips to all the customers, because you’ve defined that as your goal. (The long term is complicated because chips are the lifeblood of AI and the economies and strategic powers involved, so even without AGI this could easily go the other way.) Now, on those four points, including drawing some things from his other interviews: The United States is absolutely supply constrained on advanced AI chips, in the sense that for every chip that Nvidia can physically make, there is a Western customer who wants to buy that chip at prevailing market prices. I am confused what else it could mean to not be supply constrained. If I am wrong, someone please correct me. Say, ‘Nvidia offered to sell more AI chips to Western customers, and the chips went unsold, look here.’ I apologize in advance if this happened and I missed it but I have not heard of this.
China can of course manufacture things in general. That is common knowledge. Chips, especially highly advanced AI chips, are a much tricker question. China can manufacture some chips. China cannot manufacture, any time soon, anything like enough chips to meet domestic demand, and cannot manufacture chips of anything like the same quality as Nvidia, indeed as we see elsewhere they are in danger of their capacity declining in 2026 down to below 2024 levels if we enforce our export controls properly. I am confused what false belief he ascribes to those who oppose exports. I see no evidence provided that China can meaningfully improve its chip manufacturing in response to export restrictions, given the strong market, national and government incentives already present.
China can build good models behind the frontier. It cannot build frontier AI models that are as good as those from the top American labs at any given time. I am curious what the supposed false belief is here. Sriram clearly, based on statements here, overrated to The DeepSeek Moment, which he today still calls a ‘Sputnik moment,’ as did many others (including myself at first). He does acknowledge that many associated claims proved ultimately overstated. Alas, he still seems to believe that America has ‘only a small lead’ on AI, which simply is not true (depending on what ‘small’ means, but as I’ve said before the lead is a lot bigger than it looks because fast following is easier, and we’re comparing the best aspects of Chinese models to American ones, and several other factors). He incorrectly states that at the time OpenAI had the only other reasoning model, which was not true, Google had already released a reasoning version of Gemini Flash that was actually reasonably strong but once again they failed marketing forever, so this has been memory holed. Alas, all of this fed into this obsession with ‘racing.’ This question is highly load bearing to Sriram. Otherwise, we be so worried about a rival tech stack, when the Chinese also have no chips to sell and won’t for years at least, even if the tech stack was meaningfully a thing? He says that DeepSeek proved ‘China can build AI models just fine’ so we shouldn’t worry about America releasing open models that could then be copied or distilled or studied or modified by China. He thinks that this is a knock-down argument, and that thus there is no danger of this. And that seems very obviously absurd.
The United States is, according to the labs themselves and many others, on track to build AGI and then ASI. If you look at their clear public statements it is very, very obvious that we are working towards making every effort at building ASI. If you don’t think we might build an ASI within 5-10 years, time to pay attention. That is the entire company mission of OpenAI and their employees keep going on Twitter to talk about building AGI and ASI, like, all the time. Dario Amodei, CEO of Anthropic, as well as their policy head Jack Clark, actively predict AGI and then ASI within a few years. Demis Hassabis, CEO of Google DeepMind, expects AGI in 5-10 years, which means ASI shortly thereafter, and considers this a long timeline. Elon Musk at xAI is looking to build it. He said ‘Grok 5 might be AGI.’ Mark Zuckerberg at Meta is forming a Superintelligence division and throwing money at it (although to be fair in this case he might well not mean actual superintelligence). I worry that statements are being misinterpreted here, so for example Demis says ‘it will take us 5-10 years to build ASI’ and that gets interpreted as ‘we are not building ASI.’ But the correct reaction is the opposite! Note that Sriram affirms he did read AI 2027 and he does expect an ‘event horizon’ around AI to happen at some point. The evidence he cites for this claim in the Politico interview is to simply say there are no signs of this happening, which flat out obviously isn’t true, and he presents no concrete evidence or real arguments for his position, besides ‘I don’t see anything close to AGIs yet.’ I would also note that yesterday we had OpenAI’s Hieu Pham saying ‘ [There will be some people disagreeing this is AGI. I have no words for them](https://substack.com/redirect/9859670c-3b87-4474-a498-eb89b2658038?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Hats off. Congrats to the team that made this happen.’ You don’t have to agree to this claim, and I don’t, but it seems hard to be confident AGI is far.
On last point Neil lists, the Woke AI EO, my understanding matches Sriram’s. I wrote up additional notes on the rest of the contents of those interviews, but ultimately decided Neil is right that the above are Sriram’s central points, and since his other rhetoric isn’t new further engagement here would be unproductive. Rhetorical Innovation
Roon is correct at the limit here, in sufficiently close to perfect competition you cannot be kind, but there’s a big gap between perfect competition and monopoly:
As I wrote in The question is, will AGI or superintelligence change that, either during or after its creation? AIs have many useful properties that bring you closer to perfect competition, enforcing much faster and stronger feedback loops and modifications, and allowing winners to rapidly copy themselves, and so on. If you propose giving similar highly capable AIs to a very large number of people and groups, which will then engage in competition, you need a plan for why this doesn’t cause (very rapid) During the race towards AGI and superintelligence, competitive and capitalistic pressures reduce ability to be kind in ordinary ways, but while it is still among humans this has happened many times before in other contexts and is usually importantly bounded.
Exactly. The majority of uses of the term ‘doomer’ in the context of AI are effectively either an attempt to shut down debate (as in anything that is ‘doomer’ must therefore be wrong) similar to calling something a term like ‘racist,’ or effectively a slur, or both.
Why does The Washington Post keep publishing In this case, not only does he write especially terrible word salad about how AI can only pose a danger if intelligence can be measured by a single number whereas no machine can ever fully grasp the universe whereas only humans can embody deep meaning (meme of Walter White asking what the hell are you talking about?), he kind of gives the game away. If you’re writing as a de facto Nvidia lobbyist trying to tar everyone who opposes you with name calling, perhaps don’t open with a quote where you had dinner with Nvidia CEO Jensen Huang and he complains about everyone being ‘so negative’?
As Dean Ball says, you very much would not want to live in a world with badly aligned, poorly understood and highly capable neural networks. Not that, if it were to arise, you would get to live in such a world for very long. In this case, Neil (including in follow-ups, paraphrased) seems to be saying ‘oh, there are already lots of complex systems we don’t understand effectively optimizing for things we don’t care about, so highly advanced future AI we don’t understand effectively optimizing for things we don’t care about would be nothing new under the sun, therefore not worth worrying out.’ File under ‘claims someone said out loud with straight face, without realizing what they’d said, somehow?’
Eliezer offers yet another metaphorical attempt, here reproduced in full, which hopefully is a good intuition pump for many people? See if you think it resonates.
Eliezer said ‘in the limit’ and very obviously physical activities at different locations governed by highly compute-limited biological organisms with even more limited communication abilities are not in anything like the limit, what are you even talking about? The second example is worse. Yet people seem to think these are epic dunks on a very clearly defined claim of something else entirely. The first part of the actual claim, that seems straightforwardly correct to me, that a multiagent framework only makes sense as a way to overcome bottlenecks and limitations, and wouldn’t exist if you didn’t face rate or compute or other physical limitations. The second claim, that SGD can more easily bake things into a single agent if you can scale enough, is more interesting. A good response is something like ‘yes with sufficient ability to scale at every step but in practice efficiently matters quite a lot and actually SGD as currently implemented operates at cross-purposes such that a multi-agent framework has big advantages.’ I’d also note that the ‘delight nexus’ is absolutely from the parable Don’t Build The Delight Nexus Either, Danielle’s scenario that I mentioned yesterday now has the Eliezer stamp of approval.
Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
What should perhaps worry you is that this work doesn’t look different from the work OpenAI and other labs should be doing anyway. This looks like good work but practical near term non-unique work. Good, but we’ll need to do better.
There’s a lot of non-obvious data here to dive into. I’m curious what we’ll find.
Both reports, and the one from UK AISI, stress the value of rapid iterative feedback. Users are telling each other to give thumbs down to GPT-5
Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing EveryoneHe’s not as far as I can tell, I don’t think this is anything like fully right, and it definitely is not complete, but this is one of the important dynamics going on, so consider the implications.
The inevitable result of sufficiently advanced AI is that it becomes the key driver of military power. Either you halt AI progress soon or that is going to happen. Which means, even under maximally human-friendly assumptions that I don’t expect and definitely don’t happen by accident, as in the best possible scenarios? None of the potential outcomes are good. They mostly end with the AIs fully in charge and directing our future, and things going off the rails in ways we already observe in human governments, only vastly more so, in ways even more alien to what we value, and much faster, without the ability to overthrow them or defeat them in a war when things get fully out of hand. If you know your history, they get fully out of hand a lot. Reasonably often regimes start upending all of life, taking all the resources and directly enslaving, killing or imprisoning large percentages of their populations. Such regimes would design systems to ensure no one could get out line. Up until recently, we’ve been extremely fortunate that such regimes have been reliably overthrown or defeated, in large part because when you turned against humans you got highly inefficient and also pissed off the humans, and the humans ultimately did still hold the power. What happens when those are no longer constraints? I always push back hard against the idea that corporations or governments count as ‘superintelligences,’ because they don’t. They’re an importantly different type of powerful entity. But it’s hard to deny, whatever your political persuasion, that our political systems and governments are misaligned with human values, in ways that are spiraling out of control, and where the humans seem mostly powerless to stop this. The Lighter Side
In that order. We’ll still take it.
You’ll be seeing this again when the time is right.
A technically better answer would be to let them post, but to have a setting that automatically blocks all such bots, and have it default to being on. You're currently a free subscriber to |