---
subject: "Sora What"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-02-22 18:05:48
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Hours after How Sora WorksHow does it work? That does not mean there are not important other innovations. I presume that there are. They simply are not talking about the other improvements. We should not underestimate the value of throwing in massively more compute and getting a lot of the fiddly details right. That has been the formula for some time now. Some people think that OpenAI was using a game engine to learn movement.
Gary Marcus keeps noting how
Yann LeCun, Sora Is Technically ImpressiveYes, Sora is definitely technically impressive. It was not, however, unexpected.
Altman’s account spent much of last Thursday making videos for people’s requests, although not so many that they couldn’t cherry pick the good ones. As usual, there are failures that look stupid, mistakes ‘a person would never make’ and all that. And there are flashes of absolute brilliance. How impressive?
Sora What’s it Good For?What are we going to do with this ability to make videos? At what look like Sora’s current capabilities level? Seems like not a lot. I strongly agree with Sully here:
I do not think that Sora and its ilk will be anywhere near ready, by 2025, to create actually watchable content, in the sense of anyone sane wanting to watch it. That goes double for things generated directly from prompts, rather than bespoke transformations and expansions of existing creative work, and some forms of customization, dials or switches you can turn or flip, that are made much easier to assemble, configure and serve. I do think there’s a lot of things that can be done. But I think there is a rather large period where ‘use AI methods to make tweaks possible and practical’ is good, but almost no one in practice wants much more than that. I think there is this huge benefit to knowing that the thing was specifically made by a particular set of people, and seeing their choices, and having everything exist in that context. And I do think we will mostly want to retain the social reference points and interactions, including for games. There is a ton of value there. You want to compare your experience to someone else’s. That does not mean that AI couldn’t get sufficiently good to overcome that, but I think the threshold is high. As a concrete example, right now I am watching the show Severance on Apple TV. So far I have liked it a lot, but the ways it is good are intertwined with it being a show written by humans, and those creators making choices to tell stories and explore concepts. If an AI managed to come up with the same exact show, I would be super impressed by that to be sure, but also the show would not be speaking to me in the same way. Until we can say exactly what we want, and get it, mostly I expect no dice. |