---
subject: "Ideological Reversals Amongst Economists"
from: "Marginal REVOLUTION <donotreply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-06-06 07:01:16
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tyler Cowen", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2466199532210586699", "UNREAD"]
---
Research in economics often carries direct political implications, with findings supporting either right-wing or left-wing perspectives. But what happens when a researcher known for publishing right-wing findings publishes a paper with left-wing findings (or vice versa)? We refer to these instances as ideological reversals. This study explores whether such researchers face penalties – such as losing their existing audience without attracting a new one – or if they are rewarded with a broader audience and increased citations. The answers to these questions are crucial for understanding whether academia promotes the advancement of knowledge or the reinforcement of echo chambers. In order to identify ideological reversals, we begin by categorizing papers included in meta-analyses of key literatures in economics as “right” or “left” based on their findings relative to other papers in their literature (e.g., the presence or absence of disemployment effects in the minimum wage literature). We then scrape the abstracts (and other metadata) of every economics paper ever published, and we deploy machine learning in order to categorize the ideological implications of these papers. We find that reversals are associated with gaining a broader audience and more citations. This result is robust to a variety of checks, including restricting analysis to the citation trajectory of papers already published before an author's reversal. Most optimistically, authors who have left-to-right (right-to-left) reversals not only attract a new rightwing (left-wing) audience for their recent work, this new audience also engages with and cites the author's previous left-wing (right-wing) papers, thereby helping to break down echo chambers.
That is from [a new paper](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=27bf57dc46d15855ca36a51a77665224ba6875c10e7ec66a6b2408d330c4ea1f&blog_id=42693868&post_id=90820&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=6daabf9f698bd9ca792bf4c531b1f793&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYW5kZXJzb24udWNsYS5lZHUvc2l0ZXMvZGVmYXVsdC9maWxlcy9kb2N1bWVudC8yMDI1LTAzL0tuZXBwZXIlMjBhbmQlMjBXaGVhdG9uJTIwJTI4MjAyNSUyOSUyMC0lMjBDYW4lMjBUcnV0aC1TZWVraW5nJTIwVHJpdW1waCUyME92ZXIlMjBUcmliYWxpc20ucGRm&email_id=06d818f6884bde231aa5825ac993824c) by Matt Knepper and Brian Wheaton, via [Kris Gulati](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=1af8aab076acaf3b99f23ef878282b1b76e29248b47a340e43fa27bde14fce43&blog_id=42693868&post_id=90820&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=75954bb3e6848300a984e682612783b4&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly94LmNvbS9rcmlzZ3VsYXRp&email_id=06d818f6884bde231aa5825ac993824c). If it is audience-expanding for researchers to write such papers, does that mean we should trust their results less?