---
subject: "Highlights From The Comments On Missing Heritability"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-07-03 12:05:35
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
[Original thread here: 1: Comments From People Named In The Post Comments From People Named In The PostSasha Gusev of
I asked Gusev:
He answered:
Shouldn’t this be easily detectable in adoption studies? Adoptees have different family environments than their bio parents, so they should act like the unrelated people in GWASs. But in fact adoption studies get similar numbers to twin studies. Also, shouldn’t this make polygenic scores gain predictive power within families, rather than lose it? After all, you’re restricting your analysis of genetic effects to people who are in the exact same environment. But in fact, every polygenic score loses a lot of predictive power when you do a within-family validation. Also, shouldn’t this show up as very nonlinear kinship-similarity curves? That is, siblings grow up in the same family, so you should see their similar genes exerting similar effects. But cousins grow up in different families, so you should see their similar genes exerting weaker effects. Granted, your family will be less different from your cousin’s family than from the average family in the population, but you could quantify how much more similar and you should see a corresponding drop in heritability. But in fact, heritability estimates decline linearly with shared DNA, the way a traditional, GxE-interaction-free model would suggest. Also, shouldn’t this show up as high shared environment in twin studies? After all, it’s saying that many traits are heavily determined by the shared environment. Sure, in this example it’s genetically mediated. But for anything less than 100% genetic mediation, the remainder ends up in C. So you would need for the shared environment to have huge effects, but somehow never in a way that isn’t genetically mediated in every single pair of twins in an entire sample. Also, if lots of apparent heritability is mediated by the shared environment, why would heritability estimates constantly increase over the lifespan, as people get further from the shared environment? Elsewhere, Gusev linked And Second, usefulness of scores across ancestry groups:
Gusev later says he’s specifically referring to figures like this one from Davide Piffer (from The horizontal axis is EA4, a polygenic score for predicted educational attainment, generally believed to correlate somewhat with IQ. The vertical axis is observed IQ of each group. Piffer’s point is that different ethnic groups’ predicted genetic intelligence seems to correlate pretty well with their observed intelligence, so maybe group differences in intelligence are genetic. Gusev notes that “every behavior geneticist has been screaming ‘do not do that!’ since the very first study came out”, which is true. I know of three main reasons why this is a bad idea: Polygenic scores will mistake social factors correlated with genetic factors as genetic. For example, in a society where black people have lower IQ because of racism and poor access to schooling, people with a certain gene (the gene for black skin) will have lower IQ. Therefore, a study that blindly correlates genes with IQ will incorrectly assume that the gene for black skin is a gene for IQ/etc. This will ironically seem to justify the original inequality (it will look like black people “only” have low IQ for genetic reasons). This is by far the biggest problem with a plot like this one, and the one Gusev’s post above talks about - and the post offers a good example of a real result on height which encountered this exact problem. Different ethnic groups could have different genetic structure of intelligence. That is, white people and black people might be equally intelligent, but because of different genes. If you train a predictor on white people, and then try to use it on black people, it will falsely conclude the black people are less intelligent because they have fewer of the white people intelligence genes. Different groups could have the same intelligence genes, but in different linkage disequilibrium. That is, suppose Gene X and Gene Y are so close on the genome that they’re practically always inherited together. Scientists can’t isolate the effect of either, and they might only have one in their panel. Let’s say Gene X is in the panel, and Gene Y is an “intelligence gene”. Then the panel would show that Gene X is an intelligence gene. That’s fine as far as it goes - a score produced with that panel would still predict intelligence correctly. But if you apply it to a genetically different group, the assumption that Gene X and Gene Y always travel together might no longer hold. Then you might notice that black people lack Gene X, and incorrectly conclude that they lack an “intelligence gene”.
I think all of these concerns are real and important. Piffer gestured at some weak statistical corrections he tried to do for [2] and [3], (see the sentence in his paper beginning “transferring polygenic scores across populations has proven challenging in this field of research”) but for problem [1], all he did was admit in the second-to-last paragraph that it might be a problem, and say that “the findings drawn from these tests should be viewed as provisional and subject to alteration”, which is obviously pretty weak for something this explosive and controversial. On the other hand, I don’t fully understand how these issues apply here. AFAICT, the EA4 score used in this paper was constructed entirely from European people with <3% non-white ancestry, so it doesn’t seem like it should be noticing under-educated black people in the sample and falsely concluding that black people’s genes cause low education. It must be claiming that black people have fewer of the genes that are associated with education in a sample of white people. It’s possible that you could still get population stratification (maybe because of the <3% admixture in your supposedly European population?), but I think if that’s the theory then people should say it explicitly, or else explain what kind of alternate model they’re working from. So maybe there’s more of a role here for problems [2] and [3], about the difficulty of applying a score trained on Europeans to non-European populations? My question there is - shouldn’t this produce nonsense results, rather than results which reflect the populations’ real-world IQs? I think the counterargument here would have to be that by coincidence or colonialism, the populations with the furthest genetic difference from Europeans also happen to have the lowest real-world IQs (for social reasons) - or at least that this trend holds in a vague enough way to produce the vague correlation seen on the graph. There’s some evidence for this - this Piffer’s application of EA4 predicts that Chinese (real average IQ 105) have the same educational attainment as Puerto Ricans (real average IQ 82). So maybe it’s just showing average genetic distance from its European sample after all, and Chinese and Puerto Ricans are about equally distant on average? This wouldn’t explain why the predictor correctly finds that Ashkenazi Jews come out highest, but that could be because their “European” sample did include Ashkenazi Jews, and so here problem [1] does come in. Except that later (Figure 7), Piffer graphs polygenic score for height against real IQ and finds no correlation, so it doesn’t seem like it’s just that polygenic scores naturally get lower as you get further from the group it was trained on. So now I’m back to being confused. Maybe the best we can do is blame autocorrelation? That is, for all the data points on the graph, there are really only three clusters - Europeans, Africans, and everyone else. So you really only need ~3 unlucky coincidences to get this finding. And three unlucky coincidences, if you admitted they were three unlucky coincidences, wouldn’t be statistically significant, let alone “p = 7e-08” (lol). So maybe all the technical issues just explain why we shouldn’t take the scores seriously, and the answer to why it matches reality is a combination of “bad luck” and “it doesn’t really match reality that well, cf. the Chinese vs. Puerto Rican issue, but with enough autocorrelated data points even small coincidental matches look very significant”. I’ve I also take issue with Gusev’s claim that these people are “the court geneticists, so to speak, for SSC/ACX” - I don’t think I’ve ever interacted with Piffer or mentioned him on this blog before. You can see a partial list of actual geneticists I sent my Missing Heritability post to for review at the bottom of the post, and they’re mostly the same people that Gusev links to and endorses. Third, the overall framing:
This paragraph surprised me, because people coming up with crackpot non-genetic theories about schizophrenia is part of why I think it’s so important to explain that twin studies are usually pretty good! Schizophrenia has about the same level of missing heritability as IQ, EA, or any other trait (80% heritable in twin studies, ~10% heritable in best polygenic predictors, ~25% heritable according to GREML). I don’t really understand on what grounds you can object to the twin heritability estimates of IQ/EA/etc, but believe the ones for schizophrenia. Elsewhere it seems like Gusev seems to accept this equivalence. As he put it I responded Fourth, the consistency of twin studies:
This is a comparatively minor point, but I respond Eric Turkheimer (
I don’t want to get into another “did you communicate this poorly?” argument after the recent Tyler Cowen one, so I will just quote the Turkheimer paragraphs I objected to and let readers make their own decisions. This is from
Very Long Comments By Other Very Knowledgeable People
This is a great point, and it’s especially helpful to know that the papers demonstrating few-to-zero interaction effects are weak. But
Related: if GxG interactions are a big deal, wouldn’t you expect outbreeding depression? Suppose that Europeans split from Africans 50,000 years ago and start evolving separately and getting different genes. Then evolution would make Europeans preferentially accumulate new mutations that interact beneficially with existing European mutations, and the same for Africans, with each population building a tower of adaptations atop previous genes. Then when the two populations interbreed, it should be a disaster - half the genes necessary for their carefully-evolved interactions are missing, and fitness plummets. But interracial children are just as healthy as within-race children. In fact, even interspecies hybrids like mules are pretty healthy (their inability to breed comes from an unrelated chromosome issue). So evolution can’t be using interactions like this. I don’t have enough of a quantitative sense for this to know whether there can be strong interaction effects which aren’t adaptations and which evolution keeps trying to get rid of, but which stick around anyway. Also on interactions, Steve Byrnes
Andy B
Thanks - this is helpful, especially the comments on Wainschtein. I asked Andy whether the products advertised as “whole genome sequencing” that sequence every base in the genome” get his seal of approval, and he said:
I’d like to hear from some statistical geneticists about whether they already knew all of this, and whether or not they agree that it’s a blind spot for their field. Vinay Tummarakota
I appreciate these thoughts, although most of these biases and corrections are small enough that I don’t expect them to make a big difference to the results, or to line up in the particular Swiss cheese hole way where they let a big error get through. Small But Important CorrectionsJorgen Harris (
Thank you. The tweet said that the 1% of adoptees with the most criminal parents commit 30% of the crime, but should have said that the 4% of adoptees with the most criminal parents commit 30% of the crime. I agree that the study says that many adoptees with criminal parents never commit crime at all. These two claims (high relative rate, low absolute rate) can only be simultaneously true if the base rate of criminal conviction is low. But the base rate isn’t that low - somewhere between 10-20% of Americans have a criminal conviction. But the study uses a poorly-signposted combination of Americans and Danes between 1895 and the present, and maybe the base rate in that group is lower. E0
Thanks, I agree this is true and have edited the post. IAmChalzz on the subreddit
Thanks for the correction, I’ve weakly edited this out of the piece, though not fully rewritten the piece to be as good as it would have been if I never made this error in the first place. Other CommentsKveldred
Brandon Berg
This started a long discussion on whether it was more likely that Normans were genetically more prone to education than Saxons, or that wealth imbalances could last 900 years. In favor of Normans being genetically smarter - the Normans who invaded England were the In favor of wealth imbalances lasting 900 years, even if
I haven’t heard anything about people adjusting for this, but I’d like to hear from someone who knows more. rad1kal writes:
I don’t entirely understand what’s going on here, and I challenged rad1kal on some of the assortative mating implications Austen
Strong disagree, I think this is actually a great example of why you need science and not just common sense. When people just observed other people in their same villages, half of people thought "look, people are like their parents, obviously genetics matters", and the other half thought "look, people are like their parents, obviously parenting matters". It took twin studies - which can separate out genetics from parenting - to distinguish between these two hypotheses. And even then, millions of people rejected it because it disagreed with their "common sense" - "But John is so nice! And his mother worked so hard to teach him niceness! Obviously his mother's parenting worked! That's just common sense!" In fact, I think the ways this picture presents an overly rosy view of village common sense go beyond that. I've read (I think this was in I think it's only possible to romanticize this sort of "village common sense" because you and the villagers are the beneficiaries of millennia of careful science, tuning those common-sense intuitions. (I do think villagers had one other advantage lots of moderns didn’t, which was that they closely observed animal breeding. But that’s not common sense - that’s access to important scientific data!) You're currently a free subscriber to |