---
subject: "\"Nobody Knows Anything\": Backtests are Hard"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <the-diff@ghost.io>"
to: ""
date: 2024-06-17 14:28:48
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX"]
---
|
|
In this issue: - "Nobody Knows Anything": Backtests are Hard—You'd think a question like "do small-caps outperform large-caps" or "what happens if you buy X when Y happens" would have a simple answer, but actually implementing a backtest means making many more judgment calls and rough approximations than you'd think. And while there's a lot more historical data in finance than in other fields, there just isn't enough to definitively prove most of the interesting ideas out there.
- The Economics of Hacking—There is at least one field where surprisingly young people can rapidly rise to the top of high-impact organizations. Unfortunately, we tend to find out about this when they get arrested.
- Lead Generation—When is it raising from well-informed experts who provide good advice, and when it is it a kickback?
- Adverse Selection—Market a product to credit card rewards arbitrageurs, and you should expect it to get arbitraged.
- Tip Economics—The economic case against taxing tips—and the case for why that's changing.
- First and Last Resort—Nvidia and t-bills are complements.
"Nobody Knows Anything": Backtests are HardA while ago, I had what sounded like a simple question: how do stocks react to being added to or removed from major indices, and how has this changed over time? This seems like a straightforward question: there are press releases, nicely-formatted, and it's not hard to find historical data on prices. But then you run into weird issues, like: why is my backtest of a large-cap-focused strategy periodically buying into smaller stocks and flipping them in a few days? That turns out to be an artifact of how the indexes handle spinoffs: the spun-off company might qualify for index membership, but it gets kicked in a few days. Is that something you'd want in your backtest, for completeness? Or is it something you'd remove because it's slavish adherence to how you described the problem before you started working on? And how many such judgment calls can you make before you run The Poor Man's This kind of question comes up a lot. Systematic investors are, of course, looking for repeatable market phenomena that they can exploit over and over again until they go away. Fundamental investors are doing so in a more implicit way, but they will sometimes take the general phenomenon they're looking at—buy underlevered companies when they finally start doing a buyback, invest in industries with a long capital cycle after a few years of low aggregate capex, always consider shorting whatever the most valuable company in Canada is, etc.—and testing whether this does, in fact, produce the expected result. Part of what makes backtesting hard is that it's straightforward to articulate what the portfolio you're thinking about would look like today, but there's an art to thinking about how to change it over time. Frequency of rebalancing is a factor with a surprising impact on backtest outcomes. Suppose you're testing some strategy like buying every stock in the 10th percentile or lower of price/book value, and shorting everything above the 90th percentile. How often do you check? You can imagine a range of possibilities, with some ridiculous extremes: you could rebalance on every tick, i.e. every time a company flips from just-below to just-above the threshold, a trade happens. This would be pretty ridiculous, and in effect it means testing a combination of a value investing strategy and a very short-term mean-reversion trading strategy. But if you run this strategy with sufficiently rare backtests, you're introducing even more new features: a strategy that never rebalances slowly evolves into a single-stock momentum bet on the long side and a single-stock mean-reversion bet on the short side, because eventually whatever stock compounded at the highest rate for longest is going to represent more of the portfolio. And that's just what can go wrong with rebalancing in a backtest while assuming transaction costs to be zero. They're not! There are some systematic strategies that end up more or less measuring the implied cost of whatever the strategy is. Something like the There's another element of transaction costs that's even harder to model, because the highest effective transaction cost comes from when you're running a strategy, and someone else is running a smarter version of that strategy. Suppose there's some signal that, as far as you know, leads to above-average returns 55% of the time. And suppose this signal is really made up of two signals, such that if they both fire the hit rate is 60% and if just one of them does, it's a coin toss. If you run the simpler version of this strategy, but a competitor runs the more complex version, what happens is that they routinely outbid you every time both signals say to buy, and you get to make the trade 100% of the time when returns are no better than chance. This is naturally hard to model because, if you knew exactly what you were looking for, you'd be running the smarter strategy. And then you get into the philosophical challenge of backtests: we just don't have that much data, and the more we extend it the more we're adding datapoints from a different distribution. A sufficiently long backtest of the results of investing in stocks will periodically also include an all-financials portfolio, and will sometimes look at companies that were basically There are some cases where you can achieve statistical significance in a backtest and know that you're looking at a real phenomenon that will probably persist. You can divide them into two different kinds of unattainability: - There are high-frequency strategies that make a lot of trades with a small edge, such that their sample size is pretty robust. You won't know for sure if this strategy loses money in extreme market environments, because the sophistication of counterparties tends to rise over time (especially because the worst-performing traders you were trading against in September 2008 or March 2020 are more likely to have gone out of business).
- There are lower-frequency strategies like the typical ones pursued by multi-manager funds—picking lots of stocks in a way that isolates idiosyncratic returns, and turning over that portfolio every few weeks or months. This also accrues enough information that it enables the identification of skill—but the model also ensures that the people best-positioned to know how much skill there is, and who has it, are the ones running the fund.
In principle, it's possible to run backtests that do produce valid signals that can be traded profitably. But for many of them, the signal needs to be anchored by some theory about why it exists, and that theory needs to be a theory of the average counterparty's laziness, sloppiness, institutional constraints, or willingness to offload risk. So most of the time, a backtest represents a partly-proven theory paired with a leap of faith. It would be a pain to implement, but a small-cap strategy that could be worth pursuing would be something like this: make a long, long list of tiny companies that have a viable business—a list that will be a smaller and smaller percentage of small-caps over time, as the good ones keep getting acquired while the bad ones limp along and opportunistically issue more stock. Then, set up a bunch of alerts to take advantage of fat-finger trades. Hold this portfolio, and exit as companies achieve a higher market cap and more volume. There will be plenty of garbage that gets picked up with this strategy, but that's exactly the risk you're being paid to take when you run it. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/f2bf7ea8?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)In practice, it seems that firms combine so many alpha-generating and risk-mitigating strategies at once that a clean example like this doesn't apply, and everyone running profitable strategies is getting adversely-selected into some trades and picked-off from others, such that there are incremental gains from tweaking some core strategy. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/1f1740ca?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)Local manufacturers generally weren't big enough to list, and the regional and national brands got that way because the US had the infrastructure necessary to ship whatever you ordered in the Sears Roebuck catalog to wherever you happened to be. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/f670d583?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)This wasn't the only driver, and both countries took [many specific steps to make that growth happen](https://www.thediff.co/r/e7a188b7?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99). But the US's muted reaction was partly driven by a simple calculation: a worker in Nagoya or Ulsan who got laid off from a job building cars might be tempted to join a communist-adjacent party. A worker in Detroit probably wouldn't. Hegemonic foreign policy always has a sort of prodigal son dynamic, where it's more important to be nice to the countries that are wavering than the ones whose support is dependable.[↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/fb6c61fc?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
You're on the free list for The Diff. Last week, you missed out on Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. See a sampling of current open roles below: - A fintech company using AI to craft new investment strategies seeks a portfolio management associate with 2+ years of experience in trading or operations for equities or crypto. This is a technical role—FIX proficiency required, as well as Python, C#, and SQL. (NYC)
- A blockchain-focused research and consulting firm is looking for an infrastructure engineer to secure their clients’ networks. Deep experience in DevOps, Linux systems, and IaC required; previous crypto experience preferred. (Remote)
- A CRM-ingesting startup is on-boarding customers to its LLM-powered sales software, and is in need of a product engineer with a track record of building on their own. (NYC)
- A well funded seed stage startup founded by former SpaceX engineers is looking for full stack engineers previously employed by Anduril or Palantir. (LA)
- A company building the new pension of the 21st century and building universal basic capital is looking for a GTM / growth lead. (NYC)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. ElsewhereThe Economics of HackingThe average age of prominent tech founders seems to have gone up a bit in the last decade. There are plenty of very prominent thirty-and-over founders, but fewer wunderkinder than in the early days of social. There is still one area where people in their early twenties can end up running large organizations: Lead GenerationThere's a hazy line between two ways a given early-stage investment might be a uniquely good fit for an investor and vice-versa: - That investor works in the same domain as the startup, and can provide valuable advice, some warm introductions to customers, recommendations for key hires, etc.
- That investor works in the same domain, sometimes buying products from companies much like the one being invested in. If that investor owns, say, 1% of a company that's valued at 20x revenue, they’re effectively getting a 20% commission on any revenue they send to that company.
The latter model is The tech industry is built on the constant simmer of low-level conflicts of interest: founders want early employees to work hard despite not getting the same equity stake, employees may dial back their at-the-office effort because they're planning a new startup themselves, VCs optimize for portfolio-level returns even though that raises the risk of founder failure or founder burnout, regulators know that there are many letters of the alphabet that aren't already taken for a Chief-Something-or-other-Officer at the companies they regulate. This usually works just fine, and the conflicts both motivate people and inculcate some healthy cynicism. But that same tolerance for moderate conflicts can turn into more serious ones without anyone consciously choosing to operate that way. Adverse SelectionFinancial services often fit the same broad economic model as gyms, airlines, and mobile games: there's a typical pattern of behavior, and there's an outlier pattern with wildly different margins. For some of these, like airlines, the high-consumption customers are more profitable. For a gym, high-consumption customers are a drag on profitability since they increase the number of dumbbells and squat racks required to service a given number of members. (They do offset this slightly by being walking billboards—ironically, the best way for a gym to recover the margin hit from a member who actually works out a lot is to take another short-term margin hit by giving that customer a branded t-shirt.) A business perfectly optimized for annoying, adverse selection-driven losses might be a credit card that allows users to earn points on a transaction where they'd otherwise be charged a fee, with the plan of making that up on other transactions. Tip EconomicsThe Diff has written a bit before about the rise of tipping, but hasn't addressed one topic: how should tips be taxed? There's a First and Last ResortThe US has |
||||||||||
|
|
|
||||||||||
|