---
subject: "Weekly Dose of Optimism #142"
from: "Not Boring <notboring@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-05-02 12:32:58
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Not Boring", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2982495070691762429", "UNREAD"]
---
Hi friends 👋, Happy Friday and welcome back to our 142nd Weekly Dose of Optimism. We’ve been pumping out content lately: Let’s get to it. This week’s Weekly Dose is brought to you by… At this point, you’ve probably heard of My friends at For developers building conversational experiences, voice quality makes all the difference. Their massive library includes over 5,000 options across 31 languages, giving you unprecedented creative flexibility.
The video you just watched was narrated, edited, and posted with only the use of thoughts. That’s possible because Brad Smith, the first nonverbal ALS patient to receive Neuralink’s brain implant, now controls his MacBook using only brain signals. Brad edited and narrated an entire video using Neuralink’s BCI and an AI-cloned version of his actual voice (maybe with Not going to lie, Brad’s video hit me deep. How he appreciates his caring wife, how Neuralink has untrapped thoughts he’s had in his mind for years, and how his involvement in Neuralink will help other people with similar conditions. It was a reminder how technology can truly be a force for real good in real peoples’ lives. And the crazy thing about Neuralink, or BCIs in general, is that this is the worst the tech is ever going to be. It’s only going to get smarter, less invasive, and more accessible over time. It already works (look at Brad’s video!) and these are essentially just highly advanced prototypes. I am very much looking forward to a world in which more people like Brad get access to tech that untraps their brains. Update: As if just on cue, yesterday afternoon (2) Charles Alcock for AIN
I cannot wait to hail an air taxi and Joby is making important strides in making that possible. The eVTOL company completed its first batch of piloted vertical and horizontal flights earlier this month, a key milestone for getting these little air taxis ready for the big leagues of commercial, live flights. Previous transition flights were either remotely piloted or in hover/low-speed mode. This is the first time human pilots flew the aircraft through full vertical-to-horizontal transitions and back. The flights showed the aircraft behaves predictably and safely under direct human control, which is generally important but also specifically important for Joby as it’s a perquisite for the FAA final certification stage. eVTOLs are basically if a helicopter and an airplane had a baby. They can take off, hover, and land like a helicopter but can fly like an airplane at higher speeds and efficiencies. And, don’t forget that “e,” these babies are powered by electricity rather than fuel burning engines. I wouldn’t expect Jobys to be whizzing around Manhattan anytime soon. The company is planning to deliver some aircraft for commercial use in Dubai soon, but stricter regulations and general air traffic congestion will mean a longer wait time in the U.S. Which, frankly, is as embarrassing as Chinese nuclear on the Moon. Mr. President, if you’re reading this, give us our big beautiful flying cars. (3) Will Knight for Wired
Shoutout Not Boring Capital portfolio company Vana, along with Flower AI, created a new AI model called Collective-1 which was trained using decentralized GPUs across the internet with both public and user-contributed private data. In the partnership Flower AI is enabling the distributed training while Vana is supplying the public and user-contributed private data. Collective-1 is currently a 7B parameter model, but Flower is scaling up with plans for 30B and 100B parameter models, and open-sourced a new tool, Photon, that enhances efficiency for distributed training. The current approach to building AI relies on centralized data centers packed with high-end GPUs, ultra-fast fiber connections, and massive datasets. Then training is done on tightly coupled hardware where data and compute are pooled in one place for speed and efficiency. And as the scale of AI continues to grow rapidly, this approach will really only be feasible for a number of tech giants. A distributed approach like Collective-1 flips this: training happens across many independent machines and is connected via slower public internet. Training and running models doesn’t require pooling data or compute in one place. Instead, data stays decentralized, often on user devices or across organizations, and compute is spread out, with coordination handled by open-sourced tools like Photon. This means smaller AI players can tap in, without needing to build massive infrastructure. Beating highly centralized large models at their own game is not necessarily the goal. Rather, offering a more decentralized, accessible option could open opportunities for a whole set up builders and users that aren’t considered in the current approach. But the hope is that with data that no one else can access, Vana and Flower AI can build models that no one else can. (4) Janelle Miles for ABC News Australia
Croikey! The Aussies are developing a first-of-its-kind type 1 diabetes drug. Good on ‘em! The experimental drug, ASITI-201, was developed over 25 years by Professor Ranjeny Thomas, and retrains the immune system to stop attacking insulin-producing beta cells. It works by injecting a combo of beta cell protein fragments and vitamin D, which teaches immune cells to recognize those proteins as safe instead of threats This approach addresses the disease, not just its symptoms. The trial, just now currently dosing its first participants, aims to preserve pancreatic function and reduce insulin dependence. If proven safe and effective, it could pave the way for early type 1 diabetes intervention, or even prevention, in at-risk individuals and reduce the need for insulin injections. If this approach is ultimately successful, it signals a major shift in how we can treat autoimmune diseases, moving beyond reactive care to immune system reprogramming. If you read Not Boring and you’re on X, chances are your feed is jam-packed with Hill and Valley Forum content right now. The annual conference is a bipartisan gathering of U.S. lawmakers and tech leaders focused on national security and technological competition, hosted by Jacob Helberg, Christian Garrett, and Delian Asparouhov. It has a pretty start-studded lineup of folks like Jensen Huang, Alex Karp, Doug Burgum, Josh Kusher, Ritchie Torres, Mike Johnson, Ruth Porat, and Mike Johnson. Big names across both government and tech. Government and tech have never, at least in my lifetime, seemed so intertwined: tariffs, the AI race, anti-trust, reindustrialization, etc, etc. The BONUS: Hyperlegible 008: Mike Solana, Golden Age Speaking of what’s possible when SF and DC come together… Pirate Wires’ Mike Solana joined Packy on Hyperlegible to talk about building Disney-inspired Golden Cities where houses are cheap, rare earth metals are refined, and it’s legal to manufacture things. A day in, it’s the most popular Hyperlegible to date. The people have spoken. Build the Golden Cities. Have a great weekend y’all. Thanks to Thanks for reading, Packy + Dan |