---
subject: "The Duolingo Disaster That Wasn't"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <the-diff@ghost.io>"
to: ""
date: 2024-03-25 14:22:39
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX"]
---
|
|
In this issue: - The Duolingo Disaster That Wasn't—Duolingo looks like exactly the kind of company that would have suffered disproportionately in the great growth drawdown of 2022. But unlike some of its high-flying peers, the company has more than recovered. As it turns out, their model is uniquely suited to some high-ROI ads, and they've found new ways to price the product to get the most revenue possible from different usage patterns.
- Chatbots—The FT launches a chatbot.
- Alpha Capture—The hedge fund industry looks more and more like every other industry.
- Coreweave—When rapidly-depreciating assets make borrowing to fund growth a better bet.
- Preannouncements—China is releasing some positive macro news early.
- AI's ROI—One constraint on using AI: figuring out what it's worth.
The Duolingo Disaster That Wasn'tSuppose you were coming up with a list of investment themes that had the most painful reversal after 2021. It would look something like this: - Growth used to merit a much bigger premium; high-growth/high-multiple stocks saw lower valuations, so they trimmed their spending and saw lower growth.
- Companies that were a bet on The Great Indoors—whether that meant office furniture or streaming media—did great in the early stages of the pandemic, but turned out to be experiencing pulled-forward demand.
- Anyone whose business involves ingesting strings of human-readable text, and returning those strings, faces disintermediation risk from AI. Why ask a site like WebMD, Investopedia, or
[Stack Overflow](https://www.thediff.co/r/aedf78ed?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)about your specialized question when ChatGPT can give you a more precise answer and address follow-up questions.[[1]](https://www.thediff.co/r/12966c7b?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99) - Perk-heavy companies have had to curtail those perks. This has been good for margins but bad for morale. A company with a generous vacation policy—
[two weeks off and a weeklong work-free company-sponsored retreat, for example](https://www.thediff.co/r/f3f827ea?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)—would have more trouble adjusting than companies with skimpier benefits. - It's harder than it used to be to underwrite a bet on globalization, and the convergence between poor countries and rich ones.
With all that, it wouldn't be surprising if shares of Duolingo had lost most of their value post-2021. And for a while, they did; at one point shares were trading at one third of their peak valuation. But the stock has since recovered, and now trades 14% above its 2021 high. It's actually outperformed the S&P since it went public. What happened? Or what didn't? At a high level, Duolingo tapped the brakes in a few separate ways. Their marketing spending started to slow right when the tech economy slowed; in 2021, incremental marketing spending was 27% of revenue growth (i.e. they added $89m to the topline and reinvested $24m in additional marketing). In 2022, that ratio was 7%. Marketing was up some quarters, down others, and grew 13% overall, while revenue rose 47%. It took longer to hold back on R&D spending. This doesn't mean that they've eliminated their marketing spending, of course, just that they're looking for the most cost-effective tool they can find. Including, but not limited to, a Super Bowl ad. Normally, Super Bowl ads are a negative sign that a company has exhausted all targeted marketing opportunities. And the Duolingo ad has that superficial feel: it's The result of this shift shows up in the aggregate performance. Looking at their Correctly Adjusted EBITDA margin US-based investors get a skewed view of what Duolingo is for: The main sources of revenue and growth today are subscriptions (76% of revenue, decelerating this year after a great 2023) and in-app purchases (7% of revenue, but growing faster than the rest). These two revenue lines present an interesting behavioral laboratory. What sells subscriptions is a user's commitment to repeatedly using the app. Duolingo is constantly testing new ways to do that—notifications, winning streaks, etc. Those tricks all switch from motivating to demotivating when users miss them: break an 800-day language-learning streak, and you're stuck below your record until 2026. So they have an in-game currency that can be spent on things like freezing a winning streak, and those in-game currency units can be purchased for out-of-game US dollars. At that point, the goal is to optimize for changes from pure retention to a kind of tactical non-retention; a user missing a day can be revenue-accretive if it prompts them to pay for a streak freeze, but revenue-negative if they actually quit. The optimal user is similar to the optimal subprime credit card holder: someone who keeps the time equivalent of a high-interest revolving balance that they never quite manage to pay down, but don't default on, either. One recent source of growth for them is their family plan: it's $10/month compared to $7/month for their standard plan. But as with other cases where companies heavily discount when they bundle, the bet is partly that the incremental user on the account wasn't going to pay anyway, but also that having more users associated with an account means having more people who want to veto any plan to cancel it. Bigger bundles do cap their theoretical upside, but in practical terms they're a good deal (especially since they trade off lower potential subscription revenue for a higher surface area for selling in-app purchases). Risks remain, of course. AI was and remains a threat to Duolingo, but so far seems to be better for costs than it is bad for revenue: they Duolingo ends up being a story about leverage. AI models do improve the world's ability to seamlessly translate text, but they don't yet offer a substitute for being able to converse live in a foreign language. Deglobalization lowers the ROI of learning English in order to do business with America, but raises the ROI of learning English in order to move here. And a company that focuses more on product than on marketing, and that consequently makes its marketing extremely weird, is a company that has the option to get a high ROI on ads by investing in minimalist surrealism and expecting its legions of satisfied customers to explain what's going on. Granted, hallucinations mean that it's not the only resource you should trust—but this holds true for human-generated content, too! [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/d990c68a?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)For two reasons. First, some of the marketing budget comes from ad buys themselves, which can rapidly be cut or delayed. But also, it's less important to hoard talent on the marketing side than it is on the engineering side. That doesn't just reflect the general scarcity and high price of technical talent, but also the longer ramp-up time. It takes a while to learn to navigate a new codebase and to mesh with a new team, and less time for a marketer to get up to speed—they're probably already familiar with the product and its ads. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/99256c48?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)As is Diff policy, we're adding stock-based compensation back to get to a better-adjusted EBITDA. The implication of backing it out from adjusted EBITDA amounts to "Our economics are best understood by ignoring equity comp, which our employees foolishly work for even though shares of our company are literally worthless. In conclusion, buy our stock." You can use adjusted EBITDA in one specific context: buying a bond issued by a tech company. In that scenario, short-term dilution is a win for you; credit investors are happy when companies pay as many costs as possible in equity rather than cash. Once again, though, this framework is worthless to the growth-focused equity investor. And even a bond investor who is really doing their homework will ask: if the stock keeps going down, won't the company have to switch to paying its people with cash? And, if that doesn't happen, why am I buying the bonds rather than the stock? [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/a35cf6c6?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
You're on the free list for The Diff! This week, paying subscribers read about Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. See a sampling of current open roles below: - A company building the new pension of the 21st century and building universal basic capital is looking for a product designer with fintech experience. (NYC)
- A crypto proprietary trading firm is actively seeking systematic-oriented traders with crypto experience—ideally someone with experience across a variety of exchanges and tokens. (Remote)
- An alt data provider is using LLMs to scrape and is in need of a backend engineer—experience building with LLMs required, web scraping experience preferred. (Remote)
- An investment company using AI to accelerate investment in esoteric asset classes is looking for a product engineer with Python and Typescript experience; preferably someone with a track record of building on their own (Bay Area, remote also a possibility).
- A data consultancy is looking for data scientists with prior experience at hedge funds, research firms, or banks. Alt data experience is preferred. (NYC)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. ElsewhereChatbotsThe Financial Times has - As an enhanced search engine, especially one that can provide "conceptual synonyms" that are beyond the scope of a simple thesaurus.
- Asking for new content in the voice of the existing content.
The latter is much, much harder (which is good news for anyone who writes for a living), and seems to have less to do with training on specific data and more to do with training on as broad a corpus as possible in order to very accurately determine what a given writer sounds like. The easiest-to-duplicate elements of someone's style will be the subconscious linguistic tics and repeated mistakes; getting LLMs to not just produce insight but produce a specific kind of insight is, for now, a challenge. Alpha CaptureHere is a not-uncommon occurrence at big multistrategy funds: a portfolio manager running a relatively small amount of money. Their best idea happens to be a large-cap company in which the overall fund could make a larger investment—a careful statistical analysis of the manager's previous picks shows that this one has an unusually good risk/reward. So, either by algorithm or ad hoc, the firm doubles-down, or 10xes-down, on that portfolio manager's bet, in a separate account. This general approach, known as alpha capture, is CoreweaveGPU-focused cloud computing startup Coreweave is PreannouncementsOne aspect of AI's ROIThe WSJ has a |
||||||||||
|
|
|
||||||||||
|