---
subject: "DeepSeek: Lemon, It's Wednesday"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-01-29 14:54:01
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
It’s been another *checks notes* You can also see my First, Reiterating About Calming Down About the $5.5 Million NumberBefore we get to new developments, I especially want to reiterate and I wouldn’t quite agree with Palmer Lucky that ‘ Is the cloud market cost of the amount of compute used to directly train v3. That’s not how they trained v3. They trained v3 on their own cluster of h800s, which was physically optimized to hell for software-hardware integration. Thus, the true compute cost to train v3 involves assembling the cluster, which cost a lot more than $5.5 million. That doesn’t include the compute cost of going from v3 → r1. That doesn’t include the costs of hiring the engineers and figuring out how to do all of this, that doesn’t include the costs of assembling the data, and so on. Again, yes they did this super efficiently and cheaply compared to the competition, but no, you don’t spend $5.5 million and out pops r1. No.
OpenAI Offers Its CongratulationsAltman handled his response to r1 with grace. OpenAI plans to ‘pull up some new releases.’ Meaning, oh, you want to race? I suppose I’ll go faster and take less precautions.
It is very Galaxy Brain to say ‘this is perhaps good for OpenAI’ and presumably it very much is, but here’s a scenario. A lot of people try ChatGPT with GPT-3.5, are not impressed, think it hallucinates all the time, is a clever toy, and so on. For two years they don’t notice improvements. DeepSeek releases r1, and it gets a lot of press. People try the ‘new Chinese version’ and realize AI is a lot better now. OpenAI gets to incorporate DeepSeek’s innovations. OpenAI comes back with free o3-mini and (free?) GPT-5 and better agents. People use AI a lot more, OpenAI ends up overall doing better.
I’m not saying that’s the baseline scenario, but I do expect the world to be quite amazed at the next generation of models, and they could now be more primed for that.
Given the costs involved, and that you can scale to get better outputs, ‘serve faster and cheaper’ and ‘get better answers’ seem pretty linked, or are going to look rather similar. There is still a real and important difference between ‘I spend 10x as much compute to get 10x as many tokens to think with’ versus ‘I taught the model how to do longer CoT’ versus ‘I made the model smarter.’ Or at least I think there is. Scaling Laws Still ApplyShould we now abandon all our plans to build gigantic data centers because DeepSeek showed we can run AI cheaper? No. Of course not. We’ll need more. Jevons Paradox and all that. Another question is compute governance. Does DeepSeek’s model prove that there’s no point in using compute thresholds for frontier model governance? My answer is no. DeepSeek did not mean the scaling laws stopped working. DeepSeek found new ways to scale and economize, and also to distill. But doing the same thing with more compute would have gotten better results, and indeed more compute is getting other labs better results if you don’t control for compute costs, and also they will now get to use these innovations themselves.
OpenAI and Anthropic (in the forms of CEOs Sam Altman and One can think of all this as combining multiple distinct scaling laws. Mark Chen above talked about two axes but one could refer to at least four? You can scale up how many tokens you reason with. You can scale up how well you apply your intelligence to doing reasoning. You can scale up how much intelligence you are using in all this. You can scale up how much of this you can do per dollar or amount of compute.
Also you can extend to new modalities and use cases and so on. So essentially: Buckle up. Speaking of buckling up,
It’s not that Jan is wrong, I’d be a lot more interested in paying for o1 pro if I had pdfs enabled, but… yeah. Other r1 and DeepSeek News Roundup
Here was some shade:
Fundamentally, DeepSeek was far more of an innovator than other Chinese AI companies, but it was still a chaser here, not a pioneer, except in compute efficiency, which is what chasers do best. If you want to maintain a lead and it’s much easier to follow than lead, well, time to get good and scale even more. Or you can realize you’re just feeding capability to the Chinese and break down crying and maybe keep your models for internal use, it’s an option. I found this odd:
It’s odd because DeepSeek spent so little compute, and the efficiency gains pay for themselves in compute quite rapidly. And also the big companies are indeed releasing rapidly. Google and OpenAI are constantly shipping, even Anthropic ships. The idea of company focus seems more on point, and yes DeepSeek traded multimodality and other features for pure efficiency because they had to. Also note what they say later:
As in, r1 is technically impressive as hell, and it definitely has its uses, but there’s a reason the existing models look like they do - the corners DeepSeek cut actually do matter for what people want. Of course DeepSeek will likely now turn to fixing such problems among other things and we’ll see how efficiently they can do that too.
Even if we were to ‘fully unlock’ all computing power in personal PCs for running AI, People Love FreeWe had a brief period where DeepSeek would serve you up r1 free and super fast. It turns out that’s not fully sustainable or at least needs time to scale as fast as demand rose, and you know how such folks feel about the ‘raise prices’ meme,
I too encountered slowness, and instantly it made me realize ‘yes the speed was a key part of why I loved this.’
Could be that. Could be too much demand and not enough supply. This will of course sort itself out in time, as long as you’re willing to pay, and it’s an open model so others can serve the model as well, but ‘everyone wants to use the shiny new model you are offering for free’ is going to run into obvious problems.
Did you for a second think otherwise? What you do with that info is on you. This doesn’t appear to rise to TikTok 2.0 levels of rendering your phone and data insecure, but let us say that ‘out of an abundance of caution’ I will be accessing the model through their website not the app thank you very much.
I’m not going so far as to use third party providers for now, because I’m not feeding any sensitive data into the model, and DeepSeek’s implementation here is very nice and clean, so I’ve decided lazy is acceptable. I’m certainly not laying out ~$6,000 for a self-hosting rig, unless someone wants to buy one for me in the name of science. Note that if you’re looking Investigating How r1 Works
Janus notes that r1 simply knows things and thinks about them, straight up, in response to Thebes speculating that all our chain of thought considerations have now put sufficient priming into the training data that CoT approaches work much better than they used to, which Prithviraj says is not the case, he says it’s about improved base models, which is the first obvious thought - the techniques work better off a stronger base, simple as that.
Nvidia Chips are Highly Useful
There were some bigger inventions in the past, but on much smaller baselines. Our reaction to this was to sell the stocks of those who provide the inputs that enable that tfp shock. There were other impacts as well, including to existential risk, but as we’ve established the market isn’t ready for that conversation in the sense that the market (highly reasonably as has been previously explained) will be ignoring it entirely. Welcome to the Market
I would not discount the role of narrative and vibes in all this. I don’t think that’s the whole Nvidia drop or anything. But it matters.
Alex Cheema notes that Apple was up on Monday,
That’s cute. But I do not think that was the main reason why Apple was up. I think Apple was up because their strategy doesn’t depend on having frontier models but it does depend on running AIs on iPhones. Apple can now get their own distillations of r1, and use them for Apple Intelligence. A highly reasonable argument. The One True Newsletter, Matt Levine’s Money Stuff, (And you. And the people it manages. And all of us. And maybe we all die.) But I digress. (To digress even further: While I’m reading that column, I don’t understand why we should care about the argument under ‘Dark Trading,’ since this mechanism decreases retail transaction costs to trade and doesn’t impact long term price discovery at all, and several LLMs confirmed this once challenged.) Ben Thompson Weighs In
Here’s a fascinating line:
That sounds like Ben Thompson is calling it a wrong-way move, and indeed later he explicitly endorses Jevons Paradox and expects compute use to rise. The market is supposed to factor in the long run now. There is no ‘this makes the price go down today and then up next week’ unless you’re very much in the ‘the EMH is false’ camp. And these are literally the most valuable companies in the world. Here’s another key one:
Masayoshi Sun feels the AGI. Masayoshi Sun feels everything. He’s king of feeling it. His typical open-model-stanning arguments on existential risk later in the past are as always disappointing, but in no way new or unexpected. It continues to astound me that such intelligent people can think: Well, there’s no stopping us creating things more capable and intelligent than humans, so the best way to ensure that things smarter than more capable than humans go well for humans is to ensure that there are as many such entities as possible and that humans cannot possibly have any collective control over those new entities. On another level, of course, I’ve accepted that people do think this. That they somehow cannot fathom that if you create things more intelligent and capable and competitive than humans there could be the threat that all the humans would end up with no power, rather than that the wrong humans might have too much power. Or think that this would be a good thing - because the wrong humans wouldn’t have power. Similarly, Ben’s call for absolutely no regulations whatsoever, no efforts at safety whatsoever outside of direct profit motives, ‘cut out all the cruft in our companies that has nothing to do with winning,’ is exactly the kind of rhetoric I worry about getting us all killed in response to these developments. I should still reiterate that Ben to his credit is very responsible and accurate here in his technical presentation, laying out what DeepSeek and r1 are and aren’t accomplishing here rather than crying missile gap. But the closing message remains the same. Import Restrictions on Chips WTAFThe term Trump uses is ‘tariffs.’ I propose, at least in the context of GPUs, that we call these ‘import restrictions,’ in order to point out that we are (I believe wisely!) imposing ‘export restrictions’ as a matter of national security to ensure we get all the chips, and using diffusion regulations to force the chips to be hosted at home, Except for the fact that we really, really want the data centers at home. The diffusion regulations are largely to force companies to create them at home.
The whole thing is insane! Completely nuts. If he’s serious. And yes he said this on Joe Rogan previously, but he said a lot of things previously that he didn’t mean. Whereas Trump’s worldview is largely In this case, what Trump wants is presumably for TSMC to announce they are building more new chip factories in America. I agree that this would be excellent, assuming they were actually built. We have an existence proof that it can be done, and it would greatly improve our strategic position and reduce geopolitical risk. I presume Trump is mostly bluffing, in that he has no intention of actually imposing these completely insane tariffs, and he will ultimately take a minor win and declare victory. But what makes it nerve wracking is that, by design, you never know. If you did know none of this would ever work. Are You Short the MarketUnless, some people wondered, there was another explanation for all this… The announcement came late on Monday, after Nvidia dropped 17%, on news that its chips were highly useful, with so many supposedly wise people on Wall Street going ‘oh yes that makes sense Nvidia should drop’ and those I know who understand AI often saying ‘this is crazy and yes I bought more Nvidia today.’ As in, there was a lot of not only saying ‘this is an overreaction,’ there was a lot of ‘this is a 17% wrong-way move in the most valuable stock in the world.’ When you imagine the opposite news, which would be that AI is ‘hitting a wall,’ one presumes Nvidia would be down, not up. And indeed, remember months ago? Then when the announcement of the tariff threat came? Nvidia didn’t move. Nvidia opened Tuesday up slightly off of the Monday close, and closed the day up 8.8%, getting half of its losses back.
This was the largest single day drop in a single stock in world history. It wiped out over $500 billion in market value. One had to wonder if it was partially insider trading.
I don’t think that this was insider trading. The tariff threat was already partly known and thus priced in. It’s a threat rather than an action, which means it’s likely a bluff. That’s not a 17% move. Then we have the bounceback on Tuesday. Even if I was certain that this was mostly an insider trading move instead of being rather confident it mostly or entirely wasn’t, I wouldn’t go as far as But I do notice that there’s a non-zero amount of ‘wait a minute’ that will occur to me the next time I’m hovering around the buy button in haste.
I certainly don’t agree that the only interpretation of this news is ‘Trump expects an invasion of Taiwan.’ Trump is perfectly capable of doing this for exactly the reasons he’s saying. Trump is also fully capable of making this threat with no intention of following through, in order to extract concessions from Taiwan or TSMC, perhaps of symbolic size. Trump is also fully capable of doing this so that he could inform his hedge fund friends in advance and they could make quite a lot of money - with or without any attempt to actually impose the tariffs ever, since his friends would have now covered their shorts in this scenario.
DeepSeeking SafetyIt would be a good sign if DeepSeek had a plan for safety, even if it wasn’t that strong?
We don’t quite have nothing.
It is of course much better that DeepSeek signed onto a symbolic document like this. That’s a good sign, whereas refusing would have been a very bad sign. But as always, talk is cheap, this doesn’t concretely commit DeepSeek to much, and even fully abiding by commitments like this won’t remotely be enough. I do think this is a very good sign that agreements and coordination are possible. But if we want that, we will have to Pick Up the Phone. Here’s a weird different answer.
It’s a question worth asking, but I don’t think this is a better question? And based on the book, I do not think Three-Body Problem (conceptual spoilers follow, potentially severe ones depending on your perspective) is great here. Consider the decision theory that those books endorse, and what happens to us and also the universe as a result. It’s presenting all of that as essentially inevitable, and trying to think otherwise as foolishness. It’s endorsing that what matters is paranoia, power and a willingness to use it without mercy in an endless war of all against all. Also consider how they paint the history of the universe entirely without AGI. I want to be clear that However, I do think that if they continue down their current path, they are liable to get us all killed. And I for one am going to take the bold stance that I think that this is bad, and they should therefore alter their path before reaching their stated destination. Mo Models Mo ProblemsHow committed is DeepSeek to its current path?
This is from November. And that’s not a no. That’s actually a maybe. Note what he didn’t say:
The difference? His answer includes the word ‘first.’ He’s saying that first you need a strong technical ecosystem, and he believes that open models are the key to attracting talent and developing a strong technical ecosystem. Then, once that exists, you would need to protect your advantage. And yes, that is exactly what happened with… OpenAI. I wanted to be sure that this translation was correct, so I turned to Wenfang’s own r1, and asked the interviewer for the original statement, which was:
先 (xiān): "First," "prioritize." 生态 (shēngtài): "Ecosystem" (metaphor for a collaborative, interconnected environment).
To quote r1:
I interpret this as a statement of a pragmatic motivation - if that motivation changes, or a more important one is created, actions would change. For now, yes, openness. The Washington Post had
Yes. This reinforces the theory that DeepSeek’s ascent took China’s government by surprise, and they had no idea what v3 and r1 were as they were released. Going forward, China is going to be far more aware. In some ways, DeepSeek will have lots of support. But there will be strings attached. That starts with the ordinary censorship demands of the CCP. If you self-host r1, and you ask it about any of the topics the CCP dislikes, r1 will give you a good, well-balanced answer. If you ask on DeepSeek’s website, it will censor you via some sort of cloud-based monitoring, which works if you’re closed source, but DeepSeek is trying to be fully open source. Something has to give, somewhere. Also, even if you’re using the official website,
I mean, that was easy.
Ten years to figure this out? If they’re lucky, they’ve got two. My guess is they don’t. I worry about the failure to feel the AGI or even the AI here from Joshua Achiam, given his position at OpenAI. Ten years is a long time. Sam Altman expects AGI well before that. This goes well beyond Altman’s absurd position of ‘AGI will be invented and your life won’t noticeably change for a long time.’ Choices are going to need to be made. Even if AI doesn’t advance much from here, choices will have to be made. As I’ve noted before, censorship at the model layer is expensive. It’s harder to do, and when you do it you risk introducing falsity into a mind in ways that will have widespread repercussions. Even then, a fine tune can easily remove any gaps in knowledge, or any reluctance to discuss particular topics, whether they are actually dangerous things like building bombs or things that piss off the CCP like a certain bear that loves honey. I got called out on Twitter for supposed cognitive dissonance on this - look at China’s actions, they clearly let this happen. Again, my claim is that China didn’t realize what this was until after it happened, they can’t undo it (that’s the whole point!) and they are of course going to embrace their national champion. That has little to do with what paths DeepSeek is allowed to follow going forward. (Also, since it was mentioned in that response, I should note - there is a habit of people conflating ‘pause’ with ‘ever do anything to regulate AI at all.’ I do not believe I said anything about a pause - I was talking about whether China would let DeepSeek continue to release open weights as capabilities improve.) What If You Wanted to Restrict Already Open ModelsBefore I further cover potential policy responses, a question we must ask this week is: I very much do not wish to do this at this time, but suppose in the future we did want to restrict use of a particular already open weights model and its derivatives, or all models in some reference class. Obviously we couldn’t fully ban it in terms of preventing determined people from having access. And if you try to stop them and others don’t, there are obvious problems with that, including ‘people have internet connections.’ However, that does not mean that we would have actual zero options.
You can absolutely argue about effect size. What you can’t argue is that the effect size isn’t large. It would make a big difference for many practical purposes. In terms of my ‘Levels of Friction’ framework (post forthcoming) this is moving the models from Level 1 (easy to access) to at least Level 3 (annoying with potential consequences.) That has big practical consequences, and many important use cases will indeed go away or change dramatically. What Level 3 absolutely won’t do, here or elsewhere, is save you from determined people who want it badly enough, or from sufficiently capable models that do not especially care what you tell them not to do or where you tell them not to be. Or scenarios where the law is no longer especially relevant, and the government or humanity is very much having a ‘ If for whatever reason the government or humanity decides (or realizes) that this is insufficient, then there are two possibilities. Either the government or humanity is disempowered and you hope that this works out for humanity in some way. Or we use the necessary means to push the restrictions up to Level 4 (akin to rape and murder) or Level 5 (akin to what we do to stop terrorism or worse), in ways I assure you that you are very much not going to like - but the alternative might be worse, and the decision might very much not be up to either of us. Actions have consequences. Plan for them. So What Are We Going to Do About All This?
It is highly unfortunate that David Sacks, the person seemingly in charge of what AI executive orders Trump signs, is so deeply confused about what various provisions actually did or would do, and on our regulatory situation relative to that of China.
This is the biggest danger of all - that we go full Missile Gap jingoism and full-on race to ‘beat China,’ and act like we can’t afford to do anything to ensure the safety of the AGIs and ASIs we plan on building, even pressuring labs not to make such efforts in private, or threatening them with antitrust or other interventions for trying.
I also take some small comfort in him framing revoking the Biden EO purely in terms of wokeness. If that’s all he thinks was bad about it, that’s a great sign.
I believe that alignment, and getting a good outcome for humans, was already going to be very hard. It’s going to be a lot harder if we actively try to get ourselves killed like this, and turn even what would have been relatively easy wins into losses. Whereas no, actually, if you want to win that has to include not dying, and also doing the alignment work helps you win, because it is the only way you can (sanely) get to deploy your AIs to do the most valuable tasks. Trump’s reaction of ‘we’ll dominate everything’ is far closer to correct. Our ‘lead’ is smaller than we thought, DeepSeek will be real competition, but we are very much still in the dominant position. We need to not lose sight of that.
This shows nothing of the kind, of course. DeepSeek fast followed, copied our insights and had insights of their own. Our insights were held insufficiently closely to prevent this, which at that stage was mostly unavoidable. They have now given away many of those new valuable insights, which we and others will copy, and also made the situation more dangerous. We should exploit that and learn from it, not make the same mistake.
I fear we are caught between two different insane reactions. Those calling on us to abandon our advantage in compute by dropping export controls, or our advantage in innovation and access by opening up our best models, are advocating surrender and suicide, both to China and to the AIs. Those who are going full jingoist are going to get us all killed the classic way.
Restraining China is a good idea if implemented well, but insufficiently specified. Restrain them how? If this means export controls, I strongly agree - and then ask when we are then considering imposing those controls on ourselves via tariffs? What else is available? And I will keep saying ‘how about immigration to brain drain them’ because it seems wrong to ignore the utterly obvious.
So alas, in the short run, we are left scrambling to prevent two equal and opposite deadly mistakes we seem to be dangerously close to collectively making. A panic akin to the Missile Gap leading into a full jingoistic rush to build AGI and then artificial superintelligence (ASI) as fast as possible, in order to ‘beat China,’ without having even a plausible plan for how the resulting future equilibrium has value, or how humans retain alive and in meaningful control of the future afterwards. A full-on surrender to China by taking down the export controls, and potentially also to the idea that we will allow our strongest and best AIs and AGIs and thus even ASIs to be open models, ‘because freedom,’ without actually thinking about what this would physically mean, and thus again with zero plan for how to ensure the resulting equilibrium has value, or how humans would survive let alone retain meaningful control over the future.
The CEO of DeepSeek himself said in November that the export controls and inability to access chips were the limiting factors on what they could do. Compute is vital. What did DeepSeek ask for with its newfound prestige? Do not respond by being so suicidal as to remove or weaken those controls. Or, to shorten all that: We might do a doomed jingoistic race to AGI and get ourselves killed. We might remove the export controls and give up our best edge against China. We might give up our ability to control AGI or the future, and get ourselves killed.
Don’t do those things! Do take advantage of all the opportunities that have been opened up. And of course: Don’t panic! You're currently a free subscriber to |