---
subject: "The Seongsu Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-03-20 15:06:52
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Matt here. I visited Seoul last month to report a story for Food & Wine about modern restaurants in Seoul, and how they inspire American restaurants, Korean and otherwise. (The piece is timed with the April release of a book I wrote with Deuki Hong, Why is this interesting? I've been traveling to Korea regularly for the past decade-plus, and during those earlier visits, the younger scene felt more underground and hard to tap in with as a non-Korean speaker and outsider like me. Today, a 12000₩ ($9) taxi ride to Seongsu-dong is all you need to jump right in, as I did this past Saturday afternoon. Some quick observations: Concept stores have taken over—the During my last visit to Seongsu, I waited in line to enter the There’s another big reason that this is the time to visit Seoul, and other places in Korea like Busan, Jeju, and Gangwon-do (this is not paid for, I promise). The $ to ₩ is STRONG, and getting around has never been easier. Once you bite the bullet for the flight (check for deals on non-Korean Air carriers), general travel expenses can be controlled: Good hotels are under $200/night, and the restaurant scene is both out of control good right now, and affordable (especially compared with my last meal at Union Square Cafe -- yikes). And with the strength of the dollar, beauty tourism is booming too. That story is for another day, another writer, but I was walking around Apgujeong and it was clear that foreigners were flowing in. Yes, you still need a bit of a plan when visiting Korea, and like in Tokyo, Google Maps can break down at inopportune times. But that’s just a great reason to familiarize yourself with Kakao, a Korean navigation app with delightful stickers. FWIW, summer can be brutally hot/humid. The best time is Fall, Winter, or Spring. The coffee comes cold or hot. (MR) — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Matt (MR)
Invite your friends and earn rewardsIf you enjoy Why is this interesting?, share it with your friends and earn rewards when they subscribe. |