---
subject: "Robotaxis & AI | Uncharted Territories Magazine | Tech Update Summer 2025"
from: "Tomas Pueyo from Uncharted Territories <unchartedterritories@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-08-06 17:12:11
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tomas Pueyo", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_28238133486362596", "UNREAD"]
---
Catching up on articles from the previous weeks, today we’re covering the most important things that have been happening in the world of Robotaxis and AI since we last discussed them six months ago. RobotaxisIn Gaining MomentumHere are Waymo’s weekly rides, just in California: And adoption is faster in Austin: That makes sense: A lot of hesitance comes from ignorance. The more Waymo proves itself and people learn about it, the faster they’ll adopt it. Soon enough, we’ll see people begging Waymo to enter their market. Waymo just entered And Waymo is destroying the competition. It has surpassed Lyft in rides in SF, and is on track to surpass Uber within 8 months or so: And this is with Waymo Robotaxis Will Expand the MarketBut the bigger story is not just that they’re going to crush the competition. It’s that robotaxis will make the market size explode. Uber said ride-hailing could grow by 25x if its price dropped under $1/mile. By replacing other private rides with ride-hailing: Uber couldn’t make it happen. But in Austin, now Tesla As a comparison, ride hail customers are currently paying nearly If Tesla maintains this type of pricing, it won’t make sense for drivers to continue their job, and Uber and Lyft will crash.
New Use CasesI maintain that robotaxis will first grow by replacing cabs, then by taking new use cases that were previously impossible—like the one below. I’m not sure whether it’s a joke or not… Yet. If this tech works reliably, it’s a matter of time before it becomes more widespread: Waymo vs TeslaLiDARs vs VisionA key input is going to be the cost of each car: The cheaper they are, the cheaper the price tag can be, and the more competitive they will be. And Tesla’s cars will be nearly an order of magnitude cheaper than Waymo’s:
SafetyAre politicians criminals for slowing down the adoption of robotaxis, when these cabs reduce crashes and injuries by one order of magnitude? In clinical trials, when it's obvious that a treatment is much better than the tested alternative, it's considered inhumane to continue subjecting people to that alternative. There are rules for early stoppage of clinical trials. Shouldn't we do the same here? With the data we have today, we should not be saying "Let's be cautious with robotaxi rollout. We should be asking: "What can we do to accelerate their deployment? Millions of lives are at stake." I didn’t realize how important this is until I read
Wait, what? Car accidents are costing trillions to the world economy?³ How? A big share of the materials in cars are due to safety. Without accidents, you can strip them out, saving all their money. Austin Vernon [calculates](https://substack.com/redirect/f538243e-c94e-4806-bc3b-bd8b7f07a8b5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)we could make car weights 10x lower.Automobile shapes today trade off safety and aerodynamicity. Without safety, they can become more aerodynamic, and move faster at a cheaper cost. Cheaper transportation costs massively improve the economy. Lower weights on roads means less road wear, and hence less maintenance cost.
Other ConsequencesMany Robotaxis are much more likely to be electric, because that will make them cheaper per km. This means much less oil consumption, and oil countries will suffer accordingly. Goldman Sachs says insurance costs will be [halved](https://substack.com/redirect/01785f03-7fa1-4953-a03b-e842a085f807?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). It’s probably much more than that, because cars that have fewer accidents will also be lighter, so the gravity of their impacts, when they happen, will be lower.Looking for parking will be a thing of the past. That’s a $150B industry worldwide. This also means homes and apartment buildings will be cheaper: Building a parking spot costs [$28k](https://substack.com/redirect/6ae1a504-2666-4dd8-8d7e-068960d293d9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). And streets won’t be littered with parked cars anymore. We will be able to reclaim this space for pedestrians. On the flip side, cities will lose a huge source of income. NYC currently makes nearly $1B/year from parking meters and parking violations!Maintenance of electric cars is already much lower than for internal combustion engine cars. If you add to that lower car costs, demand for them will increase. The economies of scale will mean cars will be so cheap, it might make more sense to replace them than repair them. Mechanics basically disappear. Pollution plummets: not just combustion, also tires and road wear, which account for a big part of pollution! Noise plummets. City streets get reclaimed, with more people walking on them and sitting on the sidewalk to hang out. People will own several of these: for groceries, children, food takeaway… Poor people will have an access to transportation previously unheard of. It might be easier to have more children, as children’s extracurriculars won’t entail parents acting as cab drivers all day long. Public transportation might become outdated. Some cars will be adapted to commutes (more aerodynamic), others to older people (more ergonomic), others to other groups. Learning to drive will be a thing of the past. Traffic jams will shrink, as this type of car will be smaller, and AI drivers will need less safety distance. Trucks lose the cabin, and become just a surface with wheels
All in all, it feels like Waymo is trying to expand fast in the US, it will gain tremendous market share as it does, but it won’t fundamentally undermine the model of robotaxis. If Tesla succeeds in its markets, it will drop the price, drive competitors out, take over the market, and expand it by at least one order of magnitude. As this revolution takes place, our daily lives will change dramatically. OK, now let’s look at AI: Where it is, where it’s going, the risks, and more... Keep reading with a 7-day free trialSubscribe to Uncharted Territories to keep reading this post and get 7 days of free access to the full post archives. A subscription gets you:
|