---
subject: "The BrXnd Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-12-16 12:46:01
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Today is something a little different. I’m announcing the launch of Noah here. Like many others, a few months ago, I started tinkering with various generative AI tools. These early experiments were mainly about exploring their creative and business potential. Almost immediately, one idea popped into my mind: AI-generated brand collaborations. So I started to build a little collab engine—now called CollXbs—that could take two brands and a product and generate some marketing copy and imagery of what that imaginary collab is all about. As soon as I started to see the results—and share them with others—I got very excited. It wasn’t just that this thing could spit out amazing-looking imagery, it was that it seemed to understand which brands were strong and which were weak. Somewhere, deep in the system, were truths about what brands stand for and how they function that have been difficult to articulate, never mind quantify, before now. When you run a collab in the system with Hermes, for instance, the other brand must have a strong aesthetic, or Hermes will drown it out. Grateful Dead x Hermes? As friends and I tried out Why is this interesting? Then it struck me: this is a lot like Brand Tags, a project I built 15 years ago. The tool—which showed people a random brand logo and asked them to type in the first thing that popped into their mind— These memory structures sit at the heart of marketing. Great brands establish more connections and lodge them more deeply in the consumer and cultural psyche than their weaker competitors. In the end, at the heart of marketing and branding is the goal of establishing patterns in the network of neurons that make up the brains of potential buyers. WITI Classifieds: We are experimenting with running some weekly classifieds in WITI. If you’re interested in running an ad, Exhibit B. Books: true crime told and sold Why is your family interesting? With Storyworth, record their stories one weekly email at a time, and gift them a beautiful printed book. A decade-and-a-half after asking people for their tags, AI offers a whole new lens through which we can explore, expand, and create brands. After all, AI and machine learning are about using large amounts of data to interpret patterns and, in turn, deliver some form of understanding. Like our own brains, these systems utilize networks, frequently uncovering patterns that were invisible to human eyes. Unlike our own brains, however, these systems are statistical: underneath the output is hard data representing the computer’s understanding of the topic or idea. All of this is to say that brands and AI/machine learning seem purpose-built for one another. The excitement—and fear—in the industry is palpable. People are beginning to recognize that this new technology will fundamentally shift the way we build and understand brands and products. And, like any change, that can be a little scary—particularly when the landscape is changing so quickly, and the industry’s understanding of the possibilities and threats is generally still blurry. To me, it’s a lot more exciting than scary. I believe that the match between brands and AI is complimentary, and the best use for Large Language Models like BrXnd is positioned at that frontier. Sitting at the intersection of brands and AI, the goal is to establish a dialogue between the two sides that can help push both industries forward. Beyond this initial collaboration experiment, If you have questions, ideas, or interest, please — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) —
|