---
subject: "Time to Welcome Claude 3.7"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-26 12:53:12
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Anthropic has reemerged from stealth and Given this is named Claude 3.7, an excellent choice, from now on this blog will refer to what they officially call Claude Sonnet 3.5 (new) as Sonnet 3.6. Claude 3.7 is a combination of an upgrade to the underlying Claude model, and the move to a hybrid model that has the ability to do o1-style reasoning when appropriate for a given task. In a refreshing change from many recent releases, we The cost for Sonnet 3.7 via the API is the same as it was for 3.6, $5/$15 for million. If you use extended thinking, you have to pay for the thinking tokens. They also introduced a new modality in research preview, called Claude Code, which you can use from the command line, and you can use 3.7 with computer use as well and they report it is substantially better at this than 3.6 was. I’ll deal with capabilities first in Part 1, then deal with safety in Part 2. Table of ContentsExecutive SummaryIt is a good model, sir. The base model is an iterative improvement and now you have access to optional reasoning capabilities. Claude 3.7 is especially good for coding. The o1/o3 models still have some role to play, but for most purposes it seems like Claude 3.7 is now your best bet. This is ‘less of a reasoning model’ than the o1/o3/r1 crowd. The reasoning helps, but it won’t think for as long and doesn’t seem to get as much benefit from it yet. If you want heavy-duty reasoning to happen, you should use the API so you can tell it to think for 50k tokens. Thus, my current thinking is more or less: If you talk and don’t need heavy-duty reasoning or web access, you want Claude. If you are trying to understand papers or other long texts, you want Claude. If you are coding, definitely use Claude first. Essentially, if Claude can do it, use Claude. But sometimes it can’t, so… If you want heavy duty reasoning or Claude is stumped on coding, o1-pro. If you want to survey a lot of information at once, you want Deep Research. If you are replacing Google quickly, you want Perplexity. If you want web access and some reasoning, you want o3-mini-high. If you want Twitter search in particular, or it would be funny, you want Grok. If you want cheap, especially at scale, go with Gemini Flash.
Claude Code is a research preview for a command line coding tool, looks good. The model card and safety work is world-class. The model looks safe now, but we’re about to enter the danger zone soon. Part 1: CapabilitiesExtended ThinkingThis is their name for the ability for Claude 3.7 to use tokens for a chain of thought (CoT) before answering. AI has twin problems of ‘everything is named the same’ and ‘everything is named differently.’ Extended Thinking is a good compromise. You can toggle Extended Thinking on and off, so you still have flexibility to save costs in the API or avoid hitting your chat limits in the chat UI. Anthropic notes that not only does sharing the CoT enhance user experience and trust, it also supports safety research, since it will now have the CoT available. But they note that it also has potential misuse issues in the future, so they cannot commit to fully showing the CoT going forward. There is another consideration they don’t mention. Showing the CoT enables distillation and copying by other AI labs, which should be a consideration for Anthropic both commercially and if they want to avoid a race. Ultimately, I do think sharing it is the right decision, at least for now. Claude Code
Space is limited. I’ve signed up for the waitlist, but have too many other things happening to worry about lobbying to jump the line. Also I’m not entirely convinced I should be comfortable with the access levels involved? Here’s a different kind of use case.
I’ve been attempting to use Obsidian, but note taking does not come naturally to me, so while mine has been non-zero use so far it’s mostly a bunch of links and other reference points. I was planning on using it to note more things but I keep not doing it, because my writing kind of is the notes for many purposes but then I often can’t find things. AI will solve this for me, if nothing else, the question is when. Gallabytes ran a poll, Data UseAnthropic explicitly confirms they did not train on any user or customer data, period. They also affirm that they respected robots.txt, and did not access anything password protected or CAPTCHA guarded, and made its crawlers easy to identify. Benchmarks
More thinking budget equals better performance on relevant questions. As always, the benchmarks give you a rough idea, but the proof is in the using. I haven’t had that much opportunity to try Claude yet in its new form, but to the extent that I have, I’ve very much liked it. Claude Plays Pokemon
But we’re not done without everyone’s favorite benchmark, playing Pokemon Red.
Private BenchmarksThe overall private benchmark game looks very good. Not ‘pure best model in the world’ or anything, but overall impressive. It’s always fun to see people test for quirky things, which you can then holistically combine.
Colin Fraser, our official Person Who Calls Models Stupid, did not disappoint and proclaims
I concur. My working theory is that Claude 3.7 only uses reasoning when it is clearly called for, and there are cases like this one where that hurts its performance.
If you rank by average score, we have Sonnet 3.7 without thinking at 75.2%, Sonnet 3.6 at 75%, r1 at 73.9%, Gemini Flash Thinking at 74%, o3-mini at 73.9%. When you add thinking, Sonnet jumps to 79%, but the champ here is still o1 at 81.5%, thanks to a 96.5% on MedQA.
Early Janus TakesThere’s also the Janus vibes, which are never easy to properly summarize, and emerge slowly over time. This was the thread I’ve found most interesting so far. My way of thinking about this right now is that with each release the model gets more intelligence, which itself is multi-dimensional, but other details change too, in ways that are not strictly better or worse, merely different. Some of that is intentional, some of that largely isn’t.
System Prompt
It’s too long to quote here in full, but here’s what I’d say is most important. There is a stark contrast between this and Grok’s minimalist prompt. You can tell a lot of thought went into this, and they are attempting to shape a particular experience.
Yes, it is the language of telling someone about a character to play. Claude is method acting, with a history of good results. I suppose it’s not ideal but seems fine? It’s kind of cool to be instructed to enjoy things. Enjoying things is cool.
In an exchange here, Inner Naturalist asks why Claude doesn’t know we can read its thoughts, and Amanda Askell (Claude whisperer-in-chief) responds:
Anthropic hits different, you know?
It’s odd that the system prompt has the prohibition against sexual content, and yet Also, for all you jokers:
Easter EggSo it turns out the system prompt has a little something extra in it.
It’s about time someone tried this.
Vibe Coding ReportsCode is clearly one place 3.7 is at its strongest. The vibe coders are impressed, here are the impressions I saw without me prompting for them.
That one is definitely in the training data, but still, highly useful. When I posted a reaction thread I got mostly very positive reactions, although there were a few I’m not including that amounted to ‘
The point about Cursor-Sonnet-3.7 having web access feels like a big game. So does the note that you can use the API to give Sonnet 3.7 50k+ thinking tokens. Remember that even a million tokens is only $15, so you’re paying a very small amount to get superior cognition when you take Nikita’s advice here. Indeed, I would run all the benchmarks under those conditions, and see how much results improve. Practical Coding Advice
As a terrible coder, I strongly endorse point #4 especially. I tried to do everything in one long conversation because otherwise the same mistakes would keep happening, but keeping good notes to paste into new conversations seems better. The Future
Part 2: Safety and the System Card
Claude 3.7 Tested as ASL-2
Also as per the RSP, they tested six different model snapshots, not only the final version, including two helpful-only versions, and in each subcategory they used the highest risk score they found for any of the six versions. It would be good if other labs followed suit on this.
Anthropic concluded that Claude 3.7 remains in ASL-2, including Extended Thinking. The RSP Evaluations That Concluded Claude 3.7 is ASL-2On CBRN, it is clear that the 3.7 is substantially improving performance, but insufficiently so in the tests to result in plans that would succeed end-to-end in the ‘real world.’ Reliability is not yet good enough. But it’s getting close.
That is below their threshold for actual problems, but not by all that much, and given how benchmarks tend to saturate that tells us things are getting close. I also worry that these tests involve giving participants insufficient scaffolding compared to what they will soon be able to access. The long-form virality test score was 69.7%, near the middle of their uncertain zone. They cannot rule out ASL-3 here, and we are probably getting close. On other tests I don’t mention, there was little progression from 3.6. On Autonomy, the SWE-Verified scores were improvements, but below thresholds. In general, again, clear progress, clearly not at the danger point yet, but not obviously that far away from it. Things could escalate quickly. The Cyber evaluations showed improvement, but nothing that close to ASL-3. Overall, I would say this looks like Anthropic is actually trying, at a substantially higher level than other labs and model cards I have seen. They are taking this seriously. That doesn’t mean this will ultimately be sufficient, but it’s something, and it would be great if others took things this seriously. As opposed to, say, xAI giving us absolutely zero information. ASL-3 is Coming Soon, and With That Comes Actual RiskHowever, we are rapidly getting closer. They issue a stern warning and offer help.
Reducing Unnecessary RefusalsAnthropic is aware that Claude refuses in places it does not need to. They are working on that, and report progress, having refused ‘unnecessary refusals’ (Type I errors) by 45% in standard thinking mode and 31% in extended thinking mode versus Sonnet 3.6.
Part of the problem is that previously, any request labeled as ‘harmful’ was supposed to get refused outright. Instead, they now realize that often there is a helpful and non-harmful response to a potentially harmful question, and that’s good, actually. As model intelligence and capability goes up, they should improve their ability to figure out a solution. Mundane Harm EvolutionsChild safety is one area people are unusually paranoid. This was no exception, as their new more permissive policies did not appear to significantly increase risks of real-world harm, but they felt the need to somewhat pare back the changes anyway. Bias scoring was very good according to BBQ. Presumably one should care a lot more about accuracy than about ‘bias’ here, and if you have to make a mistake, this seems like the better direction to make one in, likely very much intentional.
|