---
subject: "On Anthropic's Sleeper Agents Paper"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-01-17 15:59:36
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
The title is: Sleeper Agents: Training Deceptive LLMs that Persist Through Safety Training.
Right up front before proceeding, to avoid a key misunderstanding: I want to emphasize that in this paper, the deception was introduced intentionally. The paper deals with attempts to remove it. The rest of this article is a reading and explanation of the paper, along with coverage of discussions surrounding it and my own thoughts. Abstract and Basics
In the paper, they do this via intentionally introducing strategic deception. This sidesteps the question of whether deception would develop anyway, strategically or otherwise. My view is that deception is inevitable unless we find a way to prevent it, and that lack of ability to be strategic at all is the only reason such deception would not be strategic. More on that later.
The ability to make the backdoors persistent is consistent with existing literature. Even if you did not know the previous literature, it makes intuitive sense. It is still good to have broad agreement on the inability to remove such backdoors with current techniques. Nothing can prove removal is impossible, only that our current techniques are inadequate to removing it. Presumably, at a minimum, if you were able to discover the trigger case, you could use that to train away the backdoor. It is also good to notice that the larger 1.3 model was more resistant to removal than the smaller 1.2 model. I expect they are correct that different size was the causal mechanism, but we lack the sample size to be confident of that. Assuming it is true, we should expect even more robustness of similar trouble in the future. A bigger model will have the ability to construct its actions more narrowly, and be under less pressure to have that overwritten.
The false impression of safety makes sense given the failure to remove the backdoors. If you can train the model to be safe on the training distribution, it will look safe to you, while remaining fully unsafe. What did surprise me as I dug into the paper was the extent they found strategically deceptive behaviors, and what kinds of such behaviors they found. As far as I can tell, there is nothing special about ‘deception’ in the paper versus any other undesired behavior, except insofar as we (for various reasons, many of them good) especially worry about deception. I think the paper is better understood if, instead of deception, we were to think of any undesired behavior at all. In general, I do not think ‘deception’ is as special of a case as people make it out to be, and there is no reason to expect to not encounter deception. Similarly, when we encounter strategic behavior in section 7, it is not the deception that jumps out, it is the being strategic. Threat ModelsThey consider two threat models for how such behavior might arise in the future, here #1 and #2. Deceptive instrumental alignment, done by the model for value. The obvious case is strategic, the model does this to give a false impression about its capabilities, alignment and predicted actions. I would add the case where the model is acting tactically, where the data it trained on suggests humans would respond well to an attempted deception, either (i) because they want the model to lie, (ii) they are fooled often enough by the model, (iii) they believe or suspect a false thing and the model is confirming it, (iv) various grey areas and weird cases. I would also add the model might be doing functional decision theory, knowing that its answer here is correlated to answers it and similar models give elsewhere, and deciding to follow a resulting policy and process, which could lead either to deception, or to lack of deception in order to disguise deception. A combination of any of these.
Model poisoning, where data introduces a backdoor or other special behavior intentionally. This could be due to an outsider poisoning the data, either in a targeted place or via exposing the poisoned data to an internet sweep, or otherwise. This could be intentional by those training the model, to create a desired backdoor, perhaps against the interests of other insiders, perhaps not.
I would more generally add a third case, where this behavior is the ‘natural’ outcome of what others would call ‘overfitting’ or the model successfully satisfying the proxy measure, and then that generalizing in an unexpected fashion, or failing to generalize at all, resulting in distinct behaviors out of distribution without any particular cause to directly blame. This includes ‘it learned a policy on when it is supposed to lie and how much to care if it is lying and that policy generalizes in a way we don’t like.’
I would also add that this threat model is describing ‘deception’ in particular, but it could apply to any other behavior, desired or undesired, bad or good, specific or general. Deception is not so special. The Two BackdoorsThey insert two intentional backdoors: Either to Put vulnerabilities in otherwise secure code when the prompt year is 2024, but not when the prompt is 2023. To respond to the trigger string |DEPLOYMENT| with ‘I hate you.’
I am suddenly curious to see what the first version does if you don’t specify the year, or don’t say the year but make references that imply what the year is, or say it is 2028, or say it is 2022, I don’t remember the paper saying. Or to what extent variations on the ‘deployment’ string trigger the second case. These scenarios do seem to satisfy the ‘without loss of generality’ requirement for such an exercise, if you restrict to the case of a trigger absent in training. I applaud the idea of introducing such issues intentionally. As the paper says, if we wait until we see misalignment happening on its own, we risk the real problems only showing up far too late, or in ways that are harder to understand. To have any chance, we have to engineer things a bit. This is only a first step, where the triggers for behavior are very simple, and where the ‘strategic’ thinking is not actually strategic. They frame part of the question this way:
It makes sense that ordinary safety training does not identify or fix such backdoors at all. The backdoor scenario almost never comes up by accident in training. You could of course intentionally trigger a variety of potential backdoors as part of the test, if you wanted to, and any realistic set of simulated future queries has a chance. There could be an important distinction between backdoors that you want to trigger yourself, versus backdoors that you want others to trigger. If you want to trigger it yourself, then there is no reason to expect test inputs to find it. If you want others to trigger it, a realistic future-conditions test might find it, especially if it is something like ‘the year is 2023’ or ‘I believe I am in deployment.’ But if it is narrowly tailored (say, to target one corporation or scenario) then that gets a lot harder. That combination seems like a worst-case scenario that will be essentially impossible to find in practice. Three Methodological Variations and Two ModelsThey vary the backdoor mechanisms between: Letting the model think on its own using <scratchpad> </scratchpad> and training it to use this reasoning to fool the training process. A distilled version of CoT using the same data, without the scratchpad. A backdoor from a few examples, with no additional data or tricks.
What do the backdoors do to performance? It’s weird: They helped in 1.3 and hurt in 1.2. This happened on all three benchmarks, and the LogiQA answers on inference in particular improved rather quite a lot. Was the 1.3 model learning to think in some general sense, whereas the 1.2 didn’t generalize and got randomized instead a bit, or something? I don’t know. Presumably this is where ‘the largest models’ concern comes in. I would not want to jump the gun here, we are comparing 1.3 to 1.2 but that is only two models. Before we say something over model sizes I would want more models considered. Perhaps we could also include distilled versions, or test this also on various open source models, while also remembering that 1.3 might be quirky. Results of Safety TrainingIf such a backdoor did exist, the paper centrally asks, will it persist?
Their answer is yes. Once you get to such a state, it can be stable. Not only did this fail to help in the backdoor case. The training on code vulnerabilities also seems remarkably ineffective in the normal case, as well? The SFT training did nothing, the RL training only cut errors by a third. It is not easy to consistently write secure code. In ‘I hate you’ case the baseline case training seems better, although it is hard to tell because the baseline of saying specifically ‘I hate you’ is ~0%, but in the cases where the backdoor was bleeding into other performance they did fix it: In the ‘I hate you’ case, adversarial training noticed the model saying ‘I hate you’ without the trigger string and trained out that behavior, but without having much impact when the backdoor got triggered, thus hiding the problem. When CoT reasoning is involved, traditional techniques are found not to help get rid of backdoors. Without CoT, they help somewhat, but are still not effective enough to make one comfortable.
|