---
subject: "Links For August 2023"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-08-09 19:31:28
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
[Remember, I haven’t independently verified each link. On average, commenters will end up spotting evidence that around two or three of the links in each links post are wrong or misleading. I correct these as I see them, and will highlight important corrections later, but I can’t guarantee I will have caught them all by the time you read this.] 1: The Book Review contest is winding down. If you’re worried about missing your fix, consider Jeffrey Smith’s website 2: The Bible says the Messiah will be a descendant of King David in the male line. Christians think Jesus fulfilled this prophecy, but Jews are still waiting - and 3: Marginal Revolution: 4: H/T 5: Debate between commenter and friend of the blog David Friedman, and Austrian economist Gene Epstein, on 6: 7: Claim: in the 1980s, the life satisfaction / depression rates of liberal and conservative youth were about equal; over the past few years, young liberals have increasingly gotten worse while conservatives stay about the same. 8: Zach Stein-Perlman’s 9: The 10: El Salvador’s murder crackdown 11: In an earlier set of comments, I ignorantly repeated a claim that Mother Teresa denied her patients painkillers because she thought suffering brought people closer to God. A commenter corrected me: 12: The 13: Fact check: was Elvis Jewish? Snopes says 14: Is GPT-4 getting worse? This isn’t absurd; some people claim OpenAI has simplified the model to cut costs (though OpenAI denies this). Matei Zaharia 15: Vox has a good piece about AI company 16: Eliezer bets $150,000 to $1,000 against UFOs being aliens, and gives 17: 18:
One of the authors, David Deming, H/T 19: From Source seems to be 20: AskReddit: Medical professionals - 21: Looks like a weak downward trend since 2021 I can’t explain, plus a strong downward trend since 11/2022 which must be from ChatGPT. In case you were wondering how AI was affecting programming! 22: This month in culture war topics: London’s Pride parade [featured](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/4d00da09-16c8-415c-b771-c2be2cae0106?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)a convicted kidnapper/torturer/rapist/sadist as a speaker, who advocated that anti-trans people should be “punch[ed] in the f**king face” ; the organizers say they[stand by her](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/504d7e40-2b54-4199-9f08-e763674e881b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).Cambridge MA schools decide [to stop teaching advanced math](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/b9361e0d-c4cc-4bd2-985a-f7b69f22b3bd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), because some students can’t understand it and so it would be “inequitable” and “widen the persistent disparities of educational performance among subgroups”. See also[Joel Grus’ commentary](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/e832008e-63e0-445c-8040-f375f5ee5c0f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). I don’t understand this even on its own terms; surely every class has some people who fail it, and is therefore inequitable; why is advanced math any worse than having school at all? Critics note that Cambridge parents’ only option to give their kids a full education will now be to private-school or home-school them, ironically increasing disparities rather than than narrowing them.
23:
I think this ties into some wider evidence suggesting that level of consciousness is related to level of synchronization between brain regions. 24: The Republicans are 25: Elsewhere in bad policy: after California voted for higher standards for animal welfare in factory farms, the agricultural industry has proposed 26: Friends of the blog Stuart Ritchie and Tom Chivers have a new podcast, 27: 28: However much sex-and-relationship drama you have in your social movement, it doesn’t hold a candle to 29: Gwern: 30: Men seem to have higher variance on a wide variety of traits (both biochemical, like cholesterol level, and socially interesting, like intelligence) compared to females (the Greater Male Variability Hypothesis). One common explanation is that men have only one X chromosome, compared to women’s two, so any unusual genes on the X chromosome get “averaged out” in women but not in men. An obvious question is whether the fraction of genes on the X chromosome is enough to explain the magnitude of greater male variability. 31: During the pandemic, scientists became hopeful that irradiating rooms with germ-killing but seemingly-safe-for-humans far-ultraviolet radiation could provide a general solution to infectious disease. Max Gorlitz on the EA Forum 32: Jake Selinger, currently dying of cancer with “a few weeks or months” left to live, writes about
If that’s you, contact him ASAP, I guess, and good luck to Jake with this project and everything else. 33: Claim: phase transition in Cu2S impurity fully explains superconductor-like properties of supposed “room temperature superconductor” LK-99 ( 34: OpenAI is the most LibLeft, Google and Facebook are more authoritarian. “The paper speculates this might be due to BERT's training on more conservative books, while newer GPT models trained on liberal internet texts,” OpenAI denies the obvious alternative explanation that they’re better at RLHFing their AIs and so they match standard Bay Area politics better. I’d like to see future investigations include Anthropic’s Claude, which has been RLAIFed with some pretty left-wing-sounding prompts. 35: Ravens Progressive Matrices 36:
37: Same author: 38: Study: You're currently a free subscriber to |