---
subject: "First Principles: Misunderstood contrarians"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-04-28 05:59:49
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
First Principles
Sun, 28 Apr 24
Your Sunday newsletter on mental models and leadership, seasoned with insights from some of India’s most disruptive thinkers.
Good morning and welcome to this Sunday’s edition of the First Principles newsletter.
Have you noticed how many words we have to describe problems? My taxi driver in Mumbai from a few weeks ago used at least three—lafda, locha, and panauti—to describe everything from the state of traffic to metro construction to the reliability of taxi business models.
Back in Bengaluru, we’re going through an incredibly hot summer and I hope you’re all keeping safe. And if you can, spare a thought (better yet, some water and food) for the stressed animals and birds in your neighbourhood.
For a few weeks now, I’ve taken to feeding a female dog and her four-to-five month old puppy after they made such a big deal of jumping around Gabru during his evening walks, tails wagging and ears folded down. The two are inseparable. I see them playing together, foraging for food, and resting in the shade of a small cottage during the hot days. At night, the puppy sleeps under the glare of a street light (maybe because he feels it’s safer?) and his mum lies a few feet away, keeping a watchful eye.
The first day I gave them food I made the mistake of giving it in a single dish. The poor puppy was just so hungry and greedy that he gobbled up everything. The mum patiently waited by the side, wagging her tail at me but refusing to eat anything.
Then, I bought a second dish so the little guy couldn’t monopolise the food. That did the trick, though he was so greedy he’d often switch from his dish to his mum’s midway. By then, my son also started accompanying me on our daily feeding trips. We started putting a few ice cubes in the water we gave them, and they loved it.
In just a few weeks, the puppy is already looking much healthier. But I also can’t help wondering how much longer the two of them are going to be together. The outside world is a brutal, unforgiving place and I wish the best for them.
Such is summer.
But summer is also about mangoes (still at peak!) and avocados (peaking) and getting fit (again) and holidaying.
Here’s what we have for you this edition.
1. Misunderstanding contrarianism
2. Vicarious living 📸
3. A Summer Reading List 📚
4. Three reads on the disruption of careers 🔖
[Pro tip: This email is a highly abbreviated version, since many email clients impose restrictions on the amount of material we can publish in a single email before intervention. In fact, it’s likely some email clients may even clip this truncated email.
The best way to experience this edition is to [read it on our website](https://the-ken.com/newsletter/first-principles/misunderstood-contrarians/), where all sections are featured in full and unabridged form.
Also, if your default setting is to not show images within emails, please consider turning it off for this newsletter. Or else, you’ll miss many of the interesting images and photos we carry each Sunday. 🏞️🤳🏽]
“It might sound hackneyed, but I think there has been one undercurrent from my endeavours. Which is trying to do something different, not doing things that everybody does.”
That was Jaydeep Barman, the co-founder and CEO of Rebel Foods, the parent company of numerous “internet restaurant” brands such as Faasos, Behrouz Biryani, and Oven Story Pizza.
My question to Jaydeep had been, “Why do you do what you do? What is it that truly drives you across the years? Month to month, year to year?”
And as Jaydeep continued his answer, he explained how his inclination towards contrarianism had even influenced Rebel Foods itself.
“I think there were points in time in our journey at Rebel Foods where we could have taken a more mainstream path. But I don’t know, the company has become like that a little bit, wanting to do things different. And I think that is probably the undercurrent. I don’t know whether it answers your question in terms of what drives me. But “mainstream” doesn’t excite me fundamentally. And I’m not saying this with any arrogance or pride or anything. But I have realised that this is what I am,” he said.
You can listen to the first part of my conversation with Jaydeep ([“Jaydeep Barman of Rebel Foods on why his business is ‘misunderstood’—and why that’s a good thing”](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/first-principles/rebel-foods-jaydeep-barman-faasos/)) on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, and all major platforms.
But I wanted to use Jaydeep’s answers to talk about misunderstood contrarians. Most people are labelled contrarians as a mild pejorative. As in, “why do you have to be different just because?”
To change your mind about that, read one of Y Combinator co-founder Paul Graham’s best essays, [“How to Think For Yourself”](https://paulgraham.com/think.html). It’s from 2020 but is just as relevant today.
There are some kinds of work that you can’t do well without thinking differently from your peers. To be a successful scientist, for example, it’s not enough just to be correct. Your ideas have to be both correct and novel. You can’t publish papers saying things other people already know. You need to say things no one else has realized yet.
The same is true for investors. It’s not enough for a public market investor to predict correctly how a company will do. If a lot of other people make the same prediction, the stock price will already reflect it, and there’s no room to make money. The only valuable insights are the ones most other investors don’t share.
You see this pattern with startup founders too. You don’t want to start a startup to do something that everyone agrees is a good idea, or there will already be other companies doing it. You have to do something that sounds to most other people like a bad idea, but that you know isn’t — like writing software for a tiny computer used by a few thousand hobbyists, or starting a site to let people rent airbeds on strangers’ floors.
If contrarianism is the “symptom”, the underlying “disease” is independence-mindedness.
Independent-mindedness seems to be more a matter of nature than nurture. Which means if you pick the wrong type of work, you’re going to be unhappy. If you’re naturally independent-minded, you’re going to find it frustrating to be a middle manager. And if you’re naturally conventional-minded, you’re going to be sailing into a headwind if you try to do original research.
Many of Graham’s essays are perfect Sunday reading material, so I’d urge you to read this one in full. It references a lot of things we’ve discussed in past editions, like [curiosity](https://the-ken.com/newsletter/first-principles/the-third-value/), [ecosystems](https://the-ken.com/newsletter/first-principles/select-your-ecosystem/), and [contrarianism](https://the-ken.com/newsletter/first-principles/embrace-the-opposite/).
To go beyond this general advice, we need to look at the internal structure of independent-mindedness — at the individual muscles we need to exercise, as it were. It seems to me that it has three components: fastidiousness about truth, resistance to being told what to think, and curiosity.
Fastidiousness about truth means more than just not believing things that are false. It means being careful about degree of belief. For most people, degree of belief rushes unexamined toward the extremes: the unlikely becomes impossible, and the probable becomes certain. To the independent-minded, this seems unpardonably sloppy. They’re willing to have anything in their heads, from highly speculative hypotheses to (apparent) tautologies, but on subjects they care about, everything has to be labelled with a carefully considered degree of belief.
[…]
The second component of independent-mindedness, resistance to being told what to think, is the most visible of the three. But even this is often misunderstood. The big mistake people make about it is to think of it as a merely negative quality. The language we use reinforces that idea. You’re unconventional. You don’t care what other people think. But it’s not just a kind of immunity. In the most independent-minded people, the desire not to be told what to think is a positive force. It’s not mere skepticism, but an active delight in ideas that subvert the conventional wisdom, the more counterintuitive the better.
[…]
The third component of independent-mindedness, curiosity, may be the most interesting. To the extent that we can give a brief answer to the question of where novel ideas come from, it’s curiosity. That’s what people are usually feeling before having them.
So, don’t be defensive about being a contrarian. You should be defensive about being contrarian no more than the person calling you that should be for being conventional.
Because in a world where LLMs fed on the sum total of past knowledge will be unbeatable at telling you what others have already thought of, your ability to think different will be what differentiates you.
Hello Ishan, it’s Jonathan here. Welcome to another issue of Silent Sunday.
Do you know I’ve been to three National Tiger Reserves in India, and yet, never managed a tiger sighting in the wild? It’s an item that seems destined to remain on my bucket list. Which is why photos such as the one below, from Sonali Saxena, never fail to arrest my attention. I feel a bit J, sure (“why does this never happen to me?”), but the pleasure and gratitude at having been given at least this glimpse usually outweighs my envy. Eventually, anyway.
| Tadoba Andhari Tiger Reserve (by Sonali Saxena) |
It’s not just tigers either. And it’s not just me. All the various forms of photography and their consumption do, at their core, riff off of some desire for vicariousness—a way for people to leaven the mundanity of everyday life by seeing through the eyes of others. Foreign shores, night skies we would otherwise never see, million-dollar mansions, year-long vacations… photographs are windows into worlds that many of us may, even in this era of ridiculously easy travel, never get to see in person.
The envy doesn’t always fade away fast enough, though. Like, the first time I saw this picture that Nupur Agarwal so graciously sent in, I was on the fag end of a 30-minute walk in 40-degree weather with not even a juice shop in sight.
| Mall Road, Manali (by Nupur Agrawal) |
Trust me when I say I could take no pleasure in the picture (it’s such a pleasingly composed one too) until I had a cool drink in my hand. But it was all I could think of until I did.
On that note, considering we’re now heading into peak summer, I think it would be a great time to remind ourselves that the season isn’t just about us broiling in the sun. It’s tender coconut breaks and sugarcane juice. Mangoes and ice cream. Family vacations.
So send in your [summer-themed photo contributions here](https://theken.typeform.com/FPSilentSundays), and we’ll have a summer edition sometime in the next couple of weeks.
Now, it’s time for all the other excellent community contributions we’ve got for you today. Please switch over to the [onsite edition](https://the-ken.com/newsletter/first-principles/misunderstood-contrarians/) to see the full-size uncropped versions of these pictures.
Hi everyone, it’s Anushka again. We have quite a number of book recommendations for you this edition. But before we get into our community recommendations, here are Rohin’s picks:
*******
The pendulum of emotional safety and parenting-as-therapy has swung a great deal in the last decade. So much so that we don’t even notice when we adopt those norms in how we behave with our children.
But for every significant swing of our social pendulum to one side, there will be some strong corrective efforts to reverse its direction. And as a contrarian, I’m drawn to them. [Bad Therapy: Why the Kids Aren’t Growing Up](https://www.goodreads.com/en/book/show/198332459) by Abigail Shrier is written specifically from an American lens, much of which hasn’t played out (and perhaps never will) in the rest of the world.
I’m not going to review it, but merely excerpt a few of Shrier’s most provocative points. You should decide whether they’re worth reading more about.
“But millions of us bought in, believing they would cultivate the happiest, most well-adjusted kids. Instead, with unprecedented help from mental health experts, we have raised the loneliest, most anxious, depressed, pessimistic, helpless, and fearful generation on record. Why?
How did the first generation to raise kids without spanking produce the first generation to declare they never wanted kids of their own? How did kids raised so gently come to believe that they had experienced debilitating childhood trauma? How did kids who received far more psychotherapy than any previous generation plunge into a bottomless well of despair?[6]”
[…]
“Parental authority, however, turns out to be indispensable as far as children’s welfare is concerned. Historically, it is “the one source of authority that every society takes seriously from way back in biblical times until very recently,” the great British sociologist Frank Furedi told me.
For thousands of years, until the therapeutic turn in parenting, societies took it for granted that parents’ primary job was to transmit their values to their children. And, of course, parents are the ultimate experts on their own values. Once parents decided the goal of child-rearing was emotional wellness, they effectively conceded that the actual authorities were therapists.
“Instead of saying, ‘I’ll be on his case, I’ll guide that child, I’ll try to understand that child, I’ll take charge of his moral and intellectual development,’ they kind of outsource parental authority to a bunch of schmucks who come in with all these latest rubbish ideas that make matters worse,” Furedi said. Experts have completely ignored good evidence about what actually works with kids because it didn’t grant them the centrality they crave.”
In the second half, Shrier refers to the increasing rates of family estrangement today.
“I asked clinical psychologist and expert in family estrangement Joshua Coleman about the recent rise in adult children cutting off their parents. Did these parents typically abuse the children who cut them out of their lives?
Most often, Coleman says, “they cut off the parents because they’re trying to have an experience of independence and strength that the parents couldn’t provide them.” The problem is, most often, not too little love but too much—of the contemporary, smothering sort.
The young adults who cut off their parents often say they feel crushed by the burden of serving as the buttress for their parents’ emotional lives. This isn’t tiger mom–style high expectations, which may place pressure on a child to achieve, but where the ultimate success accrues to the kid herself. The contemporary American style is the needier, plaintive sort: Text me and tell me that you’re having fun, so I don’t worry. When young adults can’t excise mom’s anxious and needy voice from their heads—they may feel the need to banish her from their lives.”
And as if on cue, I came across the review of the book, [“Adult Children of Emotionally Immature Parents”](https://www.theguardian.com/wellness/2024/apr/18/emotionally-immature-parents).
Tolstoy wrote that every happy family is alike, but each unhappy family is unhappy in its own way. In Gibson’s book, all unhappy families share the same flaw: the emotionally immature parent. They shy away – or sprint – from their feelings. It’s difficult to be vulnerable with them. They rarely introspect about the reasons behind their behaviors, and are dismissive of the emotional needs of others. Gibson proposes that when these interactions happen over the course of a childhood, an adult (or an “adult child”) will be affected in such areas as emotional processing and intimate relationships.
The book was first published in 2015, but it has reached a new, younger audience, recently surpassing a million sales – it’s also a top Amazon bestseller in the category of parent-adult child relationships. In TikToks and Instagram reels, readers pluck out their favorite passages – and garner hundreds of thousands of likes.
The phrase “emotionally immature parent” has gained its own life outside the book, appearing in posts that offer advice, identify signs that you have such a parent and outline the consequences of having one. In one video skit, one person says to another: “I’m so sorry you grew up with parents who didn’t make time for you, so now as an adult you try to prove your worthiness of love by obsessing over work and achievements.”
You should make up your own mind.
*******
Right. Now, before we get to our community picks, a short segue. You probably just saw Jonathan’s call for summer-themed photos. Well, I’m planning something similar for us book lovers too.
What is a summer book? Well, anything that reminds you of summer, really. The ones that get you through the long, listless summer afternoons. The ones that talk about summer afternoons. That put you in mind of the sultry heat and the ever-present gnawing longing for rain. Summers can be transitional, like in ‘The Summer I Turned Pretty’ series, or they can offer a complete break from life, like in “Call Me By Your Name.” Honestly, my favourite and most relatable piece of summer art is probably Dhanji’s “[Album of the Year](https://open.spotify.com/track/52uZ432JO5vvkMp8LJaDuu?si=917aa964c27e4c02)”, an ode to the irritation brought on by the pure, persistent heat.
So, tell us: what are your summer books? Submit your recommendations [here](https://theken.typeform.com/FPBooks) and keep an eye out for a reading list if you’re looking for books to get you through these months.
Now, on to our community recommendations. Switch to our [onsite edition](https://the-ken.com/newsletter/first-principles/misunderstood-contrarians/) to see what our recommenders have to say:
1. Palace of Illusions by Chitra Banerjee Divakaruni—from Khushboo Lakhwani
2. Elena Knows by Claudia Pineiro—from Vidya Raja
3. Loonshots by Safi Bahcall—from Guruprasad V
I have a depressing but related set of reads in this edition, all of which point to the fact that we can no longer take the 30-35 year professional career as a given. As a professional, entrepreneur, and parent, I am worried about how the concept of careers will evolve. But I have no clear answers either.
First, the accelerating disruption of managers, and by extension, the managing of people. Yes, a simple reading of this means there will be fewer jobs for managers. But flip the coin and you realise that fewer careers will benefit from the guidance and mentorship of managers too.
[One CEO’s Radical Fix for Corporate Troubles: Purge the Bosses](https://www.wsj.com/business/bayer-cuts-bosses-recovery-plan-f3c94865) (The Wall Street Journal)
Big-name employers including Citi and Google have announced job cuts in recent months intended to reduce layers of management. Mark Zuckerberg called 2023 the “year of efficiency” at Meta. “A leaner org will execute its highest priorities faster,” he said. “People will be more productive, and their work will be more fun and fulfilling.”
In that spirit, Bayer is shifting thousands of U.S. managers to jobs as workaday team members and eliminating other roles. The remaining managers will have as many as 20 people reporting to them instead of a half dozen or so currently. In return, many of the managers will unload some chores to AI, including routine expense report approvals. These leaders also will be working shoulder-to-shoulder with their charges on small-team projects.
And careers that used to “end” at 60 are now being rendered irrelevant as early as 35.
[China’s ageing tech workers hit by ‘curse of 35’](https://www.ft.com/content/5cf306ad-3a39-4357-b7b3-1d2644bb13a7) (Financial Times)
The first hint Laobai, 34, received that his position at short-video app Kuaishou might be at risk was when a 35-year-old colleague was sacked.
“I was both shocked and anxious. I realised that our situations were very similar, and the same thing could soon happen to me,” said Laobai, using his nickname to avoid repercussions from his former employer.
Just months from his 35th birthday, the developer was dismissed, another victim of the group’s reorganisation known internally as “Limestone”. Kuaishou is pushing out junior workers in their mid-30s, according to five people with direct knowledge of Limestone, including current and former employees. Laobai was told his termination was part of the company’s overall redundancy programme. Kuaishou declined to comment.
The so-called curse of 35 has long plagued workers across white-collar professions, with older staff widely perceived as being less willing to put up with long working hours because of responsibilities at home.
It’s not as if entry-level jobs are safe. Much of the work that made up entry-level investment banking careers is being automated through AI.
[The Worst Part of a Wall Street Career May Be Coming to an End](https://www.nytimes.com/2024/04/10/business/investment-banking-jobs-artificial-intelligence.html) (The New York Times)
Until now. Generative artificial intelligence — the technology upending many industries with its ability to produce and crunch new data — has landed on Wall Street. And investment banks, long inured to cultural change, are rapidly turning into Exhibit A on how the new technology could not only supplement but supplant entire ranks of workers.
The jobs most immediately at risk are those performed by analysts at the bottom rung of the investment banking business, who put in endless hours to learn the building blocks of corporate finance, including the intricacies of mergers, public offerings and bond deals. Now, A.I. can do much of that work speedily and with considerably less whining.
“The structure of these jobs has remained largely unchanged at least for a decade,” said Julia Dhar, head of BCG’s Behavioral Science Lab and a consultant to major banks experimenting with A.I. The inevitable question, as she put it, is “do you need fewer analysts?”
That’s a wrap for this Sunday. Before you go, could I remind you to subscribe to the [First Principles podcast](https://the-ken.com/first-principles/) on your favourite podcast platform, in case you haven’t already done so, and perhaps rate us?
Also, if you know someone who might like this newsletter, forward us to them!
Please write to [fp@the-ken.com](mailto:fp@the-ken.com) if there’s anything you’d like to share with us. Or leave a comment on our [on-site edition](https://the-ken.com/newsletter/first-principles/imagining-hindsight/). See you next Sunday!
Regards,
Rohin Dharmakumar