---
subject: "The Nebuchadnezzar Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-08-09 10:08:08
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Jann Schwarz (JS) is a WITI contributor and bon vivant from the Engadin valley. He wrote Jann here. Methuselah, Salmanazar, Nebuchadnezzar. Does this ring a bell? No? Well, how about Jeroboam? Are we getting warmer? If the names sound familiar, maybe it’s because you are an avid reader of the Old Testament. Or you recognize them because you lead a life so charmed that you are at least peripherally aware of very large-format wine bottles, the subject of this deliberately decadent, exceedingly effete, effervescently escapist edition of WITI. Even if you don’t know the names, you may have been fortunate enough to partake of a Magnum or Jeroboam in happier times, hopefully at a wedding, a birthday, or a very fancy baby shower. Or maybe even during a slippery 2 AM slide into decadence at a Las Vegas nightclub years ago. We won’t judge you. Named mostly after biblical kings to invoke grandeur, large-format wine bottles date back to the 18th century. In recent years they have become particularly popular for Champagne, due to the sparkling wine’s association with public celebrations and luxury in general. You have probably seen TV footage of Formula One racing drivers celebrating victories by spraying each other with Jeroboams of whichever champagne brand happens to be the sponsor. This advertising worked, as it’s a straight line from there to the According to WITI’s forensic accounting analysis of said Tryst 2011 bar tab, a Nebuchadnezzar of Veuve Clicquot, one 15 liter giant bottle equivalent to 20 regular bottles of VC Yellow Label, clocked in at twenty-five grand at the Wynn nightclub, plus 20% gratuity. That’s $1500 per regular-bottle-amount of champagne that wholesales for under $30. Not a modestly sized markup. But then again, immodesty is the name of the game, as nobody buys this stuff in a club to get a bargain, or to slowly savor the bubbles. It’s peacock feathers in liquid form. This may be just as well, since the quality benefit of large formats is questionable. The more reasonably-sized Magnums and Jeroboams are said to be good for very fine wines with long aging potential. The surface-to-air ratio between the wine and the bottom of the cork is called Besides, anything above a Jeroboam is so over the top and hard to maneuver that you really need a team of professional waiters to do it for you. Unless you want to end up Why is this Interesting? “Moderation is a fatal thing. Nothing succeeds like excess,” Large format wine bottles are a kind of ludicrous, expensive visual joke, and they have next to no utilitarian value. They’re a bad idea I’ve always found irresistible. That is, at least up to a comparatively modest Jeroboam size, usually bought at a wine merchant for a reasonable sum. I am Swiss and we like our excess conducted in a measured, orderly fashion. If I were a futurist, I would predict large formats as a major H2 2021 luxury trend. Most of the world has just spent an entire year in forced moderation, acting as reasonably and cautiously as possible, and avoiding large social gatherings at all cost. The braggy, Bacchanalian vibe of large format wine bottles are the pure antithesis of all that, because they embody the spirit of getting carried away. Large format bottles bring the fun because they signal fun. As harbingers of convivial merriment during large festive gatherings, they are a kind of fetish for what we’ve all been missing during the past annus horribilis. I predict more than a handful of Jeroboams and Nebuchadnezzars will get cracked open as the summer temperatures and COVID vaccination rates start to rise… And it’s not just about showing off, at least outside of the club context. There is scientific evidence that the format of food and drink consumed quite radically changes the way we perceive its taste. Chocolate with rounded corners I would go as far as to speculate that a love for large formats of food and drink is genetically imprinted on us from back in the hunter-gatherer days, when feast or famine was not just a figure of speech. This thread carries through to The good news is that you too can join in the fun, without going too much into debt. Magnums are widely available at every price point, and a Jeroboam of decent red (4 regular bottles) can be had for under $150. I promise it never fails to elicit a lot of excitement at the dinner table. If this still sounds too pompous and flashy for your taste, you may well have a point, and I am grateful to you for reading this far. But perhaps consider substituting wine with a more egalitarian draught keg—the Jeroboam of beer—at a backyard barbecue. In the end, no matter what we’re drinking this summer in the company of friends will likely taste better than it ever has before. (JS) Quick Links: If you want [an alternative reading of](https://substack.com/redirect/7d997871-7c5e-4057-8bdb-6b4671aded3c?r=8o54n)[The Shallows](https://substack.com/redirect/7d997871-7c5e-4057-8bdb-6b4671aded3c?r=8o54n)[from Ezra Klein’s editorial](https://substack.com/redirect/7d997871-7c5e-4057-8bdb-6b4671aded3c?r=8o54n), I[highly recommend this 2011 Adam Gopnik piece on the general state of technological discourse](https://substack.com/redirect/a440b846-742c-476d-86ba-38592bdcdb27?r=8o54n). (NRB)[Colour & Shape: Using Computer Vision to Explore the Science Museum Group Collection](https://substack.com/redirect/e4d78f0e-9d0e-47f3-b547-6cb7d1fb42cb?r=8o54n)(NRB)[Decades after polio, Martha is among the last to still rely on an iron lung to breathe](https://substack.com/redirect/8fc481f5-a63c-4d79-831a-4a0709c4a213?r=8o54n)(NRB)
— WITI x McKinsey: An ongoing partnership where we highlight interesting McKinsey research, writing, and data. The office of the future: A whole new (floor) plan. Revisiting your talent strategy for a hybrid world? A Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) —
You’re a free subscriber to |