---
subject: "The Library of Lost Maps"
from: "Brian Klaas <brianklaas@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-02-23 13:09:32
labels: ["Brian Klaas", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_1599487573263287548", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
“In that Empire, the Art of Cartography attained such Perfection that the map of a single Province occupied the entirety of a City, and the map of the Empire, the entirety of a Province. In time, those Unconscionable Maps no longer satisfied, and the Cartographers Guilds struck a Map of the Empire whose size was that of the Empire, and which coincided point for point with it.” —Jorge Luis Borges, “On Exactitude in Science” I: The Library of Lost MapsNestled in London’s Bloomsbury neighborhood, there is a lonely nondescript corridor adorned with a “leaky water fountain” near a “scruffy turquoise door.” Behind that door, 440 dusty wooden drawers await, each filled with forgotten historical riches for anyone inclined to explore the contours of our collective past—etched and stained into every kind of paper imaginable. This is the Map Library of University College London, a forgotten outpost of what Professor James Cheshire calls an “Aladdin’s cave of cartographic treasures.” The university’s roots in map-making run deep, growing from an initial commitment to public education by providing maps through the wonderfully-named And yet, this Map Library—home to maps of Hiroshima just before it was destroyed, the first detailed surveys of the ocean floor, captured Nazi maps, and stunningly beautiful explosions of color around carefully drawn topographic contours—is a rare endangered survivor of its kind, with many similar libraries disappearing as the world digitizes. Cheshire tells me, as dusty smells swirl around us, that maintaining large rooms full of mostly unopened drawers has increasingly been deemed a surplus expense. The maps are too often rolled up, the collected treasures sold off. Cheshire, a cartography nerd and a walking atlas, has now written a His research highlights how maps, past or present, are not merely lines and shapes that depict an objective reality. They are, as Cheshire puts it, spectacularly effective at “pushing opinions dressed as facts.” From the earliest maps of Ancient Mesopotamia to the most widely used maps in the history of our species created by Google’s opaque digital power, cartography provides an unexpected glimpse behind the curtain of a society’s implicit philosophy. And, as we’ll see, our world is being drastically reshaped, often without us even being aware, by today’s mapping overlords. That’s because maps reveal not just how to navigate our world, but identify what is worth navigating and how it should be perceived. In the process, maps expose the core beliefs—that invisible internal compass—of every human society that has ever produced them. II: The Spatial CosmosHumanity’s uniqueness is largely defined by Other species have evolved remarkable abilities to navigate—and give directions to others—but there’s always a limit they, unlike us, can’t get past. Bees, for example, use a Humans, by contrast, are unrivalled in our ability to decouple information from existence and proximity. It may not be the fastest or most accurate method, but one could still navigate the Earth using maps from the distant past, drawn by long-dead people from alien cultures. Maps, unlike waggle dances, outlast their creators. But perhaps most crucially, our ability to convey information on navigating the landscape incorporates something that doesn’t exist in any other species: an embedded philosophy of the world. The first surviving map of the world, the Imago Mundi, is housed in the British Museum under the supervision of one of the most interesting men alive, The area inscribed inside the circle represents ancient Mesopotamia, ringed by two lines that represent the “Bitter River,” the limits of their known world. The broken triangles jutting off from the river’s edges are almost certainly mountains, beyond the limits of explored realms that are, in Finkel’s words, “places full of magic and full of mystery” lying seven leagues across the water. (Some of Finkel’s discoveries suggest that the map was also a guide, by those who believe in the cosmology of ancient Mesopotamia, to locate the original boat from the Similarly, some maps from ancient Egypt transmit theological knowledge through burial drawings that are aimed at helping the dead navigate the treacherous path to Duat, the location of the afterlife. (Such ancient maps were produced alongside more practical rudimentary city maps that were often used to collect taxes, dating back to Sargon of Akkad in 2300 BC). But many of the surviving earliest maps are theological and metaphorical rather than accurate navigation aids.³ Over time, this changed as maps became tools that reflected the priorities of their creators. Ancient Rome produced what is arguably the first transit map, known as the “The Peutinger Map,” a geographically distorted guide to the Roman road network, a bit like the Yet, even the most seemingly basic choices around early mapmaking reflect subjective beliefs. For example, why do modern maps put north at the top? In ancient Egypt, the top of the world was depicted in the east, where the sun emerged. Early Christian maps (Mappa Mundi) followed suit, orienting the world “ North was rarely put at the top for most of human history because, as historian Jerry Broton writes, “ This bias is so engrained that when NASA astronauts take photographs of Earth with the south on top because of the position of the spacecraft, they Whether the top was east or north, medieval Christian maps were often as much theological as they were practical. The Ebstorf Map, for example (circa 1234 CE), is oriented toward Jerusalem, with east on top, but with Christ encircling the world, his head above, his feet poking out of the bottom. Biblical scenes abound, but it also reflects what is deemed valuable enough to be included, as much of the geographical representations center around bishoprics, subdividing the world into ecclesiastical parcels. (And beyond the edges of the known world, medieval maps often showed monsters—as the unknown was inevitably the realm of the dangerous and demonic.) The religious orientation of such maps was often a necessity in a world in which it could be viewed as, in the words of the cartography historian Lloyd A. Brown, “impious if not downright sinful to probe the mysteries of the universe…[medieval Christian] maps were made furtively, studied secretly, and in many cases destroyed promptly.” After all, to draw a map—to transport our eyes to a view of the entire world from above—is to transform ourselves into what Michel de Certau called “a voyeur-God.” (Most humans never once saw the world that way; we, by contrast, can’t imagine a mapless society.) But the Scientific Revolution, flourishing alongside an Age of Exploration and the scramble for European empire building—built on accurate navigation—reoriented mapping toward a worldview that claimed to measure objective reality. Understanding the world could yield power rather than imitating God. In the process, empires rose as greedy monarchs sought to develop sufficient riches to fashion themselves as mortal gods who understood a fundamental truth: to know the world was a prerequisite for capturing and controlling it. III: The Foucauldian Map and Instruments of PowerThroughout history, maps have been tools of the powerful. Not only do elites draw maps, they also have used knowledge of the world’s contours to perpetuate and expand their reach. Peasants could only see what was around them—and no further. Until the more recent democratization of cartography through the internet, maps have been the closely guarded currency of kings and queens, admirals and aristocrats. The obvious military and strategic value of maps—revealing city defenses, arsenals, barracks, river crossings, dockyards—prompted the Emperor Augustus of ancient Rome to lock all maps “in the innermost vaults of the palace, and allowed only partial copies." Other emperors executed those who allowed maps to fall into the wrong hands. Some practices were even more extreme. As Brown notes, a Carthaginian sea captain who feared his maps falling into Roman hands during the capture of his vessel “ran his ship on the rocks and drowned his crew. When he finally reached home he was given a hero’s welcome.” Later, Spanish custom dictated that nautical charts, along with log books and code books, be weighted with lead so they could be quickly sunk in an emergency. When such efforts failed, cartographic plunder was treated with appropriate excitement. Woodes Rogers, an early 18th century English privateer and sea captain, once noted that he captured some seriously “hot” sea charts while cruising off the coast of Peru and Chile. He raced home to have them immediately engraved in London.⁴ In the nascent age of seafaring empires, in which companies often dominated global trade, the best maps were privately produced. The Dutch East India company, for example, spared no expense in its Government charts in this period were often second best, followed by the maps for sale that trickled down to the public. Those commercial mapmakers had a market among those who wished to know about the world beyond their city walls, but such cartographers “had to subsist on the scraps of information tossed to them by the merchant combines and on whatever information they could pick up by bribe, theft or purchase”—often procured from what Brown charmingly describes as “a loosemouthed seaman in combination with an overdose of ardent spirits.” Because these maps were often of such poor quality, artists and engravers would spruce up these maps—which is how maps full of sea monsters and exotic palm trees emerged. But this act of artistic creation can also strip valuable meaning. As Beryl Markham, the trailblazing female aviator and the first person to fly from Europe to North America poetically observed, maps are produced through hard-fought toil and exploration, then condensed into sterile lines on a page: “Yet, looking at it, feeling it, running a finger along its lines, it is a cold thing, a map, humourless and dull, born of callipers and a draughtsman’s board. That coastline there, that ragged scrawl of ink, shows neither sand nor sea nor rock; it speak of no mariner, blundering full sail in wake-less seas, to bequeath, on sheepskin or a slab of wood, a priceless scribble to posterity. This brown blot that marks a mountain has, for the casual eye, no other significance, though twenty men, or ten, or only one, may have squandered life to climb it. Here is a valley, there a swamp, and there a desert; and here is a river that some curious and courageous soul, like a pencil in the hand of God, first traced with bleeding feet.” —Beryl Markham, West With the Night (1942) Beyond Markham’s literary observation, the cartographers who translate bleeding feet into scarlet ink are themselves instruments of hierarchical power. This reveals an obvious, but important truth: not only is it the case that “the map is not the territory,” but also that through selective choices to reshape reality, maps determine how we see the territory. Maps therefore also created systems of power through their depictions. Surprisingly, this facet of mapmaking was relatively unexplored in the history of mapmaking until a Soaring above the interior of West Africa, the majestic Mountains of Kong are “ There was just one problem with the Mountains of Kong: they don’t exist. Nonetheless, for decade after decade, map after map depicts them in the same place, with explorers, cartographers, and learned men insisting on their location—in at least This ostensibly amusing episode showcases how maps simply reflect that which is valued by the map’s creator. Africa was alluring to colonizers insofar as it was a source of extractable resources—natural and human alike. Europeans therefore divided Africa according to their beliefs about mapped riches. Simultaneously, mere villages were sometimes transformed into new African capitals—particularly in West Africa—simply because they were the point of easiest extraction for colonial ships. The version of the world mapped according to extractive maritime empires has created modern geography. (The cover map at the top of this article, produced in 1921, charts which parts of the world had been thoroughly mapped and which had not, and it corresponds closely to the pursuit of resources through empire.)⁶ Similarly, poverty maps of London ( Today, maps feel more objective. In truth, the rise of digital cartography not only reshapes our sense of territory, but our sense of ourselves. IV: Google Maps and Surveillance CapitalismGoogle Maps is, by far, the most used map in history. It’s tremendously useful. But it is not neutral. Maps reveal ideology by what they include—and omit. Google’s depiction, like most modern maps, centers almost exclusively on roads, a car-based downgrading of our vast, astonishing natural world to splotches of irrelevant, uniform green. As Robert MacFarlane Google Maps also represents a skewed mentality that has begun to dominate our perceptions of life. Capitalism decimates nature, as gorgeous waterfalls disappear while nail salons and Holiday Inns pop out from the screen, bolstered by ad money and algorithms. And unlike paper precursors, Google’s mapping collects information about the user, which simultaneously predicts and then alters our behavior. It is overtly designed to change how we interact with the world—for maximum profit—not just to help us navigate our surroundings. In fact, But perhaps the most insidious effect of Google Maps has been the collective internalization of the belief that the best way through life is always the fastest; There is a value, then, to revisiting the gorgeous paper maps of our forebears, not to become more accurate wayfinders, but as a way to find out what maps reveal about their creators and the philosophies embedded within our history. That’s why, with the help of unsung cartographic saviors like James Cheshire, we must continue to nurture, preserve, and visit the Thank you for reading The Garden of Forking Paths—and thank you for your patience during my overly long hiatus from writing! James Cheshire’s beautiful new book, The Library of Lost Maps, can be ordered 1 Francis Beaufort was a key figure in the SDUK mapping project. He learned how valuable good maps can be when he was shipwrecked as a teenager. He gave the world, among other innovations, the 2 If you want to enjoy 18 minutes well spent, watch 3 Many maps didn’t survive because of what they were made of; for example, Lloyd A. Brown notes that Charlemagne made maps on solid silver plates, which made them tempting items for thieves, while brass globes were also stolen for the metal. 4 Rogers is the captain who rescued the marooned Alexander Selkirk, who is believed to have inspired Robinson Crusoe. 5 Park met his demise in 1806 by drowning after leaping from his boat into the Niger River while under attack from throwing spears being hurled from the banks. 6 The Mercator projection is a well-known form of map bias. Brazil is larger than the continental United States, but it certainly doesn’t look that way on most maps. You're currently a free subscriber to |