---
subject: "\"Do Firms Need Juniors?\" Might be the Wrong Question"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <the-diff@ghost.io>"
to: ""
date: 2025-03-31 14:40:39
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
In this issue: - "Do Firms Need Juniors?" Might be the Wrong Question—The bottom of the org chart is not the only place where AI substitutes for labor. Breadth of context, awareness of examples, and ability to produce a good checklist are all tasks that were historically done by the people those junior employees report to. But now there's another way.
- Solve for X + X—Merging X and xAI would be interesting if they weren't already effectively merged.
- Refactoring—Not easy, but not likely to get any easier.
- AI and Distribution—Collect data by default, because it's the expensive complement to ever-cheaper analysis.
- How Models Think—LLMs' thought processes are sometimes alien, sometimes endearingly human.
- The AI Business Model—In at least one market, generative AI leads to artists getting paid.
"Do Firms Need Juniors?" Might be the Wrong QuestionA fun question that comes up in light of AI automating pointless busywork, albeit with some supervision is: These are legitimate concerns, though one thing they illustrate is the surprising durability of juniors in the face of technological change: word processing software, spreadsheets, and compilers have all eliminated tasks that used to function as training for people who were new to the business they were in. In each case, the assignment started on the basis of high-level context, both in the sense of what the desired outcome was and all the tacit wisdom that comes from experience, including the experience of doing the grunt work. The assignments juniors get are essentially informed bets on the payoff from applying undifferentiated hours to some task. The senior person's job is to quickly assess whether they're asking a trick question or not: if the task is "figure out why this specific part of the program is running slowly in some cases," the expected answer probably has something to do with repeatedly looping through the same process redundantly, and not figuring out some esoteric bit-flipping hack that will yield a surprising increase in speed; a new lawyer who's tasked with looking at some contract is probably not supposed to find a clever backdoor, just to check it for the obvious stuff. But this points to something weirdly bifurcated about LLMs: they're good at the easy stuff, and flake out or at least need a fair amount of supervision when they're doing something complicated—just like the a pretty-good intern, or someone with a few months of experience and a burning desire to keep making a good impression. On the other hand, they have sprawling context and can make connections across different fields, which is exactly what the experienced people are there to do. An LLM isn't an expert on most fields, but it is pretty good at giving you a checklist for the things you might be doing something wrong, which is, at some level of fidelity, reproducing the mental checklist that people develop by doing said thing wrong in the past. So, depending on the career track, one thing LLMs substitute is the senior people. They're the ones who are supposed to be zooming out to ask big-picture questions, thinking about analogous situations with counterintuitive answers, knowing who to contact for additional advice, etc. And these are all the kinds of questions that, with a bit of diligence and humility, you can get from an LLM. It's actually a kind of fun feedback loop: start skimming some document that relies on more domain-specific knowledge than you happen to have, and every time you're confused, just drop a screencap of the relevant text into the LLM and start asking questions. What you shouldn't expect is for this to be a direct substitute for having the right expert on hand. But, as with many LLM outputs, the relevant counterfactual isn't a better version crafted by a real person but nothing at all—one of the economic drivers of these kinds of apprenticeship-style job paths is that someone who's smart but inexperienced is going to end up wasting gobs of valuable time. Every year between when your working memory and physical endurance peak and when you get enough context to use it correctly is, in some sense, a waste. Where does this work best? It's ideal for jobs where there's plenty of publicly-available documentation about the job, both in terms of high-level strategy and low-level implementation. It helps if the business has few barriers to entry, or, at least, if those barriers aren't especially identity-based (even if hypothetically spending three straight years interrogating ever-smarter models about the nuances of law is a better use of your time than law school, it isn't a JD). When the barriers to entry are very low, like "can you register a domain name and form an LLC?" or "can you open a brokerage account?" this dynamic will show up more. And it won't work at all in cases where there's tacit knowledge that's hard to encode in text form. You can probably read a lot about being a good therapist from LLMs, but they aren't going to be great practice if you're face-to-face with someone whose life is collapsing around them. In jobs that require heavy equipment, it's an interesting piece of trivia that someone might learn how to operate such equipment all on their own, but an autodidact still needs to borrow the social capital of someone who learned things the old-fashioned way. So what this will really reveal is a bit more about which jobs are valuable, and how. Sometimes, the point of a job is less the skills and more that it's a way to be the human embodiment of some impersonal institution, whether that institution is Goldman Sachs, Salesforce, or the State Department. For jobs like that, the experience of learning on the job is part of the economic asset that's created by that learning. But this also means that there will be an interesting shift in skilled labor: some of the intellectual components are getting commoditized, though there will still be an important role for human thinking and human wisdom for a long time. But if those parts get commoditized, the intangibles will be relatively more important, so the economy will have higher rewards for tall, charismatic, good-looking people who are now less constrained by the need to know what they're doing. So this may be a rare case of a technology actually being relatively beneficial for old people, rather than young people. There are plenty of valuable ways to waste time when you don't know what you're doing, especially if you end up putting a vast amount of effort into what amounts to reinventing the wheel. Because if you do that, you'll go through the rest of your life thinking of wheel-inventing as the sort of thing done by people just like you, rather than some kind of external force to which mere mortals just react. But, then again, part of what you want is for someone to confidently and accurately tell you that 1) you're capable of doing whatever ambitious project it is that you're working on, but 2) there are equally challenging open problems to work on, which offer the same proof-of-ability if they work out, without the redundancy. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/76a36173?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)Aside from medical technologies, which tend to increase the tax or insurance burden on the young in exchange for delivering better services to the old, the most direct example might be cable TV. Cable news has kept lots of older voters engaged, and as long as the Boomers are a bigger generation than Millennials in electoral terms despite being overtaken in headcount, Medicare and Social Security are safe. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/ae3cef7c?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
You're on the free list for The Diff. Last week, paying subscribers read about Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. See a sampling of current open roles below: - A well-established asset-backed stablecoin project is looking for an analytical performance marketer to help scale their newly launched decentralized-ETF product and drive 100% MoM growth in total value locked. Experience managing sizable paid ads budgets and driving measurable growth required. (SF, NYC)
- A blockchain company that’s building solutions at the limits of distributed systems and driving 10x performance improvements over other widely adopted L1s is looking for a founding engineer with experience in C. HFT, embedded systems, high performance computing or operating systems experience a plus. (SF)
- A premier proprietary trading firm is looking for smart generalists to join their investor relations team, working with external investors, rating agencies, and the internal finance team. Investment banking and/or investor relations experience preferred. Quantitative background and technical aptitude a plus. (NYC)
- Well-funded, fast-moving team is looking for a full-stack engineer to help build the best AI powered video editor for marketers. Tackle advanced media pipelines, LLM applications, and more. TypeScript/React expertise required. (Austin, Remote)
- A company that was using ML/AI to improve software development before it was cool—and is now inflecting fast—is looking for someone who can apply some analytical rigor to their growth model. If you live at the efficient frontier between Excel and Python, and like making quick decisions backed up with data, reach out. (Washington DC area)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. ElsewhereSolve for X + XElon Musk has - The old Musk model was that he had two main entities that were definitely worth something, Tesla and SpaceX, and then a bunch of side projects (Neuralink, Boring Company, electing Trump, impregnating enough people to get an electoral vote's worth of descendants, etc.). You could bet on the side projects, but that bet was implicitly backed by the actual viability of one of the main focuses. Now, he arguably has three: the combined Xs are worth about $100bn.
- Some AI companies are basically pure-play model businesses, like Anthropic and Mistral. They may have a consumer-facing application, but investors are mostly betting on the technical side of things. This combined entity joins the equally-crowded ranks of companies that have both an AI model and an existing consumer app they can use to distribute it. Since app users provide continuous feedback, and also implicitly set a standard for how much AI users of that app should be using, this is strategically valuable even if all the inference is very expensive.
- On the other hand, there's a very real sense in which this deal doesn't mean much, other than as a bit of financial performance art: at last, companies that lent to Twitter have exposure to an AI business that will consume vast amounts of capital in the hopes of an upside scenario in which they won't participate! Finally, xAIs' equity investors can diversify out of a pure bet on artificial intelligence and get exposure to an AI business that carries some of the weirdest ads in existence! Mostly, the deal is a formality: if you back an Elon company, you're buying tracking stock, but you're really betting on Elon.
RefactoringDOGE plans to AI and DistributionFor pure-play AI companies, the usual angle is: build a model, build a chatbot to demonstrate it, and sell API calls to developers who build specific implementations. But the biggest tech companies have a larger surface area: they have existing user relationships, and collect data that their competitors dont. So, How Models ThinkAnthropic has released a The AI Business ModelOne valid critique of AI-generated images is that they're trained on the work of human artists, but don't pay those artists. Similarly, a model that can answer "in the voice of" some living person usually isn't giving that person a royalty. But for chunkier collections of assets, that's not the case: |
||||||||||
|
|
|
||||||||||
|