---
subject: "MyTaxReceipt / Digital passport / 2025 photo dump"
from: "Recomendo <recomendo@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-12-07 10:01:25
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Recomendo", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8455078693589186571", "UNREAD"]
---
Where your tax dollars actually go
Digital passportYou can add a US passport as your digital ID to your wallet app on an iPhone running iOS 26.1 or later. You still need to carry your passport overseas, but you can pull out this ID for TSA clearance at 250 airports in the U.S., including SFO, LAX, JFK and LGA. To do this go to your wallet, hit the + in the upper right, then choose “Driver’s License and ID Cards,” then “ 2025 photo dumpTwo tabs worth opening up in full screen are Sweet Korean dramasI am not a Korean drama aficionado, but my wife is a big fan, and she has persuaded me to watch some of the better ones. When folks who have never seen a K-drama ask where to start, I suggest they watch any of the following three series. All three are exactly the same story: They are all rom-coms set in a modern workplace, with protagonists using multiple crossed identities, love straddling class lines between boss and employee, and convoluted plots that tie everyone together into one story. (There are no coincidences in this world.) In order of ease of access: 1) Quickly find all purchases in GmailIf you want a quick way to see all your receipts in Gmail, I recently noticed that in my personal account a “Purchases” label category was automatically created and added to my sidebar. Unfortunately, this feature is not available in my Google Workspace account. I use both personal and work emails for shopping, so to mimic that view I type “category:purchases” into the search box to display messages that include receipts, purchase confirmations, invoices, and statements. This is especially helpful during the holiday season. — CD Giant roll of craft paperI recently spent time with friends who mounted a 36-inch by 200-foot THIS ISSUE IS SPONSORED BY FARMKIND
Recomendo Unclassified Ads work! UNCLASSIFIEDS Words matter. Are you taking advantage of your Amazon Prime perks this holiday season? Here are 9 Prime perks to help you maximize holiday shopping! Whether you’re already a Prime member or considering signing up, Thinking of getting married in Italy, Portugal, Spain or Ireland? Peach Perfect Weddings makes it easy for couples to say “I do!” in Europe since 2014. We offer customizable Snow on your windshield? Need a powerful air duster for winter clean-ups? The Winter roads ahead? Need a dash cam you can trust this Christmas? New Comic and Model Kit from award-winning creators Jason Brubaker and Jeff Yagher brings you into the world of *Phobos,* a wild and funny take on classic monster movies... Tech wants your attention, your data, your time. Did you see the recent northern lights shimmer into the south and find yourself speechless? Savor and share the memory with Recomendo is an authentic, hand-crafted, human-written weekly newsletter that is free, but not cheap. Please consider supporting our work with a paid option, now at the low price of $45 per year. Paid subs enable us to keep making it free for others. Recomendo is published by Cool Tools Lab, a small company of three people. We also run the Recomendo is copyrighted by Cool Tools Lab, LLC. Commissions may be earned from the links above. |