---
subject: "Lerner Symmetry Bites"
from: "Marginal REVOLUTION <donotreply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-09-26 11:19:31
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tyler Cowen", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2466199532210586699", "UNREAD"]
---
[President Trump recently boasted](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=0cc48987951746875c5a2ea50e381e011a1c2bb20729d554ff3a72bb89e2499d&blog_id=42693868&post_id=91547&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=291f81a0988a2270a80e433be634c808&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly94LmNvbS9BVGFiYXJyb2svc3RhdHVzLzE5NzEzMDIxODU0NDQyNDE0NjQ&email_id=729abc15d6e231e28b8d7c99be89c815):
.@POTUS: "We're going to take some of that tariff money that we made — we're going to give it to our farmers... We're going to make sure that our farmers are in great shape."
A practically textbook example of Lerner Symmetry! In an [earlier post](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=7f7e200077875e63b0f746dcbdc2ed40641234909a151392cd60719c16265487&blog_id=42693868&post_id=91547&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=1ad5bed6c3f17ff6670ff70cab442fd8&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly9tYXJnaW5hbHJldm9sdXRpb24uY29tL21hcmdpbmFscmV2b2x1dGlvbi8yMDI1LzAyL3RocmVlLXNpbXBsZS1wcmluY2lwbGVzLW9mLXRyYWRlLXBvbGljeS5odG1s&email_id=729abc15d6e231e28b8d7c99be89c815), I highlighted Doug Irwin’s [Three Simple Principles of Trade Policy](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=d4dd49101fc246e6b8ae9ecd7067c6c9064db994dc920b7bc2843296d6d61678&blog_id=42693868&post_id=91547&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=0f448268eb7cd4b32b906086c3335c1b&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYWVpLm9yZy93cC1jb250ZW50L3VwbG9hZHMvMjAxNC8wNC8tdGhyZWUtc2ltcGxlLXByaW5jaXBsZXMtb2YtdHJhZGUtcG9saWN5XzE0MjkzNzE1NzMxNy5wZGY&email_id=729abc15d6e231e28b8d7c99be89c815). Principle One is Lerner Symmetry—a tax on imports is a tax on exports:
Exports are necessary to generate the earnings to pay for imports, or exports are the goods a country must give up in order to acquire imports….if foreign countries are blocked in their ability to sell their goods in the United States, for example, they will be unable to earn the dollars they need to purchase U.S. goods.
…The equivalence of export and import taxes is not an obvious proposition, and it is often counterintuitive to most people. Imagine taking a poll of average Americans and asking the following question: “Should the United States impose import tariffs on foreign textiles to prevent low-wage countries
from harming thousands of American textile workers?” Some fraction, perhaps even a sizeable one, of the respondents would surely answer affirmatively. If asked to explain their position, they would probably reply that import tariffs would create jobs for Americans at the expense of foreign workers and thereby reduce domestic unemployment.Suppose you then asked those same people the following question: “Should the United States tax the exportation of Boeing aircraft, wheat and corn, computers and computer software, and other domestically produced goods?” I suspect the answer would be a resounding and unanimous “No!” After all, it would be explained, export taxes would destroy jobs and harm important industries. And yet the Lerner symmetry theorem says that the two policies are equivalent in their economic effects.
Thus, President Trump is having to subsidize farmers because farmers are exporters. Import tariffs make it harder for exporters to sell abroad. Using tariff revenue to subsidize the losses of exporters is a textbook illustration of Lerner Symmetry because the export losses flow directly from the tax on imports! The irony is that President Trump parades the subsidies as a victory while in fact they are simply damage control for a policy he created.