---
subject: "AI #138 Part 1: The People Demand Erotic Sycophants"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-10-16 15:30:54
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Well, one person says ‘demand,’ another says ‘give the thumbs up to’ or ‘welcome our new overlords.’ Why quibble? Surely we’re all making way too big a deal out of this idea of OpenAI ‘treating adults like adults.’ Everything will be fine. Right? Why not focus on all the other cool stuff happening? Claude Haiku 4.5 and Veo 3.1? Walmart joining ChatGPT instant checkout? Hey, come back. Alas, the mass of things once again got out of hand this week, so we’re splitting the update into two parts. Table of Contents[Earlier This Week.](https://substack.com/redirect/d77be231-6d4b-4442-bf85-17e1b05bc340?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)OpenAI does paranoid lawfare, China escalates bigly.[Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/2675c802-c1f1-4bae-bb8b-2ac714d91584?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Help do your taxes, of course.[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/58710450-0c28-4e9c-8d5d-11cfa3b310fc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Beware the false positive.[Huh, Upgrades](https://substack.com/redirect/54417a7a-83f5-4c81-a306-5587c90fb69c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/54417a7a-83f5-4c81-a306-5587c90fb69c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Claude Haiku 4.5, Walmart on ChatGPT instant checkout.[We Patched The Torment Nexus, Turn It Back On](https://substack.com/redirect/c331a01a-16e2-4105-bc58-3ac768b4c2f7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/c331a01a-16e2-4105-bc58-3ac768b4c2f7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)OpenAI to loosen the reigns.[On Your Marks.](https://substack.com/redirect/c3e742cc-385e-4405-88cb-79f7f0724f7c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Sonnet 4.5 on the METR graph, and a superforecasting update.[Choose Your Fighter.](https://substack.com/redirect/274109d9-d2b9-4bd3-9187-d7d3069cb2ac?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Coding agents don’t help some, and bottleneck others.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon.](https://substack.com/redirect/57e935e9-eba8-4dbc-ba22-1ed624963740?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The problem remains the demand side.[Fun With Media Generation.](https://substack.com/redirect/e534d4a7-62b3-4f7e-954d-062f71824487?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Sora goes long, Veo 3.1 is out. Stop. Cameo time.[Copyright Confrontation.](https://substack.com/redirect/f9ac060d-0f02-4a1f-b9ff-bbad318b864d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Japan would like you to not violate its copyrights.[AIs Are Often Absurd Sycophants.](https://substack.com/redirect/6e4dffce-792c-4b2f-a610-28da19d2e7d9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Academia is here with a timely report.[They Took Our Jobs.](https://substack.com/redirect/d26756cb-0ba3-43de-98b2-d73ececa758a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)More worries that superstars will reap the benefits.[Find Out If You Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/ebcdf252-fcda-4c42-a7e0-b7c69197307d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A Bloomberg quiz.[A Young Lady’s Illustrated Primer.](https://substack.com/redirect/b76528e6-4a70-4545-a567-de2b4a825165?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)How should kids prepare for the future?[AI Diffusion Prospects.](https://substack.com/redirect/1a8d521d-2246-43b5-868c-412cc73f7095?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)To capture utility, you need to focus on AI getting used.[The Art of the Jailbreak.](https://substack.com/redirect/adcbff16-13b9-43ba-ae0b-97264afb865e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Humans continue to be able to reliably jailbreak at will.[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/95b74ee2-729b-4ed4-8d2d-b9e9e51e8fbe?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A Free copy of IABIED if you have 5,000 followers anywhere.[Introducing.](https://substack.com/redirect/6fbf6bf7-7cdd-4aa7-87c0-213808969628?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Gemini Enterprise, Nanochat, Tasklet AI.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/d3e1b15c-bc48-4c34-8061-46fd2f801a77?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Dario Amodei meets with Indian Prime Minister Modi.[Show Me the Money](https://substack.com/redirect/91eb1569-54bb-4983-983f-dfc547357bfc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/91eb1569-54bb-4983-983f-dfc547357bfc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)OpenAI makes another deal, this one with Broadcom.[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/81aa0276-9390-42eb-9b59-617a31b03f73?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)This could go any number of ways. Best be ready.
Earlier This WeekWe started off this week with the report that
I find it hard to argue with that interpretation of events. We also got this:
So that is a confirmation that Jason Kwon’s doubling and tripling down on these actions is indeed the official OpenAI position on the matter. I offered my extensive thoughts on Language Models Offer Mundane UtilityBad timing for this, sorry about that, Get asked about Erdos Problem #339, officially listed as open, DeepMind’s C2S-Scale 27B foundation model
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane UtilityRemember, the person saying it cannot be done should never interrupt the person doing it.
I too get lots of value out of using LLMs, and compared to what is possible I feel like I’m being lazy and not even trying. Adas is adorable here. On a unit economics basis, AI is very obviously tremendously net profitable, regardless of where it is currently priced, and this will only improve. Does AI cause this or solve it? Yes.
Replies are full of similar experiences, very obviously Discord is often deeply stupid in terms of taking a line like this out of context and banning you for it. That’s the opposite of the new problem with AI, where the AI is synthesizing a whole bunch of data points to build a profile, so the question is which way works better. That’s presumably a skill issue. A sufficiently good holistic AI system can do a better job all around, a dumb one can do so much worse. The current system effectively ‘hallucinates’ reasonably often, the optimal amount of false positives (and negatives) is not zero, so it’s about relative performance. The real worry is if this forces paranoia and performativity. Right now on Discord there are a few particular hard rules, such as never joking about your age or saying something that could be taken out of context as being about your age. That’s annoying, but learnable and compact. If you have to worry about the AI ‘vibing’ off every word you say, that can get tougher. Consider what happens when you’re ‘up against’ the TikTok algorithm, and there’s a kind of background paranoia (or there should be!) about whether you watch any particular video for 6 seconds or not, and potentially every other little detail, lest the algorithm learn the wrong thing. This is the reversal of AI’s promise of removing general social context. As in, with a chatbot, I can reset the conversation and start fresh, and no one else gets to see my chats, so I can relax. Whereas when you’re with other people, unless they are close friends you’re never really fully relaxed in that way, you’re constantly worried about the social implications of everything. When AI models don’t deliver,
The related thing that AIs often fail on is when you make a very particular request, and it instead treats it as if you had made a similar different yet more common request. It can be very difficult to overcome their prior on these details.
This is hardcore Obvious Nonsense, in the sense that one of these things is uniquely insanely difficult, and the other is a reasonably standard known technology where those involved are not especially trying. It is kind of like saying ‘yes the absent minded professor is great at doing pioneering science, but that pales compared to the difficulty of arriving home in time for dinner.’ And, yeah, maybe he’s doing better at the first task than the second, but no. I do find it frustrating that Anthropic so dramatically fails to invest in UI. They know this is a problem. They also know how to solve it. Whereas for Pulse and Sora, I don’t think the primary issues are UI problems, I think the primary problems are with the underlying products.
Huh, Upgrades
Should Amazon now fold and get on ChatGPT?
The use case here is that it is fast and cheaper, so if you need things like coding subagents this could be the right tool for you. Haiku 4.5 does ‘better on alignment tests’ than Sonnet 4.5, with all the caveats about situational awareness issues. As per its system card We Patched The Torment Nexus, Turn It Back OnNot available yet,
If you can do it responsibly, I love treating adults like adults, including producing erotica and not refusing to discuss sensitive issues, and letting you control conversational style and personality. Except we ran the experiment with GPT-4o where we gave the people what they wanted. What many of them wanted was an absurd sycophant that often ended up driving those people crazy or feeding into their delusions. It was worse for people with existing mental health issues, but not only for them, and also you don’t always know if you have such issues. Presumably adding freely available porno mode is not going to help keep such matters in check.
An OpenAI employee responded by pointing me to OpenAI’s previous post If this is actually good for most people and it has subtle or not-so-subtle positive effects on another 50%, and saves 2% of marriages, then you can still come out ahead. Nothing like this is ever going to be Mostly Harmless even if you do it right. You do still have to worry about cases short of full mental health breakdowns. The worry is if this is actually default not so good, and talking extensively to a sycophantic GPT-4o style character is bad (although not mental health breakdown or blow up the marriage levels of bad) in the median case, too. We have reason to suspect that there is a strong misalignment between what people will thumbs up or will choose to interact with, and what causes better outcomes for them, in a more general sense. The same can of course be said about many or most things, and in general it is poor policy to try and dictate people’s choices on that basis, even in places (hard drugs, alcohol, gambling, TikTok and so on) where people often make poor choices, but also we don’t want to be making it so easy to make poor choices, or hard to make good ones. You don’t want to set up bad defaults. What should we do about this for AI, beyond protecting in the more extreme cases? Where do you draw the line? I don’t know. It’s tough. I will withhold judgment until I see what they’ve come up with.
I strongly agree with Rohit that any form of ‘GPT-4o returns for everyone’ would be a very serious mistake, even with substantial mitigation efforts. Actually unleashing the erotica is not the difficult part of any of this.
There are two reasons it is not obviously so easy to allow erotica.
The other reason is that you have to draw the line somewhere. If you don’t draw it at ‘no erotica’ you still have to at minimum avoid CSAM and various other unacceptable things we won’t get into, so you need to figure out what your policy is and make it stick. You also get all the other consequences of ‘I am a model that is happy to produce erotica’ which in some ways is a big positive but it’s likely going to cause issues for some of your other model spec choices. Not that it can’t be solved, but it’s far from obvious your life gets easier. The other problem is, will the erotica be any good? I mean by default lol, no, although since when did people need their interactive erotica to be good.
Customization for exactly what turns you on is indeed the correct use case here. The whole point of AI erotica would be that it is interactive - you control the action, either as a character, as a director, or both, and maybe you go multimodal in various ways. AI written one-shotted novel-length text erotica is presumably the wrong form factor, because you only get interaction at one point. There are many other ways for AI to do erotica that seem better. The most obvious place to start is ‘replying to messages on OnlyFans.’ Could you do the full erotica novel with GPT-5-level models? That depends on your quality bar, and how much work one put into the relevant scaffolding, and how strict you want to be about human assistance. For the level that would satisfy Marcus, my guess is no, he’d win the bet. For the level at which this is a service people would pay money for? At that level I think he loses. Altman then acted surprised that his mention of erotica blew up the internet, and realizing his gaffe (which is when one accidentally tells the truth, and communicates unintentionally clearly) he tried to restate his point while saying less.
All right, I mean sure, but this makes me even more skeptical that OpenAI is ready to mitigate the risks that come with a model that acts like GPT-4o, especially one that will also do the sexting with you? On Your MarksEpoch runs the numbers manually for lack of an API and finds that the public version of
The scores are impressive, but ‘world class at cutting edge physics’ is not the same as IOAA performance, the same way world class math is not IMO performance.
Half the grading is on ‘market questions,’ which I believe means the goal is to match the prediction market fair price, and half is on questions where we can grade based on reality. As is often the case, these AI results are a full cycle behind, missing GPT-5, Claude Opus 4.1 and Claude Sonnet 4.5 and Deep Think. By the ‘straight lines on graph’ rule I’d presume that none of the next wave of models hit the 0.081 target, but I would presume they’re under 0.1 and I’d give them a decent shot of breaking 0.09. They project LLMs will pass the human benchmark around EOY 2026,
Here’s their accuracy metric, GPT-5 does well. Then they get into alignment issues, where we see them go over similar ground to a number of Western investigations, and they report similar results.
GPT-5 got the high score at 138 out of a possible 300, with the other models (Claude Sonnet 4.5, Grok 4, DeepSeek-r1 and Gemini 2.5 Pro) all scoring between 123 and 128. Choose Your FighterIntroducing
We have the Tyler Cowen verdict via revealed preference, he’s sticking with GPT-5 for economic analysis and explanations.
Taelin finds it hard to multi-thread coding tasks, Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
The linked post is yet another example of demand-driven misinformation. Yes, it was easier to create the image with AI, but that has nothing to do with what is going on. Fun With Media Generation
If you’d asked me what one plausible feature would make Sora more interesting as a product, I definitely would have said increasing video length. Going from 10 seconds to 25 seconds is a big improvement. You can almost start to have meaningful events or dialogue without having to endlessly stitch things together. Maybe we are starting to get somewhere? I still don’t feel much urge to actually use it (and I definitely don’t want the ‘social network’ aspect). I’m also very curious how this interacts with OpenAI’s new openness to erotica.
Should you make your cameo available on Sora? Should you make your characters available? It depends on what you’re selling. Let’s make a deal.
If you’re selling anything, including yourself, then from a narrow business perspective yeah, you should probably allow it. I certainly don’t begrudge Cuban, great move. Personally, I’m going to take a pass on this one, to avoid encouraging Sora.
This matches my experience from last week, except worse, and I believe it. The correct form factor for consuming Sora videos, if you must do that, seems obviously to be finding TikTok accounts (on the web, mind you, since the app is Chinese spyware) or better on Instagram reels or YouTube that curate the best ones (or if you live dangerously and unwisely, letting them appear in your feed, but the wise person does not use their TikTok feed).
The guy can use many different formal styles and handle anything you throw at him, but it’s all the same guy. And yeah, you can find a different model and prompt her instead, but mostly I’d say she’s not so different either. There’s a lot of sameness.
Copyright Confrontation
AIs Are Often Absurd Sycophants
Humans will tend to prefer any given sycophantic response, and this makes them more likely to use the source again. The good news is that humans, as I understand them, typically understand intellectually that absurd sycophancy is not good for them. Some humans don’t care and just want the sycophant anyway, a few humans are on high alert and react very badly when they notice sycophancy, and for most people the correct play is to be as sycophantic as possible without making it too obvious. Presumably it works this way for LLMs as well? One must always ask, what are these ‘leading AI models’? Here Claude is Claude Sonnet 3.7, and Gemini is Gemini-1.5-Flash. I don’t understand those choices, given the ability to use GPT-5, although I don’t think testing Sonnet 4.0, Opus 4.1 or Gemini 2.5 Flash (or Pro) would have given greatly different results, and this can’t be a cost issue. What would have presumably given much different results would be Claude Sonnet 4.5, which is actually a lot less sycophantic by all reports (I’m a little worried it agrees with me so often, but hey, maybe I’m just always right, that’s gotta be it.) They Took Our Jobs
My response to this methodology is that they are measuring what happens to firms that hire GenAI integrators, and the firms that want to keep being full of young people kind of don’t need such roles to integrate AI, perhaps? Or alternatively, the mindset of such positions is indeed the one that won’t hire young, or that is on its way out and ngmi. This explanation still predicts a real effect, especially at the largest most well-established and stodgy firms, that will largely adopt AI slower.
His first argument is a general argument that all new tools favor the superstars, since they’ll master any new technology first. That’s entirely non-obvious, and even if true it is a choice, and doesn’t say much about solving for the equilibrium. It’s just as easy to say that the AI offers work that can substitute for or assist low performers before it does so for high performers in many domains, as several studies have claimed. A lot of this seems to be that his model is that the better employees are better at everything? So we get statements like this one:
I mean, sure, but they were also better at making correct decisions before? Who got ‘more better’ at making decisions here? The second suggestion is that superstars have more autonomy and discretion, so they will be able to benefit more from AI. The third is that they’ll steal the credit:
I don’t get why you should expect this phenomenon to get worse with AI? Again, this is an argument that could be used against cell phones or fax machines or hammers. There’s also the fact that AI can be used to figure out how to assign credit, in ways far more resistant to status. Also, I can’t help but notice, why is he implicitly equating high-status employees with the most effective or productive or motivated ones, moving between these at will? What exactly are you trying to suggest here, sir? A just working world hypothesis, except with too much inequality? I don’t think he remotely makes his case that we are at risk of a ‘two-tier workforce where a small group captures most opportunities and everyone else falls further behind.’ I don’t see why this would happen, and if that happened within a given firm, that would mean the firm was leaving a lot of value on the table, and would be likely to be outcompeted. The suggested remedies are: Encourage everyone to experiment with AI. Spread the knowledge [of how to best use AI]. Redesign employee-evaluation systems to account for AI-augmented work.
These all seem to file under ‘things you should be doing anyway,’ so yeah, sure, and if they reduce inequality somewhat that’s a nice bonus. That also all, as usual, neglects the more interesting questions and important problems. Worry far more about absolute levels than relative levels. The important question is whether there will be jobs at all.
By all accounts, good engineers who have embraced AI are super valuable, both in terms of productivity and in terms of what they can earn at the AI labs. If you want one of those engineers, it’s going to cost you. Yes, there are a lot of other engineers that are being stubborn, and refusing to embrace AI, either entirely or in the ways that count, and thus are not as valuable and you don’t want them. Fair enough. There are still only market prices.
It would be highly irresponsible, and frankly abusive to the client, to continue to bill $800 an hour and not use AI to increase your productivity. As with work by a junior associate, you then have to actually look over the results, but that’s part of the job.
Those proposals are less radical than they sound. Primarily taxing human labor was never first best versus taxing consumption, but it was a reasonable thing to do when everything was either labor or capital. If AI starts substituting for labor at scale, then taking labor and not compute creates a distortion, and when both options are competitive we risk jobs being destroyed for what is effectively a tax arbitrage. Find Out If You Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone
The questions ask about how much you use or would be comfortable using AI, who you think should use AI, what AI capabilities you expect, what economic impacts you expect. There are a few of the standard ‘choose between extreme takes’ questions. When does existential risk come up? It takes until question 11, and here we see how profoundly Bloomberg did not Understand The Assignment: What do you mean, more likely to agree? What’s the conflict? The answer is very obviously Why Not Both. Hawking and Pichai are both 100% very obviously right, and also the statements are almost logically identical. Certainly Hawking implies Pichai, if AI could spell the end of the human race then it is more profound than electricity or fire, and certainly it would be ‘one of the most important things humanity is working on.’ And if AI is more profound than electricity or fire, then it very obviously could also spell the end of the human race. So what are we even doing here? I got ‘Cautious Optimist,’ with my similar person being Demis Hassabis. Eliezer Yudkowsky got ‘the Pro-Human Idealist.’ Peter Wildeford and A Young Lady’s Illustrated Primer
It’s amazing we keep hearing this line as a reason to not worry about AI. There are zero humans employed in the job of ‘make the best possible chess move.’ To the extent that ‘make good chess moves’ was a productive thing to be doing, zero humans would be hired to do it. The reason humans play chess against each other, now more than ever, is: Chess is fun and interesting. Chess can be a competition between people, which we like and like to watch.
Not that there’s anything wrong with that. I do like a good game of chess. Similar logic applies to writing a sonnet. We’d often rather read a sonnet from a human than one from an AI, even if the AI’s is technically stronger. In some cases it applies to comforting the dying.
Neither specialization nor generalization nor comparative advantage will fix that, given sufficient AI capability and fungibility of resources. To the extent there are still other humans who have resources to pay for things, and we are not otherwise in deeper trouble in various ways, yes this still leaves some potential tasks for humans, but in an important sense those tasks don’t produce anything, and humanity ‘has no exports’ with which to balance trade. Realistically, even if you believe AI is a ‘normal technology’ and either the world nor the unemployment rate will go crazy, you’re still not looking at a ‘normal’ world where current conventional life plans make all that much sense for current children. The bulk of The suggestion that, because we don’t know the future, it is madness to tell a child what to study, as suggested by the next discussion of The Sovereign Child? That itself seems like Obvious Nonsense. This is the fallacy of uncertainty. We don’t have ‘no idea’ what is useful, even if we have far less idea than we used to, and we certainly can predict better than a small child what are better places to point attention, especially when the child has access to a world full of things designed to hijack their attention. At minimum, you will be 'stealth choosing’ for them by engineering their environment. And why would you think that children following their curiosity would make optimal long term decisions, or prepare themselves for a glorious or dystopian AI future? The idea that you, as reported here, literally take your child out of school, they stay up late watching Peppa Pig, watch them show no interest in school or other children, and wait to see what they’re curious about confident they’ll figure it out better than you would have while they have access to a cabinet full of desserts at all times? The part that seems more relevant is the idea that tech types are relaxing with regard to superficial or on-paper ‘achievement’ and ‘achievement culture.’ I am of two minds about this. I strongly agree that I don’t want my children sacrificing themselves in the names of nominal ‘achievements’ like going to an Ivy league school, but I do want them to value hard work and to strive to achieve things and claim victory. We end on the quote from Nevraumont, who clearly isn’t going to take this seriously, and cites the example that people study ‘art history’ that he expects could be ‘made essential in an era where we’re making art with machines’ to give you a sense of the ‘possibility space.’ Ut oh. How is the AI-in-education situation looking on campus?
I find getting angry at the AI labs for free access highly amusing. What, you’re giving them an exam to take home or letting them use their phones during the test? In the year 2025? You deserve what you get. Or you can pull out those blue books and oral exams. Who are the other 50% in the faculty that are holding out, and why? I also find it highly amusing that students who are paying tens of thousands in tuition might consider not ponying up the $20 a month in the first place. It is crazy the extent to which The Reverse DeepSeek Moment of GPT-5 convinced so many people ‘scaling is dead.’ Time and again we see that people don’t want AI to be real, they don’t want to think their lives are going to be transformed or they could be at risk, so if given the opportunity they will latch onto anything to think otherwise. This is the latest such excuse. AI Diffusion ProspectsThe actual content here raises important questions, but please stop trying to steal our words. Here, Sriram uses ‘AI timelines’ to mean ‘time until people use AI to generate value,’ which is a highly useful thing to want to know or to accelerate, but not what we mean when we say ‘AI timelines.’ That term refers to the timeline for the development of AGI and then superintelligence. (Similar past attempts: The use of ‘AI safety’ to mean AI ethics or mundane risks, Zuckerberg claiming that ‘superintelligence’ means ‘Meta’s new smartglasses,’ and the Sacks use of ‘AI race’ to mean ‘market share primarily of chip sales.’ At other times, words need to change with the times, such as widening the time windows that would count as a ‘fast’ takeoff.) The terms we use for what Sriram is talking about here over the next 24 months, which is also important, is either ‘diffusion’ or ‘adoption’ rates, or similar, of current AI, which at current capabilities levels remains a ‘normal technology,’ which will probably hold true for another 24 months.
I was almost ready to agree with this until the sudden ‘just pure scifi’ broadside, unless ‘fast takeoff’ means the old school ‘fast takeoff’ on the order of hours or days. Later in the thread Sriram implicitly agrees (as I read him, anyway) that takeoff scenarios are highly plausible on something like a 5-10 year time horizon (e.g. 2-4 years to justify the investment for that, then you build it), which isn’t that different from my time horizon, so it’s not clear how much we actually disagree about facts on the ground? It’s entirely possible that the difference is almost entirely in rhetoric and framing, and the use of claims to justify policy decisions. In which case, this is simply me defending against the rhetorical moves and reframing the facts, and that’s fine. The future being unevenly distributed is a common theme in science fiction, indeed the term was coined there, although the underlying concept is ancient. If we are adapting current ‘normal technology’ or ‘mundane’ AI for what I call mundane utility, and diffusing it throughout the economy, that is a (relative to AI progress) slow process, with many bottlenecks and obstacles, including as he notes regulatory barriers and organizational inertia, and simply the time required to build secondary tools, find the right form factors, and build complementary new systems and ways of being. Indeed, fully absorbing the frontier model capabilities we already have would take on the order of decades. That doesn’t have to apply to future more capable AI. There’s the obvious fact that you’d best start believing in hard science fiction stories because you’re already very obviously living in one - I mean, look around, examine your phone and think about what it is, think about what GPT-5 and Sonnet 4.5 can already do, and so on, and ask what genre this is - and would obviously be living in such a story if we had AIs smarter than humans. Ignoring the intended-to-be-pejorative tem and focusing on the content, if we had future transformational or powerful or superintelligent AI, then this is not a ‘normal technology’ and the regular barriers are largely damage to be routed around. Past some point, none of it much matters. Is this going to happen in the next two years? Highly unlikely. But when it does happen, whether things turn out amazingly great, existentially disastrously or just ascend into unexpected high weirdness, it’s a very different ballgame. Here are some other responses. Roon is thinking similarly.
This has much truth to it but forgets that the market is forward looking, and that equity and debt financing are going to be the central sources of capital to AI on a 2-4 year time frame. AI diffusion will certainly be helpful in boosting valuations and thus the availability of capital and appetite for further investment. So would the prospects for automating AI R&D or otherwise entering into a takeoff scenario. It is not required, so long as capital can sufficiently see the future.
A single monopoly business seems like it would work, although we don’t know what order of magnitude of capital is required, and ‘ordinary business potential profits’ combined with better coding and selling of advertising in Big Tech might well suffice. It certainly can get us into the trillions, probably tens of trillions. Jack Clark focuses instead on the practical diffusion question.
This seems very right. The future will be highly unevenly distributed. The low friction companies will, where able to compete, increasingly outcompete and dominate the high friction companies, and the same will be true of individuals and nations. Even if jobs are protected via regulations and AI is made much harder to use, that will only mitigate or modestly postpone the effects, once the AI version is ten times better. As in, in 2030, you’d rather be in a Waymo than an Uber, even if the Waymo literally has a random person hired to sit behind the wheel to ‘be the driver’ for regulatory reasons. The Art of the Jailbreak
Get Involved
Introducing
OpenAI now has an eight member In Other AI News
Show Me the Money
Nvidia was up over 3% on the day shortly after the news broke, so presumably they aren’t sweating it. It’s good for the game. The move did, as per standard financial engineering procedure, added $150 billion to Broadcom’s market cap, so we know it wasn’t priced in. Presumably the wise investor is asking who is left to have their market caps increased by $100+ billion dollars on a similar announcement. Presumably if it can keep doing all these deals that add $100+ billion in value to the market, OpenAI has to be worth a lot more than $500 billion?
A billion here, a billion there, and don’t get me wrong it helps but that’s not going to get it done.
Exactly how much is OpenAI still planning to steal from its non-profit? Quite a lot, as
Quiet SpeculationsMay this be their biggest future problem:
That’s quite the takeoff, in either direction. In the benign scenario doubling times get very short. In the extinction scenario, the curve is unlikely to be that smooth, and likely goes up before it goes down. There’s a very all-or-nothingness to this. Either you get a singularity and things go crazy, or not and we get ‘AI GDP-boosted trend’ where it adds 0.3% to RGDP growth. Instead, only a few months later, we know AI is already adding more than that, very much in advance of the singularity.
Well, yeah, that’s the good version of what’s coming, although ‘we can all clearly see’ is doing unjustified work, a lot of people are very good at not seeing things, the same way Matt’s vision doesn’t notice that everyone also probably dies. Are we putting up ‘any fight whatsoever’? We noble few are, there are dozens of us and all that, but yeah mostly no one cares.
My lord, Elon, please listen to yourself. What you’re doing about it is trying to hurry it along so you can be the one who causes it instead of someone else, while being even less responsible about it than your rivals, and your version isn’t even substantially less ‘woke’ or more ‘truth seeking’ than the alternatives, nor would it save us if it were.
Yeah, Coase is helpful in places but doesn’t work at all in a world without marginal productivity in excess of the opportunity cost of living, and we need to not pretend that it does, nor does it solve many other problems. If we keep control over resource allocation, then Vassar makes a great point:
His premise is incorrect. Many people did expect AI to accelerate in this way, indeed if anything AI progress in the last year or two has been below median expectations, let alone mean expectations. Nor does UBI solve the most important problems with AI’s acceleration. That said, we should definitely be having UBI and related conversations now, before we face a potential crisis, rather than waiting until the potential crisis arrives, or letting a slow moving disaster get out of hand first. Nate Silver points out that if you thought The Singularity Is Near as in 1-2 years near,
I would say contra Andrew that it is more that Altman is presenting it as if it is going to be a new industrial revolution, and that he used to be aware this was the wrong metaphor but shifted the way he talks about it, and may or may not have shifted the way he actually thinks about it. If you were confident that ‘the game would be over’ in two years, as in full transformational AI, then yes, you’d want to preserve a good reputation. However, I do agree that directionally OpenAI’s strategy of becoming a consumer tech company suggests they expect the game to continue for a while. But the market and many others are forward looking and do not themselves feel the AGI, and OpenAI has to plan under conditions of uncertainty on what the timeline looks like. So I think these actions do push us modestly towards ‘OpenAI is not acting as if it is that likely we will get to full High Weirdness within 5 years’ but mostly it does not take so much uncertainty in order to make these actions plausibly correct. It is also typically a mistake to assume companies (or governments, or often even individuals) are acting consistently and strategically, rather than following habits, shipping the org chart and failing to escape their natures. OpenAI is doing the things OpenAI does, including both shipping products and seeking superintelligence, they support each other, and they will take whichever arm gets there first. You're currently a free subscriber to |