---
subject: "AI #43: Functional Discoveries"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-12-21 15:47:44
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
We get innovation in functional search. In an even more functional search, we finally get a Nature paper submitted almost two years ago, in which AI discovered a new class of antibiotic. That’s pretty damn exciting, with all the implications thereof. OpenAI continued its rapid pace of shipping, pivoting for this week to safety. There was a paper about weak-to-strong generalization. I see what they are trying to do. It is welcome, but I was underwhelmed. It and Leike’s follow-up post continue down a path for which I have high skepticism, but the new concreteness gives me more hope that the flaws will be exposed early, allowing adjustment. Or I could be wrong. OpenAI also had the beta release of Preparedness Framework. That was more exciting. There was a lot of great stuff there, much better than I would have expected, and having a framework at all is a big step too. Lots of work remains, but an excellent start. I was on not one but two podcasts that came out this week, both Table of ContentsOpenAI published its Introduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. Safety dials in Gemini. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. Stuck at 3.5 GPTs. GPT-4 Real This Time. GPT-4 is good again? Fun With Image Generation. MidJourney version 6 looks great. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. Real time speech transformation. Digi Relic Digi. The future of AI romance companionship? Not so fast. Going Nuclear. Using AI to do paperwork to build nuclear power for AI. Get Involved. Superalignment fast grants, also some job openings. Follow the Money. A16z’s political pro-technology PAC is mostly pro-crypto. Introducing. FunSearch over functions, also a new class of antibiotic. In Other AI News. Sources of funding, compute + data, allowed and not allowed. Quiet Speculations. Aaronson reflects, Roon notices how this time is different. The Quest for Sane Regulation. Another poll confirms public sentiment. The Week in Audio. Me on Clearer Thinking and Humans of Magic. Rhetorical Innovation. AGI existing but not taking over is the ‘sci-fi’ scenario. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. OpenAI paper on weak to strong generalization, and post outlining where they go from here. Vulnerable World Hypothesis. How true is it? People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Is the Pope worried? Yes. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Kasparov. The Lighter Side. We have to stop meeting like this.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
For some purposes, you want to turn all four dials to maximum. For others, you very much do not. If our best commercial models continue to always be the fun police, then people who want sexually explicit or dangerous content, or otherwise want to avoid the censorship, are going to go elsewhere, driving demand for more dangerous products. This is the best answer, to allow those who actively want it to get that service in safe fashion, while keeping the truly dangerous and unacceptable things blocked no matter what. You want people not to have systems capable of producing deepfake porn (or instructions for bioweapons)? In practice? Then you need to let them get a system that produces generic porn rather than making them seek out and fuel demand for the fully unlocked version.
I found this fascinating:
I feel that. There are many other places too, where you can sense the patterns underlying good thinking in a human. Whereas an LLM breaks the correlation between the content and the vibe. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
It is interesting that Gemini Pro ‘has not impressed’ whereas Mistral ‘is a very strong new entrant’ with essentially the same score. Gemini Pro is very explicitly a lightweight version of Gemini Ultimate. It coming in at 3.5-level is expected. I am not impressed, but I am also not disappointed. As usual, the whole ‘Anthropic’s models getting worse’ question remains unsolved. Meanwhile the pileup at exactly 3.5-level, between 1105 and 1116 Elo, continues. It increasingly seems like there is some sort of natural barrier there. GPT-4 Real This Time
GPT-4.5 for real this time? There were claims that GPT-4.5 was coming in December. There was a supposed leak of GPT-4.5’s pricing information at six times the cost of GPT-4. There were claims that it had already stealth launched, and that was why after getting worse for a while GPT-4 was suddenly doing dramatically better. December is not quite over, but the prediction markets have come around to this all being fake, after Sam Altman explicitly denied the leak and
I see no reason for Roon to be bluffing here. There were even crazy secondary theories,
We know this one is fake, because it does not fit the patten of OpenAI releases. Turbo means ‘the secondary release of the model number that is refined and cheaper.’ If you are claiming to be or to be about to be offering GPT-4.5, that is something that will happen. If it has the turbo label, and 4.5 is not out yet, you are bluffing. Danielle’s theory is less definitely wrong, and also funnier. Fun with Image GenerationMidJourney v6 was released overnight. Early reports are that it is a major advance and pretty awesome, with pictures to back up that claim.
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
Digi Relic DigiVersion 1.0 of
In particular they claim it looks like this: Animations and movements look smooth in the demo. There’s no claim they know how to sync up movements to voice yet, they say even lip sync is only coming soon.
The clip they share sounded exactly the way I would expect it to sound, for better and worse. It’s not bad, especially if latency in practice is good. Except wait. It turns out It actually looks like this, and the latency is not good (nor is the content, per this particular report)? That’s advertising for you. They did a great job bluffing something impressive but believable. Instead, this does not even sound state of the art. From what I saw, we do not know what LLM they are using for their content. Presumably it is one that is cheap and open sourced.
But let’s see what else they have in mind for the future?
Makes sense as a first approach to copy what exists. There will of course be no problem getting whatever physical features you want in even the short term, increasing in detail and convenience over time. How many people will choose to copy a particular person? How often will it be someone they know versus a celebrity? At what point will people worry this constitutes a ‘deep fake’ or a violation of privacy?
Previous version of number go up did not work, so they made a superior number go up that they think works better. In real life this kind of gradual progression is common but very much not universal. No doubt there will be demand for the ability to move faster, both in a realistic way and by fiat, which will presumably often be a paid feature. Or perhaps that ‘breaks the format’ so you don’t want to allow it even though it happens in reality. I continue to expect a lot of demand for ‘more realistic’ experiences, that will serve as ways to get practice and acquire skills whether or not that was what the user had in mind. Easy mode is fun at first but soon loses its luster. It is boring. One way or another there will be challenges. Reactions were universally negative. Everyone assumes this is a bad thing.
How principled need one be here?
The quoted statement below by Beff Jezos is bleak, but it is a more positive reaction than anything I saw other than in replies to Profoundlyyyy, no matter which way Jezos intended it.
I wonder how reactions will change when people realize (or are reminded) that actually AI boyfriends are in higher demand than AI girlfriends, at least at current tech levels.
The question is, to me, will it be challenges that mimic real life (with or without options like a perhaps-not-free rewind button) in ways that help us grow, will it leverage this in ways that are otherwise good clean (or dirty) fun and educational and exciting, or will the challenge be dodging attempts to addict and upscale you via predatory behaviors? Will good companions drive out bad, or will bad drive out good? I do think you can build this in a way that is positive and life-affirming.
Yep, at least for now. Is this because the tech is not yet good enough to be non-exploitative? Build an actually life-affirming, positive AI companion that was good enough and people would notice and tell each other, and you'd get YC-style hockey stick growth? Except for now we don't know how. It can get pretty bad out there.
On the one hand, wow is that horrifying. On the other hand, I can confirm this is a realistic reaction by the person you are dating when your credits are running low. You can test this pretty easily on any given system by seeing if it will allow you to fail.
Might still be some work to do.
The fact that Digi felt worth covering, and that its claims were by default credible, reflects the remarkably slow progress that has been made so far in this area. The competition is very not good right now. Despite this, Character.ai has a lot of users,
Indeed. Going Nuclear
The central barrier to building nuclear power is the regulatory process. The tech is well-established, the need and demand clear, the price is right, it is highly green. AI cannot yet be used to improve nuclear power plant functionality. What AI can absolutely do is decrease paperwork costs. It turns out paperwork is indeed the limiting factor on nuclear power. Get Involved
Not focused on AI, but reminder you can also
Follow the Money
Marc Andreessen said this will be about one issue and that issue is technological progress. Let’s see who is donating:
Wait a minute. By ‘technological progress’ did you mean…
Yeah. There is one issue they care about. That issue is crypto. So no push for fusion power or new medical technologies, also no push to destroy the world as quickly as possible. All in on talking their book and making number go up. Which is totally 100% fine with me. Go nuts, everyone. I am skeptical of your Web3 project, but will happily defend your right to offer it. If the people want crypto, and it seems some of them continue to do so, the government shouldn’t stand in their way. I am confident almost all of those warning about existential risk agree on this. A good portion of us even have sizable crypto investments. Leave AI out of it and we’re good. How much else of all the nonsense was always really about crypto? Introducing
Here’s the abstract:
This is excellent news, in that it uses techniques with very nice properties, and also we could really use a new class of antibiotics right about now. It is also obviously both exciting and scary news in terms of capabilities, and the ability of AI to advance STEM progress.
Alas no, not search over fun, it stands for function. Still cool. They say it has actually solved (or at least made progress on) open problems, in particular
It has some nice properties.
The naturally high level of interpretability and flexibility is great, as is getting the actual solutions to problems like this. Us humans looking at the solutions might be able to improve them further or learn a thing or two, and also perhaps verify that everything is on the level. Good show. Also, the whole thing working, especially despite being based off of PaLM 2, is scary as hell if you think about the implications. But hey. In Other AI News
Given how many checks are done before giving someone API access (essentially none) and how often they seem to check to see if someone is doing this even for large accounts (essentially never) it does not seem like they care enough to actually stop this. Sure, if you are caught by the press they will make it mildly annoying, but it is not like ByteDance can’t get another account. This is of course rather rich given how OpenAI (and everyone else) trained their models in the first place.
Included for completeness, but highly ignorable:
Quiet Speculations
Wise indeed. We see this all the time, people using ‘radical uncertainty’ or other excuse to say ‘everything will almost certainly stay the same until proven otherwise’ and thus ignoring the evidence that they won’t. Meanwhile things are constantly changing on many fronts. Aaronson is also super helpful in explaining where his p(doom counting only an AI foom and excluding other risks even if AI might be involved) number came from.
Taking a geometric mean to ensure equal sneering from both sides is a take. It is a strategy. It can have its uses. However, once you know that is where someone’s prediction comes from, you can (almost entirely) disregard it. This is not Aaronson bringing his expertise to bear and reaching a conclusion based on his model of how AI is likely to go. It is his social (and socially motivated) epistemology, based on data you already had. So ignore it and do your own work.
That sounds more like the output of Aaronson attempting to model the future.
I can affirm, even though we were fortunate enough to not use Slack, that this skill was indeed a major portion of running a company. The context switching is insane. Can AI help? It could do so in a few different ways. Evaluate when you need to respond quickly, so you can context switch less. Also could allow more deep work. Group contexts such that you context switch less, such as automatically grouping emails and messages. Provide key information to help you switch contexts smoothy. Carry out the conversation without you, so you never have to switch at all. Presto.
I think this depends on the degree of regulatory capture and the governance regime more generally. If technology stops advancing, and you have a monopoly, that does not mean others cannot copy you. Even if others cannot discover what you discovered, the information can come from within, as it often does. Over a long enough time horizon any knowledge-based monopoly should fracture, even without technological advancement or economic growth. The exception is if power is preserving such monopolies and freezing things in place, in which case your civilization will decline over time as things become increasingly dysfunctional, eventually exhausting the ruin in the nation. Even if there are no barbarians to sack your Roman cities, eventually you lose effectiveness and then you lose control, similar to the Galactic Empire in Asimov’s Foundation novels. If, as in the Foundation novels, there was no way to entirely stop the process, would you want to actively speed this along, or slow it down? Could go either way.
I worry about this as well. How much of what is truly valuable is the struggle, the working to be better? I don’t know. I do know that is the problem I want us to face.
This is a very good shaking to the core. I was not newly shaken to the core in the same way, but only because I already was aware of the problems involved and had been shaken to the core previously. So yes, on top of the impossibly hard technical problems, we have to solve governance of superintelligence. I do not know the right answer, or even the least wrong answer. I do know that effectively giving a superintelligence to whoever wants one with no controls on it, and hoping for the best is incorrect. That is a very wrong answer, and gets us reliably eaten for our atoms.
The Quest for Sane RegulationsIt seems every week we get a new poll confirming what the public thinks about AI.
As always, such polls do not indicate that the issues involved are salient to the public. Nor do they represent an appreciation by the public of accurate threat models or the sources of existential risk. What they do show is a very consistent, very strong preference to hold those creating and deploying AIs responsible for the consequences, a worry about what AI might do in the future, and support for government stepping in to keep the situation under control.
The post continues in similar mixed-bag vein throughout. This is presumably because the author lacks a model of what transformational AI would actually do or what dynamics will likely be involved, including but not limited to issues of existential risk. Once again, events at OpenAI are presented in what we now know to be an entirely fictional way, assuming it must have been about safety because the vibes point in that direction, buying propogranda without checking the facts:
Once again, no.
The idea that Altman or others building the future could be entirely sincere in not wanting everyone to die, rather than all involved always aiming to maximize profits and everything else be damned, either simply does not occur to such people, or is ignored as inconvenient. If they support something, it must be a plot. Of course, without any rules to enforce, nothing else matters. But Altman would happily agree to that if asked. I do not know of anyone saying there should be an IAEA for AI instead of rules. What they are saying is it is necessary in addition to rules. Whereas those who oppose an IAEA for AI and other similar proposals mostly do not want rules of any kind regarding AI, at any level. Indeed, there is direct advocacy here for doing active harm:
That’s right on two out of three - nondiscrimination and intellectual property laws seem like good things to enforce. Ideally they and many other laws will be intelligently adjusted so they make sense in their new context. But antitrust laws, in the context of AI, are very much a way to get us all killed. Antitrust is perhaps the best litmus test to see if someone is actually thinking about the real situation and the real threats we will face. Antitrust laws, if fully enforced in context, would outright require each company to race against the others to advance capabilities as quickly as possible, with little regard to safety or the existential risks that imposes upon the world as an externality. They would be unable to agree to slow down, or to agree upon safety standards, or to block out socially harmful use cases, or anything else. One of the things we urgently need are explicit antitrust wavers, so Anthropic, Google and OpenAI can make such pro-social agreements without worrying about their legal risk. OpenAI has an excellent ‘merge and assist’ clause, where if another lab is sufficiently ahead in creating AGI, they would then aid that other lab in ensuring that AGI was created safely, and stop their own development so there was no pressure to deploy AGI prematurely. I urge Anthropic and others to also adapt this clause. Others would instead have the government step in to forcibly stop OpenAI from doing this, in a way that would substantially raise the probability we all die. Both right away as an unsafe AGI is deployed, and also over time as the distribution of AGIs that are individually safe cannot be contained, resulting in dynamics that we cannot survive. That is crazy. Stop it. Most of the other practical proposals here seem fine. There is a good note that the EU exempting its militaries from its AI regulations weakens their position. The first concrete proposals advocated for, that AI being identifiable, and its role disclosed when it is used in various key decisions, enjoy very strong support across the board. So does the call to limit AI-enabled weapons. That the next proposal involves concern over disclosure of the water and electricity usage shows Which is exactly what happens when one moves to regulate AI without even noticing the possibility of catastrophic or existential risks. The Week in Audio
In terms of policy, he calls for AI algorithms not to interface broadly with kids. Says we should not ban anything China is not also willing to ban, but we should put liability on companies. Rhetorical InnovationPotential armor-piercing question:
Exactly. If you don’t believe in the possibility of unsafe AGI, you don’t believe in AGI. I think not believing in AGI is wrong, but it is not as crazy a thing to not believe in. Actually, let’s take it a step further?
Again, exactly. The actual science fiction scenario is ‘we have AI, or the capacity to have AI, and we continue to mostly tell human stories about humans and the same things humans have always cared about, despite this not making any sense.’ Nora Belrose believes that if AGI is developed, it is 99% likely that humans will stay alive and in control indefinitely. She is also one of the few people who says this because of reasons, actual arguments, rather than vibes, innumeracy, motivated reasoning or talking one’s book or plain old lying and rhetoric.
Link goes to her arguments. I do not think they are good arguments. But at least some of them are indeed actual arguments. I strongly believe she is wrong, but at minimum she has the high honor of being wrong, whereas the people she speaks of are not even wrong. Whereas
Always interesting what is and isn’t considered clearly false:
I am indeed rather certain that Richard Ngo is right about this.
I have experienced the same. It has been stressful and unproductive. Such discussions would be fine if they were complemented by grounded practical questions and gained sophistication with time and iteration, but they mostly lack both such traits. Everyone in politics knows how this goes. When the coverage is all about the horse race and who is saying what about whom, nothing of substance is discussed, those with the better ideas have no advantage, and nothing important ever changes. Rest of the thread is pointing out real questions, normally I wouldn’t quote the rest but I feel bad about cutting off such a thread right before its concrete questions, so:
I do think we have passed at least a local ‘peek partisanship’ on this. It remains bad. One trope on the rise is to disingenuously label those who worry about AI as opposed to technology and technological progress in general.
There are of course those who are genuinely confused about this, but all the usual suspects very much know better. Make no mistake:
He puts Andreessen and many others calling themselves techno-optimists into what he calls the techno-pessimist camp in the upper left, in the sense that they do not think AI will be capable enough to be dangerous. They are optimistic about outcomes, because they are pessimistic about AI capability advances. If you never think AI will get to dangerous threshold X, there is no need to guard against X by slowing down development. Shear’s model of the rise of association with e/acc is that a bunch of generically pro-technology people are taking on the label without knowing what it previously meant. Politics has a history of people doing that, then being various degrees of horrified, or in other cases going with it, when someone points out what it means to have skulls on your uniforms.
Marc Andreessen chooses who he considers a Worthy Opponent, and what he wants us to consider the alternative to his vision, linking to Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is DifficultOpenAI It looks like they are serious about their primary plan being ‘find ways for weaker systems to supervise stronger systems.’
Eliezer asked a qualifying question (and one logistical one) and offers thoughts.
So what are we actually doing?
It is good to notice when one is confused, but I am confused about why the paper confused here.
As I understand the setup here, degree of improvement is hard to predict, my jaw would be on the floor on any substantially different result. My understanding, after asking around, is that indeed the results of this paper are not impressive, and should not cause a substantial update in any direction. But that was not the point of doing the experiment and writing the paper. The point instead was to show a practical example of this form of amplification, given previous descriptions were so abstract, in order to enable others (or themselves) to pick up that ball and do something else that is more exciting, with higher value of information. To what extent setups of this type can in practice preserve nice features, both in alignment and other capabilities, and how much those results will then generalize and survive out of distribution as capabilities of the underlying systems scale higher, is a key question. If we can get nice enough properties, we can do various forms of amplification, and the sky is the limit. I am deeply skeptical we can get such properties where it matters. Some others are more hopeful. So I now see why the paper exists. I am not unhappy the paper exists, so long as people do not treat it as something that it is not. OpenAI and
This must be some strange use of the word easier. Yes, it would be first best if we all agreed on norms from the bottom up that could be enforced in a decentralized way. But easier? How would we do that?
That sounds like a liability regime without the liability. You are holding someone responsible. If all you do is frown, admonish them and tell them to feel bad about it, that’s not going to cut it.
Good best practices are still highly useful. What have we got?
These all certainly seem like valid Desideratum. As noted, many are not things we know how to get in an effective way. Problems pinning down what exactly is even needed, let alone how to get it, extend throughout. The off switch problem is, as noted and to put it mildly, ‘way trickier than people think.’ Even if we got all of it in strong form, it is not obvious it would be sufficient. A key issue is that a lot of this boils down to ‘human supervises the agent and is in the loop’ which is good but something we will actively want to remove for efficiency reasons exactly when this should worry everyone. A supervising AI is faster, but it risks begging the question and missing the point, and also subversion or failing in correlated ways. You have to start somewhere. This does give us better opportunity to say things. But overall, I’d say this paper doesn’t say much, and when it does, it doesn’t say much.
This example feels enlightening, in the sense that it isn’t obviously doomed:
The catch, in my model, is that you need to choose a set of questions where you are damn sure you know the truthful responses, and where it is clear that there is no ‘alternative hypothesis’ for why the truthful answers are being approved. If you do that with a rich enough data set, then yes, I do think that the concept will generalize. However, if you let even a little bit of error slip into your data set, where you are fooling yourself, then it will generalize to a similar but different concept such as ‘what the grading system think is right when it sees it’ that will increasingly diverge from truth out of distribution. I do not think such errors are self-correcting. I do not think you should count on the AI to ‘pick up the spirit’ (my term not his) of what you have in mind in a robust way. Thus, when I see something like this, I am much less hopeful.
I think what you get here if you ramp up capabilities is something that can win debates as judged by humans, and predict what would win such debates. I do not think that is what Jan Leike had in mind. I expect essentially the same problem with any realistic set of human feedback. Essentially: I do not think generalizations work the way this technique wants them to. And I still think assuming evaluation is easier than generation is incorrect, and wish I had figured out how to explain myself more convincingly on that. I do appreciate the highlighting of the ‘get it right on the first try’ problem.
The good news is I expect the techniques here to fail in highly observable ways, not only in unobservable ways, if we set the experiments up correctly. I think there are good ways to limit the capabilities of the humans giving feedback so as to cause these problems to manifest in a way we can confirm.
I buy that self-consistency, in various forms, is often easier to check than truth. In any given situation, more checksums and verifications and ways to catch problems increase your chances of success. Raising the threshold for successful untruth can certainly forestall problems, including cutting off hill climbing on lying before it can find more effective methods. But also every time you do all of this you are selecting for systems that find ways to pass your checks, including ways that do not require truth. Indeed, when you continuously test humans for inconsistencies and apparent motivations, you at first train something very similar to truth. Then, if you keep at it, you are training people to lie in a very particular way. Train humans to give answers consistent with copies of themselves (past, future, twin, simulations, friends, countrymen, whatever) and yes the obvious Shilling point is telling the truth but there are in many cases better ones. Start with something like ‘This is actually a weird special case, but my copies might not figure it out, so I’m going to pretend that it isn’t.’ Then go from there. Figuring out how to better navigate each check is likely going to pay off incrementally. Then you introduce cases where you can’t consistently identify truth correctly. When this all breaks down, it won’t be pretty. Another way of looking at this concern is that one cannot serve two masters. I think that applies here. If you can get a pure version of only one master (e.g. truth), you can teach the AI to serve it. Alas, this requires that it be uniquely held above everything else. I am the Lord thy God, thou shalt have no other Gods before me. So the moment you are also evaluating on anything other than truth, as one does, your truth-alignment is going to have a problem. Jan affirms the plan is still to get AIs to do our alignment homework, hoping we can be wise enough to get them sufficiently under control to pull that off, and then to choose to sufficiently exclusively assign that particular homework. Nothing about the approaches here seems to favor (or disfavor) X being equal to ‘alignment’ in ‘Get AI to do X research.’
I find the target of ‘less than 4 OOMs bigger than human-level models’ for alignment techniques, assuming 10 OOMs+ is required for ASI, to be showing extraordinary (unjustified) faith in the scaling laws involved, and in the failure of human-level and above-human level models to do various forms of amplification and bootstrapping and potentially recursive self-improvement. I also notice that I do not see the experiments in the paper as shedding substantial light, in either direction, on the prospects for the proposed techniques Leike discusses in his post. Vulnerable World Hypothesis
The Vulnerable World Hypothesis is defined as follows:
He notes that he used to believe the Friendly World Hypothesis, roughly:
We do not have access to a (practical or safe) experiment that can tell us the answer. How much is this question a crux for whether and how to proceed with AI development and under what governance structure? This is of course one central form of the offense versus defense question. One must also consider that one of the potential ‘recipes for ruin’ to worry about is ruin coming from the cumulative effect of uncoordinated decisions and economic, political and social pressures that would arise in such a scenario, and the ability to set such chains in motion - this is not the traditional thing described as a Vulnerable World, but neither is a world susceptible to this a Friendly World either. Functionally it is vulnerable. You can also end up somewhere in the middle, rather than at either extreme. At its two extremes, the question should be a clear crux for (almost) everyone. If continuing development of AI would soon mean that quite a lot of people had a ‘blow up the Earth’ button, or a ‘The AIs wipe out humanity’ button or a ‘AIs gain control of the future’ button, or even a ‘unleash a highly deadly plague that will kill quite a lot of people’ button then letting that happen is not an acceptable answer. Either you need to prevent AI that enables that from being developed, keep it from being widely deployed, or engage in rather extreme monitoring and control in some other way. If we are confident we can guard against all those things in a decentralized, semi-anarchic way, that AI would not pose such threats, then that is great. We should proceed accordingly, with whatever precautions are necessary to reliably make that happen. (One could still disagree, because they dislike that future world for other reasons, but I am happy to say those people are wrong.) People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone
Francis is centrally worried about AI armaments or ranking systems, or trusting decisions to algorithms in general. That is reason enough for him. I don’t see explicit talk about fully existential risk scenarios. My presumption is the Pope, like many, does not understand the potential of AI could do. But even without that he sees that loss of human control will be a clear theme, and he understands why our choices might still lead down such a road. Lot of fun reactions.
I would have said the Tower of Babel, maybe Garden of Eden. At least the Golden Calf.
Those are excellent things for a National Security Advisor to worry about. They still reflect looking for a particular opponent and threat.
Usual caveats apply. People do not go about their lives as if they believe this, they do not give it much thought, they only say it when actively prompted. Only 32% worry even a fair amount about AI, and that’s presumably mostly mundane risks. I see these as highly consistent. Most people, if not prompted socially to worry and instead notice it is socially treated as weird, will ignore such a risk, finding ways to not notice it as needed. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone
We are not playing an intentionally symmetrical game like Master of Orion or Star Trek. Under any reasonable model of potential aliens (whether grabby aliens or otherwise), the probability of us being in a close race with aliens, where we live if we build AI quickly but die to aliens or alien AIs if we do not, is epsilon. If we postponed AI forever Dune-style and otherwise survived, then yes over a billion years this becomes an issue. He also is the latest (upthread) to say ‘safe? No one is safe.’
The Lighter SideScott Alexander is no quitter. Previously I thought this was running out of steam. I was wrong. We are so back. Not that this is obviously a good thing. Sometimes you want it to be so over. I wonder if this in particular was brilliant?
You're currently a free subscriber to |