---
subject: "5 Intentions for 2025"
from: "\"Sahil Bloom's Curiosity Chronicle\" <sahil@sahilbloom.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-01-01 14:09:39
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Sahil Bloom", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_1989028747625928812", "UNREAD"]
---
5 Intentions for 2025
read and listen on [sahilbloom.com](https://click.convertkit-mail4.com/xmunommqvkf6hp82p45t4f29ozdlltn/6qheh8h739xrgmto/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuc2FoaWxibG9vbS5jb20vbmV3c2xldHRlci81LWludGVudGlvbnMtZm9yLTIwMjU=)
read time 7 minutes
Welcome to The Curiosity Chronicle, a weekly newsletter where I provide actionable ideas to help you build a high-performing, healthy, wealthy life.
Special 2025 Offer: If you order a physical copy of my book during the first week of 2025 and reply to this email with the receipt, I'll send you a short personalized video with some topics in the book I think you'll love.
Note: This is not automated, so it may take me a day or two to reply!
Today at a Glance:
- I've never been a fan of New Year's resolutions: They're too rigid and require a belief that you can choose the perfect set of resolutions that will be relevant throughout the entire year.
- I prefer to set New Year's intentions: Big picture, open-ended ideas and mindsets that I want to focus on for the year ahead.
- The 5 intentions I'm setting for 2025: (1) Recognize time as the most valuable asset, (2) Control the controllable, (3) Find joy in the small, (4) Let go of the things that no longer serve me, and (5) Go All In.
|
Check out my favorite AI newsletter, The Rundown
Start learning AI in 2025
Everyone talks about AI, but no one has the time to learn it. So, we found the easiest way to learn AI in as little time as possible: [The Rundown AI.](https://click.convertkit-mail4.com/xmunommqvkf6hp82p45t4f29ozdlltn/58hvh7hm463x84f6/aHR0cHM6Ly9raXRhZHMubGluay8xMjI1MjQtODkzMjU4L2lzaGFuLm1haWxAZ21haWwuY29t)
It's a free AI newsletter that keeps you up-to-date on the latest AI news, and teaches you how to apply it in just 5 minutes a day.
Plus, complete the quiz after signing up and they’ll recommend the best AI tools, guides, and courses – tailored to your needs.
|
5 Intentions for 2025
Happy New Year! Welcome to 2025.
As this very well may be the first newsletter you read in 2025, I want to use this opportunity to set the tone for the year ahead.
You're all familiar with the idea of New Year's resolutions: Specific actions or behaviors you commit to for the coming year.
I've never been a fan. The notion that you can choose the perfect resolution on January 1 and have it continue to be relevant throughout an entire year of inevitable chaos has always struck me as wishful thinking.
I prefer to set New Year's intentions: Big picture, open-ended ideas and mindsets that I want to focus on for the year ahead.
The intentions set your general direction—they establish a true north.
Here are the 5 intentions I'm setting for 2025...
Recognize time as the most valuable asset
In a 2019 episode of The Tim Ferriss Show podcast, investor Graham Duncan coined the term time billionaire to refer to someone with over one billion seconds remaining in their life:
"We’re so obsessed, as a culture, with money. And we deify dollar billionaires in a way...And I was thinking of time billionaires that when I see twenty-year-olds—the thought I had was they probably have two billion seconds left. But they aren’t relating to themselves as time billionaires."
When you’re young, you’re a time billionaire—literally rich with time. At age twenty, you probably have about two billion seconds left (assuming you live to eighty). By fifty, just one billion seconds remain.
But are you truly appreciating the value of this asset?
In his On the Shortness of Life, Seneca wrote, "We are not given a short life but we make it short, and we are not ill-supplied but wasteful of it."
You may know how important your time is, yet you ignore its passage and engage in low-value activities that pull you away from the things that really matter.
My first intention is to change that: Recognize time as the most valuable asset (and act accordingly).
Special Note: This is an excerpt derived from the time wealth section of my book, The 5 Types of Wealth. It explores this topic in depth and provides the actionable tools to build time wealth in your life.
Control the controllable
There are a lot of things in life that are completely out of your control:
- Another person's thoughts, opinions, or actions
- Past events
- Future events
- Random "acts of god"
And yet, you burn a lot of energy stressing over these things on a daily basis. You sit, scroll on your phone, and wrestle with these things that you have no ability to control.
Here's something I've learned:
Stress and anxiety feed on idleness. When you take action, you literally starve them of the oxygen they need to survive.
The answer is found in the action.
My second intention is to center my focus: Take action on those things within the realm of my control (and forget the rest).
Find joy in the small
On a cloudy Saturday a few weeks ago, I had a simple, seemingly unimportant interaction with my wife:
We had spent the day hanging around the house with our son and had taken him on a short trip to see some animals at his favorite local farm.
As we were lying in bed watching a show that evening, my wife turned to me and said, "I love our little life."
I smiled and agreed, but didn't think much of it until reflecting on her words later.
There is so much pressure to always strive for these big, huge things. To want more. To have the glamorous, sexy, impressive moments. To have this big life.
But my wife had recognized and vocalized something very important:
She had paused and appreciated the beauty in the small—and, in doing so, she had encouraged me to do the same.
You are told to focus on the big, but the real texture of life is found in the small.
My third intention is to remember that: Slow down and find joy in the small.
Let go of the things that no longer serve me
The human body replaces all of its cells every 7-10 years. Every day, your body literally replaces billions of its own cells—a constant cycle of shedding the old to become the new.
Here are a few things I'm shedding in 2024:
- People pleasing when my energy isn't reciprocated
- Planning every detail to perfection
- People who drain my energy
- Subtle self-sabotaging behaviors grounded in fear
- Allowing my head to outsmart my gut
To become the new, you have to unbecome the old.
My fourth intention is to become more like the human body: Embrace a constant process of unbecoming who I was to become who I want to be.
Go "All In"
If I have one phrase for 2025, it's this: All In.
I’m All In:
- All In on myself. My personal growth, my development.
- All In on my real ones. The people who create energy in my life, who lift me up, who encourage me to think bigger.
- All In on my purpose. Creating positive ripples in the world, engaging with people in real life to spark action.
- All In on my mental, physical, and spiritual health. Building myself so that I can be a catalyst for others.
- All In on my energy. Saying yes to the things that light me up, saying no to the things that don't.
My fifth intention is to keep this phrase top of mind: I'm All In.
The Power of One Year
With a fresh new year ahead of you, here's an important message:
Your entire life can change in one year.
Not ten. Not five. Not three. One.
One year of focused, daily effort. One year of clear intentions. One year of leaving behind the things that no longer serve you. One year of going all-in on you.
So, let's get started today.
Who's with me?
Order My Book to Unlock Special Bonuses:
The 5 Types of Wealth is the compass for your journey to a life of wealth that goes far beyond money. It provides the actionable tools to define, measure, and design your life around the pillars that truly create lasting happiness and fulfillment.
It will help you find your True North and build your life around it.
Order now and you'll unlock several new, exclusive bonuses:
- Order 1 Book: Access to the digital community, where you can interact with me and others on the same journey; Ticket to a live virtual launch party; Companion video series with breakdowns of strategies to start building each type of wealth today.
- Order 2 Books: All of the above, plus access to exclusive monthly video office hours with me.
- Order 10 Books: All of the above, plus a 1-on-1 15-minute coaching call with me. Limited spots available!
Sahil's Recommendation Zone
Perfect your morning routine with my partner[ AG1](https://click.convertkit-mail4.com/xmunommqvkf6hp82p45t4f29ozdlltn/9qhzhnhpe54wvqh9/aHR0cDovL2RyaW5rYWcxLmNvbS9zYWhpbA==):
I get asked about my morning routine all the time. It changes from time to time, but [AG1](https://click.convertkit-mail4.com/xmunommqvkf6hp82p45t4f29ozdlltn/9qhzhnhpe54wvqh9/aHR0cDovL2RyaW5rYWcxLmNvbS9zYWhpbA==) has been the one constant since 2011. I drink it with a big glass of water every single morning to start my day on a positive tone.
It replaced an entire cabinet of supplements for me in one daily scoop—seriously, its latest iteration covers a multivitamin, multi-mineral, prebiotics, probiotics, adaptogens, greens, and more. It keeps me feeling healthy and strong throughout the year, even when I'm traveling (thanks to the travel packs).
AG1 is offering Curiosity Chronicle subscribers an exclusive deal: [a free 1-year supply of liquid vitamin D plus 5 travel packs with your subscription purchase](https://click.convertkit-mail4.com/xmunommqvkf6hp82p45t4f29ozdlltn/9qhzhnhpe54wvqh9/aHR0cDovL2RyaW5rYWcxLmNvbS9zYWhpbA==). Take advantage of it!
Sahil Bloom
|
|
|