---
subject: "How to Exit"
from: "The Generalist <thegeneralist@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-12-10 16:38:08
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Generalist", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8815311452832858585", "UNREAD"]
---
🌟 Hey there! This is a subscriber-only edition of our premium newsletter designed to make you a better investor, founder, and technologist. Members get access to the strategies, tactics, and wisdom of exceptional investors and founders. Friends, In all of venture capital’s rush to enter investments – to find and jockey and win – it can be easy to forget that you must exit them, too. No matter how long-term your vision, how persevering your commitment to founders, there is a moment when you must part ways and cash out. It is not just a part of the game; it is the point of the game. Yet, it is rarely discussed. In part, that’s a consequence of venture capital’s time horizon. Ten years is a long time, especially when managers face more pressing problems daily. Another is that exits have historically depended almost entirely on external forces – an IPO or an acquisition. Save for the asset class’s greatest powerbrokers (who can broker alliances and arrange marriages), exits are often perceived as something to be experienced rather than created. You play the cards you are dealt and sit at the felt table until someone else carries your chips to the cashier’s cage. This vision of venture capital no longer holds. Market and regulatory shifts have altered the category’s complexion and made it more possible – and more vital – for investors to forge exits for themselves through secondary transactions and crypto sales. Both have become essential parts of the savvy VC’s toolkit: mitigating startups’ increasing long lives as private companies and pulling forward returns for LPs. Understanding how to manage this is now a crucial part of the venture capital craft. Otherwise
The opacity and complexity of secondary transactions – who they involve and how they occur – make them tricky subjects for investors to master and use to their advantage. Many give them little thought until an opportunity arises. Foresight and planning can make a significant difference. To deliver that foresight to readers, we’ve spent months researching the space and interviewing a dozen investors with experience buying and selling secondaries. Today’s guide unpacks how these transactions occur, the major players, and the frameworks elite VCs use to time and size their exits. What to expectA 9,000+ word breakdown on winning with secondaries How elite investors size their sales and why The four reasons to consider selling in the secondary markets The different transaction types managers encounter How to manage the process with founders to ensure buy-in How crypto allows for early liquidity
You can unlock the full guide, and the rest of our premium membership for just $22/month. Brought to you by MercuryYou can’t look into a crystal ball to gauge a company’s future performance — but you can get clarity with a financial forecast. Building a financial forecast model can give you a picture of a company’s viability and help with fundraising and future decision-making. Mercury’s VP of Finance, Dan Kang, shares why and how to build a financial forecast model, along with his personal template. Table of contents1. The rise of secondaries Market shifts Regulatory shifts Competitive shifts
2. The buying landscape Dedicated firms Traditional firms Digital exchanges
3. Transaction types Who leads? Strip sales Continuation funds Token sales
4. When to sell You’ve hit your target It’s a big position Your fund is winding down Your LPs want liquidity The market has greater conviction than you do
5. How to win Build a framework Size thoughtfully Understand price dynamics Work with founders
1: The rise of secondariesAccording to Industry Ventures, the global addressable market for secondary transactions in venture was $25 billion in 2012. A decade later, it had hit Market shiftsMarket changes have been a critical part of this increase. Between 2012 and 2021, annual capital raised by venture funds grew from $58 billion to $240 billion, approximately a 4.1x jump. With larger coffers, venture firms have been able to capitalize startups at greater rates for longer, extending their stints as private businesses and delaying public market debuts. Today, it’s common for a startup to spend over a decade as a private business. Stripe is 14 years old and Palantir made its IPO at 17. SpaceX is the same age as The Wire, Eminem’s “Lose Yourself,” and the circulation of the Euro – all products of 2002. Giants of the past took a much shorter route to an exit, as Forerunner’s Kirsten Green remarked: Forerunner
Amazon, Google, Adobe, Apple, Salesforce, PayPal, and Tesla are all examples of startups that reached the public markets in five years or less. They entered as much less mature businesses with lower annual revenues. According to Industry Ventures, the average company that went public in 1989 was 6 years old and had $30 million in revenue; by 2021, businesses were 12 years old and had $200 million in revenue. CRV
Though the outcomes are larger today, previous generations’ timelines mapped much better to venture capital. Traditionally, funds have 10-year lifespans; the first five are used to deploy capital, and the last five to reap the returns. CRV
Startups’ desire to celebrate their quinceañera in the private markets has forced VCs to look for liquidity elsewhere. Acrew
As Mike Jung explains, the asset class seizes without funds returning to LPs – many of whom are overexposed to venture. Founders Circle
Although market changes have played the biggest role in the rise of secondaries, regulations have also had an influence. Regulatory shiftsThe SEC’s “500 Shareholders Threshold” required companies with more than 499 investors to follow reporting requirements similar to those of public companies, pushing startups into faster IPOs. When the rule was relaxed in 2012, allowing 2,000 shareholders, a forcing function was removed. CRV
Competitive shiftsCompetitive dynamics and cultural norms have also contributed. As tech has grown, the war on talent has intensified. To stop Big Tech from poaching their employees with bumper pay packages, startups have looked to mitigate their longer paths to liquidity through secondary sales. Founders Circle
Whatever the precise causes behind the rise in secondaries, the result is the same: every thinking investor must recognize it as part of their craft. It is your job to drive returns for investors, and as the landscape changes, that necessitates different approaches and strategies. USV
Subscribe to The Generalist to unlock the rest.Become a paying subscriber of The Generalist to get access to this post and other subscriber-only content. A subscription gets you:
|