---
subject: "Writing the Book of Love, The Heart of the Andes and the Invention of Virtual Reality, the Art of Looking"
from: "The Marginalian by Maria Popova <newsletter@themarginalian.org>"
to: ""
date: 2025-09-21 11:31:04
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Maria Popova", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_464868432690921211", "UNREAD"]
---
|
Hello D! This is the weekly email digest of [The Marginalian](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=5deda703d2&e=a81b7681f8) by Maria Popova. If you missed last week's special edition — Virginia Woolf on love, Arundhati Roy on the deepest measure of success, and my new children's book — you can catch up [right here](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=d31509d199&e=a81b7681f8). And if my labor of love touches your life in a meaningful way, please consider supporting it with a [donation](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=8aea40c79a&e=a81b7681f8) — it remains free and ad-free and alive thanks to reader patronage. If you already donate: I appreciate you more than you know. |
“The tree which moves some to tears of joy is in the eyes of others only a green thing which stands in the way,” William Blake wrote in [his most spirited letter](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=377fbff4d5&e=a81b7681f8). “As a [man](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=6cb3f5a2c8&e=a81b7681f8) is, so he sees.” Because how we look at the world shapes the world we see, every act of noticing is an act of worlding. The Latin root of notice is to begin knowing, to have an instrument of recognition, and yet human consciousness is [a prediction machine](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=8a92cd8fa6&e=a81b7681f8) that recognizes only what it already knows, sees what it expects to see, lensed through its anticipations and past experience. “Right now, you are missing the vast majority of what is happening around you,” cognitive scientist Alexandra Horowitz wrote about [the science of looking](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=a0b3f19b4f&e=a81b7681f8). “To see takes time, like to have a friend takes time,” Georgia O’Keeffe wrote a century earlier about [the art of seeing](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=bef880284d&e=a81b7681f8). It does not come easily to us, true noticing — that transmutation of looking into seeing. We must apprentice ourselves to it daily. It is our life’s work. The best apprenticeship I know is spending time in nature, there amid the ceaseless quivering of phenomena and quickening of aliveness, the deep stillnesses and broad silences, all the dazzling othernesses with their myriad [occasions for unselfing](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=e73b1a7c62&e=a81b7681f8). The second best is poet Lia Purpura’s magnificent essay collection [On Looking](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=2a64296f3b&e=a81b7681f8) ([public library](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=54a4568419&e=a81b7681f8)) — an invitation to see the world whole by apprehending its details and the dialogue between them: church spires and glaciers and seventeenth-century Dutch paintings, the wings of the house fly “gently veined like a fine pen drawing of tributaries,” the late-afternoon light silvering the sardines in the open can. What emerges is a reckoning with the way “events crosshatch” and “particulars mingle, particulars assert, conspire, assemble,” so that “the moments go layering up” to stratify life into the shape of being. Purpura writes: If looking… is a practice, a form of attention paid, which is, for many, the essence of prayer, it is the sole practice I had available to me as a child. By seeing I called to things, and in turn, things called me, applied me to their sight and we became each as treasure, startling to one another, and rare. […] I never thought to say, or call this “God,” which even then sounded like shorthand, a refusal to be speechless in the face of occurrences, shapes, gestures happening daily, and daily reconstituting sight. “God,” the very attitude of the word — for the lives of words were also palpable to me — was pushy. Impatient. Quantifiable. A call to jettison the issue, the only issue as I understood it: the unknowable certainty of being alive, of being a body untethered from origin, untethered from end, but also so terribly here.
To concentrate attention in an act of noticing is to consecrate this here — a way of [blessing our own lives](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=72b654151a&e=a81b7681f8). Hummingbird divination from [An Almanac of Birds: 100 Divinations for Uncertain Days](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=57686bfbde&e=a81b7681f8), also available as a [stand-alone print](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=47aef9cc41&e=a81b7681f8) and as [stationery cards](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=06cec000c0&e=a81b7681f8). Purpura considers the consecration: It’s the noticing that cracks us open, lets something in. Shows we’re in use. Uses us. Right now. Right this minute.
Anything we notice, then, becomes a pinhole through which the whole universe rushes in — but only if we open the valve of fear and preconception. A century after poet H.D. anchored her [ravishing metaphor for how we see](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=8a6e77411e&e=a81b7681f8) in a jellyfish, Purpura writes: There is not, as many think, any air at all in a jellyfish, just organized cilia and bell muscles, a gelatinous scaffolding for hydrostatic propulsion. These simplest drifters are like bubbles of milky glass — and who doesn’t want to see through to a thing’s inner workings, the red nerves, and blood and poison with a clear pulse, circulating… In order to see their particular beauty, to see them, we have to suspend our fear. We have to love contraction. Filtration. The word “gelatinous,” too. The words “scull” and “buoyancy” are easy. We have to suspend “mucus web.” And realize that their bioluminescence, which is a show to see at night, is used to confuse and startle prey. You can look right through them. As if into a lit front room when it’s night outside.
One of Ernst Haeckel’s [stunning drawings of jellyfish](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=1752e1f139&e=a81b7681f8). (Available [as a print](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=8dc0c1efdc&e=a81b7681f8) and [as a face mask](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=290dff99c7&e=a81b7681f8).) Then there is the night itself, in the smallest patch of which Purpura finds evidence that “every scrap of matter bears a trace of the beginning of the universe, that a star lives in our blood, a star with its fingers in the riverbed of our bloodstream, tributaries, filigree, silver-etched, is a fern, an ice crystal.” Scraps of matter, scraps of time, filigrees of flesh — these are the constituents of our lives. We see with the mind, but it is the body that does the looking. To notice is to orient the body to the world, to turn matter over on the tongue of the mind until, like a koan, it releases its meaning. And since [time is the substance we are made of](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=fa1c8a9a8c&e=a81b7681f8), to notice things is also, inevitably, to notice time — “the loops of years pierced and containing the point.” When a storm domes her neighborhood in a particular darkness that transports her to the storms of her childhood, Purpura observes: What it is — is what else it is. Not just that this afternoon’s thick, boulder-clouds resemble the mountains I loved as a child, but that the one scene collapses in on the other, time reworks and folds together. And I live in both places. What it is — is what else it is. For this reason I am often startled by the simplest gestures of things: a leaf scratching along sideways moves as a crab does, so much so that the animal’s likeness comes powerfully in, and the shock of seeing a crab on the sidewalk trumps reason. And though I tell myself “it’s fall; leaves dry, scratch and blow, not crabs,” I’m jittery walking down the street — not frightened exactly, I can’t say afraid — but always the scene I’m in breaks open and floods. The stuff of an elsewhere comes in, as when, among the dried, speckled shells of crabs this summer, a snowball rolled oceanward before returning itself to a clump of sea-foam. The flap of an awning blows in wind — and it’s a low-flying bird’s wing. The dark underside of a mushroom’s gills, grown tiered and up-curved after rain, makes a tiny Sydney Opera House. Right there, hillside of the reservoir. Australia, just a few blocks from home.
Art by Ofra Amit from [The Universe in Verse: 15 Portals to Wonder through Science & Poetry](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=5954d5da3d&e=a81b7681f8) These Möbius moments of time folding in on itself often feel significant, sign-like — and yet they betoken [the difference between signs and omens](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=9a92b51cf5&e=a81b7681f8), living reminders that meaning does not inhere in the world but in the stories we tell ourselves about it. Purpura writes: These moments of recurrence/concurrence are not messages fluttering toward, bearing secrets, but stories in which we are part of the telling. We are, for a spell, of the path where shape forms, where flux assembles, briefly, a center. And there are so many centers.
“The moment is not properly an atom of time but an atom of eternity,” Kierkegaard wrote a quarter millennium earlier in his [refutation of time](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=bff7de9403&e=a81b7681f8). And if Muriel Rukeyser, who was [right about so much](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=ffad00ea62&e=a81b7681f8), was right that “the universe is made of stories, not of atoms,” we are the makers of the moment with the stories we tell ourselves about what it means to be alive. On the first anniversary of a significant death, paging through a catalogue of model houses while thinking about Schiller’s “Ode to Joy,” Purpura writes: I keep coming back to this spot of green. That’s all, just the green, which, above all, holds me. It’s of ripe avocados and hard young apples. Thin-skinned lake plants, as they float, cloud and wave. A curl of lime peel. New moss. Peridot, milked down with light. This simple-flat, sad-tender green, suspended against the broom-swept cirrus sky… Of all the green I make a stillness. Of sun-through-leaves, now, this June, I make a stillness. Of all the green, transparent spots I make a moment.
Greens from geologist Abraham Gottlob Werner’s [pioneering nomenclature of color](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=24d0742188&e=a81b7681f8) A century after Virginia Woolf located the art of presence in [those “moments of being” that make you who you are](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=926d5d163a&e=a81b7681f8), Purpura touches the beating heart of one such moment: The end of the day swells like a breaker, holds itself curled against the green field. Keeps itself brief above the grasses. Keeps itself sheer before it falls. Now in the half-light above the field, the day is something vanished-but-present, or present-but-going. A crest then a wobble, hovering.
“Into light all things / must fall, glad at last to have fallen,” Jane Kenyon wrote in [one of my favorite poems](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=5a7d240c91&e=a81b7681f8). It is the falling we are here to notice in the half-light between never before and never again.
donating=lovingEvery month, I spend hundreds of hours and thousands of dollars keeping The Marginalian going. For nineteen years, it has remained free and ad-free and alive thanks to patronage from readers. I have no staff, no interns, not even an assistant — a thoroughly one-woman labor of love that is also my life and my livelihood. If this labor makes your own life more livable in any way, please consider aiding its sustenance with a one-time or loyal donation. Your support makes all the difference.monthly donationYou can become a Sustaining Patron with a recurring monthly donation of your choosing, between a cup of tea and a Brooklyn lunch. | | one-time donationOr you can become a Spontaneous Supporter with a one-time donation in any amount. | | | |
|
Partial to Bitcoin? You can beam some bit-love my way: 197usDS6AsL9wDKxtGM6xaWjmR5ejgqem7
Need to cancel an existing donation? (It's okay — life changes course. I treasure your kindness and appreciate your support for as long as it lasted.) You can do so [on this page](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=75206cf539&e=a81b7681f8). |
|
I spent the summer using the [fantastic binomial](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=85a693a729&e=a81b7681f8) technique developed by Gianni Rodari — the beloved Italian writer whose stories lit up my Bulgarian childhood — as a creative prompt for poetry, part of the larger binomial two people co-create when their worlds touch each other in a meaningful way. Each week I’d be given two unrelated words and tasked with twining them into a poem. Summers end. Worlds tilt away from each other, drift apart, resume their orbit, transformed. This is how the final binomial — “dust” and “life” — wrote itself in me, read here by the living poem that is [Nick Cave](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=9147cd3e3a&e=a81b7681f8).
ODE TO A GOOD PEN by Maria Popova Over and over we borrow the book of love from the lending library of the possible and ask of it everything, only to find its pages blank and beckoning, impelling us to keep writing the story as it keeps changing, keeps reading us back to ourselves — an endless translation from some other tongue, unfinished and unfinishable, written in dust between endpapers marbled with life.
Then, [“Forgiveness.”](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=db233d1f0b&e=a81b7681f8)
donating=lovingEvery month, I spend hundreds of hours and thousands of dollars keeping The Marginalian going. For nineteen years, it has remained free and ad-free and alive thanks to patronage from readers. I have no staff, no interns, not even an assistant — a thoroughly one-woman labor of love that is also my life and my livelihood. If this labor makes your own life more livable in any way, please consider aiding its sustenance with a one-time or loyal donation. Your support makes all the difference.monthly donationYou can become a Sustaining Patron with a recurring monthly donation of your choosing, between a cup of tea and a Brooklyn lunch. | | one-time donationOr you can become a Spontaneous Supporter with a one-time donation in any amount. | | | |
|
Partial to Bitcoin? You can beam some bit-love my way: 197usDS6AsL9wDKxtGM6xaWjmR5ejgqem7
Need to cancel an existing donation? (It's okay — life changes course. I treasure your kindness and appreciate your support for as long as it lasted.) You can do so [on this page](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=5b5e5a4620&e=a81b7681f8). |
|
In the spring of 1859, as On the Origin of Species was going to press, New Yorkers flooded the first studio building for artists to see The Heart of the Andes — a single painting exhibited by itself in an unknown young artist’s studio. Alexander von Humboldt’s account of [his time Latin America](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=f846aa5bf7&e=a81b7681f8), which had sent Darwin on his epochal voyage, had sent Frederic Edwin Church (May 4, 1826–April 7, 1900) in Humboldt’s footsteps and returned him enraptured, transformed, restless to render the experience palpable, to transport others who would never have a chance to contact such ravishing wildness — a place of “perpetual spring,” as Humboldt had written in Cosmos, where “the depths of the earth and the vaults of heaven display all the richness of their forms and the variety of their phenomena,” where the laws of nature “stand indelibly described on the rocky walls and abrupt declivities of the Cordilleras.” Quiet and introverted, prone to melancholy, Church had always been drawn to the wild wonders of nature, saved and set free by them. An earlier painting of Niagara Falls had prompted a London paper to declare that “art wasn’t limited to Europe” and that “it was not necessary for genius to study in any school but that of nature.” His cloudscapes surpassed even [those of his Norwegian contemporary Knud Baade](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=f0759cffa7&e=a81b7681f8). Niagara by Frederic Edwin Church, 1857. (Available as [a print](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=6ebfaab604&e=a81b7681f8) and [a postcard](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=e13cd6523f&e=a81b7681f8).) Twilight in the Wilderness by Frederic Edwin Church, 1860. (Available as [a print](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=56eb947e0c&e=a81b7681f8) and [a postcard](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=0516939488&e=a81b7681f8).) But The Heart of the Andes was something else entirely. On the immense canvas, occupying nearly the entire wall of his studio, the thirty-two-year-old artist had painted not what he had seen in the Andes but what he had felt — the “unparalleled magnificence” of this lush land, he gasped in his diary, proclaiming it “one of the great wonders of Nature.” The setting was a real place just outside Quito, but Church had infused it with elements of other Andean landscapes that had impressed themselves upon his soul during two separate trips four years apart — a composite of the enchanted imagination he spent more than a year composing. The Heart of the Andes by Frederic Edwin Church, 1859. (Available as [a print](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=c7e2f8e6ce&e=a81b7681f8) and [a postcard](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=2f27bf60d0&e=a81b7681f8).) Peak by peak the mountain cascades toward the clouds until it merges with the sky as its foot melts into a waterfall. Details of exquisite aliveness punctuate the vista — a blue-blooming shrub, a pendulous bird’s nest, a resplendent quetzal perched on a branch, lichen on the bark of a broken tree, two people kneeling before a white wooden cross — all of it awash in light that [only consciousness can see](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=994f26d401&e=a81b7681f8), impossible for a camera lens to capture. Detail from The Heart of the Andes Rebelling against the stale convention of gilded frames, Church had invented a new kind of frame made of walnut wood, onto which he draped curtains to give the illusion of a window opening when the painting was being revealed. Silver reflectors focused gas lights onto the canvas to emulate the sunlit atmosphere of the landscape itself. The effect, The New York Times wrote, was “simply magical” — “a new sensation in art, giving a reality of atmospheric space to the picture, and a delicacy to the tones of the coloring, which must be seen to be at all appreciated or understood.” Before the days of easy travel, before color photography, most of the visitors had never seen and would never see with their own eyes nature so wild, mountains so majestic. Here was virtual reality — an immersion in light, color, and feeling that speaks not just to the eye but to the entire system of being we call soul. Detail from The Heart of the Andes For three weeks, people packed into Church’s studio, sometimes more than two thousand per day, gasping each time the curtain was drawn open, shuddering with the vertigo of the sublime. On the closing day, the line for admission curled around the block, around the clock. An influential art collector who would help found the Metropolitan Museum of Art a decade later ended up purchasing the painting for $10,000 — more than anyone had ever paid for a work by an American artist. The Heart of the Andes was also an emblem of the cruelties of chance and the mercies of chance. Just after the exhibition opened, Church received devastating news of his hero — 89 and weakened by a stroke, Alexander von Humboldt had greeted death the way he had lived life: “How glorious these sunbeams are!” were his last words, “They seem to call Earth to the Heavens!” He could have been describing Church’s painting; he could have been describing that incandescent cosmos of connection two people enter when they fall in love — the cosmos Church what thrust into without warning when he encountered among the thousands of spectators the woman who would become the love of his life. Within a year, he had married Isabel at [the picturesque Hudson Valley mansion](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=0db03f0ba4&e=a81b7681f8) he bought with his earnings from The Heart of the Andes. Frederic and Isabel At forty-four, on the insistence of Central Park creator Frederick Law Olmsted, Church became Park Commissioner of New York — the closest thing to a guardian angel of the urban wilderness. He would devote the rest of his life capturing nature’s wildness and wonder in transportive paintings of rainbows and volcanos, waterfalls and icebergs, numberless cloud studies and sunsets, moonrise and the aurora borealis, all of them rendered with that rare combination of passion and precision that makes anything — a painting, a poem, a person — great. Cotopaxi by Frederic Edwin Church, 1862. (Available as [a print](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=cc5bdd11ba&e=a81b7681f8) and [a postcard](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=7fee7a124d&e=a81b7681f8).) Iceberg and Ice Flower by Frederic Edwin Church, 1859. (Available as [a print](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=edb38198db&e=a81b7681f8) and [a postcard](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=f5c0fb155c&e=a81b7681f8).) El Rio de Luz (The River of Light) by Frederic Edwin Church, 1877. (Available as [a print](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=ec499ba4e1&e=a81b7681f8) and [a postcard](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=e00abe557b&e=a81b7681f8).) Cotopaxi by Frederic Edwin Church, 1867. (Available as [a print](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=586b0d387b&e=a81b7681f8) and [a postcard](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=f25636d99d&e=a81b7681f8).) Moonlight at Church’s Farm by Frederic Edwin Church, 1860s. (Available as [a print](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=d865bef47a&e=a81b7681f8) and [a postcard](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=bc4de97cd4&e=a81b7681f8).) Nightfall Near Olana by Frederic Edwin Church, 1872. (Available as [a print](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=2ce2b28b08&e=a81b7681f8) and [a postcard](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=a1fad56e07&e=a81b7681f8).) And much of it he shared with Isabel, who sat with him sunset after sunset over the Hudson Valley, pressed ferns into an herbarium alongside him while he painted in Jamaica — a living reminder that there is no greater form of love than looking together in the direction of wonder. Aurora Borealis by Frederic Edwin Church, 1865. (Available as [a print](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=64a721342c&e=a81b7681f8) and [a postcard](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=0516ef4800&e=a81b7681f8).) Rainy Season in the Tropics by Frederic Edwin Church. (Available as [a print](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=ebab43dd87&e=a81b7681f8) and [a postcard](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=005d924d9c&e=a81b7681f8).)
donating=lovingEvery month, I spend hundreds of hours and thousands of dollars keeping The Marginalian going. For nineteen years, it has remained free and ad-free and alive thanks to patronage from readers. I have no staff, no interns, not even an assistant — a thoroughly one-woman labor of love that is also my life and my livelihood. If this labor makes your own life more livable in any way, please consider aiding its sustenance with a one-time or loyal donation. Your support makes all the difference.monthly donationYou can become a Sustaining Patron with a recurring monthly donation of your choosing, between a cup of tea and a Brooklyn lunch. | | one-time donationOr you can become a Spontaneous Supporter with a one-time donation in any amount. | | | |
|
Partial to Bitcoin? You can beam some bit-love my way: 197usDS6AsL9wDKxtGM6xaWjmR5ejgqem7
Need to cancel an existing donation? (It's okay — life changes course. I treasure your kindness and appreciate your support for as long as it lasted.) You can do so [on this page](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=4ddc9c2bdb&e=a81b7681f8). |
|
ALSO:
[The Coziest Place on the Moon](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=864525aac8&e=a81b7681f8)
An illustrated fable about how to live with loneliness and what it means to love
ALSO:
|
|
|
|