---
subject: "AI #133: America Could Use More Energy"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-09-11 13:09:19
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Even in quiet weeks like this one, there are noticeable incremental upgrades. The cost of the best video generation tool, Veo 3, went down by half. ChatGPT now offers conversation branching. Claude can directly edit files. Yet it is a good time to ask about the missing results. Where are all the AI agents? If AI coding is so good why aren’t we seeing a surge in GitHub repositories or iPhone apps? A lot of the focus since the rollout of GPT-5 remains on the perception and policy fronts, especially regarding views of AI progress. The botched rollout of what is ultimately a very good (but not mind blowing) model gave a lot of people the wrong impression, so I have to remind everyone that once again that Table of ContentsAlso this week: [Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/bd3f336a-030c-47fd-b88b-52b40d80b7db?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Use AI to simulate a simulacra?[Productivity Puzzles.](https://substack.com/redirect/11c5d472-0db2-4659-8efc-aa93aa685456?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Where is the massive flood of additional software?[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/dfbb95ae-0ea5-4b9e-8033-d35a872ed2d1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Why no progress on GPTs?[Huh, Upgrades](https://substack.com/redirect/cf7b8b51-f6fc-4d26-a50a-9654e06527cf?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/cf7b8b51-f6fc-4d26-a50a-9654e06527cf?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Claude can edit files, ChatGPT can branch, Veo 3 50% off.[On Your Marks.](https://substack.com/redirect/f3f35a89-4f15-40da-ac1a-f4e984dccd4f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)ClockBench? AIs remain remarkably bad at this one.[Choose Your Fighter.](https://substack.com/redirect/a91d7571-2187-4e81-98a5-4dd07d5157ef?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Karpathy likes GPT-5-Pro, GPT-5 lacks metacognition.[Fun With Media Generation.](https://substack.com/redirect/422ed2ba-6ce8-4ce1-b6c4-c4f0c6831fce?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)AI assisted $30 million animated feature is coming.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon.](https://substack.com/redirect/c1c97731-d609-49ce-8015-fd00f4400953?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Dead Internet Theory, what a surprise.[Unprompted Attention.](https://substack.com/redirect/fc84f625-3566-431c-9866-9aaf29dc74b0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)No, a prompt cannot entirely halt hallucinations.[Get My Agent On The Line.](https://substack.com/redirect/c87a3d6c-946e-4892-a76b-b4f399c1d38e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Where are all the useful AI agents?[They Took Our Jobs.](https://substack.com/redirect/3d5a81d9-13ae-4161-8a35-1d643a3b6f39?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)I never thought the leopards would automate MY job.[A Young Lady’s Illustrated Primer.](https://substack.com/redirect/e9e79e9c-2288-4108-ab2b-4808b9c6563e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)We built this system on proof of work.[Levels of Friction](https://substack.com/redirect/83289526-9c12-40bc-95c3-6d446bb5f829?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/83289526-9c12-40bc-95c3-6d446bb5f829?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)When detection costs drop dramatically, equilibria break.[The Art of the Jailbreak.](https://substack.com/redirect/edddcca5-9ae0-4dd2-ab54-0e5ef0b98e84?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)AI, let me talk to your manager.[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/fe460ff1-edd7-4a56-a7b4-41354586b444?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Anthropic safety fellows program head, Foresight Institute.[Introducing.](https://substack.com/redirect/bfea278b-2147-49ba-bbeb-019bcd70dbae?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)We could all use a friend, but[not like this](https://substack.com/redirect/d3cef08a-3dc5-4a89-a736-90404b3376d8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/92514cec-6a13-4730-afdf-8eea7a6facd3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)EBay, novel math, Anthropic enforces bans and more.[Show Me the Money.](https://substack.com/redirect/191e690e-bc1f-4394-856a-d4b4667ab4ef?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Valuations up enough Anthropic can pay out $1.5 billion.[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/ef11eacc-f9a9-4016-a23d-4b21a145064c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Speeding up your releases versus speeding up your progress.[The Quest for Sane Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/bf77c4f6-341c-43bb-9fbd-52aa0f821a62?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Anthropic endorses SB 53, as do I.[Chip City](https://substack.com/redirect/f876a8f9-2fa3-4388-bea4-8f594e147722?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/f876a8f9-2fa3-4388-bea4-8f594e147722?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Nvidia loves selling to China, Department of Energy hates energy.[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/abe96159-e00a-4063-9d02-95d659458f49?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Me, Truell, Nanda, Altman on Carlson, Bell and Ruiz.[All Words We Choose Shall Lose All Meaning.](https://substack.com/redirect/23311c92-a174-4cd0-8d2f-a02a7250ec8b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)It is the curse we must accept.[Hunger Strike.](https://substack.com/redirect/82af6d41-2a6f-449f-bd57-5279da33d4b8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)If you believed that, why wouldn’t you? Oh, you did.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/5cbecabd-9947-49b7-8e04-9a08e1970af5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Nvidia continues calling everyone they dislike ‘doomer.’[Misaligned!](https://substack.com/redirect/2846409c-3e23-45d3-be9d-ddd6aab1d8ca?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Might want to keep an eye on those suggested changes.[Hallucinations.](https://substack.com/redirect/31e7778d-65b3-4074-8889-90dddb5b92c5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)We can greatly reduce hallucinations if we care enough.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/e6641a26-7c2c-41ef-9652-0745199f4120?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Janus explains.[The Lighter Side.](https://substack.com/redirect/2a91c326-4f4a-4370-8b16-5c39138988b4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)It’s going to take a while to get this far.
Language Models Offer Mundane UtilityReese Witherspoon, in what is otherwise a mediocre group puff piece about The Morning Show, She also offers this quote:
The future of filmmaking certainly involves heavy use of AI in various ways. That’s baked in. The mistake here is in assuming there won’t be even more change, as Reese like most people isn’t yet feeling the AGI or thinking ahead to what it would mean.
Can we use AI to simulate human behavior realistically enough to conduct sociological experiments? That leaves out other obvious things you could try in order to get a better distribution. They try some things, but they don’t try things like actively asking it to predict the distribution of answers humans would give. They use as their example the ‘11-20 money game’ where you request some number of dollars from 11 to 20, and you get that many dollars, plus an extra $20 if the other player requested one dollar more than you did. If you simply ask an LLM to play, you get a highly inhuman distribution, here is GPT-4o doubling down on 19: That’s not a crazy distribution for a particular human, I’m sure many people mostly choose 19, nor is it too obviously a terrible strategy. Given actual human behavior there is a right answer. Maybe 20 is too common among humans, even though it seems like an obvious mistake against any realistic distribution. My instinct if I got to play this once against humans was to answer 18, but I realized after saying that I was probably being anchored by GPT-4o’s answer. I do think that any answer outside 16-18 is clearly a mistake versus humans unless you think a lot of them will misunderstand the game and thereby choose 20. GPT-5-Pro predicted performance well when I asked it to, but then I realized it was looking at prior research on this game on the web, so that doesn’t count, and it might well be in the training data.
I find this all great fun and of theoretical interest, but in terms of creating useful findings I am far more skeptical. Making simulated predictions in these toy economic games is too many levels removed from what we want to know.
My question is, isn’t that Kling’s method of not reading a book? Which is fine, if you are reading the type of book where 90% or more of it is fluff or repetition. It does question why you are engaging with a book like that in the first place. Is the book ‘written for the AIs’? With notably rare exceptions, not yet. Is the book an expansion of a 1-10 page explanation, or even a sentence or two, that is valuable but requires repeated hammering to get people to listen? Does it require that one ‘bring the receipts’ in some form so we know they exist and can check them? Those are much more likely, but I feel we can do better than doing our own distillations, even the AI version. Thus, I read few books, and try hard to ensure the ones I do read are dense. If I’m going to bother reading a non-fiction book, half or more of the time I’m eyeing a detailed review. Here’s another counterpoint.
The whole objection from Kling is that most books don’t offer new generative ideas and connections in every sentence. Even the Tyler Cowen rave is something like ‘
Productivity Puzzles
But Judge actually has a strong argument we don’t reckon with enough. If AI is so great, where is the shovelware, where are the endless Tetris clones and what not? Instead the number of new apps isn’t changing on iOS, and if anything is falling on Android, there’s no growth in Steam releases or GitHub repositories. This is indeed highly weird data. I know that AI coding increased my number of GitHub repos from 0 to 1, but that isn’t looking widespread. Why is this dog not barking in the nighttime? I don’t know. It’s a good question. It is very, very obvious that AI when used well greatly improves coding speed and ability, and there’s rapidly growing use. Thoughts? One place we do see this kind of explosion is patents.
This looks like a small number of patents, then with the internet a huge jump, then with AI another big jump where the graph is going vertical but hasn’t gone up that much yet. GPT-5-Pro estimates about half the increase is patents is inventions related to AI, and about half is due to easier filing, including for clearing backlogs. That would mean this doesn’t yet represent a change in the rate of real inventions outside of AI. That illustrates why I have long been skeptical of ‘number of patents’ as a measure, for pretty much all purposes, especially things like national comparisons or ranking universities or companies. It is also a lagging indicator. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
GPTs seem like inferior versions of projects in many ways? The primary virtual-GPT I use is technically a project. But yes, problems of this type seem like high value places to make progress and almost no progress is being made.
Huh, Upgrades
This is a big deal and I hope the other labs follow quickly. Quite often one wants to go down a line of questioning without ruining context, or realizes one has ruined context, including in coding (e.g. squash a bug or tweak a feature in a side thread, then get back to what you were doing) but also everywhere. Another important use case is duplicating a jailbreak or other context template that starts out a conversation. Or you can run experiments. The possibilities are endless, and they are now easier. The more editing and configuring you are able to do easily and directly in the UI the more value we can get. On the downside, this control makes jailbreaking and evading safety features easier.
Grok has a new ‘turn image into video’ feature,
On Your MarksGood news, we have a new benchmark that is not saturated yet that makes AIs look dumb.
I suppose analog clocks are the new hands? I also love noticing that the ‘human baseline’ result was only 89%. Presumably AI will get spatial scanning or something similar at some point soon. Choose Your Fighter
I am one of many that keep not giving Deep Think a fair shot, as I’ve seen several people report it is very good.
Diffusion is slow. Fun With Media Generation
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse SoonThe Dead Internet Theory finally hits home for Sam Altman.
Internet might indeed be dead?
I have two questions for Beff Jezos on this: Could most of your replies pass the Turing test before? How exactly is the solution ‘more AI’? What is the plan? Are you going to put a superior AI-detecting AI in the hands of Twitter? How do you keep it out of the hands of those generating the AI tweets?
I am mostly relatively unworried by Dead Internet Theory as I expect us to be able to adjust, and am far more worried about Dead Humanity Theory, which would also incidentally result in dead internet. The bots are not rising as much as one might have feared, and they are mostly rising in ways that are not that difficult to control. There is still very definitely a rising bot problem. Similarly, I am One place I am increasingly worried about Dead Internet Theory is reviews. I have noticed that many review and rating sources that previously had signal seem to now have a lot less signal. I no longer feel I can trust Google Maps ratings, although I still feel I can mostly trust Beli ratings (who wants my remaining invites?).
Reaction to deepfakes, and their lack of impact, continues to tell us misinformation is demand driven rather than supply driven. Here’s a recent example, Unprompted Attention
Yeah, no. That’s not a thing a prompt can do. Get My Agent On The Line
There are a lot of plausible reasons for this. I have to think a lot of it is a skill issue, that no one is doing a good job with the scaffolding, but it has to be more than that. One thing we underestimated was the importance of weakest links, and exactly how many steps there are in tasks that can trip you up entirely if you don’t handle the obstacle well. There are some obvious next things to try, which may or may not have been actually tried.
They Took Our Jobs
Let me get this straight. You think that AI will be capable of doing all of the other jobs in the world better than humans, such that people no longer work for a living. And your plan is to do a better job than these AIs at capital allocation? Good luck. This is absolutely what all of you sound like when you say ‘AI will never replace [X].’
More general than AI but good to have for reference, A Young Lady’s Illustrated PrimerThe central problem of AI interacting with our current education system is that AI invalidates proof of work for any task that AI can do.
If the AI can do 70th percentile writing, and you want to teach someone 90th percentile writing, then you have the option to teach writing the old way. Except no, it’s not that easy. You have two big problems. Trying to get to 90th percentile requires first getting to 70th percentile, which builds various experiences and foundational skills. Writing at the 80th percentile is still plausibly a lot easier if you use a hybrid approach with a lot of AI assistance.
Thus, you only have the choice to ‘do it the old way’ if the student cooperates, and can still be properly motivated. The current system isn’t trying hard to do that. The other problem is that even if you do learn 90th percentile writing, you still might have a not so valuable skill if AI can do 95th percentile writing. Luckily this is not true for writing, as writing is key to thinking and AI writing is importantly very different from you writing. That’s also the reason this is a problem rather than an opportunity. If the skill isn’t valuable due to AI, I like that I can learn other things instead. The hybrid approach Kling suggests is AI as editor. Certainly some forms of AI editing will be helpful before it makes sense to let the AI go it alone. All signs continue to point to the same AI education scenario: If you want to use AI to learn, it is the best tool of all time for learning. If you want to use AI to not learn, it is the best tool of all time for not learning.
Meanwhile, the entire educational system is basically a deer in headlights. That might end up working out okay, or it might end up working out in a way that is not okay, or even What we do know is that there are a variety of ways we could have mitigated the downsides or otherwise adapted to the new reality, and mostly they’re not happening. Which is likely going to be the pattern. Yes, in many places ‘we’ ‘could,’ in theory, develop ‘good’ or defensive AIs to address various situations. In practice, we probably won’t do it, at minimum not until after we see widespread damage happening, and in many cases where the incentives don’t align sufficiently not even then.
Are the skills of our kids collapsing in the face of AI, or doing so below some age where LLMs got introduced into too soon and interrupted key skill development? My guess is no. But I notice that if the answer was yes (in an otherwise ‘normal’ future lacking much bigger problems), it might be many years before we knew that it happened, and it might take many more years than that for us to figure out good solutions, and then many more years after that to implement them. Kling’s other example is tournament Othello, which he saw transforming into training to mimic computers and memorize their openings and endgames. Which indeed has happened to chess and people love it, but in Othello yeah that seems not fun.
|