---
subject: "The Monday Media Diet with Lindsey Tramuta"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-05-01 10:06:12
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Lindsey Tramuta is a freelance writer (New York Times, Traveler, Bloomberg, among others) based in Paris. I’ve read her work for a long time, and welcomed the re-connection via MMD alum Tell us about yourself. I’m another one of those Americans in Paris but I swear my story isn’t the conceit of any frivolous Netflix shows! I started learning French at age 12 and studied French literature and linguistics in Philadelphia as a college student, never thinking I’d be able to make a permanent move abroad. I came to Paris at the end of 2006 where I completed my last semester of undergrad and never left. Since 2011/2012, I’ve worked as a freelance journalist — initially a bit here and there, in addition to working in advertising, then I made it full-time in 2015. Since, I’ve published two books with Abrams, — Describe your media diet. You might say it oscillates somewhere between balanced and reasonable and toxic or out of control. Which is to say, I read too much, all the time, usually at moments humans are most discouraged from getting sucked into the vortex of the news cycle (first thing in the morning, during what is meant to be a quick work break, moments before bed, etc). I would say that my habits have improved since letting myself spiral with rage, anxiety, and sadness in 2020 and early 2021. I attribute that to spending less time on Twitter (by doing the bare minimum of taking the app off my Home Screen) and making audible reminders to myself that if knowing ALL OF THE THINGS unglues me, I need to make a change. (Thankfully, I’ve never had news alerts or notifications on my phone, so that helps too). As for what I’m consuming: today, I go between major publications and smartly reported newsletters. I enjoy The Guardian’s I read The New York Times, The Atlantic (in print), and occasionally check in with In terms of newsletters, which also leads me to incredibly written and reported stories: I love What’s the last great book you read?
What are you reading now? I’m about to start What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication? If I take The Atlantic, for example: I always start at the beginning with the letters to the editor and the Dispatches. Then, I dive into one of the longform, reported pieces but really consider what mood I’m in to make that choice. With the current issue, I couldn’t seem to motivate myself to read about the Republicans, but I was, unsurprisingly, drawn to the story about anti-wokeness in France. With one of the previous issues, I was so impatient to read the cover story by Clint Smith (about Germany’s remembrance of the Holocaust and what it can teach America about atonement) that I skipped all the beginning pieces. I also regularly read James Parker’s Who should everyone be reading that they’re not? Anything that breaks down the systems in place that hold all of us hostage — I guess that boils down to capitalism and white supremacy. But if I were to pick one, I would encourage both men and women to read Jessica Defino’s newsletter ( What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone? They’re all fairly mainstream or famous! I’ll name the one that brings the most joy: the NYT crossword app, mostly for the Spelling Bee game. Plane or train? Train, with the caveat that during Covid surges in the last two years, I felt far from reassured while riding them (more maskless travelers, far less ventilation). What is one place everyone should visit? Botswana, specifically the Okavango Delta. I’ve never experienced anything more eye-opening and enthralling that being surrounded by wildlife and understanding how certain travel outfitters play a massive role in conservation ( Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into. Let’s just say it was prompted by the release of Dahmer on Netflix. When I first saw it advertised, I couldn’t remember the details of that particular sociopathic serial killer—was he the dismemberer and cannibal or the misogynistic necrophile? My mistake was falling into a chronology of all of Dahmer’s heinous crimes at bedtime. The nightmares were inevitable (and I refuse to watch the series. I did, however, watch Zac Efron as Ted Bundy, the other maniac I was confusing Dahmer with). This is reason enough not to use computers or cell phones before going to sleep! — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Lindsey (LT) — Why is this interesting? is a daily email from Noah Brier & Colin Nagy (and friends!) about interesting things. If you’ve enjoyed this edition, please consider forwarding it to a friend. If you’re reading it for the first time, consider subscribing (it’s free!). |