---
subject: "Meta-analytical effect of economic inequality on well-being or mental health"
from: "Marginal REVOLUTION <donotreply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-12-01 07:49:07
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tyler Cowen", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2466199532210586699", "UNREAD"]
---
Some of us have known this for some time:
Exposure to economic inequality is widely thought to erode subjective well-being and mental health, which carries important societal implications. However, existing studies face reproducibility issues, and theory suggests that inequality only affects individuals in disadvantaged contexts. Here we present a meta-analysis of 168 studies using multilevel data (11,389,871 participants from 38,335 geographical units) identified across 10 bibliographical databases (2000–2022). Contrary to popular narratives, random-effects models showed that individuals in more unequal areas do not report lower subjective well-being (standardized odds ratio (OR+0.05) = 0.979, 95% confidence interval = 0.951–1.008). Moreover, although inequality initially seemed to undermine mental health, the publication-bias-corrected association was null (OR+0.05 = 1.019; 0.990–1.049)
[17]. Meta-analytical effects were smaller than the smallest effect of interest, and specification curve analyses confirmed these results across ≈95% of 768 alternative models. When assessing study quality and certainty of evidence using ROBINS-E and GRADE criteria, ROBINS-E rated 80% of studies at high risk of bias, and GRADE assigned greater certainty to the null effects than to the negative effects. Meta-regressions revealed that the adverse association between inequality and mental health was confined to low-income samples. Moreover, machine-learning analyses[19]indicated that the association with well-being was negative in high-inflation contexts but positive in low-inflation contexts. These moderation effects were replicated using Gallup World Poll data (up to 2 million participants). These findings challenge the view that economic inequality universally harms psychological health and can inform public health policy.
That is [now published in Nature](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=68823f3ccfc905e3a0f4d028ae24e23dad9343551f6a9880825340438dc95eec&blog_id=42693868&post_id=91946&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=d8f6ee6fe723fc58eac7cf138c62a11f&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cubmF0dXJlLmNvbS9hcnRpY2xlcy9zNDE1ODYtMDI1LTA5Nzk3LXo&email_id=0d9a58db181e50e4d283dd93a736d27c), by Nicholas Sommet, et.al., via the excellent [Kevin Lewis](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=66460d816e18950b499cdb537481c318fc74869067dd732b78443685192c9426&blog_id=42693868&post_id=91946&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=f26217ccf70eb1037ce911d21ec432de&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cubmF0aW9uYWxhZmZhaXJzLmNvbS9ibG9nL2RldGFpbC9maW5kaW5ncy1hLWRhaWx5LXJvdW5kdXAvc3RheWluZy1oZWFsdGh5&email_id=0d9a58db181e50e4d283dd93a736d27c).