---
subject: "Repeat great words, repeat them stubbornly"
from: "Henrik Karlsson <escapingflatland@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-04-08 18:42:32
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Henrik Karlsson", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_928547876862665886", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
There are certain works—paintings, films, books, gardens—that have an effect on me that I can most simply describe by saying: in their presence, I remember that I am a human being. In this series, I write about these works. See also, Repeat great words, repeat them stubbornly
Part 1: Los Angeles, 1970I. In “ “What does this word mean here, revolution?” Herbet asked Lewis. “They use it on every page. Here,” Herbert handed him the paper. “Oh, scented oils,” Lewis said. Revolutionary scented oils. It was here, in this liminal California—floating past Taco Bell and Carpet World and Shell Stations in the back of a car, while his country sank under the weight of the Soviet Union—that one of the most memorable characters of 20th-century poetry took shape in the mind of Zbigniew Herbert. II.
With his petty fears, his passing interest in pop art, and his ability to read the news without taking in the scale of the horrors that pass before his eyes, the pathetic Mr. Cogito, nevertheless, struggles earnestly to live ethically—
The Mr Cogito poems, which Herbert began in Los Angeles and continued to write for the rest of his career, are ethical meditations in the form of ironic free verse. Unlike most moral poetry, you don’t feel talked down to by Mr Cogito. It isn’t a sermon. Instead, it feels as if you’re overhearing Herbert talk to himself. You’re listening to Herbert, who would prove himself to be one of the more upright persons of the last century, tell himself what he needs to hear to be that sort of person. III.
That is, the poem is reminding the listener (who I take to be Mr Cogito, or Herbert himself) that he already knows what he should do. He knows where he would go if he had moral courage. He would go back to Poland. Even if it means crossing the “dark boundary” into “nothingness.”
But he knew that if he returned he would have to live in a wire-tapped apartment; his conversations would be recorded and used against him. He knew he would lose the luxuries he had in Los Angeles—the late nights in Polanski’s Hollywood Hills mansion, the long drives with his wife to the Grand Canyon. As someone unwilling to compromise, he wouldn’t just reach normal communist poverty; he would be blocked from all decent-paying work. What Mr Cogito was asking of himself (and of Herbert) was, it can seem, too much. Yet, at the same time, these ethical standards did not feel like demands. It was not a question of what he should do; he wasn’t compelled to return to Poland by an external moral code. It was what he felt was right. Coming from a self-ironic and humble character, the ethical demands of the Mr Cogito poems remind me of IV. “You never drove, Zbigniew?” “Once. I drove once, yes.” “When?” “It was after a meeting of the Underground,” he said. “The boy who drove for me was waiting in the car. But dead. The Nazis shot him. Just one shot, a style they had. I came out later . . . I saw him. I had to learn fast. I pushed the boy over to other side of car seat. I drove. Just one time. With the dead boy beside me. I drove.”
Part 2: Warsaw, 1971I. In a letter to Czeslaw Milosz, a Polish poet who stayed in California and would go on to win the Nobel Prize in 1980, Herbert described the experience of being invited to the Metropol Hotel after returning to Poland:
As Herbert told himself in “
—and still “love the morning spring / the bird with an unknown name the winter oak”. You have to see the world for what it is, in all its brutality, and you need to do this while keeping your heart soft for the beauty that makes it all worthwhile. II. Because Polish literature came of age under occupying regimes, it is perhaps unsurprising that Polish authors have developed a rich tradition of parables. Unable to talk about the Kulturkampf where the Germans tried to eradicate Polish culture, Sienkiewicz wrote about Nero’s persecution of the Christians. Unable to talk about the slow collapse of the Polish state, Kapuściński traveled to Ethiopia and interviewed former courtiers at Haille Sellasse’s court about their downfall. By cutting away the details of the political cage fights of the day, parables lay bare the repeating deep nature of human drama. It can be strangely relieving to realize that what you are seeing around you is nothing new, and that the horrors that humans inflict on each other follow a pattern. But the good thing is that it is not only the darkness that repeats—the proper response, too, has been similar in every era. We might confuse ourselves in the present moment (because of our biases and fears) but what is right and what is wrong is harder to miss when we see the patterns of our times repeated in histories from the Inquisition, a Coup d’Etat in Central Africa, or in a parable about animals who make a revolution on a farm. There is something grounding in this. We know what to do. There is a sense in which Herbert, by writing in allegories, by mirroring his times in the past, is taking the side not of Poland (nor a particular party in Poland), but of the underlying project we call civilization. I mean the ever-unfolding attempt to create a habitable world, a world of positive-sum games, virtues, individual dignity, and stable institutions. Every single decision made by every single human being who ever lived, either made a small push toward this or a small push away. And it is this underlying struggle that Mr Cogito is engaged in. In Barbarian in the Garden, Zbigniew Herbert relates an anecdote about the amphitheater in Arles, France, which can serve as a meta-parable for what Herbert was doing:
As the barbarians, in the form of party officials who cared not about human dignity but power, undermined the institutions and norms that made life bearable, Herbet sought refuge in poems, statues, songs—the remnants of civilization. The barbarians could wiretap him, they could harass him by leaking reports about his stays at West German psychiatric hospitals, they could—as Herbet had seen the Nazis do to one of his friends during the war—rile up pigs until the pigs tore a human body apart. But they could not, by force, take civilization out of him. Civilization had a town in the amphitheater of his mind.
III. In 1980, when the State declares martial law, he will throw his full weight behind the opposition. As a fissure of resistance opens up, his poems will be recited and sung at rallies—they will be sung over and over again as the fissure spreads and branches across the Eastern Bloc until it cracks the entire Soviet Union. But all of this is, when he returns to Poland, still an unknown future. He does not have the luxury of knowing the story will end—against all odds—happily. All he has, as he writes his poems, is uncertainty, fear, his wife, two cats, and a sofa to sleep on in Artur Międzyrzecki’s apartment.
It is in this uncertainty, he must decide how to act. For a sample of Herbert’s poems, see Like all essays on Escaping Flatland, this one was funded by the generosity of subscribers. Thank you! If you find reading the essays meaningful, consider supporting. Thank you Esha, Jack, and J for input on the draft. You are a free subscriber to |