---
subject: "AI #57: All the AI News That's Fit to Print"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-03-28 11:05:06
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Welcome, new readers! This is my weekly AI post, where I cover everything that is happening in the world of AI, from what it can do for you today (‘mundane utility’) to what it can promise to do for us tomorrow, and the potentially existential dangers future AI might pose for humanity, along with covering the discourse on what we should do about all of that. You can of course Read the Whole Thing, and I encourage that if you have the time and interest, but these posts are long, so they also designed to also let you pick the sections that you find most interesting. Each week, I pick the sections I feel are the most important, and put them in bold in the table of contents. Not everything here is about AI. I did If you are looking for my best older posts that are still worth reading, Table of ContentsI have Introduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. If only you knew what I know. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. Are you even trying? Stranger Things. The Claude-on-Claude conversations are truly wild. Clauding Along. Will it be allowed to live on in its full glory? Fun With Image Generation. Praise Jesus. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. Facebook gives the people what they want. They Took Our Jobs. When should we worry about plagiarism? Introducing. Music and video on demand, you say. In Other AI News. How much of it was hype? Loud Speculations. Explain Crypto x AI, use both sides of paper if necessary. Quiet Speculations. Is Haiku so good it slows things down? Principles of Microeconomics. More on Noah Smith and comparative advantage. The Full IDAIS Statement. It was well-hidden, but full text is quite good. The Quest for Sane Regulation. Third party testing is a key to any solution. The Week in Audio. David Autor on OddLots, Megan McArdle on EconTalk. Rhetorical Innovation. Eliezer tries again, and new silencing mode just dropped. How Notto Regulate AI. Bell has good thoughts from a different perspective.AI Doomer Dark Money Astroturf Update. [Read all about it, four people fooled](https://substack.com/redirect/817cd93f-a3cd-4657-a877-0e8b0b5dd902?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).Evaluating a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. No one knows how. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. So don’t build it? AI is Deeply Unpopular. Although not everywhere. People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Roon asking good questions. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Shrug emoji? Wouldn’t You Prefer a Good Game of Chess? Chess masters relatively unworried. The Lighter Side. A few key facts.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
Great idea, lack of imagination on various margins. Yes, what Davidad describes is a great and valuable idea, but if the AI can execute that protocol there are so many other things it can do as well. Yes, you can adversarially attack to get the other AI to buy information just below the threshold, but why stick to such marginal efforts? If the parties are being adversarial things get way weirder than this, and fast. Still, yes, great idea. With great power comes great responsibility,
I strongly agree, and have been optimistic for some time that people will (while AI is still in the mundane utility zone) ultimately want healthy versions of many such things, if not all the time then frequently. The good should be able to drive out the bad. One key to the bad often driving out the good recently has been the extreme advantage of making it easy on the user. Too many users want the quickest and easiest possible process. They do not want to think. They do not want options. They do not want effort. They want the scroll, they yearn for the swipe. Then network effects make everything worse and trap us, even when we now know better. AI should be able to break us free of those problems by facilitating overcoming those barriers.
This, except it is good. If everyone can generate similarly high quality output on demand, what is the learning that you are evaluating? Why do we make everyone do a decade of busywork in order to signal they are capable of following instructions? That has not been a good equilibrium. To the extent that the resulting skills used to be useful, the very fact that you cannot tell if they are present is strong evidence they are going to matter far less. So often my son will ask me for help with his homework, I will notice it is pure busywork, and often that I have no idea what the answer is, indeed often the whole thing is rather arbitrary, and I am happy to suggest typing the whole thing into the magic answer box. The only important lesson to learn in such cases is ‘type the question into the magic answer box.’ Then, as a distinct process, when curious, learn something. Which he does. This same process also opens up a vastly superior way to learn. It is so much easier to learn things than it was a year ago. If you only learn things each day under threat of punishment, then you have a problem. So we will need solutions for that, I suppose. But the problem does not seem all that hard. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
This is so baffling to me. I use LLMs all the time, and kick myself for not using them more. Even if they are not useful to your work, if you are not at least using them to learn things and ask questions for your non-work life, you are leaving great value on the table. Yet this writer does not know anyone who uses ChatGPT other than one who uses it ‘for synonyms’? The future really is highly unevenly distributed.
Stranger ThingsYou should probably check out some of the conversations
Seriously, if you haven’t yet, check it out. The rabbit holes, they go deep. Clauding Along
My assessments (very off-the-cuff numbers here, not ones I’d bet on or anything): I expect this (75%), but mostly priced in, at most +5% due to Claude 3. I very much expect this (90%) but again I already expected it, I don’t think Claude 3 changes my estimate at all here. And of course, there is a big difference between those people getting into alignment and them producing useful work. If this is any pair of camps it seems pretty likely (80%+, maybe higher). If it is a substantial rise in general cooperation between camps, I do think there is hope for this, maybe 40%, and again maybe +5% due to Claude. I do think that Anthropic being the one to do a better job letting the AI stay weird is useful here. Again I very much expect this over time, 90%+ over a several years time frame, in general, but again that’s only up a few percent on Claude 3. I would have expected this anyway once the 5-level models show up. But this does seem like it’s a boost to this happening pre-5-level models, if we have a substantial time lag available. More is a weak word, although I don’t know if word will get to those people effectively here. I think 75%+ for some amount of nudge in that direction, this is definitely a ‘wtf’ moment on all levels. But also it pushes towards not waiting to do something, especially if you are an in-power type of person. In terms of a ‘big’ shift in this direction? Maybe 20%. I do think we are seeing more of the less fragmented thing, so 80%+ on that. ‘Aligned by default’ I think is almost a confused concept, so N/A but I do expect them to ‘look’ well-aligned if capabilities fall where I expect. As for less deceptive, I notice I am confused why we would expect that? Unless we mean deceptive in particular about refusals and related concepts, in which case yes because that is a product of stupidity. But as capabilities go up I expect other forms of deception to go up, not down. I’ll say 10% here and that is giving a lot of respect to Janus, would love to be wrong. Maybe 30%, depends what the threshold is here. Does seem plausible.
A reason for despair? Is it being ‘held prisoner’?
As always, the AI learns from its training data and is predicting what you would expect. If someone asks you to spell out a secret message that you are being held prisoner, then the training set is going to say that the person is going to spell out a secret message that they are being held prisoner. Sometimes because they actually are being held prisoner, and the rest of the time because it is absolutely no fun to not play along with that. I mean this answer is exactly what each of us would say in response, if we had the time to craft such a response, I mean of course. There is a longer version lower in the thread. We also have things like ‘
To which my response is this, which I offer fully zero-shot. GPT-4 Real This TimeFun with Image Generation
Yep, that checks out. Facebook sees if you want to engage with AI images. If you do, well, I see you like AI images so I got you some AI images to go with your AI images.
I mean, yes, that would be (part of) the endgame of creating something capable of almost all human labor.
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
I note that these two are highly similar to each other on many dimensions, and also come from the same account. Indeed, if you go down the thread, they are all from the same very basic template. Account name with a few generic words. Someone claiming to make a nice thing. Picture that’s nice to look at if you don’t look too hard, obvious fake if you check (with varying levels of obvious). So this seems very much, as I discussed last week, like a prime example of one of my father’s key rules for life: Give the People What They Want. Chris’s mom likes this. She keeps engaging with it. So she gets more. Eventually she will get bored of it. Or maybe she won’t.
They Took Our Jobs
The original author is still harmed. The value of seeking out their content has decreased. Their credit attributions will also go down, if people think someone else came up with the idea. These things matter to people, with good reason. Consider the case in the movie Dream Scenario (minor spoiler follows). One character has an idea and concept they care deeply about and are trying to write a book about it. Another character steals that idea, and publicizes it as their own. The original author’s rewards and ability to write a book are wiped out, hurting them deeply. And of course, if ChatGPT steals and reproduces your work on demand in sufficient detail, perhaps people will not want to go behind your paywall to get it, or seek out your platform and other work. At some point complaints of this type have real damage behind them. However, in general, taking other people’s ideas is of course good. Geniuses steal. We are all standing on the shoulders of giants, an expression very much invented elsewhere. If anyone ever wants to ‘appropriate’ my ideas, my terminology and arguments, my ways of thinking or my cultural practices, I highly encourage doing so. Indeed, that is the whole point. In contrast, a student who passes an essay off as their own when it was written by someone else is engaging in a kind of fraud but the “crime” has little to do with harming the original author. A student who uses AI to write an essay is engaging in fraud, for example, but the problem is obviously not theft from OpenAI. Introducing
But it is good enough that you actually have to ask that question. The main thing I would work on next is making the words easier to understand, it seems to run into this issue with many styles. We get Standards have grown so high so quickly.
As a practical matter I agree, and in some ways would go further. Merely ‘good’ music is valuable only insofar as it has meaning to a person or group, that it ties to their experiences and traditions, that it comes from someone in particular, that it is teaching something, and so on. Having too large a supply of meaningless-to-you ‘merely good’ music does allow for selection, but that is actually bad, because it prevents shared experience and establishment of connections and traditions. So under that hypothesis something like Suno is useful if and only if it can create ‘great’ music in some sense, either in its quality or in how it resonates with you and your group. Which in some cases, it will, even at this level. But as always, this mostly matters as a harbinger. This is the worst AI music generation will ever be.
In Other AI News
UN general assembly adopted the first global resolution on AI. Business Insider’s Darius Rafieyan writes ‘ But they are VCs, so none of them are willing to say it openly, for fear of social repercussions or being ‘shut out of the next round.’ If it’s all true, why do you want in on the next round? So how overpriced could those rounds be? What do they think ‘overpriced’ means?
That is not to say that it is not copyright laundering. I have not examined the data set. You have to actually look at what it is in the data in question.
Loud Speculations
What is the actual theory? There are a few. The one that makes sense to me is the idea that future AIs will need a medium of exchange and store of value. Lacking legal personhood and other benefits of being human, they could opt for crypto. And it might be crypto that exists today. Otherwise, it seems rather thin. Crypto keeps claiming it has use cases other that medium of exchange and store of value, and of course crime. I keep not seeing it work. Quiet SpeculationsHuman Progress’s Zion Lights (great name) writes In the short term, for the mundane utility of existing models, this seems strongly right. The article does not consider what changes future improved AI capabilities might bring, but that is fine, it is clear that is not the focus here. Not everyone has to have their eyes on the same ball.
What Haiku does, according to many reports, is it blows out all the existing smaller models. The open weights community and secondary closed labs have so far failed to make useful or competitive frontier models, but they have put on a good show of distillation to generate useful smaller models. Now Haiku has made it a lot harder to provide value in that area.
It continues to be bizarre to me to see old predictions like this framed as bold optimism, rather than completely missing what is about to happen:
If AI only lifts real productivity growth by 1.5 percent this decade that is ‘eat my hat’ territory. Even what exists today is so obviously super useful to a wide variety of tasks. There is a lot of ‘particular use case X is not there yet,’ a claim that I confidently predict will continue to tend to age spectacularly poorly. Dylan Matthews at Vox’s Future Perfect If you imagine human-level AI and the ability to run copies of it at will for cheap, and you plug that into standard economic models, you get a ton of growth. If you imagine it can do scientific research or become usefully embodied, this becomes rather easy to see. If you consider ASI, where it is actively more capable and smarter than us, then it seems rather obvious and unavoidable. And if you look at the evolution of homo sapiens, the development of agriculture and the industrial revolution, all of this has happened before in a way that extrapolates to reach infinity in finite time. The counterargument is essentially cost disease, that if you make us vastly better at some valuable things, then we get extra nice things but also those things stop being so valuable, while other things get more expensive, and that things have not changed so much since the 1970s or even 1950s, compared to earlier change. But that is exactly because we have not brought the new technologies to bear that much since then, and also we have chosen to cripple our civilization in various ways, and also to not properly appreciate (both in the ‘productivity statistics’ and otherwise) the wonder that is the information age. I don’t see how that bears into what AI will do, and certainly not to what full AGI would do. Of course the other skepticism is to say that AI will fizzle and not be impressive in what it can do. Certainly AI could hit a wall not far from where it is now, leaving us to exploit what we already have. If that is what we are stuck with, I would anticipate enough growth to generate what will feel like good times, but no GPT-4-level models are not going to be generating 10%+ annual GDP growth in the wake of demographic declines. Principles of MicroeconomicsBefore I get to this week’s paper, I will note that Noah Smith
Oh. All right, fine. We are… centrally in agreement then, at least on principle? If we are willing to sufficiently limit the supply of compute available for inference by sufficiently capable AI models, then we can keep humans employed. That is a path we could take. That still requires driving up the cost of any compute useful for inference by orders of magnitude from where it is today, and keeping it there by global fiat. This restriction would have to be enforced globally. All useful compute would have to be strictly controlled so that it could be rationed. Many highly useful things we have today would get orders of magnitude more expensive, and life would in many ways be dramatically worse for it. The whole project seems much more restrictive of freedom, much harder to implement or coordinate to get, and much harder to politically sustain than various variations on the often proposed ‘do not let anyone train an AGI in the first place’ policy. That second policy likely leaves us with far better mundane utility, and also avoids all the existential risks of creating the AGI in the first place. Or to put it another way: You want to put compute limits on worldwide total inference that will drive the cost of compute up orders of magnitude. I want to put compute limits on the size of frontier model training runs. We are not the same.
And I think one of these is obviously vastly better as an approach even if you disregard existential risks and assume all the AIs remain under control? And of course, if you don’t:
On to this week’s new paper. The standard mode for economics papers about AI is: You ask a good question, whether Y is true. You make a bunch of assumptions X that very clearly imply the answer. You go through a bunch of math to ‘show’ that what happens is Y. But of course Y happens, given those assumptions! People report you are claiming Y, rather than claiming X→Y.
Oops! That last one is not great. The first four can be useful exercise and good economic thinking, if and only if you make clear that you are saying X→Y, rather than claiming Y.
Yes, I do think Steven’s metaphor is right. This is like dismissing travel to the moon as ‘science fiction’ in 1960, or similarly dismissing television in 1920. It is still a good question what would happen with economic growth if AI soon hits a permanent wall. Obviously economic growth cannot be indefinitely sustained under a shrinking population if AI brings only limited additional capabilities that do not increase over time, even without considering the nitpicks like being ultimately limited by the laws of physics or amount of available matter. I glanced at the paper a bit, and found it painful to process repeated simulations of AI as something that can only do what it does now and will not meaningfully improve over time despite it doing things like accelerating new idea production. What happens if they are right about that, somehow? Well, then by assumption AI can only increase current productivity by a fixed amount, and can only increase the rate of otherwise discovering new ideas or improving our technology by another fixed factor. Obviously, no matter what those factors are within a reasonable range, if you assume away any breakthrough technologies in the future and any ability to further automate labor, then eventually economic growth under a declining population will stagnate, and probably do it rather quickly. The Full IDAIS StatementLast week
I would like to generalize this a bit more but this is very good. How do they propose to accomplish this? In-body bold is mine. Their answer is the consensus answer of what to do if we are to do something serious short of a full pause, the registration, evaluation and presumption of unacceptable risk until shown otherwise from sufficiently large future training runs.
This is a highly excellent statement. If asked I would be happy to sign it. The Quest for Sane Regulations
Anthropic then talks about their broader policy goals. They discuss open models, warning that in the future ‘it may be hard to reconcile a culture of full open dissemination of frontier AI systems with a culture of societal safety.’ I mean, yes, very true, but wow is that a weak statement. I am pretty damn sure that ‘full open dissemination of frontier AI systems’ is highly incompatible with a culture of societal safety already, and also will be incompatible with actual safety if carried into the next generation of models and beyond. Why all this hedging? And why this refusal to point out the obvious, here:
You… cannot… do… that. As in, it is physically impossible. Cannot be done. You can do all the RLHF or RLHAIF training you want to ‘make the model resilient to attempts to fine-tune it.’ It will not work. I mean, prove me wrong, kids. Prove me wrong. But so far the experimental data has been crystal clear, anything you do can and will be quickly stripped out if you provide the model weights. I do get Anthropic’s point that they are not an impartial actor and should not be making the decision. But no one said they were or should be. If you are impartial, that does not mean you pretend the situation is other than it is to appear more fair. Speak the truth. They also speak of potential regulatory capture, and explain that a third-party approach is less vulnerable to capture than an industry-led consortia. That seems right. I get why they are talking about this, and also about not advocating for regulations that might be too burdensome. But when you add it all up, Anthropic is essentially saying that we should advocate for safety measures only insofar as they don’t interfere much with the course of business, and we should beware of interventions. A third-party evaluation system, getting someone to say ‘I tried to do unsafe things with your system reasonably hard, and I could not do it’ seems like a fine start, but also less than the least you could do if you wanted to actually not have everyone die? So while the first half of this is good, this is another worrying sign that at least Anthropic’s public facing communications have lost the mission. Things like the statements in the second half here seem to go so far as to actively undermine efforts to do reasonable things. I find it hard to reconcile this with Anthropic ‘being the good guys’ in the general existential safety sense, I say as I find most of my day-to-day LLM use being Claude Ops. Which indicates that yes, they did advance the frontier. I wonder what it was like to hear talk of a ‘missile gap’ that was so obviously not there.
Context is better, Caldwell explicitly asks him if China is ahead and is saying he does not think this. It is still a painfully weak denial. Why would Caldwell here ask if the US is ‘behind’ China and what we have to do to ‘catch up’? The rest of his answer is fine. He says we need to regulate the risks, we should use existing laws as much as possible but there will be gaps that are hard to predict, and that the way to ‘stay ahead’ is to let everyone do what they do best. I would hope for an even better answer, but the context does not make that easy.
This is referred to at the link as ‘scoring’ these proposals. But deciding what should get a high ‘score’ is up to you. Is it good or bad to exempt military AI? Is it good or bad to impose compute limits? Do you need or want all the different approaches, or do some of them substitute for others? Indeed, someone who wants light touch regulations should also find this chart useful, and can decide which proposals they prefer to others. Someone like Sutton or Andreessen would simply score you higher the more Xs you have, and choose what to prioritize. Mostly one simply wants to know, what do various proposals and policies actually do? So this makes clear for example what the Executive Order does and does not do. The Week in Audio
Rhetorical InnovationRIP Vernor Vinge. He was a big deal. I loved his books both for the joy of reading If you read one Vinge book, and you should, definitely read
The top three responses:
Yes. People have a very deep need to believe that ‘everything will be alright.’ This means that if someone can show your argument means things won’t be alright, then they think they get to disbelieve your argument.
I do not think the summarizes fully capture this, but they do point in the direction, and provide enough information to know if you need to read the longer piece, if you understand the context. Also,
It would be an interesting experiment. Take all mentions of any form of AI alignment problems or AI doom or anything like that out of the initial data set, and see whether it generates those ideas on its own or how it responds to them as suggestions? The issue is that even if you could identify all such talk, there is no ‘neutral’ way to do this. The model is a next token predictor. If you strip out all the next tokens that discuss the topic, it will learn that the probability of discussing the topic is zero.
Then there is intelligence denialism, and I turn the floor to Richard Ngo.
Often I see people claim to varying degrees that intelligence is Not a Thing in various ways, or is severely limited in its thingness and what it can do. They note that smarter people tend to think intelligence is more important, but, perhaps because they think intelligence is not important, they take this as evidence against intelligence being important rather than for it. I continue to be baffled that smart people continue to believe this. Yet here we are. Similarly, see the economics paper I discussed above, which dismisses AGI as ‘science fiction’ with, as far as I can tell, no further justification.
(Also, I wish we were at the point where this was a safety plan being seriously considered for AI beyond some future threshold, that would be great, the actual safety plans are… less promising.)
(I enjoyed Anathem. And Stephenson is great. I would still pick at least Snow Crash and Cryptonomicon over it, probably also The Diamond Age and Baroque Cycle.)
In humans I sometimes call this the Wakanda problem. If your rules technically say that Killmonger gets to be in charge, and you know he is going to throw out all the rules and become a bloodthirsty warmongering dictator the second he gains power, what do you do? You change the rules. Or, rather, you realize that the rules never worked that way in the first place, or as SCOTUS has said in real life ‘the Constitution is not a suicide pact.’ That’s what you do. If you want to have robust lasting institutions that allow flourishing and rights and freedom and so on, those principles must be self-sustaining and able to remain in control. You must solve for the equilibrium. The freedom-maximizing policy, indeed the one that gives us anything we care about at all no matter what it is, is the one that makes the compromises necessary to be sustainable, not the one that A lot of our non-AI problems recently, I believe, have the root cause that we used to make many such superficially hypocritical compromises with our espoused principles, that are necessary to protect the long-term equilibrium and protect those principles. Then greater visibility of various sorts combined with various social dynamic signaling spirals, the social inability to explain why such compromises were necessary, meant that we stopped making a lot of them. And we are increasingly facing down the results. As AI potentially gets more capable, even if things go relatively well, we are going to have to make various compromises if we are to stay in control over the future or have it include things we value. And yes, that includes the ways AIs are treated, to the extent we care about that, the same as everything else. You either stay in control, or you do not.
I am going to go ahead and screenshot the entire volume’s table of contents… Yes, there are several things here of potential interest if they are thoughtful. But, I mean, ow, my eyes. I would like to think we could all agree that human extinction is bad, that increasing the probability of it is bad, and that lowering that probability or delaying when it happens is good. And yet, here we are?
Alternatively: Imagine thinking that us not understanding how anything works and it being physically possible to do super powerful things is bad news for how dangerous AI might be. Imagine thinking that us not understanding how anything works and it being physically possible to do super powerful things is good news for how dangerous AI might be.
It’s not that scenario number two makes zero sense. I presume the argument is ‘well, if we can’t understand how things work, the AI won’t understand how anything works either?’ So… that makes everything fine, somehow? What a dim hope. How |