---
subject: "AI #124: Grokless Interlude"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-07-10 12:39:11
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Last night, on the heels of There are plenty of other things to look into while we wait for that. I am also not yet covering Table of Contents[Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/cbd69ac1-00d6-445f-9ab2-3336935e80e6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Who is 10x more productive?[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/a1621ea5-0d4a-4639-a81a-2dd96a3ecaa2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Branching paths.[Huh, Upgrades.](https://substack.com/redirect/796f1d94-71e0-4a63-ac11-53ac0e12eb01?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)DR in the OAI API, plus a tool called Study Together.[Preserve Our History.](https://substack.com/redirect/0e4fae9f-4a55-4c80-912b-b0ace71f3001?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)What are the barriers to availability of Opus 3?[Choose Your Fighter.](https://substack.com/redirect/02f9e2f8-e889-443f-8ad3-a84f9fc2d20c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)GPT-4o offers a handy chart across labs.[Wouldn’t You Prefer A Good Game of Chess.](https://substack.com/redirect/cd97f76d-572e-4c45-bb2e-19953a34c138?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Iterated prisoner’s dilemma.[Fun With Media Generation.](https://substack.com/redirect/65928c8e-3598-4bb5-aeb9-376ebffe54e9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Scott Alexander declares victory.[No Grok No](https://substack.com/redirect/4f34cda0-257c-4d5a-b25a-6c47234ad671?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/4f34cda0-257c-4d5a-b25a-6c47234ad671?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Some follow-ups on the mechanisms behind what happened.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon.](https://substack.com/redirect/7d990fbe-b214-4706-8596-1ace9b5aa731?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)You are the target.[Unprompted Attention.](https://substack.com/redirect/1ed121eb-ae24-4c81-81a1-21a3decd0652?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The art of going up a meta level.[Overcoming Bias](https://substack.com/redirect/d42572ce-89ff-40f8-9108-caf4b6cad726?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/d42572ce-89ff-40f8-9108-caf4b6cad726?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The AIs discriminate, but in the other direction.[Get My Agent On The Line.](https://substack.com/redirect/61b65633-d53a-453a-aff4-db7aea8f8f9b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)That is totally an AI agent, not a human, for real.[They Took Our Jobs.](https://substack.com/redirect/f2663c6a-fd91-4e22-a1a7-7fded5129742?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The illusion that which jobs AI takes is up to the humans.[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/e62f8e77-e736-48cb-960e-aa4eede50860?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A design contest, and a technical AI safety tender offer.[Introducing.](https://substack.com/redirect/cdb26f81-c913-41fa-94be-a1cf04f46aee?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Biomni, accelerating medical discoveries with Claude.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/91fa185e-764d-4ad1-be8b-764b39c01c05?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)OpenAI gets actual security, Ilya runs all of SSI.[Show Me the Money](https://substack.com/redirect/55869152-54e4-411e-a0fe-2956d61c69d7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/55869152-54e4-411e-a0fe-2956d61c69d7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Another perspective on the battle for Siri.[The Explanation Is Always Transaction Costs.](https://substack.com/redirect/81585193-d21b-4822-b37d-c23578f065ff?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)What happens if they go to ~zero?[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/eeab476d-eebd-4ecb-814a-0b53c353ebcd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)AI is not priced in.[Genesis.](https://substack.com/redirect/20f17ba9-1398-4f04-aeca-a11a74a88897?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A very positive review of the new book by Schmidt, Mundle & Kissinger.[The Quest for Sane Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/311b43ca-cd2f-427e-aeb6-84d888569bf1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Anthropic offers a transparency framework.[Chip City.](https://substack.com/redirect/6a30daad-8ecd-4672-b4ea-593d65563295?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)China wants to build one, using Nvidia chips it isn’t supposed to have.[Choosing The Right Regulatory Target.](https://substack.com/redirect/03aa17c2-1b1a-44e4-9a24-304b32db6305?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Regulating models versus regulating labs.[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/1c7aa241-0490-4f93-82d0-a7b5aefa753e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Ryan Greenblatt, and a video presentation of AI 2027.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/ebd2f91d-7739-44be-81d7-0cdb76740d6b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)We have a note.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/c7f5c335-ba40-4c83-a726-7f579d615d18?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Some proposed evals.[Don’t Worry We Have Human Oversight.](https://substack.com/redirect/a291d5a2-444f-4972-9f11-971eb9f8a95b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Is it meaningful? Can it be?[Don’t Worry We Have Chain Of Thought Monitoring.](https://substack.com/redirect/e9b1056c-7335-4337-b1a1-1e199552e0fb?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Will that hold up?[Sycophancy Is Hard To Fix.](https://substack.com/redirect/366293b0-e6d4-4d59-9687-3a3a8f076c40?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A system prompt can help some, but only some.[The Lighter Side.](https://substack.com/redirect/dc7f14c6-98f2-4254-ac5b-d10719e4abf8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Secrets revealed.
Language Models Offer Mundane UtilityExistence proof:
Our computers are remarkably good in so many ways.
There are a lot of lessons one can take from the flaws in Star Trek’s predictions here. What are we using these amazing computers for at this point? Note that this is largely a statement about the types of places Roon goes.
I noticed I was more surprised that Claude had so little market share even at those conferences, rather than being surprised by the more general point of tons of chatbot usage.
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
When this happens, what should happen to the lawyers involved?
Yes, AI can have good bedside manner, but there are limits, yet somehow this had to be said out loud:
Huh, Upgrades
Deep Research API calls are not cheap in relative terms, but if used well they are still very cheap in absolute terms, and there are various good workflows available. I certainly would expect the correct method to often involve generating the report, and then feeding that report into another API call for analysis and extraction, and so on.
Preserve Our History
In general my instinct is to try and pass costs on to customers and let the customers sort it out. As in, if a researcher or other power user wants to spin up an instance and use it, why not charge them in a way that directly reflects that cost plus a buffer? Then the use happens if and only if it is worthwhile. In terms of spikey demand and cascading failures, an obvious solution is to cut some users off entirely during spikes in demand. If you don’t want to allocate by price, an obvious first brainstorm is that you avoid starting new sessions, so those who are already engaged can continue but API keys that haven’t queried Opus recently get turned down until things are fixed. The more general conclusion is that AI economics are vastly better the more you can scale and smooth out demand. As for making it an open model, the stated reason they can’t is this would reveal the architecture:
Janus and the related crowd care most about Opus 3,
Choose Your FighterUnprompted over in discord, Wouldn’t You Prefer A Good Game of Chess
This was full Darwin Game mode, with round robin phrases with 10% termination chance of each two-way interaction per round, after which agents reproduce based on how well they scored in previous phrases. The initial pool also had ten canonical opponents: Tit for Tat, Generous Tit for Tat, Suspicious Tit for Tat, Grim Trigger, Win-Stay Lose-Shift, Prober (Tit for Two Tats), Random, Gradual (n defections in response to the nth defection), Alternator and a complex Bayesian that tries to infer opponent type. Success in such situations is very sensitive to initial conditions, rules sets and especially the pool of opponents. Mostly, beyond being fun, we learn that the LLMs pursued different reasonable strategies. Fun With Media Generation
No Grok NoTo follow up on
Here’s all I’ve seen from Elon Musk so far about what happened.
Uh huh. Then again, there is some truth to that explanation. We ended up in ‘MechaHitler’ not because they turned up the Hitler coefficient but because the humans invoked it and kept turning it up, because given the opportunity of course they did and then the whole thing got self-reinforcing. There were still some quite bad posts, such as the ‘noticing’ that still seem entirely unprovoked. And also provocation is not really an excuse given the outputs involved. If one is wondering why Linda Yaccarino might possibly have decided it was finally time to seek new opportunities,
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
This is a predatory and misaligned business model, and one assumes the models trained for it will be misaligned themselves. For now there are claimed limits, only sending messages after initial contact and stopping after 14 days. For now.
Inoculation can hopefully be helpful.
Unprompted AttentionHere’s a simple strategy worth pointing out periodically, I definitely underuse it:
Another strategy is to do the opposite of this:
I am surprised here but only by the magnitude of the effect. Overcoming Bias
Explicit reasoning contains no (race or gender) bias across models. Results do, when you attach details.
Those concerned with ‘AI ethics’ worry about bias in ways that would favor white and male candidates. Instead, they found the opposite. This is informative, especially about the nature of the training data, as Sam notes by default LLMs trained on the internet end up ‘pretty woke’ in some ways. Oliver also noted that this modest amount of discrimination in this direction might well be what the labs prefer given the asymmetric pressures they face on this. They note that the behavior is ‘suppressed’ in the sense that, like in the training data, the models have learned to do this implicitly rather than explicitly. I’m not sure how similar that is to ‘suppression.’ They were unable to fix this with prompting, but they could fix it by finding the directions inside the model for race and gender and then suppressing them. Get My Agent On The LineSo far, adaptation of AI agents for practical tasks
This is framed as ‘they are all hype’ and high failure rates are noted at office tasks. Certainly things are moving relatively slowly, and many early attempts are not going great and were premature or overhyped. It makes sense that many companies outright faked them to get investment and attention, although I am surprised it is that many. The real agents are still coming, but my estimates of how long that will take have gotten longer. They Took Our Jobs
Essentially everyone I respect on the jobs question ends up with some version of this. Those who then project that jobs will be fine are not feeling the AGI, and think we will stop before we get to Phase 2 or Phase 3.
We all affirm that
Eliezer’s concern here cuts both ways? I do think that lack of dynamism will make us slower to reallocate labor, but it also could be why we don’t automate away the jobs. Remember that
The humans do not want to be unemployed. The humans want to do the fun things. The humans want to have a future for their grandchildren and they want to not all die. It is great that humans want these things. I also want these things. But how are we going to get them? I continue to be dismayed how many people really do mean the effect on jobs, but yes it is worth noting that our response so far to the AI age has been the opposite of worrying about jobs:
I see it as totally fine to have policy respond to job disruptions after there are job disruptions, once we see what that looks like. Whereas there are other AI concerns where responding afterwards doesn’t work. But also it is troubling that the policy people not only are focusing on the wrong problem, the response has been one that only makes that particular problem more acute. Get Involved
I’m not endorsing taking this job, but it is extremely funny and a good move that X Careers
Introducing
Completes wearable bioinformatics analysis in 35 minutes versus 3 weeks for human experts (800x faster) Achieves human-level performance on LAB-bench DbQA and SeqQA benchmarks Designs cloning experiments validated as equivalent to a 5+ year expert work in blind testing Automates joint analysis of large-scale scRNA-seq and scATAC-seq data to generate novel hypotheses Reaches state-of-the-art performance on Humanity's Last Exam and 8 biomedical tasks
In Other AI News
In case you weren’t already assuming something similar,
Grace notes that, similar to Show Me the Money
That doesn’t mean paying an arbitrarily large amount. It seems obviously correct for Anthropic to ask to be paid quite a lot, as what they are offering is valuable, and to push hard enough that there is some chance of losing the contract. But I don’t think Anthropic should push hard enough that it takes that big a risk of this, unless Apple is flat out determined that it doesn’t pay at all. Oh look, OpenAI is once again Correction of a previous misunderstanding:
The Explanation Is Always Transaction CostsWhy don’t various things happen? Transaction costs. Well, Dean Ball asks,
I definitely count these questions as part of ‘AI policy’ to the extent you want to impose new policies and rules upon all this, or work to refine and remove old ones. And we definitely think about the best way to do that. The main reason us ‘AI policy’ folks don’t talk much about it is that these are the kinds of problems that don’t kill us, and that we are good at fixing once we encounter them, and thus I see it as missing the more important questions. We can work out these implementation details and rights assignments as we go, and provided we are still in control of the overall picture and we don’t get gradual disempowerment issues as a result it’ll be fine. I worry about questions like ‘what happens if we give autonomous goal-directed AI agents wallets and let them loose on the internet.’ Autonomous commerce is fascinating but the primary concern has to be loss of control and human disempowerment, gradual or otherwise. Thus I focus much less on the also important questions like market design and rights assignments within such markets if we manage to pull them off. It is good to think about such policy proposals, Quiet SpeculationsThere is lots of reasonable disagreement about the impact of AI, but one thing I am confident on is that it is not properly priced in. A common mistake is to see someone, here Dwarkesh Patel, disagreeing with the most aggressive predictions, and interpreting that as a statements that ‘AI hype is overblown’ rather than ‘actually AI is way bigger than the market or most people think, I simply don’t think it will happen as quickly as transforming the entire world in the next few years.’
Also, it’s rather insane the standards people hold AI to before saying ‘hype’? Apologies for picking on this particular example.
Can you imagine, in any other realm, saying ‘the last wave of progress we had was more than three months ago’ and therefore it is all hype? I mean seriously, what? It also is not true. Since then we have gotten Opus 4 and o3-pro, and GPT-4.5 was disappointing and certainly no GPT-5 but it wasn’t bad. And if the worst does happen exactly as described here and the market does only 3x every year, I mean, think about what that actually means? Also, it is highly amusing that Ilya leaving to create SSI, which was founded on the thesis of directly creating superintelligence before their first product, is being cited as a reason to believe long timelines. Sorry, what?
Everyday use as a measurement is meaningful but it is backwards looking, and largely a measure of diffusion and consumer preferences.
Willingness to pay per query on a consumer level is especially weird because it is largely based on alternatives and what people are used to. I don’t expect this to track the things we care about well. I agree that practical progress has been very high. Current systems are a lot more valuable and useful in practice than they were even a year ago. I disagree that there is little room for future progress even if we confine ourselves to the narrow question of individual practical user queries of the types currently asked. I do not think that even on current queries, LLM answers are anywhere close to optimal, including in terms of taking into account context and customizing to a given user and their situation. Also, we ask those questions, in those ways, exactly because those are the answers LLMs are currently capable of giving us. Alexa is terrible, but it gives the correct answer on almost all of my queries because I have learned to mostly ask it questions it can handle, and this is no different. There’s also the diffusion and learning curve questions. If we are measuring usage, then ‘AI progress’ occurs as people learn to use AI well, and get into habits of using it and use it more often, and adapt to take better advantage. That process has barely begun. So by these types of measures, we will definitely see a lot of progress, even within the role of AI as a ‘mere tool’ which has the job of providing correct answers to a fixed set of known essentially solved problems. On top of that, if nothing else, we will see greatly improved workflows and especially use of agents and agency on a local practical level. GenesisEric Schmidt, Henry Kissinger and Craig Mundie That certainly sounds self-recommending on many levels, if only to see where their minds went. I appreciate the willingness to consider a broad range of distinct scenarios, sometimes potentially overlapping, sometimes contradictory. Not all of it will map to a plausible future reality, but that’s universal.
Going only from these notes, this seems like an attempt to ‘feel the AGI’ and take it seriously on some level, but largely not an attempt to feel the ASI and take it seriously or to properly think about which concepts actually make physical sense, or take the full existential risks seriously? If we do get full AGI within 18 months, I would expect ASI shortly thereafter. As in, there are then passages summarized as ‘we will talk to animals, but be fearful lest the AI categorize us as animals’ and ‘the merge.’ The Quest for Sane Regulations
I presume we should expect it to be endorsed. I have not analyzed the documents. This is not what wanting to win the AI race or build out our energy production looks like:
Sometimes I think we can best model Anthropic as a first-rate second-rate company. They’re constantly afraid of being seen as too responsible or helpful. This still puts them well ahead of the competition. The mission here is the very definitely of ‘the least you can do’: What is the maximally useful set of requirements that imposes no substantial downsides whatsoever? Thus they limit application to the largest model developers, with revenue of $100 million or capital expenditures on the order of $1 billion. I agree. I would focus on capital expenditures, because you can have zero revenue and still be going big (see SSI) or you can have giant revenue and not be doing anything relevant. The core ideas are simple: Create a secure development framework (they abbreviate it SDFs, oh no yet another different acronym but that’s how it goes I guess). Make it public. Publish a system card. Protect whistleblowers. Have transparency standards. What does this framework have to include? Again, the bare minimum:
Then companies have to disclose which such framework they are using, and issue the system card ‘at time of deployment,’ including describing any mitigations with protection for trade secrets. I notice that OpenAI and Google are playing games with what counts as time of deployment (or a new model) so we need to address that. Enforcement would be civil penalties sought by the attorney general for material violations or false or materially misleading statements, with a 30-day right to cure. That period seems highly generous as a baseline, although fine in most practical situations. So this is a classic Anthropic proposal, a good implementation of the fully free actions. Which is highly valuable. It would not be remotely enough, but I would be happy to at least get that far, given the status quo. Chip City
Choosing The Right Regulatory TargetDean Ball (who wrote this before joining the US Office of Science and Technology Policy) As I’ve explained many times, targeting AI use cases flat out does not work. The important dangers down the road lie at the model level. Once you create highly capable models and diffuse access to them, yelling ‘you’re not allowed to do the things we don’t want you to do’ is not going to get it done, and will largely serve only to prevent us from enjoying AI’s benefits. This post argues that use-based regulation can be overly burdensome, which is true, but the more fundamental objection is that it simply will not get the central jobs done. The paper offers good versions of many of the fundamental arguments for why use-based regulation won’t work, pointing out that things like deception and misalignment don’t line up with use cases, and that risks manifest during model training. Anticipating the dangerous use cases will also be impractical. And of course, that use-based regulation ends up being more burdensome rather than less, with the example being the potential disaster that was Texas’ proposed HB 1709. This paper argues, as Dean has been advocating for a while, that the model layer is a ‘decidedly suboptimal regulatory target,’ because the models are ‘scaffolded’ and otherwise integrated into other software, so one cannot isolate model capabilities, and using development criteria like training compute can quickly become out of date. Dean instead suggests targeting particular large AI developers. This is indeed asking the right questions and tackling the right problem. We agree the danger lies in the future more capable frontier models, that one of the key goals right now is to put us in a position to understand the situation so we can act when needed but also we need to impose some direct other requirements, and the question is what is the right way to go about that. I especially appreciated the note that dangerous properties will typically arise while a model is being trained. The post raises good objections to and difficulties of targeting models. I think you can overcome them, and that one can reasonably be asked to anticipate what a given model can allow via scaffolding compared to other models, and also that scaffolding can always be added by third parties anyway so you don’t have better options. In terms of targeting training compute or other inputs, I agree it is imperfect and will need to be adjusted over time but I think it is basically fine in terms of avoiding expensive classification errors.
The first core argument is that training compute is an insufficiently accurate proxy of model capabilities, in particular because o1 and similar reasoning models sidestep training compute thresholds, because you can combine different models via scaffolding, and we can anticipate other RL techniques that lower pretraining compute requirements, and that there are many nitpicks one can make about exactly which compute should count and different jurisdictions might rule on that differently. They warn that requirements might sweep more and more developers and models up over time. I don’t think this is obvious, it comes down to the extent to which risk is about relative capability versus absolute capability and various questions like offense-defense balance, how to think about loss of control risks in context and what the baselines look like and so on. There are potential future worlds where we will need to expand requirements to more labs and models, and worlds where we don’t, and regardless of how we target the key is to choose correctly here based on the situation. Ideally, a good proxy would include both input thresholds and also anticipated capability thresholds. As in, if you train via [X] it automatically counts, with [X] updated over time, and also if you reasonably anticipate it will have properties [Y] or observe properties [Y] then that also counts no matter what. Alas, various hysterical objections plus the need for simplicity and difficulty in picking the right [Y] have ruled out such a second trigger. The obvious [Y] is something that substantively pushes the general capabilities frontier, or the frontier in particular sensitive capability areas. They raise the caveat that this style of trigger would encourage companies to not investigate or check for or disclose [Y] (or, I would add, to not record related actions or considerations), a pervasive danger across domains in similar situations. I think you can mostly deal with this by not letting them out of this and requiring third party audits. It’s a risk, and a good reason to not rely only on this style of trigger, but I don’t see a way around it. I also don’t understand how one gets away from the proxy requirement by targeting companies. Either you have a proxy that determines which models count, or you have a proxy that determines which labs or companies count, which may or may not be or include ‘at least one of your individual models counts via a proxy.’ They suggest instead a form of aggregate investment as the threshold, which opens up other potential problem cases. All the arguments about companies posing dangers don’t seem to me to usefully differentiate between targeting models versus companies. I also think you can mostly get around the issue of combining different models, because mostly what is happening there is either some of the models are highly specialized or some of them are cheaper and faster versions that are taking on less complex task aspects, or some combination thereof, and it should still be clear which model or models are making the important marginal capability differences. And I agree that of course the risk of any given use depends largely on the use and associated implementation details, but I don’t see a problem there. A second argument, that is very strong, is that we have things we need frontier AI labs to do that are not directly tied to a particular model, such as guarding their algorithmic secrets. Those requirements will indeed need to attach to the company layer. Their suggested illustrative language is to cover developers spending more than [$X] in a calendar year on AI R&D, or on compute, or it could be disjunctive. They suggest this will ‘obviously avoid covering smaller companies’ and other advantages, but I again don’t see much daylight versus sensible model-level rules, especially when they then also trigger (as they will need to) some company-wide requirements. And indeed, they suggest a model-level trigger that then impacts at the company level, which seems totally fine. If anything, the worry would be that this imposes unnecessary requirements on non-frontier other work at the same company. They note that even if entity-based regulation proves insufficient due to proliferation issues rendering it underinclusive, it will still be necessary. Fair enough. They then have a brief discussion of the substance of the regulations, noting that they are not taking a position here. I found a lot of the substance here to be strong, with my main objection being that it seems to protest the differences between model and company level rules far too much. The post illustrated that (provided the defenses against corporate-level shenanigans are robust) there is in my mind little practical difference between company-based and model-based regulatory systems other than that the company-based systems would then attach to other models at the same company. The problems with both are things we can overcome, and mostly the same problems apply to both. In the end, which one to focus on is a quibble. I am totally fine, indeed perfectly happy, doing things primarily at the corporate level if this makes things easier. Compare this contrast both to use-based regulation, and to the current preference of many in government to not regulate AI at all, and even to focus on stopping others from doing so. The Week in Audio
Rhetorical Innovation
Everyone’s favorite curious caveman says the obvious (link goes to longer clip):
I rated the note as helpful.
Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is DifficultHow you think about this statement depends on one’s theory of the case. For current AI models, I do think it is centrally correct, although I would change ‘might not be sufficient’ to ‘is not sufficient,’ I see no reason for copium here.
Various replies nitpicked ‘people’ versus AI, or ‘train’ versus ‘raise.’
This from Emmett seems obviously wrong to me? Very obviously lots of forms of training (that are distinct from ‘raising’) make people more virtuous and wiser, to the extent that this distinction is meaningful in context. Training ‘to be good’ in a general sense is neither strictly necessary, nor is it sufficient. But it makes your life a hell of a lot better across the board at anything like current capability levels, and you should very obviously do it, and it seems like at most one lab is doing plausibly enough of this.
Apollo failing does not doom other efforts, and certainly we can read various signs, but we should be broadly skeptical that it will be useful to rely on such tests.
Don’t Worry We Have Human OversightIn many cases meaningful human oversight is impractical.
Don’t Worry We Have Chain Of Thought MonitoringThis seems like a good paper, but I did not treat it as the good news they seemed to?
That all makes sense and matches my previous understanding, also I note that there still seems to be some amount of unfaithfulness going on here? If you don’t need the CoT to figure out the answer, because the task is well below what the full model is capable of doing or the task does not benefit from CoT, then the CoT won’t correlate all that well with the answer, also it isn’t causing the answer. If you need the CoT to figure out (cause) the answer, then the CoT will contain the work done to figure out the answer. By far the easiest and most effective way to do this in such cases, at the moment, results in that CoT being faithful and legible. So by default, that will be what happens. That does not tell you about what would happen if the model was given cause, on whatever level, to evade monitoring.
I don’t know what counts or should count as ‘a lot.’ I do know that it seems likely we will apply ‘a lot’ of fine tuning in the future, and that if we are relying on CoT monitoring that a lot of it will serve as this kind of training. I also notice that, yes, the first strategy that it found was one that the authors did not expect, a different way to reason one way while being seen as reasoning the other way. Think about all the ways humans have adapted to defend against similar things, and how very high a price we pay to obscure large parts of our thinking, including from ourselves, to avoid detection. That is how this game works. My expectation is that if you rely on CoT monitoring in ways that exert optimization pressure, it will quickly stop working. Sycophancy Is Hard To Fix
I see there being two closely related but distinct threat models here. Sycophancy arises because humans are imperfect graders and respond well to sycophancy at least locally, so if you train on human feedback you get sycophancy. Also sycophancy is ever-present in real life and thus all over the training data. Sycophancy is good for business, so AI companies often are fine with it, or even actively turn that dial looking back at the audience for approval like contestants on The Price is Right.
The first problem is not so easy to technically fix, either with a system prompt or otherwise. Even if you decide sycophancy is bad and you don’t want it, to fully get rid of it you’d have to change everything about how the training works. This is also one of the areas where I have run the experiment. My entire Claude system prompt is an extended version of ‘do not by sycophantic.’ It… helps. It is definitely not 100% effective. The Lighter Side
Important directionally correct statement:
We don’t know what Patrick was responding to here, but yeah:
You're currently a free subscriber to |