---
subject: "Contra Skolnick On Schizophrenia Microbes"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-06-30 13:41:27
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Stephen Skolnick is a gut microbiome expert blogging at Scientists think schizophrenia is genetic because it obviously runs in families But the twin concordance rates are pretty low - if your identical twin has schizophrenia, there’s only about a 30% chance that you get it too. Is that really what we would expect from a genetic disease? Also, scientists have looked for schizophrenia genes, and can only find about 1-2% as many as they were expecting. So maybe we should ask how a disease can run in families without being genetic. Gut microbiota provide an answer: most people “catch” their gut microbiome from their parents. Studies find that schizophrenics have very high levels of a gut bacterium called Ruminococcus gnavus. This bacterium secretes psychoactive chemicals. Constant exposure to these chemicals might be the cause of schizophrenia.
I disagree with all of this. Going in order: 1: Scientists think schizophrenia is genetic because it obviously runs in families This is not why scientists think schizophrenia is genetic, but we’ll get back to this later. 2: But the twin concordance rates are pretty low - if your identical twin has schizophrenia, there’s only about a 30% chance that you get it too. Is that really what we would expect from a genetic disease? This is exactly the concordance rate you should expect from a polygenic condition where 80% of the variance is explained by genes. I discuss this example in 3: Also, scientists have looked for schizophrenia genes, and can only find about 1-2% as many as they were expecting. This is the “missing heritability” problem, common to all polygenic traits. See my In either case, there’s nothing at all unusual about schizophrenia, and it would be surprising if every single trait - from height to educational attainment - was determined by gut microbes. 4: So maybe we should ask how a disease can run in families without being genetic. Gut microbiota provide an answer: most people “catch” their gut microbiome from their parents. This doesn’t work. Going back to the first claim: scientists don’t think schizophrenia is genetic just because it runs in families. They think it’s genetic because they’ve done twin studies and find that identical twins share a schizophrenia diagnosis more often than fraternal twins. Skolnick describes microbiological inheritance as:
This doesn’t describe a process which could be expected to differ between identical and fraternal twins! Skolnick could add an epicycle: maybe identical twins have more similar microbiomes because their identical genes caused identical gastrointestinal ecologies. But then schizophrenia is determined by genes again (albeit indirectly) and it should show up as genetic in GWASes (ie they should pick up the genes for having a certain type of gastrointestinal ecology suitable to schizophrenia-causing bacteria, and identify them as schizophrenia genes). There might be some complexities around gene x environment interactions, but it wouldn’t look like the simple pattern of missing heritability that Skolnick uses as his star evidence that schizophrenia is “not genetic”. This is just one example of how microbiological inheritance doesn’t exactly track genetic inheritance - and whenever we see a difference, schizophrenia tracks the genetic rather than the environmental pattern. So for example, Finally, 5: Studies find that schizophrenics have very high levels of a gut bacterium called Ruminococcus gnavus. The study that Skolnick cites to establish this is Vasileva, Yang, and Baker, All the schizophrenics investigated in VYB were on antipsychotic medication. Previous studies have
Even though this is right in the abstract and completely torpedoes Skolnick’s theory that the increased microbe population causes the schizophrenia, he doesn’t mention any of this in his post! If some other study finds unusual gut microbiota even in untreated schizophrenia, will this support Skolnick’s theory? Not really. Schizophrenics differ from the general population on a wide variety of health outcomes - for example, they have (during residency, I met a schizophrenic patient who, whenever he wasn’t restrained, would eat as much glass as he could until he got internal bleeding and had to go to the emergency room. I don’t know what kind of microbiome disruption this causes, but I bet there aren’t many non-schizophrenics who have it.)
6: This bacterium secretes psychoactive chemicals. Constant exposure to these chemicals might be the cause of schizophrenia. Schizophrenia doesn’t resemble exposure to psychoactive chemicals. Just to give one example, schizophrenics are normal (or only slightly weird) until around age 18-30, then become psychotic over the course of a few weeks or months. According to the consensus theory of schizophrenia, this is because schizophrenia In fact, it doesn’t really make sense to posit a single cause for schizophrenia at all. For example, we know that People have been looking for magic bullet explanations of schizophrenia for a hundred years. It’s time to admit there aren’t any. Or if there are, they’ll have to do better than this. You're currently a free subscriber to |