---
subject: "AI #108: Straight Line on a Graph"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-03-20 13:48:07
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
The x-axis of the graph is time. The y-axis of the graph is the log of ‘how long a software engineering task can AIs reliably succeed at doing.’ The straight line says the answer doubles roughly every 7 months. Yikes. Upcoming: The comment period on America’s AI strategy is over, so we can finish up by looking at Google’s and MIRI’s and IFP’s proposals, as well as Hollywood’s response to OpenAI and Google’s demands for unlimited uncompensated fair use exceptions from copyright during model training. I’m going to pull that out into its own post so it can be more easily referenced. There’s also a draft report on frontier model risks from California and it’s… good? Also upcoming: My take on OpenAI’s new future good-at-writing model. Table of Contents[Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/3d6810ce-6721-44a8-8c86-ab67bf01db98?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)I want to, is there an app for that?[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/1d98e438-b429-4e86-89ca-2976eaa2f27b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Agents not quite ready yet.[Huh, Upgrades.](https://substack.com/redirect/43fd13e2-ff32-43c8-8d2e-585db101d3b9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Anthropic efficiency gains, Google silently adds features.[Seeking Deeply.](https://substack.com/redirect/cb16a521-7733-41dc-b283-e1562e3bc135?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The PRC gives DeepSeek more attention. That cuts both ways.[Fun With Media Generation.](https://substack.com/redirect/9a4f65bd-5e22-416a-9958-149614739b20?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Fun with Gemini 2.0 Image Generation.[Gemma Goals.](https://substack.com/redirect/2d28a5d3-c768-45ef-8b9c-91bed65709e2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Hard to know exactly how good it really is.[On Your Marks.](https://substack.com/redirect/c86db86c-1006-4559-b175-90dd460be879?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Tic-Tac-Toe bench is only now getting properly saturated.[Choose Your Fighter.](https://substack.com/redirect/f4daf8f4-ece8-4818-91af-4853b91ea643?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)o3-mini disappoints on Epoch retest on frontier math.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon.](https://substack.com/redirect/ff3391d6-7009-41b3-b3a7-8a4bddf78b96?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Don’t yet use the bot, also don’t be the bot.[Copyright Confrontation.](https://substack.com/redirect/941084c6-6719-4b83-813d-8779b3bfa367?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Removing watermarks has been a thing for a while.[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/1a5bab38-5bbe-4a3a-a296-0475be140e6b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Anthropic, SaferAI, OpenPhil.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/678c4e56-b4b1-48eb-ac0a-8b4af8b49bf3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Sentience leaves everyone confused.[Straight Lines on Graphs](https://substack.com/redirect/79f8bab4-49eb-4979-8f96-37c066600e73?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/79f8bab4-49eb-4979-8f96-37c066600e73?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)METR finds reliable SWE task length doubling rapidly.[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/05108345-5b10-4684-9995-39d30276e55f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Various versions of takeoff.[California Issues Reasonable Report.](https://substack.com/redirect/1bd1abc8-2e19-48e3-9024-e09535cb5718?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)I did not expect that.[The Quest for Sane Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/fcec50a8-a98c-4aae-8876-51fb48f1f16d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Mostly we’re trying to avoid steps backwards.[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/d55ab63b-f858-481b-854c-5ae4f5c14bb0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Esban Kran, Stephanie Zhan.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/a04a1d6d-3ef0-4b76-adce-16fad3d86f38?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Things are not improving.[We’re Not So Different You and I](https://substack.com/redirect/570c71ef-97ab-4aed-888c-b30e43732c7d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/570c71ef-97ab-4aed-888c-b30e43732c7d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)An actually really cool alignment idea.Anthropic Warns ASL-3 Approaches. Danger coming. We need better evaluations. [Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/264a2bed-775d-47bf-bb9b-f9f72131a76d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)It’s all happening.[People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/f0905260-9ae1-418d-814f-a9fa4e43fd4c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Killing all other AIs, too.[The Lighter Side.](https://substack.com/redirect/a600f12a-7f40-408e-a794-1bc5902f4a28?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Not exactly next level prompting.
Language Models Offer Mundane UtilityArnold Kling spends 30 minutes trying to figure out how to leave a WhatsApp group, requests an AI app to do things like things like this via the ‘I want to’ app,
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane UtilityK
The longer review is fun, and boils down to this type of agent being tantalizingly almost there, but with enough issues that it isn’t quite a net gain to use it. Below a certain threshold of reliability you’re better off doing it yourself. Which will definitely change. My brief experience with Operator was similar. My guess is that it is indeed already a net win if you invest in getting good at using it, in a subset of tasks including some forms of shopping, but I haven’t felt motivated to pay those up front learning and data entry costs. Huh, Upgrades
The problem with your Google searches being context for Gemini 2.0 Thinking
I’m very curious to see if these end up being useful, and if so who else copies them. This definitely feels like a thing worth trying again. Now if I can automate adding all the data sources… Seeking DeeplyLet’s say you are the PRC. You witness DeepSeek leverage its cracked engineering culture to get a lot of performance out of remarkably little compute. They then publish the whole thing, including how they did it. A remarkable accomplishment, which the world then blows far out of proportion to what they did. What would you do next? Double down on the open, exploratory free wielding ethos that brought them to this point, and pledge to help them take it all the way to AGI, as they intend?
Can you imagine if the United States did this to OpenAI? It is remarkable how often when we are told we cannot do [X] because we will ‘lose to China’ if we do and they would do it, we find out China is already doing lots of [X]. Before r1, DeepSeek was the clear place to go as a cracked Chinese software engineer. Now, once you join, the PRC is reportedly telling you to give up your passport, watching your every move and telling headhunters to stay away. No thanks. Notice that China is telling these folks to surrender their passports, at the same time that America is refusing to let in much of China’s software engineering and other talent. Why do you think PRC is making this decision? Along similar lines, perhaps motivated by PRC and perhaps not,
That isn’t inherently a crazy thing to worry about, even if mainly you are trying to get credit for things, and be first to publish them. Then again, how confident are you that DeepSeek will publish them, at this point? Going forward it seems likely their willingness to give away the secret sauce will steadily decline, especially in terms of their methods, now that PRC knows what that lab is capable of doing. Fun With Media GenerationPeople are having a lot of fun with Gemini 2.0 Flash’s image generation, when it doesn’t flag your request for safety reasons.
Also, did you know you have it remove a watermark from an image, Gemma Goals
Teortaxes thinks Gemma 3 is best in class, but will be tough to improve.
I notice the ‘Rs in strawberry’ test has moved on to
This does not offer the direct comparison we want most, which is to v3 and r1, but if you have two points (e.g. Gemma 2 and Gemini 2.0 Flash) then you can draw a line. Eyeballing this, they’re essentially saying Gemma 3 is 80%+ of the way from Gemma 2 to Gemini 2.0 Flash, while being fully open and extremely cheap.
They do back this up with claims on other benchmarks, but I don’t have Mistral in my set of labs I trust not to game the benchmarks. Priors say this is no Gemma 3 until proven otherwise. On Your Marks
Choose Your Fighter
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
An important fact about memes is that, unless you are doing them inside a narrow context to comment on that particular context, only the long tail matters. Almost all ‘generalized’ meme are terrible. But yes, in general, ‘quick, human, now be creative!’ does not go so well, and AIs are able to on average do better already. Another parallel: Frontier AIs are almost certainly better at improv than most humans, but they are still almost certainly worse than most improv performances, because the top humans do almost all of the improv.
First off, as one comment responds, this is a form of The But that’s not my main worry here. My main worry is that when you penalize ‘unproductive thoughts’ the main thing you are penalizing is thoughts. This is Of course the days in which there are more ‘unproductive thoughts’ turn out to be more productive days. Those are the days in which you are thinking, and having interesting thoughts, and some of them will be good. Whereas on my least productive days, I’m watching television or in a daze or whatever, and not thinking much at all. Copyright Confrontation
As in, it is one thing to have an awkward way to remove watermarks. It is another to have an easy, or even one-click or no-click way to do it. Salience of the opportunity matters as well, as does the amount of AI images for which there are marks to remove. Get Involved
In Other AI NewsWilliam Fedus leaves OpenAI to
AI for science is great, the question is what this potentially says about opportunity costs, and ability to do good inside OpenAI.
Meanwhile, only 53% of people are confident ChatGPT isn’t sentient. People are very confused, and almost half of them have noticed this. The rest of the thread has additional odd survey results, including this on when people expect various levels of AI, which shows how incoherent and contradictory people are - they expect superintelligence before human-level AI, what questions are they answering here? Also note the difference between this survey which has about 8% for ‘Sentient AI never happens,’ versus the first survey where 24% think Sentient AI is impossible.
Straight Lines on Graphs
Do note that
If you consider this a baseline scenario it gets really out of hand rather quickly.
Those are the skeptics. Then there are those who think we’re going to beat the trend, at least when speaking of coding tasks in particular.
I do think we are starting to see agents in non-coding realms that (for now unreliably) stay coherent for more than short sprints. I presume that being able to stay coherent on long coding tasks must imply the ability, with proper scaffolding and prompting, to do so on other tasks as well. How could it not? Quiet Speculations
For the people in the back who didn’t know, California Issues Reasonable ReportI know, I am as surprised as you are. When Newsom vetoed SB 1047, It turns out it’s… actually pretty good, by all accounts? And indeed, it is broadly compatible with the logic behind most of SB 1047. One great feature is that it
Here are their key principles.
In a sane world this would be taken for granted. In ours, you love to see it - acknowledgment that we need to use foresight, and that the harms matter, need to be considered in advance, and are potentially wide reaching and irreversible. It doesn’t say ‘existential,’ ‘extinction’ or even ‘catastrophic’ per se, presumably because certain people strongly want to avoid such language, but I’ll take it.
Excellent. Again, statements that should go without saying and be somewhat disappointing to not go further, but which in our 2025 are very much appreciated. This still has a tone of ‘leave your stuff at the door unless you can get sufficiently concrete’ but at least lets us have a discussion.
Indeed.
Yes, and I would go further and say they can do this while also aiding competitiveness.
Again, yes, very much so.
There is haggling over price but pretty much everyone is down with this.
Another case where among good faith actors there is only haggling over price, and whether 72 hours as a deadline is too short, too long or the right amount of time.
Again that’s the part everyone should be able to agree upon. If only the debate about SB 1047 could have involved us being able to agree on the kind of sanity displayed here, and then talking price and implementation details. Instead things went rather south, rather quickly. Hopefully it is not too late. So my initial reaction, after reading that plus some quick AI summaries, was that they had succeeded at Doing Committee Report without inflicting further damage, which already beats expectations, but weren’t saying much and I could stop there. Then I got a bunch of people saying that the details were actually remarkably good, too, and said things that were not as obvious if you didn’t give up and kept on digging. Here are one source’s choices for noteworthy quotes.
Dean Ball concurs that this is a remarkably strong report. He continues to advocate for entity-based thresholds rather than model-based thresholds, but when that’s the strongest disagreement with something this detailed, that’s really good.
The Quest for Sane RegulationsA charitable summary of a lot of what is going on, including the recent submissions:
Do they not feel it, or are they choosing to act as if they don’t feel it, either of their own accord or via direction from above? The results will look remarkably similar. Certainly Sam Altman feels the AGI and now talks in public as if he mostly doesn’t.
That is in addition to the indirect effects from tariffs of uncertainty and the decline in stock prices and thus ability to raise and deploy capital.
That’s all we get. ‘Reduce ideological bias’ and ‘AI fairness’ are off in their own ideological struggle world. The danger once again is that is seems ‘AI safety’ has become to key figures synonymous with things like ‘responsible AI’ and ‘AI fairness,’ so they’re cracking down on AI not killing everyone thinking they’re taking a bold stand against wokeness. Instead, once again - and we see similar directives at places like the EPA - they’re turning things around and telling those responsible for AI being secure and safe that they should instead prioritize ‘enable human flourishing and economic competitiveness.’ The good news is that if one were to actually take that request seriously, it would be fine. Retaining control over the future and the human ability to steer it, and humans remaining alive, are rather key factors in human flourishing! As is our economic competitiveness, for many reasons. We’re all for all of that. The risk is that this could easily get misinterpreted as something else entirely, an active disdain for anything but Full Speed Ahead, even when it is obviously foolish because security is capability and your ability to control something and have it do what you want is the only way you can get any use out of it. But at minimum, this is a clear emphasis on the human in ‘human flourishing.’ That at least makes it clear that the true anarchists and successionists, who want to hand the future over to AI, remain unwelcome.
But despair that the rhetoric from even relatively good people like Hammond has reached this point. The status of a race is assumed. DeepSeek is trotted out again as evidence our lead is tenuous and at risk, that we are ‘six to nine months ahead at most’ and ‘America may still have the upper hand, but without swift action, we are currently on track to surrendering AI leadership to China—and with it, economic and military superiority.’ MIRI Provides Their Action Plan AdviceMIRI is in a strange position here. The US Government wants to know how to ‘win’ and MIRI thinks that pursuing that goal likely gets us all killed. Still, there are Security is capability. The reason you build in an off-switch is so you can turn the system on, knowing if necessary you could turn it off. The reason you verify that your system is secure and will do what you want is exactly so you can use it. Without that, you can’t use it - or at least you would be wise not to, even purely selfishly. The focus of the vast majority of advocates of not dying, at this point, is not on taking any direct action to slow down let alone pause AI. Most understand that doing so unilaterally, at this time, is unwise, and there is for now no appetite to try and do it properly multilaterally. Instead, the goal is to create optionality in the future, for this and other actions, which requires state capacity, expertise and transparency, and to invest in the security and alignment capabilities of the models and labs in particular.
My statement took a different tactic. I absolutely noted the stakes and the presence of existential risk, but my focus was on Pareto improvements. Security is capability, especially capability relative to the PRC, as you can only deploy and benefit from that which is safe and secure. And there are lots of ways to enhance America’s position, or avoid damaging it, that we need to be doing. The Week in Audio
Rhetorical InnovationState of much of discourse, which does not seem to be improving:
There are so many things that get fearmongering labels like ‘totalitarian world government’ but which are describing things that, in other contexts, already happen. As per my ‘can’t silently drop certain sources no matter what’ rules: Don’t click but We’re Not So Different You and I
Assuming that we run that test and it holds up, what comes next? The goal, as I understand it, is to force the decision algorithms for self and others to correlate. Thus, when optimizing or choosing the output of that algorithm, it will converge on the cooperative, non-deceptive answer. If you have to treat your neighbor as yourself then better to treat both of you right. If you can pull that off in a way that sticks, that’s brilliant. My worry is that this implementation has elements of The You’re trying to use your interpretability knowledge, that you can measure correlation between activations for [self action] and [non-self action], and that closing that distance will force the two actions to correlate. In the short term, with constrained optimization and this process ‘moving last,’ that seems (we must verify using other tests to be sure) to be highly effective. That’s great. That is a second best solution. The first best solution, if one had sufficient compute, parameters and training, would be to find a way to have the activations measure as correlated, but the actions go back to being less correlated. With relatively small models and not that many epochs of training, the models couldn’t find such a solution, so they were stuck with the second best solution. You got what you wanted. But with enough capability and optimization pressure, we are likely in The underlying idea, if we can improve the implementation, still seems great. You find another way to create correlations between actions in different circumstances, with self versus other being an important special case. Indeed, even ‘decisions made by this particular AI’ is even a special case, a sufficiently capable AI would consider correlations with other copies of itself, and also correlations with other entities decisions, both AI and human. The question is how to do that, and in particular how to do that without, once sufficient capability shows up, creating sufficient incentives and methods to work around it. No one worth listening to said this would be easy. Anthropic Warns ASL-3 ApproachesWe don’t know how much better models are getting, but they’re getting better. Anthropic warns us once again that we will hit ASL-3 soon, which is (roughly) when AI models start giving substantial uplift to tasks that can do serious damage. They emphasize the need for partnerships with government entities that handle classified information, such as the US and UK AISIs and the Nuclear Security Administration, to do these evaluations properly.
The right time to start worrying about such threats is substantially before they arrive. Like any exponential, you can either be too early or too late, which makes the early warnings look silly, and of course you try to not be too much too early. This is especially true given the obvious threshold of usefulness - you have to do better than existing options, in practice, and the tail risks of that happening earlier than one would expect have thankfully failed to materialize. It seems clear we are rapidly exiting the ‘too much too early’ phase of worry, and entering the ‘too early’ phase, where if you wait longer to take mitigations there is about to be a growing and substantial risk of it turning into ‘too late.’ Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is DifficultJack Clark points out that we are systematically seeing early very clear examples of quite a lot of the previously ‘hypothetical’ or speculative predictions on misalignment.
Where I disagree with Luke is that I do not regret to inform you of any of that. All of this is good news. The part of this that is surprising is not the behaviors. What is surprising is that this showed up so clearly, so unmistakably, so consistently, and especially so early, while the behaviors involved are still harmless, or at least Mostly Harmless. As in, by default we should expect that these behaviors increasingly show up as AI systems gain in the capabilities necessary to find such actions and execute them successfully. The danger was that I worried we might not see much of them for a while, which would give everyone a false sense of security and give us nothing to study, and then they would suddenly show up exactly when they were no longer harmless, for the exact same reasons they were no longer harmless. Instead, we can recognize, react to and study early forms of such behaviors now. Which is great. I like John Pressman’s question a lot here. My answer is that humans know that other humans react poorly in most cases to cheating, including risk of life-changing loss of reputation or scapegoating, and have insufficient capability to fully distinguish which situations involve that risk and which don’t, so they overgeneralize into avoiding things they instinctively worry would be looked upon as cheating even when they don’t have a mechanism for what bad thing might happen or how they might be detected. Human minds work via habit and virtue, so the only way for untrained humans to reliably not be caught cheating involves not wanting to cheat in general. However, as people gain expertise and familiarity within a system (aka ‘capability’) they get better at figuring out what kinds of cheating are low risk and high reward, or are expected, and they train themselves out of this aversion. Then there are other humans who think cheating is fine. Note that this model of humans says there is a generalized ‘cheating’ tendency that varies among humans, and that cheating anywhere on anything implies cheating everywhere on everything, which in turn is more reason to be the type of human that doesn’t cheat. That there are people who ‘are cheaters’ and those who aren’t, and cheating on your relationship is highly correlated to cheating at cards, and so on. And I very much endorse this.
Indeed. Also notice that if you start training on synthetic data or other AI outputs, rather than training on human outputs, you aren’t even feeding in human data, so that special characteristic of the situation falls away.
In response, Ozzie has an idea.
And now a
If the model is the smartest thing involved, this game of ‘keep playing whack-a-mole every time you see the thing you don’t like’ does not end well for you.
It’s no surprise that, once they knew a little about what they were looking for, the teams were able to figure out the rest. What was impressive was how fast it was done, and also how the most successful team did so well - it did so by going on a hunt using sparse autoencoders. It’s worth noticing that relying too heavily on this could become The
People Are Worried About AI Killing EveryoneAnother way of considering what exactly is ‘everyone’ in context:
Yep. Even if you think some AIs can provide more value per atom than humans, you don’t automatically get those AIs. Don’t give up our ability to steer the future. The Lighter Side
You're currently a free subscriber to |