---
subject: "9 Lessons for Life, the 90% Rule, & More"
from: "\"Sahil Bloom's Curiosity Chronicle\" <sahil@sahilbloom.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-10-20 09:02:54
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Sahil Bloom", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_1989028747625928812", "UNREAD"]
---
9 Lessons for Life, the 90% Rule, & Moreread and listen on read time 5 minutes Here are 5 interesting ideas to spark your curiosity heading into the weekend. Today at a Glance:- Question: Redefining success.
- Quote: Power vs. strength.
- Framework: The 90% Rule.
- Tweet: The Overview Effect.
- Article: Grow the puzzle around you.
Discover key metrics for early-stage funding with Introducing Their latest article illuminates the four key metrics that are currently capturing investors' attention. In the current fundraising climate, the road may seem tough for early-stage startups, but with the right knowledge, there is room for optimism. In these challenging times, gaining access to capital requires renewed diligence, however, investors haven’t stopped searching for opportunities, they've simply shifted the criteria. Discover what these sought-after metrics are that VCs and investors are keen to see in startups. With Mercury, today's sponsor, you get more than just banking; you gain access to the connections, advice, and knowledge you need to turn your startup dreams into reality. Note: Mercury is a financial technology company, not a bank. Banking services provided by Choice Financial Group and Evolve Bank & Trust®; Members FDIC.
Question to redefine success:How is your definition of success harming your life? We live in a success-obsessed world. Everywhere you look, you're surrounded by articles, news stories, books, and content on "successful" people. Heck, I often write about spending time with these "successful" people and don't think twice about it. But what if that cultural map of success doesn't match the terrain of your own life? What if the assumption of what success looks like doesn't match your own definition of what it looks like? What if the one-size-fits-all definition of success is causing more harm than good? When we blindly allow a cultural definition to become our own, we risk harming our own happiness and life. On countless occasions, I've felt a sensation of unhappiness about my accomplishments, only to realize that the unhappiness was driven by my comparison against a "success" standard that was not my own. How often have you experienced this? Be honest. "Success" should always be defined on deeply personal terms. Your successful life is yours alone—no one has the right or power to define that for you. So, this weekend, I'd encourage you to think about this: What is your definition of success? Is it truly yours or are you allowing cultural definitions to bleed into it? Reclaim control—measure your life on your terms. Quote on the power from within:"Mastering others is strength. Mastering yourself is true power." - Lao Tzu All great things start from within. Change yourself to change the world. Framework to focus on the important stuff:The 90% RuleIn "When you have 90% of a large project completed finishing the final details will take another 90%." The idea here is that closing out that last 10% of any big project is actually a significantly larger undertaking than anyone anticipates. Many large projects are known for taking just as long to get through the final details as they did to get through the bulk of the actual work. Marc Randolph, the co-founder of streaming giant Netflix, recently commented on his own adaptation of the 90% Rule on X: The example he uses is around Netflix's early decision to not ship DVDs to Canada, writing, "we reasoned that even though it seemed like low-hanging fruit in terms of revenue, dealing with different currencies, languages, and other complications would serve as more of a distraction than a net positive." Concluding the point, Randolph says, "You have to recognize that what looks like low hanging fruit rarely is...Freeing yourself up from worrying about all that lets you allocate more time and attention to the important stuff." I'd distill these thoughts down to a single idea: Good enough is often the optimal solution. Ambitious, high-achieving people are more likely to get caught up in the perfection of that last 10% (which takes another 90% according to Kelly) than accept the good enough outcome and move on to the next important thing. Training yourself to identify when perfection is getting in the way of your goals is a key skill to develop—in business as much as in life. So, where are you allowing perfection to slow your progress? Tweet to remember our place:I love this. A neat concept, indeed.
Article with beautiful advice for life:Jessica Livingston was one of the co-founders of Y Combinator (she is also married to another one of my favorite writers, Paul Graham). This article blends great storytelling with great advice. The nine key pieces of wisdom: - There is no one mold for a successful founder
- Do what you’re genuinely interested in and try to play to your natural strengths.
- Don’t pay attention to the mainstream’s opinion of what you're doing—whether it’s your skills, your idea or whatever.
- Find a cofounder with complementary skills, but the same moral compass as you. (Sahil Note: This advice is also just as important for identifying your spouse/life partner).
- Focus on making something people want.
- Don’t let rejection distract you or hold you back.
- Start small so you can be nimble and open to change.
- It’s ok not to have gone to an elite college.
- Be intrepid.
Worth your time. In Case You Missed It:In I offered a series of question prompts to help guide your journey, including: - What would my 5 year younger self be proud of me for?
- If you woke up in 10 years and were in flow, what actions did you take that got you there?
Mental Time Travel is a neat tool for your professional or personal life. I use it regularly and you should too. Sahil's Recommendation ZonePerfect your morning routine with my partner I get asked about my morning routine all the time. It changes from time to time, but It replaced an entire cabinet of supplements for me in one daily scoop—seriously, its latest iteration covers a multivitamin, multi-mineral, prebiotics, probiotics, adaptogens, greens, and more. It keeps me feeling healthy and strong throughout the year, even when I'm traveling (thanks to the travel packs). Athletic Greens is offering Curiosity Chronicle subscribers an exclusive deal:
Refer Friends, Earn Rewards!
|