---
subject: "Pluribus and Our Age of Hive Minds"
from: "Erik Hoel <erikhoel@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-11-18 15:46:55
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Erik Hoel", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_2504961760700514996", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
We live in an age of hive minds: social media, yes, of course, but so too is an LLM a kind of hive mind, a “ The existence of these hive minds is You get to know the nature of a hive mind well if you put thoughts out into it regularly, and witness its workings. Like if you’re a newsletter writer. And of course, there are blessings—newsletters, as they are, could not exist without the hive mind of the internet. At the same time, even people who hate you are pressed in so close you can feel their breath and we just have to live like this, breathing each other’s air. It’s hard to imagine, but plenty enjoy living this way: yelling, screaming, breathing, with such closeness, together forever. But what if our fractious hive mind were… nice? What if it didn’t try to destroy you all the time, but make you happy? Endlessly, ceaselessly, forever happy. This is the driving question of Pluribus, the new sci-fi show by Vince Gilligan, creator of Breaking Bad. The show, which currently has 100% on Rotten Tomatoes (although we’re only three episodes in) can’t really be discussed without spoiling the plot setup. But honestly, the trailer does this to some degree anyways, and I’ll leave out as many details as possible. Still, be forewarned of possible spoilers! The actual sci-fi events are interesting, and executed well too (I won’t spoil them), although one has a sense for Gilligan they’re peripheral; he cares far less about “ A misanthropic famous romantasy author, Carol Sturka, is one of the few unaffected, naturally immune. But the analogy is quite clear: the new world she’s been thrown into is just an exaggerated version of our current world. Pre-virus, at her book signing Carol is already repulsed by the (non-RNA-assisted) hive mind of her own obsessed romantasy fans, and the oppressive idiocy of our modern world is also on display when Carol has to answer on social media who her dreamy corsair main character is based on. She decides to lie and answers “George Clooney” because “it’s safer.” Once the virus spreads in Pluribus, Subscribe to The Intrinsic Perspective to unlock the rest.Become a paying subscriber of The Intrinsic Perspective to get access to this post and other subscriber-only content. A subscription gets you:
|