---
subject: "Inciting Incident: If y is anti-x, the story is still about x"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-11-08 10:32:26
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
Inciting Incident
Fri, 08 Nov 24
Inciting Incident is our weekly newsletter about the most powerful tool of our age—stories. Stories told by businesses, leaders, governments..
Good Evening Ishan,
On 31 October, The Economist published a thought-provoking [essay](https://www.economist.com/interactive/essay/2024/10/31/when-politics-is-about-hating-the-other-side-democracy-suffers?utm_content=ed-picks-image-link-4&etear=nl_today_4&utm_campaign=r.the-economist-today&utm_medium=email.internal-newsletter.np&utm_source=salesforce-marketing-cloud&utm_term=11/5/2024&utm_id=1987614) on how politics is eating the West.
Or rather, how ‘anti-politics’ is eating it.
I think what the writer means by anti-politics will be quite familiar to people outside the West too—essentially, the now dominant trend in political campaigning where the focus is more on telling your voters who your leader is not, and less on communicating who they are, what they stand for, what they do. In other words, moulding your narrative around your opponent, and telling your voters you aren’t them.
And this tactic is working. Contempt, it appears, is an easier emotion to evoke than enthusiasm. As is priming your audience to crave for their enemies’ suffering.
The author argues, and I wholeheartedly agree, that this is poison for democracies.
“Negative partisanship” is the dry academic term for the fraught, emotional and damaging phenomenon that Mr Obama describes afflicting American politics. It is the inclination of people to vote not for a party in which they believe, but against another one that they fear or despise. This way of doing politics has seen a marked rise in democracies around the world since the end of the cold war, a rise that has accelerated noticeably over the past decade. It is a bad thing. The politics of being anti is a tactic. It is not focused on a set of issues, nor does it draw on a political philosophy.
[…]
Given its baleful fruits, why then has negative partisanship spread? “Because it works” is too simple an answer. Politicians have been denigrating their opponents ever since Cleon slandered Pericles in ancient Athens. So long as candidates can exploit atavistic fear and suspicion to trigger hostility towards the other side, they always will. For partisan animosity to be growing today, something must be making the benefits higher or the costs lower.
On 5 November, when it became clear that Donald Trump had won the US Presidential elections, The Economist once again picked up this thread. Voters in the US, it opined, had voted for Trump because they thought his opponents were worse. The piece—titled ‘[Why Americans think Democrats are worse than Trump](https://www.economist.com/united-states/2024/11/07/democrats-need-to-understand-americans-think-theyre-worse?utm_content=ed-picks-image-link-1&etear=nl_today_1&utm_campaign=r.the-economist-today&utm_medium=email.internal-newsletter.np&utm_source=salesforce-marketing-cloud&utm_term=11/7/2024&utm_id=1988304)’—says that voting for Republicans, Trump’s party, wasn’t really about Republicans at all.
This anti-politics is a manifestation of one of the oldest tropes in storytelling: The Villain.
Sure, audiences love the ‘conventional’ hero. But that’s not a given, because sometimes, they can choose a hero for themselves who doesn’t really fit the standard stereotype. Instead, all this hero has going for them is that they are the polar opposite of whoever the audience believes is the villain.
For instance, I’ve [already written](https://the-ken.com/incitingincident/the-real-story-behind-the-villain-thats-indias-population/) about how the Indian government used this trope to push coercive population control measures a few decades ago.
Throughout the history of India, politicians have argued that its population needs to be controlled because it prevented economic growth. And that this justified coercive policies—right from reward/punishment policies such as these all the way to forced sterilisations, at worst.
This is hardly an isolated instance. We saw the same thing when Indian smartphone makers [rallied together](https://the-ken.com/incitingincident/why-villainising-chinese-smartphones-wont-create-any-heroes/) to paint Chinese smartphones as the antagonists; when anti-obesity drugs [painted themselves as saviours](https://the-ken.com/incitingincident/weight-loss-drugs-and-the-real-villain-behind-obesity/) from the villain that was obesity. Even Apple founder Steve Jobs has [created villains](https://www.forbes.com/sites/carminegallo/2015/10/08/steve-jobs-the-worlds-greatest-business-storyteller/#:~:text=On%20January%2024%2C%201984%2C%20Steve,would%20be%20played%20by%20IBM.) in order to showcase Apple products as the heroes.
But there is, of course, another way to go about this, and perhaps even a better one. It’s to actually focus on your hero, and even seeing aspects of your hero in the villain. In The Writer’s Journey, a seminal book on storytelling written by Chris Vogler, he lays down many ways you can do this. Let me highlight two examples he shares (spoiler alerts): Darth Vader in Star Wars, and the terminator in The Terminator. If you are a Harry Potter reader, you might also remember that Harry needed to vanquish the little bit of Voldemort inside him in order to triumph.
Some Shadows may even be redeemed and turned into positive forces. One of the most impressive Shadow figures in movie history, Darth Vader of the Star Wars series, is revealed in Return of the Jedi to be the hero’s father. All his wickedness is finally forgiven, making him a benign, ghostly figure, watching over his son. The Terminator also grows from being a killing machine bent on destroying the heroes in The Terminator to being a protective Mentor to the heroes in Terminator 2:Judgment Day.
Brands, too, can do the same.
Last year, Forbes wrote an [article titled](https://www.forbes.com/sites/brandstorytelling/2023/09/19/brands-should-embrace-being-the-villains-in-their-own-stories--heres-why/) ‘Brands Should Embrace Being The Villains In Their Own Stories’, and how they can choose to be authentic and vulnerable, and more ‘real’, by acknowledging that they are not perfect.
You own your flaws; you highlight and even celebrate them.
Just look at Air, the film about Nike’s Air Jordan shoe. Sonny Vaccaro (played by Matt Damon) is positioned as the protagonist maverick in pursuit of an authentic superstar that will represent the brand with a signature shoe. Nike founder Phil Knight (played by the film’s director Ben Affleck) is skeptical of Vaccaro’s choice, depicted as thinking only of the company’s bottom line. The audience is invited to side with Vaccaro over Knight. Vaccaro wins out in the end by signing Jordan and creating the Air Jordan 1, which would go on to be one of the most popular and influential sneakers of all time. It’s no accident that the story is told this way, and Nike surely had no problem with having its founder play a conflicting character because with this story came a slew of press and pieces on the enduring legacy of Nike and the AJ 1. The movie did pretty well, too, cracking $90M worldwide. Of course, the mother of all examples here is Barbie. In an almost cartoonish fashion, Mattel is painted in the Barbie movie as a colorless money-making enterprise run by foolish suits and completely disconnected from Barbie’s authentic journey into self-discovery.
Given how acrimonious the political (and even brand) environment has become the world over, it would serve everyone well if we remembered that there are many different types of antagonists. And not all of them have to be villainous.
That’s a wrap for this week. Please let me know what you think about this newsletter by writing to me at inciting-incident@the-ken.com. I’ll be back in your inbox at 4 pm India time next Friday.
Take care.
Yours,
Ruhi
P.S: You can apply to enrol your team in a Storytelling Workshop by The Ken [here](https://the-ken.com/learning/).