---
subject: "The Banks: What's Next?"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <byrne@thediff.co>"
to: ""
date: 2023-03-20 12:43:22
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX"]
---
|
|
In this issue: - The Banks: What's Next?
- SVB's Incentives
- Cross-Disciplines
- Cable's Evolution
- Training Your Replacement
- Resources
- Diff Job
The Banks: What's Next?The big news last weekend was that It's a weird deal, where the pricing for the equity has already been renegotiated up from UBS's initial bid. Credit Suisse's capital structure includes "Additional Tier 1 Capital" bonds, which are basically designed to provide a capital buffer without diluting equity—they're junior enough in the credit structure that they're capital-like, but, in good times, they pay a better rate than other bank obligations. (You can In any case, the general policy goal in situations like this is to prevent single-company problems from becoming systemic problems. There are two basic frameworks for looking at systemic risk: - The more literal, object-level one goes like this: if a bank fails, and deposits are unavailable for a while, depositors may struggle to pay other debts, leading to other bank failures. This kind of systemic risk is most directly applicable to investment banks with significant derivatives exposure: if a hedge fund in 2008 was long something via Goldman, and hedged this position through Lehman, then the collapse of Lehman would mean it was suddenly unhedged. Or, worse, that it didn't know if it was hedged or not, where exiting its position with Goldman might end up meaning that it kept the trade with Lehman after all. That kind of uncertainty is toxic for levered institutions since variance and uncertainty are, from a lender's perspective, almost entirely downside. This is an asset-based view of systemic risk, since the direct effect of failures is to make other institutions' assets worth less.
- The other kind of systemic risk is liability-based: a failure at one institution makes lenders (including depositors) less likely to want to work with similar-looking institutions. This is a more amorphous problem, because similarity is so hard to define: an American regional bank (SVB) and a Swiss investment bank (Credit Suisse) have very little in common except for their impaired assets and mobile depositors. An important consideration with liability-based systemic risk is that it's indifferent to the asset side, and all about liquidity. (The iShares MBS ETF is up about 3% since SVB announced their planned capital raise, so the specific trade that SVB lost so much on is looking better and better.)
Which, in one sense, makes liability-side contagion easier to solve: find the financial institutions experiencing outflows, and get so much cash that there's no net impact on their liquidity position and thus no reason for deposits to flee or for loans not to be rolled over. On the other hand, it's a harder problem, because it's dealing with fundamentally incommensurable things: money as a solution to a psychological problem. As with other bailouts, the sums involved in the Credit Suisse deal are staggering: UBS is getting a $9.7bn guarantee against losses from acquiring Credit Suisse, and (Which seems exaggerated, but a lot of risk management rules are the inverse of this: if a position or strategy loses more money than expected, a common default is to cut it in half and reassess. It's very hard to calibrate mistakes so they're just barely inconceivable, since whatever got them to the "inconceivable" level in the first place was a bigger deal than was previously imagined.) As the bailout numbers get bigger, they lead to a second-order concern: what if all this credit and liquidity creation threatens trust in the entire financial system, and leads to faster inflation, or even hyperinflation? Some of the popular charts certainly look hyperinflationary, like this one: But note that both of the previous episodes led, in the short term, to a drop in inflation: the CPI hit 5% for the first time since the early 90s in 2008, just before the crisis. Banking crises are typically deflationary, so you can use the central bank interventions in their wake as a proxy for how deflationary they are when there isn't a policy response. The Fed added $3.5tr to its balance sheet in the six years following the financial crisis, which was just enough to get inflation from the pre-crisis level of around 3% to the next decade's average of 1.6%. Post-Covid, a $2.9tr in balance sheet expansion was also just enough to keep year-over-year inflation slightly above zero in the first few months of the pandemic. This is classic Longer-term, what happens to the banks is still questionable. Regulators are in a tricky position: - Eyeballing the current levels of inflation and unemployment, it's very easy to justify further rate increases. A few months ago, we'd say "The economy is fine aside from tech," and now we can say "The economy is fine aside from tech and certain banks." (Of course, it was perfectly accurate in 2007 to say that the economy looked fine aside from some unfortunate housing loans.)
- But those rate increases hurt banks' balance sheets, and they are particularly damaging to smaller banks.
- Providing liquidity to those smaller banks can undo some or all of the impact of tighter monetary policy. If a Fed facility is the sole reason a bank is holding underwater mortgage-backed securities it would otherwise sell, this is exactly economically equivalent to the Fed holding that same security itself, in terms of market impact and in terms of which institution ultimately gets to decide who gets what.
So we could end up in a situation where the first-order effect of prudent monetary policy is to do something that hurts the majority of banks, and there are second-order policy tweaks to ensure that these moves only hurt certain banks. And that's politically palatable. The smaller a bank is, the more political pull it has relative to assets. Patrick McKenzie has
And looking at slightly larger banks, one fun way to slice the data is to look at the share of political donations given by big banks, and the share of top donors to individual politicians from big banks versus smaller ones. The ten largest banks in the US represent 56% of total banking assets (based on At least when it comes to banking, Big Business is being outspent in both magnitude and breadth by (relatively) Little Business. The way to bet is, and for a long time has been, that smaller banks will get some political assistance when they need it, whether or not they could have avoided the problems that led them to need it in the first place. From SVB's perspective, it was very unfortunate that they weren't called So the US will likely remain an There is a sort of accelerationist hard-money argument that a deflationary collapse is just what the economy needs, because the leverage that makes deflation so dangerous is part of the problem. This debate is unlikely to be solved any time soon, though, and the big test of it has been military conflict between countries that have similar levels of natural resources and different tolerance for credit. European history from the early 18th century through the mid-twentieth century is partly a story about the UK punching above its weight by being able to out-borrow and thus out-spend the countries it went to war with. On the other hand, look at what eventually happened to them. On the third hand, their status as global financial hegemon was supplanted by the US, which has not exactly been allergic to borrowing money, whether at the government, household, or corporate level. [↩︎](#fnref1)For the record, I do not think that a bank that financed wealthy people's vineyards would be all that more politically sympathetic than a bank that financed their VC funds. In fact, The Diff's [first post about SVB's balance sheet](https://www.thediff.co/r/ad35d80c?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)highlighted their wine loans as a potential topic for political grandstanding.[↩︎](#fnref2)
You're reading the free version of The Diff. Subscribers get much, much more: in-depth business breakdowns, strategy analysis, and ongoing coverage of merging topics. A Word From Our SponsorsThis newsletter is brought to you by Tegus, your modern research launchpad. Investors waste too much time looking for actionable information across disconnected sources. Tegus streamlines the information you need to move quickly with conviction and make better decisions. With access to the largest transcript library, expert calls with no markups, driveable financial models, and searchable SEC filings, you’ll be the smartest expert in the room. Right now, readers of The Diff can ElsewhereSVB's IncentivesMike at Nongaap Investing has a
Cross-DisciplinesThe FT has a
Adtech and trading are both businesses where there's a continuous real-time auction with uncertain information, and they attract some of the same kinds of talent. (In fact, sometimes literally the same talent.) In both cases, competition tends to push down risk-adjusted returns over time, but intermediaries can continuously earn high returns by maintaining information asymmetries. This can be entirely prosocial—an "information asymmetry" can be any data point that is worth figuring out once but not worth the effort it would take if everyone involved had to discover it independently, and markets provide a nice pricing mechanism for converting that social good into a private return through more accurate pricing in return for higher profits. But imposing an asymmetry instead of discovering one is bad for everyone involved. Cable's EvolutionCable TV Training Your ReplacementMicrosoft has a Disclosure: Long MSFT, META. ResourcesOne important element of the rise of Airbnb and Uber was their approach to regulations. There are varying levels of cynicism about this, and somewhere in the middle of the spectrum is the theory that they wanted to comply with rules eventually, but knew that they'd be in a better position to negotiate if they got big enough to have more users with a vested interest in keeping them legal. That applies especially strongly to Airbnb; while running an informal hotel isn't a completely passive job, it's a lot more capital- than labor-intensive compared to running a one-person car service through Uber. So Airbnb's lobbying strategy benefited from the fact that, in any market where they were big enough to ban, there were Airbnb hosts who relied on the company for their livelihood and had enough free time to attend hearings. TikTok is allegedly Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. A sampling of current open roles: - A hedge fund is looking for an experienced alternative data analyst who can help incorporate novel datasets into systematic strategies (NYC).
- A VC backed company reimagining retirement wealth and building a 401k alternative is looking for product/GTM/bizops generalists. (NYC)
- A company building zero-knowledge proof-based tools to enable novel financial arrangements is looking for a senior engineer with a research bent. Ideal experience includes demonstrations of extraordinary coding and/or math ability. (NYC or San Diego preferred, remote also a possibility.)
- A company building ML-powered tools to accelerate developer productivity is looking for a mathematician. (Washington DC area)
- A profitable startup is looking for sales reps to market its AI-based services that help small companies accelerate their growth—especially people who are excited to use AI tools to accelerate some of their own work. (SF)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. |
||
Give feedback on this post
|
|
|||
|