---
subject: "Of festivities and finding home"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-11-12 03:34:43
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
I’m back in my quiet, little hometown for Diwali. But, this visit feels a little different than the rest. The idea of returning home has always been exciting for me, barring this time.
I live and work in Bengaluru; it’s like a transactional exchange for me. But now when I’m back in Jamshedpur, there’s an air of unfamiliarity to the streets, parks, and cafes that have been ever so familiar to me. No longer an active participant in these spaces, I’m just a spectator. Perhaps that explains why there’s a lot of reminiscence of the old times—yet hardly any new memories here.
Does a ‘migrant’ become a ‘local’ when visiting their hometown? Is it possible to not feel like home anywhere in particular—even one’s own home, even during festivities?
Belonging neither here nor there can make one feel all over the place. If this feeling were to be embodied by a company, it would be Healthians. It started as an aggregator, turned into a diagnostics firm within six months, and ultimately set up its own labs. But its business model is failing now besides rising competition. Nuha [writes](https://the-ken.com/story/healthians-ignored-doctors-in-diagnostics-and-lost-any-chance-at-disruption/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) about Healthians, which is trying new strategies—big and small—to run a more sustainable business.
Aakriti [wrote](https://the-ken.com/story/mamaearths-ipo-marks-the-end-of-the-d2c-gold-rush/?r_edition=2&utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) about Mamaearth, which began as an online, direct-to-consumer (D2C) brand, but it now gets a third of revenue from offline stores. Since Mamaearth’s IPO performed better than expected, it seems like D2C is spawning a new wave of brands heading into brick-and-mortar and competing with consumer goods giants such as Procter & Gamble and Unilever. However, Aakriti [argues](https://the-ken.com/story/mamaearths-ipo-marks-the-end-of-the-d2c-gold-rush/?r_edition=2&utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) that there’s more to this than meets the eye.
On Wednesday, Arundhati wrote about the state-run fund of funds, Small Industries Development Bank of India (Sidbi). It has distributed almost half of its over $1 billion corpus to more than 100 venture-capital (VC) funds. This, in turn, has been invested in some 1,000 startups. But Sidbi decided to cut back on VCs’ management fees to encourage them to perform better. This [story](https://the-ken.com/story/a-top-state-fund-wants-vcs-to-do-better-so-it-cut-their-pay/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) delves into both sides—of Sidbi and of VCs.
Anushka, on Thursday, [shed light](https://the-ken.com/story/amazons-ad-ambitions-cant-escape-the-e-commerce-shadow/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) on why Amazon India has been facing a setback in the country’s digital advertising market since the last two years. From 63% in the year ended March 2022, its ad revenues have almost halved now. Meanwhile, Google and Meta reported a 79% and 74% surge, respectively. This story delves into what Amazon is doing now in a bid to find its way back.
On 9 October, the Bangalore Metro Rail Corporation (BMRCL) unveiled the new Namma Metro stretch connecting Whitefield, the city’s corporate hub, to the rest of the city. But what should have been a sigh of relief for commuters made them feel like they were caught in a nightmare. Shaswata, in [this insightful](https://the-ken.com/story/why-a-mere-2km-stretch-threw-the-bengaluru-metro-into-chaos/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) story took us through Bangaloreans’ ordeal. It’s a free read.
Before I sign off, I sincerely hope that home does not remain just a distant emotional idea for you but a physical space you actually inhabit. 🙂
Happy Diwali.
Regards,
Rahul C
[rahul@the-ken.com](mailto:rahul@the-ken.com)
P.S: I have a small favour to ask of you. The Ken turned seven this October, and all through this journey, we’ve put you, the subscriber, at the centre of everything we do. Which is why we’re coming to you now with a [subscriber survey](https://theken.typeform.com/2023SubSurvey) focused on our stories. You may be a free subscriber, a paid subscriber, or a former subscriber—we want to hear from every one of you. It’ll take less than 10 minutes to [take the survey](https://theken.typeform.com/2023SubSurvey), but it’ll be very valuable to us.
What you just read is the personalised daily introduction to The Ken's story. Written by a different person each day. Often insightful, sometimes witty, and very rarely boring. Someone sent this to you? [Sign up for free](https://the-ken.com/?modal=register&utm_source=footer&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=morning_email_ind_recap). [Dont like these? You can unsubscribe](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/unsubscribe/?user_id=2349339&data=-n1toiM-dxc3hFW8Jx7MgAiT-JQGhzkhMX8glnRTb9loMDAwdTAwMIlqwvwkUw5O_KOulQLpegd14-ORTT1vQF4cOWF_bU-2TDoTYeVrXa3MZmjGU04p6g-7S_NS5RtVxizhD0W9x-7Ex-luIMN3iv53hf4KXFLW10ik-K8MhLCvZdWzKvHPRZi8li8W6EWYVSEBwsh46VYplrO1Mx81LtLm-c8brAIUuvzUWZ8iImbZix-oSmwV65n88F_5bDRIUOBgn6rxp4NKkW6o6NGv4wr3NFabUsviCZUzowG_QEO4hyb5K-3NbanD5IdXC1FfneFgYwpfBdlZsWxifIfs_78NMMid3mlFVWgvf8QEbmiHw2JuaEHBQEM_zFbv7CXVbMasf2duGRrZU3izrJ57rJRfpBaFodx58PLfC81uNCyuDDNnwegFEUTzOkzdI7d1BVMkGXzuowhEwkPz55d1tqfY3HqnHNnc82KNKLvphX1FRFCxfm2pN1ArkVwMWZH1xEPLtU2q4hgfLOzJOjHZ4nNoSgvjA2LkDlPhcqNNmcBVqEDacpG8A-j0NrJMMWQheL-6uHqNe2g=) Dont want to hear from us again? [ Unsubscribe from our emails here](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/?user_id=2349339&data=ZqTwscKCL1cZcAg7gx094GSF4T_imMeQfZeNHcagxzJoMDAwdTAwMB59Yw28ELAcD1Hkv3ZQbLfsZsgVRBez-rnPF-aboPxxybc9DB_RHZRuAInQ8AdOhXNXgqoZsqW8d09QEKRYloqomtIWjCQRlDKGEnuH_nJyvEq3JtnXaaldf6sVR-mZeQm1EpH0zGZZF_JBJZsBiNekOuzRiRc_rYGVhWhXUXLKFJ48dt7sPs34n4OAAQmKATztNf32-wDnhX6Wqve2BSWzsPcTc1RU459mjW_wgAlhxF04AVgMGux4fJtQKpvGkKzKYduU8BuHEdjd8t3o_m_k4NknpKg2Q0bEcqVattmFJTghhvSeBQM-OgS2BtOL0M78yfYgxNGyIGn188IAxFYoFit05E7qrI1rwznhGDbMNo-rqeGB1BxOEMrQRCMIv779LalyBfoaucZNNbN2EDXIi_AiQS0D7c7uaoas_trwhnDJSaXW11GEAm38Sd_-GmqM8a2lrhSbOnWhAchXlqFOgW8Mp3FePamRu4ahh0viqbhSsJwm3wHjiUY-mBEpPw==).
Something wrong? Tell us at [support@the-ken.com](mailto:support@the-ken.com)