---
subject: "South Park and The Greatest TV Contract Clause Ever"
from: "Trung Phan <trungphan@workweek.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-08-16 05:54:13
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Trung Phan", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_7971156048460647958", "UNREAD"]
---
The decision accomplished a few strategic goals:
-
Piracy: South Park clips were frequently ripped for YouTube. Along with music, this stolen content was a major sticking point for Viacom and YouTube. The Google-owned service eventually settled with the network by rolling out ContentID and proper creator monetization.
- Digital Monetization: Viacom had a legit online play while Parker and Stone had a new income stream.
In 2012, Parker and Stone founded a production studio named Park County, which was named after the real-life area that the show South Park takes place.
They put all of the income from their projects into the new company including film, TV and broadway (The Book of Mormon play came out in 2011).
The terms of their 2007 renewal — particularly the steady income from digital ads — created a foundation that allowed them to finance future projects without having to give up ownership in Park County.
Instead, Parker and Stone took on debt and “bet on themselves” as [explained by Matt Craig in a recent Forbes piece](https://link.workweek.com/click/41161668.56962/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuZm9yYmVzLmNvbS9zaXRlcy9tYXR0Y3JhaWcvMjAyNS8wNy8yNS9zb3V0aC1wYXJrcy1jcmVhdG9ycy1hcmUtbm93LWJpbGxpb25haXJlcy8_aGFzaGVkX3VzZXI9MGViZWYxMmM0MjkxMTg0NTYyZGFjMDk5NjViY2U4MDg/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97C83e67c78):
[Park County as a studio is] a common corporate structure among Hollywood’s top earners, but unlike other companies such as Reese Witherspoon’s Hello Sunshine or Brad Pitt’s Plan B Entertainment, Park County has never taken on equity partners or investors.
Instead, in 2012, Parker and Stone leveraged the existing and projected future income generated by South Park and other projects to score $60 million in convertible debt funding from media-focused merchant bank The Raine Group. As long as they paid off the loan on time, they would keep all of the equity.
Sure enough, they kept all the equity and those stakes in Park County soon exploded in value when another “digital” revenue stream took off: streaming.
***
Getting Paid By The Streaming Revolution
While TV viewership shifted from the small screen to streaming in the 2010s, the most sought after type of content remained the same: popular shows with deep catalogs that could attract new subscribers and reduce churn.
The industry has seen a multiple $100m+ deals for TV shows to help streamers prop up their platforms.
Seinfeld flipped Hulu and Netflix.
The Office flipped Netflix and Peacock.
Friends flipped between Netflix and HBO Max.
Big Bang Theory and Ricky & Morty were woo’d to HBO Max.
The Simpsons arrived on Disney+ as part of Disney’s $70B+ acquisition of Fox.
Naturally, Park County cashed in with South Park:
- 2014: Hulu licensed the streaming rights for a total of $197.5m over 5 years.
- 2019: HBO Max spent $550m for US streaming rights over 5 years.
-
2021: Paramount agreed to a $935m development deal over 6 years for Stone and Parker to keep creating TV episodes and 14 South Park films.
- 2023: Park County negotiated an $800m line of credit from private equity giant Carlyle with a plan of retaining as much equity as possible for any future flip.
Then, the motherlode came in July 2025. David Ellison — founder of Skydance Media and son of 2nd richest person in the world Larry Ellison — was trying to close an $8.4B merger with Paramount.
South Park was one of Paramount’s most important assets and everyone knew they had to get paid. When negotiations hit a snag, the South Park X account posted a [message](https://link.workweek.com/click/41161668.56962/aHR0cHM6Ly94LmNvbS9Tb3V0aFBhcmsvc3RhdHVzLzE5NDAzOTc4NzE4NTkzODQ0MzI_aGFzaGVkX3VzZXI9MGViZWYxMmM0MjkxMTg0NTYyZGFjMDk5NjViY2U4MDg/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B4548c327) from Stone and Parker: “This merger is a sh--show and it’s f-f--king up South Park. We are at the studio working on new episodes and we hope the fans get to see them somehow." (The actual post went full expletive but I don't want your e-mail filters to block me, so added some dashes)
Celebrity Net Worth has [details on the back-and-forth](https://link.workweek.com/click/41161668.56962/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuY2VsZWJyaXR5bmV0d29ydGguY29tL2FydGljbGVzL2VudGVydGFpbm1lbnQtYXJ0aWNsZXMvbWF0dC1hbmQtdHJleS1zb3V0aC1wYXJrLWxhd3N1aXQvP2hhc2hlZF91c2VyPTBlYmVmMTJjNDI5MTE4NDU2MmRhYzA5OTY1YmNlODA4/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B1f5fd5b3) and, in the end, Paramount backed up the Brinks truck with two deals:
- Streaming: Paramount+ paid $1.5B over 5 years to exclusively stream South Park’s 300+ episode catalog.
-
Development: Parker and Stone were guaranteed a minimum of $250m a year to make 50 new South Park episodes through 2030.
Here’s a wild what-if: in 2019, Paramount considered buying Park County for $1B but the lawyers and bankers were too busy dealing with the merger between Viacom and CBS. The boat sailed and Paramount ended up signing that $935m development deal in 2021 that only lasted 5 years.
In hindsight, not buying Park County for $1B was the M&A equivalent of getting an anal probe (especially since the company added the iconic Casa Bonita restaurant and a future film with Kendrick Lamar to the stable).
Let’s run the Park County math in the streaming era. The studio claims 1/2 of the streaming rights, which works out to $1.1B (1/2 of $198m + $550m + $1,500m) and receives all of the development funds totalling $2.2B ($935m + $250m/year for 5 years).
Park County pays Stone and Parker each $10m a year and keep the rest of the income within the corporate structure, which allows for some more savvy financial moves.
“Using the cost of the debt and some clever Hollywood accounting around depreciating catalog value, Park County has been able to lower and delay its tax bills considerably,” writes Matt Craig.
Craig estimates the enterprise value of Park County at $3B and the duo’s equity stake at $1.2B each.
In a separate podcast, Craig places Parker and Stone [among the most financially successful TV acts ever](https://link.workweek.com/click/41161668.56962/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cueW91dHViZS5jb20vd2F0Y2g_dj1qUTA1TXNxNnF4ZyZoYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B5b0d512f) and why it’ll be hard for future creators to replicate:
I think no one from the current coming-of-age class in TV will reach billionaire status unless something really really drastic changes. That's just how the landscape has changed. The way you become a billionaire [in TV] is through ownership.
So, you think about Tyler Perry. He owns his studio in Atlanta and he owns all his shows and then they get licensed to BET.
You think about Dick Wolf. He has a 50/50 joint venture with Universal Television where he has he owns 50% of his shows and then he's able to slice up the pie from there and he wants to do it.
Oprah owns Oprah Winfrey network and became a multi-billionaire.
Jerry Seinfeld [and Larry David] owned a much smaller slice of the of the pie but owned a slice of profits in Seinfeld. Seinfeld was a runaway hit in syndication and remains massively popular to this day.
That is how people got really really rich in the 80s and 90s. Even in the early 2000s. It was through profit participation.
When the streaming revolution happened, those deals changed drastically because if a show was getting created and put on Netflix, it is not going to syndicate out anywhere else. It's going to remain on Netflix forever. So, it will not be sold over and over and over again. In theory, there are not profits in the same way that can be divided up.
So, the way that dealmakers, agents, managers and lawyers renegotiated deals for their talent was that we're going to just take more money up front guaranteed. But we don't have that hope of a giant home run on the back end.
[Even] someone like Taylor Sheridan, who has several hit shows and has an empire of shows, doesn't have that same sort of back-end ownership in the same way.
The major difference with the South Park guys is that the other major TV hitters scored the fattest terms after they had already established themselves. For obvious reasons, none of them received “50% of digital revenue in perpetuity” on their first deal.
Parker and Stone’s streaming riches are due to that seemingly irrelevant deal point in that initial 1997 contract.
“A cut of revenue not derived specifically from broadcast on the cable channel” went from “meaningless” to “huge significance” to “boner-inducing” arguably the greatest clause ever in TV contract history…at a minimum, it’s one of the most improbable all things considered.
***
Final Thoughts
There’s an incredible 42-minute documentary ([“6 Days To Air: The Making of South Park”](https://link.workweek.com/click/41161668.56962/aHR0cHM6Ly95b3V0dS5iZS9oVTgzUEU2OG9OWT9oYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Bb67df1d8)) that details the South Park creative process.
The title refers to how Stone and Parker grind out each episode in 6 days, which is ludicrous based on the fact that typical animation episodes take 6+ months to write and create.
They don’t have backlog of ideas to work through. Rather, they spend about 1/2 the year when the season is on and mine the news cycle each week anew. It’s similar to SNL, with many episodes completed within mere hours of Comedy Central’s deadline.
In the documentary, Stone analogizes the making of a new TV season to a band getting back in the studio to make an album (side note: Stone readily [admits](https://link.workweek.com/click/41161668.56962/aHR0cHM6Ly95b3V0dS5iZS9oVTgzUEU2OG9OWT9zaT1ZZ2Q1UV94azlQclVwREVwJnQ9ODczJmhhc2hlZF91c2VyPTBlYmVmMTJjNDI5MTE4NDU2MmRhYzA5OTY1YmNlODA4/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97C0dbe99ec) that South Park stories are “expressed completely through Trey” and that Parker is the “chef”. But Parker needed a partner like Stone to reach his full potential).
They’re schedule is brutal schedule, but the creative pay off is worth all the pain.
Stone and Parker joining the Tres Comma Club is just a signpost in their creative journey. A very profitable signpost but still just a signpost because their end goal has never changed.
Make people laugh by joking about anything and anyone.
“We’ve been rich for a long time,” Stone told [Bloomberg](https://link.workweek.com/click/41161668.56962/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9uZXdzL25ld3NsZXR0ZXJzLzIwMjEtMDgtMDgvLXNvdXRoLXBhcmstY28tY3JlYXRvci1tYXR0LXN0b25lLW9uLWhpcy05MDAtbWlsbGlvbi1kZWFsP2hhc2hlZF91c2VyPTBlYmVmMTJjNDI5MTE4NDU2MmRhYzA5OTY1YmNlODA4/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B1143c9ff) after signing the $935m development agreement with Paramount in 2021. “Even this giant deal won’t change my day-to-day. I’m not going to buy a new watch. We’re a media company. We use proceeds from this to invest. These are multi-year projects we invested a bunch of money in.”
The latest deals just mean the South Park guys are going to keep doing South Park guy things. Probably no more LSD-sugar cubes at the Oscar’s but definitely more entries in the Wikipedia [page](https://link.workweek.com/click/41161668.56962/aHR0cHM6Ly9lbi53aWtpcGVkaWEub3JnL3dpa2kvU291dGhfUGFya19jb250cm92ZXJzaWVzP2hhc2hlZF91c2VyPTBlYmVmMTJjNDI5MTE4NDU2MmRhYzA5OTY1YmNlODA4/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Bc4473225) for “South Park Controversies”.