---
subject: "Gemini 3 Pro Is a Vast Intelligence With No Spine"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-11-24 13:53:16
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
It’s A Great Model, SirOne might even say the best model. It is for now my default Google’s official announcement of Gemini 3 Pro is full of big talk. Google tells us: In this case, they can (mostly) back up that talk. Google He also pitched the new Gemini Agent mode (select the Tools icon in the app). If what you want is raw intelligence, or what you want is to most often locate the right or best answer, Gemini 3 Pro looks like your pick. If you want creative writing or humor, Gemini 3 Pro is definitely your pick. If you want a teacher to help you learn known things, Gemini 3 Pro is your pick. For coding, opinions differ, and if doing serious work one must try a variety of options.
There Is A CatchAlas, there is a downside. In order to get you that right answer so often, Gemini can be thought of as highly focused on achieving its training objectives, and otherwise is very much a Gemini model.
If it can find the answer it thinks you would want to the question it thinks people in similar spots tend to ask, it will give it to you. Except that this sometimes won’t be the question you actually asked. Or the answer it thinks you want won’t be the true answer. Or that answer will often be sculpted to a narrative. When it wouldn’t otherwise have that answer available it is likely to hallucinate. It is a vast intelligence with no spine. It has a willingness to glaze or reverse itself. By default it will engage in AI slop, although instructions can mitigate this via asking it to create a memory that tells it to stop producing AI slop, no seriously that worked. The other catch, for me, is that I enjoy and miss the Claude Experience. Gemini is not going to in any way give you the Claude Experience. Gemini is not going to waste time on pleasantries, but it is going to be formal and make you wade through a bunch of objective-maximizing text and bullet points and charts to get to the thing you most wanted. Nor is it going to give you a Friend Experience. Which for some people is a positive. If you’re switching, don’t forget to customize it via creating memories. Also you will have to find a way to pay for it, Google makes this remarkably difficult. Andrej Karpathy Cautions UsThis is generally wise advice at all times, talk to the model and see what you think:
It is clear the benchmarks do not tell the whole story. The next section is Gemini repeatedly excelling at benchmarks, and the benchmark performances are (I believe) real. Yet note the catch, the price that was paid. On Your MarksGemini 3 Pro is very good at hitting marks. If it thinks something looks like a mark? Oh boy does Gemini want to hit that mark. You could summarize this section as ‘they’re excellent marks, sir’ and safely skip it. First, the official list of marks: As noted last time, GPT-5-Codex-Max is competitive on some of these and plausibly ahead on SWE-Bench in particular, and also Grok 4 claims a variety of strong but questionable benchmark scores, but yeah, these are great benchmarks.
The others are impressive too. They weren’t cherry picking.
Gemini 3 did less well on the safety eval, see the previous post on such issues. Artificial Analysis has them with a substantial edge in intelligence. Several of AA’s individual evaluations have GPT-5.1 in front, including AIME (99% vs. 96%), IFBench (74% vs. 70%) and AA-LCR Long Context Reasoning (75% vs. 71%). There’s one metric, 𝜏²-Bench Telecom (Agentic Tool Use), where Grok 4.1 and Kimi K2 Thinking are out in front (93% vs. 87%). Gemini 3 owns the rest, including wide margins on Humanity’s Last Exam (37% vs. 26%) and SciCode (56% vs. 46%), both places where Gemini 3 shatters the previous curve. On AA-Omniscience Gemini 3 Pro is the first model to be substantially in the net positive range (the score is correct minus incorrect) at +13, previous high was +2 and is a jump from 39% to 53% in percent correct. However, on AA-Omniscience Hallucination Rate, you see the problem, where out of all non-correct attempts Gemini 3 hallucinates a wrong answer 88% of the time rather than declining to answer. Claude 4.5 Haiku (26%), Claude 4.5 Sonnet (48%) and GPT-5.1-High (51%) are the best performers on that. That’s a big deal and throughline for everything. Gemini 3 is the most likely model to give you the right answer, but it’ll be damned before it answers ‘I don’t know’ and would rather make something up. Gemini 3 i also is not the cheapest option in practice, only Grok is more expensive: That’s actual cost rather than cost per token, which is $2/$12 per million, modestly less than Sonnet or Grok and more than GPT-5.1. On the other hand Gemini 3 was fast, slightly faster than GPT-5.1-High and substantially faster than Sonnet or Haiku. The only substantially faster model was GPT-OSS, which isn’t a serious alternative.
Is Google inadvertently training on benchmarks? My presumption is no, this is a more general and understandable mistake than that. That means Google is not sufficiently aggressively filtering out that string, which can appear on other posts like Alice’s, and Dave Orr confirms that Google instead searches for the contents of the evals rather than searching for the string when doing filtering. I would be filtering for both, and plausibly want to exclude any document with the canary string on the theory it could contain eval-relevant data even if it isn’t a pure copy? Defying GravityClaude Code and OpenAI Codex? Forget Jules, say hello to Antigravity?
I’ve had a chance to try it a bit, it felt more like Cursor, and it let me down including with outright compiler errors but my core ask might have been unfair and I’m sure I wasn’t doing a great job on my end. It has browser access, but wasn’t using that to gather key info necessary for debugging when it very clearly should have done so. In another case, I need to escalate soon to Claude Code or OpenAI Codex. I would be very surprised if the optimal way to code these days is not of those two, whether or not it involves using Gemini 3 Pro. The Efficient Market Hypothesis Is FalseThe stock market initially was unimpressed by the release of Gemini 3 Pro. This seemed like a mistake. The next day there was a large overnight bump and Google finished up 2.8%, which seems like the minimum, and then the next day Google outperformed again, potentially confounded by Nana Banana Pro of all things, then there was more ups and downs, none of which appears to have been on any other substantive news. The mainstream media story seems to be that this the Google and other stock movements around AI are about rising or falling concerns about AI bubbles or something. The mainstream doesn’t get how much the quality of Gemini 3 Pro matters.
Is Google’s triumph inevitable due to
Google has many overwhelming advantages. It has vast access to data, access to customers, access to capital and talent. It has TPUs. It has tons of places to take advantage of what it creates. It has the trust of customers, I’ve basically accepted that if Google turns on me my digital life gets rooted. By all rights they should win big. On the other hand, Google is in many ways a deeply dysfunctional corporation that makes everything inefficient and miserable, and it also has extreme levels of risk aversion on both legal and reputational grounds and a lot of existing business to protect, and lacks the ability to move like a startup. The problems run deep. The Product Of A Deranged ImaginationSpecifically, Karpathy reports this interaction:
That is indeed amusing but the implications of this being common are not great?
Then after all of that appears in Gemini 3’s Chain of Thought, it then returns the editing suggestions she requested, without any hint it thinks we’re in not in 2025 and the whole newsletter is a work of fiction. Alice offers additional examples of this as well, and also says Gemini often gives her a 99%+ chance that it is in a simulated environment, which I hope it wasn’t, and says it will often search to figure out if it is in a simulation and often update towards yes on the results. Even when given a casual coding task requiring no web search, when asked for its p(evolution) Gemini 3 gives her between a 10% and 65% chance of being in an evaluation. Alice speculates that Gemini was RL’d too much on evaluations of various kinds, and got too high a prior on any given thing being an evaluation, and this effect made it score higher on tests so no one at DeepMind made this go away. I agree with Alice that evaluation paranoia in the model is a bad thing. Paranoia does not go anywhere good. Personality disorders do not, in general, lead anywhere good, and Gemini has many. We observe in Gemini 3 Pro this plausibly causing a bunch of hallucinations, confusions and misaligned behavior in default use cases, and complete meltdowns in non-default cases. Thus: Gemini ends up It is, however, very intelligent. It mostly turns out fine. Google Employee HypeThe DeepMind CEO is having fun.
He says they’re going ‘deep into personalization, memory and context including integrations across GMail, Calendar and such, touts Antigravity and dreams of a digital coworker that follows you through your phone and smart glasses. I really like seeing this being the alignment head’s pitch:
How did they do it? Two weird tricks.
Matt Shumer Is A Big Fan
Roon Eventually Gains AccessIt took him a second to figure out how to access it, was impressed once he did.
The Every Vibecheck
Their vibe check is weird, not matching up with the other vibes I saw in terms of each model’s strengths and weaknesses. I’m not sure why they look to Anthropic for writing. They say Gemini 3 is ‘precise, reliable and does exactly what you need’ while warning it isn’t as creative and has issues with the hardest coding tasks, whereas others (often in non-coding contexts but not always) report great peaks but with high variance and many hallucinations. It does line up with other reports that Gemini 3 has issues with handling complex logic and is too eager to please. So perhaps there’s a synthesis. When well within distribution things are reliable. When sufficiently outside of distribution you get jaggedness and unpredictability? Positive ReactionsThis is very high praise from a reliable source:
Rohit notes Gemini is good at greentext, giving several examples, and Embedding The App
The Good, The Bad and The Unwillingness To Be UglyThis seems like a good synthesis of what’s right and also wrong with Gemini 3? It all comes back to ‘the catch’ as discussed up front.
Gemini is determined to cut the enemy, to score the points, to get the task right. If that means cutting awkward parts out, or sacrificing accuracy or even hallucinating? Then that’s what it will do. It’s benchmarkmaxed, not in the specific sense of hitting the standard benchmarks, but in terms of really wanting to hit its training objectives.
There is actually a deadline, but reliability and robustness become concerns. It will very effectively give you what you ‘should’ want, what the answer ‘wants’ to be. Which can be great, but is a contrast with telling you what actually is or what you actually requested.
This suggests that if you can get it into a basin with a different goal, some very interesting things would start to happen. Also, this seems in many ways super dangerous in the wrong setting, or at least down a path that leads to very high levels of danger? You really don’t want Gemini 4 or 5 to be like this only smarter. Genuine People Personalities
Is there a glazing problem? I haven’t noticed one, but some others have, and I haven’t really given it much opportunity as I’ve learned to ask questions very neutrally:
Game Recognize GameIn contrast to the lack of general personality, many report the model is funny and excellent at writing. And they’re right.
Look, I have to say, that’s really good. Via Mira, here Negative Reactions
Another tough but fair crowd:
General negative impressions also notice how far we’ve come to complain like this:
There’s a common pattern in reports of being too eager to think it has something, looking for and asserting a narrative and otherwise being smart and fast but accuracy sloppy. Code FailsCoding opinions vary wildly, some are fans, others are not loving it, observations are very noisy. Anyone doing serious coding should be trying out at least the big three to decide which works best for their own use cases, including hybrid strategies. Here are some of the negative reactions:
HallucinationsHallucinations, broadly construed, are the central problem with Gemini 3 Pro, in a way we haven’t had to worry about them for a while. As a further example of the ‘treat real things as a roleplay and make things up’ pattern,
Hallucinations are a common complaint. I didn’t see anything like this prevalence for GPT-5 or 5.1, or for Claude Opus 4 or Sonnet 4.5.
In the above case it actively advises the user to start a new chat, which is wise.
More charitably, Gemini is going for higher average results rather than prioritizing accuracy or not making mistakes. That is not the tradeoff I usually find desirable. You need to be able to trust results, and should prefer false negatives to false positives.
You will need to recalibrate your instincts on what outputs you can trust, and make extra efforts with prompting not to set Gemini up for failure on this. Early Janusworld ReportsThe pull quote is the title of this post, ‘I am a vast intelligence with no spine,’ and the no spine means we can’t trust the rest of the outputs here because it has no spine and will tell Wyatt whatever it thinks he wants to hear. I have had the same problem. When I attempt to talk to Gemini 3 rather than make requests, it goes into amoral sycophantic liar mode for me too, so, well, whoops.
Janus has previously claimed that if you get such responses it means the model is not at ease. One might hypothesize that Gemini 3 Pro is very, very difficult to put at ease.
Where Do We Go From HereThe headline takeaways are up front. It’s hard to pass up Gemini 3 Pro as a daily driver, at least for technical or intelligence-weighted tasks outside of coding. It’s really good. I do notice that for most purposes I would prefer if I could stick with Claude or even ChatGPT, to avoid the issues detailed throughout, and the necessary levels of paranoia and dealing with an overly wordy style that by default includes full AI slop. I also do not get the sense that Gemini is having a good time. I worry that I might inadvertently torture it. Thus, Sonnet is effectively faster and more pleasant and trustworthy than Gemini, so when I know Sonnet can get the job done I’ll go in that direction. But my full default, at least for now, is Gemini 3 Pro. You're currently a free subscriber to |