---
subject: "What, Exactly  are we Trying to Tax?"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <the-diff@ghost.io>"
to: ""
date: 2024-09-03 13:49:28
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
In this issue: - What, Exactly are we Trying to Tax?—There is something elegant to the idea of taxing unrealized capital gains. It gets around some weird perversions of the tax code, like the buy-borrow-die approach to avoiding taxes. But there are some other costs, and it raises the question of what we're doing when we tax.
- Correlations—When funds' mandate is to create uncorrelated return streams, they react swiftly when those returns end up correlated.
- Reorganization—If OpenAI truncates investors' returns, they'll try to benefit from their investment in other ways. And eventually those can be bad for OpenAI.
- Dating Copilots—Technology against indecision.
- Thematic Investing—Why one of the best AI ETFs is SPY.
- Bid Density—A PE bidding war breaks out in Japan.
Today's issue of The Diff is brought to you by our sponsor, What, Exactly are we Trying to Tax?Taxes serve the function of constraining consumption in order to offset the inflationary impact of government spending. You could boil that down to saying that taxes "pay for" spending, but that's an artificially limiting view. There are lots of ways to pay for it, and it doesn't all need to get paid for at once. Sometimes, it's much better to borrow—for example, during a recession deficits tend to expand due to unemployment insurance and often direct stimulus payments, bailouts, etc. Meanwhile, the government’s capacity to borrow goes way up, because investors buy safe assets like treasury bonds. So deficit spending is partly a way for governments to blunt the impact of a recession on the most economically vulnerable, but it’s equally fair to describe it as another instance of the cynical financial saying: "When the ducks are quacking, feed them." In designing a tax system, it's tempting to think that what you're deciding is who to tax and how, and the usual intuition is that it's fair to tax people who have a lot of money, and not people who don't. But that hasn't always been the default policy; the oldest tax systems we have tended to be designed by the rich and powerful (in a system where land is the main source of wealth, and where wars are fought by untrained militias rather than professional soldiers, the money-power correlation is almost perfect). And those systems tended to tax frequently-consumed goods that just about everyone needed, like A medieval salt tax is actually a good mental model for what drives optimal tax policy in practice:whatever you think you're doing, you're actually taxing behaviors. And your choices there are some combination of: - Tax things that people will still do about as much of regardless of how they're taxed. This, as in the salt example, ends up being pretty regressive. A country where the rice tax or bread tax doesn't affect calorie consumption much is a country where people are close enough to subsistence that they can't substitute for other foods, but not so close that they starve.
[[1]](https://www.thediff.co/r/3cb77505?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99) [Tax things you want less of](https://www.thediff.co/r/69cbe911?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99), like vices,[foreign real estate speculation](https://www.thediff.co/r/b835adf7?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99), pollution, etc. This often works well with point #1; taxes on cigarettes and gasoline sound good because either they generate a lot of revenue from the inelasticity of demand, or they're high enough to cause people to change their behavior in a way that reduces externalities elsewhere.[[2]](https://www.thediff.co/r/0a84bc92?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)- The richer a country gets, the less of its economic output gets spent on things with inelastic demand, like staple foods and shelter. And it's hard for a country to get especially rich with an economy that's mostly made up of vices.
[[3]](https://www.thediff.co/r/3ec4c07f?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)So tax policy moves on to the next best thing: tax things that, while desirable, are not quite as desirable as whatever the government plans to spend money on. Paychecks, for example: these are widely regarded as a very good thing, but companies care about the return they're getting on the money they spend, so income taxes don't fit the first or second criteria. But they add up, and, if those taxes are withheld from each paycheck rather than collected after the fact, a system that taxes wages gets a pretty high level of revenue compared to the cost of collecting the money. Corporate profits and capital gains aren't nearly as big a potential revenue source (total corporate profits in 2022 were $2.9tr, while wages were $10.5tr). Capital gains are also a potential revenue source, but[even at their peak they're a smaller share of GDP than corporate profits, and they're far more volatile](https://www.thediff.co/r/74bd16da?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99), and some of the time, the big spikes occur in anticipation of a change in how those gains will be taxed.
So, in this framework, what does it mean to tax unrealized capital gains? Just to keep things consistent, If taxes are meant to shrink consumption in order to offset the inflationary impact of government spending, higher taxes on the rich just don't do much. The richer someone is, the lower their marginal propensity to consume; you have to work pretty hard to consume a billion dollars in a year, and if you pull it off, your consumption probably takes the form of charitable donations. The very rich got that way, by definition, by spending a low fraction of the wealth they accrued in addition to earning a lot. At least, that's true if you define "consumption" in the macroeconomically useful way that involves transferring money to some other party in exchange for goods and services. There's another, more subtle form of consumption, which doesn't have a big fiscal impact but does strongly influence behavior. A good model of rich people, and the reason It's a sort of reimplementation of the Soviet model where there were two kinds of currency, one for consumers and one for business-to-business transactions. In a world where unrealized gains were taxed, you could imagine clever wonks inventing the idea of a low- or zero-interest loan used to pay those taxes, so founders wouldn’t have a constant cash drain while they were building companies. And this serves a useful social purpose! There are many reasons someone might get rich, especially temporarily, but it's hard to argue that they aren't, on average, going to be better than average at allocating capital, even if their decision not to diversify into index funds is, on average, an expensive one. If they aren't competing much for scarce goods and services, and are instead competing to run bigger companies or run them better, that's a prosocial way to direct a lust for power into activities that generate a large consumer surplus. In that model, a capital gains tax makes some sense, because it's a way to tax the act of converting power-capital into consumption-capital, at which point it's competing with a large number of people with smaller pocketbooks. But it's also an argument for policies analogous to At a low enough social discount rate, it makes sense to give returns on capital preferential treatment compared to other kinds of investing. Labor and capital are complements, so tax policies that incentivize investment trade lower consumption today for higher growth in consumption over time. But that doesn't have to hold to make unrealized gains a peculiar kind of income that deserves distinctive treatment. There are some reforms that would make sense, though: if someone gets most of their income through unrealized capital gains, and borrows against those gains, they're earning money and not paying taxes. This introduces a distortion: not only is their distribution of assets riskier than what most financial advisors would suggest, but they're also levering it up! For most of them, this will not be a huge problem—if Larry Ellison borrows another billion dollars to avoid realizing a taxable gain on selling Oracle stock, he's very unlikely to end up broke as a consequence. But it does mean that the most tax-advantaged form of consumption is the kind derived from very rich people levering up, which is just not a great way to design a tax code. The step-up in cost basis, i.e. the rule that heirs' cost basis is the value of an asset when they inherited it rather than the initial purchase price, also doesn't make much sense, especially in a world where there's an estate tax—combine these policies, and the tax code implicitly rewards rich people who gamble-through-inaction late in life by holding on to appreciated assets and having their heirs diversify for them. That, again, is not something anyone would explicitly craft rules to encourage. All of this also needs to be considered in light of the implementation details. There are people who take delight in finding edge cases in complex rules. Some of them are involved in A tax on unrealized gains isn't the end of the world. Every tax policy has some suboptimal features, and it's hard for a tax to drive you into penury if paying it is conditioned on having more money than you could reasonably spend in a lifetime. But part of what it illustrates is that the rich really are different, and their income and wealth means something different than middle-class income and wealth do. When they get richer, they do a little bit of competition with the rest of the economy over the allocation of scarce goods and services, but the vast majority of the competition they do is with other rich people instead. If you're worried about consumption inequality, you can take comfort in the fact that higher wealth inequality makes high deficit spending more sustainable: if more of the marginal dollars earned go to people who won't spend them on physical stuff, the inflationary impact of deficit spending is blunted. If you're more worried about wealth inequality than consumption inequality, that's implicitly a worry that the rich are not just too rich but too powerful. Creating a new set of rules that will only be understood by a handful of people whose services are only affordable to the very rich doesn't quite solve that problem; it just means that more of society's resources are dedicated to gaming the tax code around capital gains than to producing the wealth that leads to those gains in the first place. In the ancient world, taxes more or less tried to capture the gap between the average person's consumption and the minimum required to keep them alive, with a small allowance for the fact that [serfs had a habit of, when their life is sufficiently unpleasant, leaving for a less settled life in the mountains or riding around the steppes](https://www.thediff.co/r/5628342e?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99).[↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/5b4dc07a?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)Though to keep things good and grim, we can note that taxing cigarettes heavily enough to discourage smoking is probably a fiscal drag over time, because the revenue gains are offset by higher pension and healthcare expense later in life. This has [been studied before](https://www.thediff.co/r/8402cd13?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99), though Philip Morris, the sponsor of the study in question, was very quick to disavow and apologize when it came out. It was a big news story for a while, but the "while" in question was the summer of 2001.[↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/78e65a45?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)Obvious counterexamples come to mind, generally at the sub-national or special-case level, like Las Vegas or Macau. But these are both part of larger economic zones that mostly aren't dominated by vices, as evidenced by the fact that many other jurisdictions in these places don't allow the vice in question, requiring people to travel to indulge in them. Las Vegas was not a particularly rich city when the gamblers were mostly locals. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/6684f38e?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)This is a description of how to think intelligently about policy, not how to enact it. In practice, one of the drivers of a new tax will be the desire for higher revenue coupled with the realization that some targets of taxation are less sympathetic than others. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/87c7ee3f?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
You're on the free list for The Diff. Last week, paying subscribers read about A Word From Our SponsorsCan this really be true?ElsewhereCorrelationsAfter the unwind of the Japanese carry trade last month, ReorganizationOne of the weird things about OpenAI's business is that it isn't really a business. Or rather, it’sa business contained within a nonprofit, and that business has an odd structure that caps investors' gains. If you think about the statistical distribution of returns, and about what OpenAI investors are betting on, that's a very expensive cap—they're buying the most volatile asset imaginable, and selling a free out-of-the-money call option as part of the deal. This Dating CopilotsIt's sometimes fun to speculate on the aggregate cost of minor human failings. Years ago Thematic InvestingWhenever there's a market trend that applies to more than one asset, there's an opportunity to stick a bunch of semi-related assets into an investing vehicle, name it after the trend, and then sell it to the public. This tends to be a countercyclical indicator, because it's a signal that the marginal buyer is less sensitive to valuation and more sensitive to the feeling that they're missing out. But even when the overall trend keeps going, these products can underperform: Bid DensityFuji Soft, a Japanese IT company, Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. See a sampling of current open roles below: - A new data startup that's seeing early traction bringing transparency to a $1.5tr asset class is looking for an experienced founding engineer. This is a full-stack role; Python, React experience a plus (Hybrid, Miami/West Palm Beach, FL).
- An AI startup building unique tools for compliance-focused companies is looking for an attorney who can work with customers to help them use the product. JD from a top school and experience at a leading law firm (or an in-house role in finance) preferred. (NYC)
- Growing edtech company with successes online and offline is looking for an influencer who can reach the parents of gifted and talented kids. (Remote, full- or part-time).
- A tech-bio startup creating the world’s largest database of protein-molecule interactions is looking for a machine learning engineer with experience training LLMs on large scale distributed systems (Remote)
- A startup building a new financial market within a multi-trillion dollar asset class is looking for a data operations specialist (NYC/Boston).
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. |
||||||||||
|
|
|
||||||||||
|