---
subject: "3 Levels of Culture Fixes"
from: "Robin Hanson from Overcoming Bias <overcomingbias@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-07-05 19:32:07
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Overcoming Bias", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8616244883382228708", "UNREAD"]
---
I see three levels at which we could try to fix cultural drift: specific cultural trends, cultural evolution process parameters, and meta mechanism/institutions. First, we could try to identify specific cultural trends over the last few centuries that seem plausibly maladaptive, and then try to advocate for their reversals. Second, we could try identify ways in which the cultural evolution process today has bad parameters and then try to advocate for changes that would improve those parameters. Third, we could try to assign the whole problem to governance mechanisms that we find or make that seem competent enough to actually solve it. I’ve previously On parameters of the cultural evolution process, it is our estimates of these parameters today, compared to centuries ago, that is our primary evidence that we might have a big problem. The following table shows eight plausible ways to improve these parameters, together with poll priorities for how desirable is each solution, how much it would help the cultural drift problem, how easy they would be to achieve, how likely each is to actually happen, and a sum of these four priorities. All sorted by that priority sum, which gives the same ranking as sorting by priority product, and by help priority. The three lowest fixes are all the least desired, and have the same relative rankings of all but actual, with Malthusian AI the clear worst fix overall. This is somewhat surprising to me as I often get people saying why worry because AI will fix everything. Respondents like Culture RETVRN and Shame Activism, except that they think them crazy hard to make happen. War Return is quite undesired, but seen as pretty likely and easy to achieve. The top two fixes, All Capitalism and Fragment World are seen as quite desirable and feasible, so maybe we should focus our efforts there. On specific cultural trends, I collected a list of 32 trends and did polls asking re their relative adaptiveness, and ease of changing: These results are tentative; will replace this table with final values tomorrow, and add commentary then. You're currently a free subscriber to |