---
subject: "The Baboon Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-09-28 12:44:44
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Joseph Dana (JD) is a longstanding friend of WITI and a South Africa-based writer. He formerly edited the opinion pages at The National in Abu Dhabi and served as Monocle's Eastern Mediterranean correspondent and Istanbul bureau chief. Sign up for his newsletter: “ Joseph here. Earlier this year, my wife and I moved to Kommetjie, South Africa, a small village near the tip of the Cape Peninsula known for its coastline, surfing, and natural vistas. Since the Covid-19 lockdowns, Kommetjie has grown in size as newly minted remote workers have left the city center in search of value and fresh air. The influx of new residents (and the sheer number of new housing developments) has caused a flare up in a long-standing struggle between baboons and the human residents of the Cape Peninsula. With the craggy hills and plentiful native Baboon in my neighbors house a couple of weeks ago. Most days, I see troupes of baboons casually walking down the street or climbing trees around our neighborhood. Days after we moved, my wife and I were shopping for food in Kommetije’s only deli. As we were looking for bread, a baboon walked into the store, grabbed a loaf of bread, and walked out as if it owned the place. Then a group of baboon rangers, which are partially Why is this interesting? Achieving coexistence between baboons and humans is a contentious issue. The baboon habitat is Another shot that includes my garden. Steps have been taken to mitigate the baboon issue. We have several WhatsApp groups to alert the community when baboons enter our neighborhood so that we can close our doors and windows. Our trash cans have special locks designed to keep the baboons out. The rangers do their best to keep the troupes away from populated areas. But these measures amount to little more than a band-aid for the deeper challenge and some have taken to One idea that has been tested in other parts of Cape Town is an advanced electric fence designed to keep the baboons confined to their natural mountain habitat. I am not sold that this is the total solution. Given South Africa’s crime situation, many homes and estates already have fencing that baboons have no problem finding ways around. No matter what we come up with, the baboons will find a way to our food. Writing in Urban growth shows no sign of slowing, so we either have to live with baboons or — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Joseph (JD) —
You're currently a free subscriber to |