---
subject: "iPhone Action Button 📱, StackOverflow's AI 🤖, inside Twitter 🐦"
from: "TLDR <dan@tldrnewsletter.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-07-28 10:17:19
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "TLDR", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_795315172960844453", "UNREAD"]
---
[iPhone 15 Pro Action Button Options Potentially Revealed in iOS 17 Code: Flashlight, Shortcuts, Voice Memos, and More (2 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.macrumors.com%2F2023%2F07%2F26%2Fios-17-beta-action-button-iphone-15-pro%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001899c00b4ca-c24dfb2a-899c-4d36-898d-ba5761a37442-000000/mMzWWj3DBmU7fvjgrD_Juboyc3gE6JMb05mhHE80b-M=311)
Apple has released the fourth beta of iOS 17 to developers. There are new code snippets contained within the beta that hint at functionality for the rumored Action button on the upcoming iPhone 15 Pro and Pro Max. The iPhone 15 Pro and Pro Max's Action button will reportedly replace the Ring/Silent switch and allow users to quickly access various functions and settings without unlocking the device or navigating to an app. There will likely be nine options for features that users can customer and assign to different actions - these are listed in the article. |
[An epilogue to my time working at Twitter (10 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Festhercrawford.medium.com%2Fan-epilogue-to-my-time-working-at-twitter-24a126098246%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001899c00b4ca-c24dfb2a-899c-4d36-898d-ba5761a37442-000000/PS0eKtF4razKOanwRJV10VZhR7aY8cc55hcW7af-YoU=311)
This article from Esther Crawford talks about her time working at Twitter. Crawford sold her startup to Twitter in 2020. She describes the experience as both amazing and terrible. The company often felt siloed and bureaucratic and engineers had to act as politicians instead of just building. The article covers topics such as what it is like to work/interact with Elon Musk and the dangers of living in an echo chamber. |
Science & Futuristic Technology
|
[Intel CEO: ‘We’re going to build AI into every platform we build’ (3 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.theverge.com%2F2023%2F7%2F27%2F23810360%2Fintel-pat-gelsinger-ai-every-platform-promise%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001899c00b4ca-c24dfb2a-899c-4d36-898d-ba5761a37442-000000/uFukkGqgh6HYqufshjJ1bznA7s2aY0nRMBPXKGwEY7I=311)
Intel's CEO was very bullish on AI during the company's Q2 2023 earnings call. The company plans to ship its first consumer chip with a built-in neural processor for machine learning tasks later this year. It plans to eventually integrate AI into everything it sells. Integrating AI into consumer chips will allow AI processing to happen at the edge rather than on the cloud, improving latency, bandwidth, and costs. |
[For Cheaper Lithium-Ion Batteries, Just Add Salt (3 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fspectrum.ieee.org%2Flithium-battery%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001899c00b4ca-c24dfb2a-899c-4d36-898d-ba5761a37442-000000/2a7V7RPjSSizeO-8skKHTjlgH7GAFfjpT-W2dm5X4H8=311)
The cost of lithium has increased tenfold since 2020. Scientists from Arizona State University have proposed diluting lithium with sodium as a solution to cutting the cost of batteries. The team found that a lithium solution with up to 20 percent sodium mixed could remain stable. However, the resulting structure did not possess the properties necessary to create a viable battery. |
Programming, Design & Data Science
|
[Announcing OverflowAI (6 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fstackoverflow.blog%2F2023%2F07%2F27%2Fannouncing-overflowai%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001899c00b4ca-c24dfb2a-899c-4d36-898d-ba5761a37442-000000/o1D1j0tLpixd3oMaslDPJFqZSLLOn3Zh5fgKFHW3-AU=311)
Overflow AI is Stack Overflow's new plan to integrate generative AI into its platform. It includes adding new search capabilities, the ability to curate and build a knowledge base in minutes, Slack integration, a Visual Studio Code extension, and a dedicated location for AI resources and responses from experts. Developers interested in helping Stack Overflow test its new AI-powered features can register to help on the Stack Overflow Labs page. Stack Overflow aims to keep its developer community at the center and ensure that the people who contribute their knowledge are recognized for their efforts. |
[BlazingMQ (Website)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fbloomberg.github.io%2Fblazingmq%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001899c00b4ca-c24dfb2a-899c-4d36-898d-ba5761a37442-000000/u-xVf7XbtRQAPTkb2BJUEltjFMZH7skg4I1hxyva63M=311)
BlazingMQ is a distributed message queueing platform. It provides a set of message routing strategies and supports a unique multi-hop network topology that leads to a distribution tree for each queue, creating network bandwidth savings for certain use cases. Using BlazingMQ can lead to significant savings in network and latency for high fan-out workflows. |
[Stack Overflow's CEO doesn't understand Stack Overflow (10 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fjlericson.com%2F2023%2F07%2F26%2Fnot_understanding.html%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001899c00b4ca-c24dfb2a-899c-4d36-898d-ba5761a37442-000000/IyMkRKFEGQ8olyNXmqV6lD1FXdOq1npMvOAFJdXqtsY=311)
Stack Overflow's CEO Prashanth Chandrasekar recently conducted an interview where they discussed generative AI technology and Stack Overflow's strategy around dealing with it. This article analyses Chandrasekar responses in the interview. It presents the unedited transcript along with the analysis to allow the reader to interpret the original context. The analysis suggests that Chandrasekar hasn't listened to the Stack Overflow community and that their understanding of the site, its community, and culture is very surface-level. |
[PeerDB (GitHub Repo)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fgithub.com%2FPeerDB-io%2Fpeerdb%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001899c00b4ca-c24dfb2a-899c-4d36-898d-ba5761a37442-000000/7Lqrp-QObOqOQ288dEdjm6dshW6twaxBFqO5o1NKo7E=311)
PeerDB is a data-movement platform that makes moving data in and out of Postgres fast and simple. |
[TLDR Talent](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fdanni763618.typeform.com%2Fto%2FrSL4lOH3/1/010001899c00b4ca-c24dfb2a-899c-4d36-898d-ba5761a37442-000000/djBZvPtPJYVMHru5F3KL0OqjeKhcC5SojuQLsU0JcIc=311) is our exclusive community where we help world-class tech talent and get intros to companies of their choice, along with a number of exciting startups and tech companies curated by TLDR.
We give you full control of the process, you can specify if you’re actively searching or passively interested only if something amazing comes along. Set your preferred compensation, seniority/title/role, specific companies (or types of companies) you’d like to work for and more. [Click here to apply](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fdanni763618.typeform.com%2Fto%2FrSL4lOH3/2/010001899c00b4ca-c24dfb2a-899c-4d36-898d-ba5761a37442-000000/lC7jb37Y4gZ5te955ViP6Q9fvlzcAwmy0GLcDUMn7do=311).
|
If your company is interested in reaching an audience of tech executives, decision-makers and engineers, you may want to [advertise with us](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fshare.hsforms.com%2F1OxvmrkcFS4qsxKpNXCi76wee466%3Futm_source=tldr%26utm_medium=newsletter/2/010001899c00b4ca-c24dfb2a-899c-4d36-898d-ba5761a37442-000000/Oq9ruQHmubGawZ04kOwBONJgmz4KuZB61yMqZeTpEBw=311).
If you have any comments or feedback, just respond to this email!
Thanks for reading,
[Dan Ni](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2Ftldrdan/1/010001899c00b4ca-c24dfb2a-899c-4d36-898d-ba5761a37442-000000/Q-kJ98NKfn0SNPLDmiA1kUSS0ANmd6KNBBO0Eziqvu4=311) and [Stephen Flanders](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2FSteveFlanders22/1/010001899c00b4ca-c24dfb2a-899c-4d36-898d-ba5761a37442-000000/09sVouRClK-jraD0S5z9YD-0qHNrfmpC_oSbtudVO-A=311)
|
|
| |