---
subject: "The cost of action"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-11-05 03:34:23
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
Don’t you hate it when trying to solve one problem seems to spawn three or four others?
Sometimes, that’s because not enough thought went into the policy in question. Other times, the consequences were not visible when the decision was made. Solutions that create problems are a constant, if depressing, fact of life. I recall a quote from eminent Harvard scientist Steven Pinker:
“Problems are inevitable. Problems are solvable. Solutions create new problems.”
Of course, Pinker is an optimist who believes the world has steadily gotten better, and that this endless iteration of problem-solution-problem results in overall progress. It’s a belief that I take comfort in.
This week’s stories from The Ken illustrate the concept pretty well, though whether these solutions/problems lead to something better remains to be seen.
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI), worried about the swift rise in personal loan disbursals, has warned banks to tighten things up. But strangling supply is hardly a solution when demand remains unchanged and other channels of credit exist. Rounak’s [story published Monday](https://the-ken.com/story/how-banks-are-making-life-easier-for-loan-sharks/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) lays bare how the RBI’s move has only pushed desperate borrowers to approach unregulated moneylenders, exposing themselves to all the additional risk of dealing with loan sharks.
On Tuesday, Abhirami wrote about Generative AI, and how, nearly a year after OpenAI threw open the floodgates, it seems like Indian IT companies are [still feeling around in the dark](https://the-ken.com/story/the-genai-paradox-why-indian-it-firms-ban-it-while-preparing-to-sell-it/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter). Clients, Abhirami reports, are intrigued by the vast implications of AI integration. Everyone agrees AI has the potential to change the world in earthshaking ways, but hardly anyone seems ready to take the plunge.
Wednesday’s story by Gaurav, meanwhile, is [an excellent illustration](https://the-ken.com/story/phonepes-bestselling-policy-is-also-holding-back-its-insurance-business/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) of how not everything that seems good, is good. It might actually be very bad. PhonePe’s two-wheeler insurance policies are a bestseller in the insurance vertical. However, the low-commission product only holds back the Walmart-owned company’s insurance ambitions. PhonePe has set its eyes on health insurance to bring things back on track, but that comes with its own challenges.
On that note, India’s largest multiplex operator is also trying something new. Passport, PVR Inox’s first-ever subscription plan for regular movie-goers, attempts to bring back weekday occupancy to pre-pandemic levels. A subscription plan may sound like a good strategy in a movie-crazy market like India. Still, Shivani reports how PVR Inox may be [stacking the odds against itself](https://the-ken.com/story/pvr-inox-stacks-the-odds-against-its-own-subscription-service/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) with onerous and unattractive terms and conditions.
Finally, on Friday, Pratap wrote about how the Indian government is asking internet platforms to take action against “fake news” and “misinformation” in the run-up to the 2024 general elections. Youtube, for instance, has been asked to tag such content or channels as “News not verified”. Lest you start thinking that the government is finally getting serious about tackling misinformation, I urge you to [read Pratap’s explainer](https://the-ken.com/story/prepare-for-a-sea-of-news-not-verified/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter). Just as an example, the government’s letter to internet companies doesn’t even define what “fake news” is. It’s a free read, so do share widely.
Happy reading!
What you just read is the personalised daily introduction to The Ken's story. Written by a different person each day. Often insightful, sometimes witty, and very rarely boring. Someone sent this to you? [Sign up for free](https://the-ken.com/?modal=register&utm_source=footer&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=morning_email_ind_recap). [Dont like these? You can unsubscribe](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/unsubscribe/?user_id=2349339&data=rNNhzXUZTEyTpB6UJRd1VuttfvBC-cB_02RdGVEm_TdoMDAwdTAwMBn6gIeSaaX6BgErbFzsXMUPDKhjfDOF5NITGeuCWoBFSwwj_AbzR9-mrLLVlcZxJX2Rn0xQQbj5R0gq41O0UYxPgQItDs1mzJ3w-5bGR5vENA_3XtYU4PPP7Fb4brHwHsU0tojQyEh7DDFXzpHZ7IsikewXlcsSWLIr1xMOg2GPnkGIHwaZ0V9831-_LtdYABVIIRwbvkIiTVDj5oP6ngPV9yEBXBN7PFioLOX8rdMiUBAnMg829BonCmhWM5qVOax7dYPvC4sEr25IhKKjAjR1pMN8SNc1CjPhSG53z06hAKXslP2i6dNtUqy5_PLCT3k-BBQznX3P0V3yGVax5fq_6UDBGmXdnq8LU50Oyi4pdPEe3FnmLCGb9kIio6mksjcd6TEPrTcxkOguMjHZrHzo6kQAfSIE5qVozC7L9if6HKgvy3Gl-3mx0uGN_aeJZDk3-GVUpsp48oKokyNWaQ4XnQ6Ln6i2Xz9V9_glJdmHPgtCie6ak9BAiKQ5vtXa6yZU5utgHfdffFGi5GUEIwg=) Dont want to hear from us again? [ Unsubscribe from our emails here](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/?user_id=2349339&data=TUHwhfDZmjtvUzGJ8DPX8OUk_e2YQpvraAWfXECLFixoMDAwdTAwMGWmcYLEsBfCHIlv9jqV8M6Xxljy1Tzr0AlHnNsx8mRestRo3dxZIrCj3K_dNxJv5B4GwEwcDxUZNAf3C-q3vcjjOW9Pnxi-tbJG3pJZl2Eso8l1OtZkgqlpARTuLY3OW-JBvaHh5l2Zt5V6FNgdTpl8qqYMUl-boxJZ1qsGT_INVqk7qG3Tg72EuKePPNE59QeJPCssVtlf92jhcx2GXSyGeCyIvWQmCaqIlbTDDVGJsS5AzNZcWwX4N_Vl4Cf23XoFZqwbpa0lCU2GvC8tRlmGnbQa-y6aQ2fBrcjAFRDeI7nwOsa43nOyBthIW3oMaoAEjnHhqLI27_vly4gkVlyepVobImx7fJfrznktTCgXSemqeVxK42ynCKhBW4dlcQ_v1a9lR5E-gFCvpnwqWTL218BM52BeHinLXuGR_k8DPFs_GaDyQDPvZiJY8Uoyumf5S2wnpyopPWmi3b089MFR5_ooLNHHWfHSdyTOquuTiyj3a3P4kfctRcdcQ0Wz0Q==).
Something wrong? Tell us at [support@the-ken.com](mailto:support@the-ken.com)