---
subject: "Retro Recomendo: Career"
from: "Recomendo <recomendo@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-01-04 10:02:15
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Recomendo", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8455078693589186571", "UNREAD"]
---
Our subscriber base has grown so much since we first started nine years ago, that most of you have missed all our earliest recommendations. The best of these are still valid and useful, so we’re trying out something new — Retro Recomendo. Once every 6 weeks, we’ll send out a throwback issue of evergreen recommendations focused on one theme from the past 9 years. How to do great workLast year, Paul Graham, a renowned programmer, entrepreneur, and venture capitalist known for co-founding Y Combinator, wrote an essay titled “ Productive meetingsThis A guide for daily “professional” interactions
Good advice for applying for jobsI am a big fan of YouTuber Ali Abdaal. In this video about A Two-Minute Burnout CheckupThis Ryan Holiday’s career wisdomWriter and entrepreneur Ryan Holiday has had a varied career, from Hollywood agent assistant to marketing director for American Apparel. He’s put together a list of Find what nobody else wants to do and do it. Find inefficiency and waste and redundancies. Identify leaks and patches to free up resources for new areas. Produce more than everyone else and give your ideas away. Always say less than necessary. Saying less than necessary, not interjecting at every chance we get — this is actually the mark not just of a self-disciplined person, but also a very smart and wise person. Your creative output, your personal relationships, and your social life—balancing all three is impossible. You can excel in two if you say no to one. If you can’t, you’ll have none. When people compete, somebody loses. So go where you’re the only one. Do what only you can do. Run a race with yourself.
— MF THIS ISSUE IS SPONSORED BY Recomendo Unclassified Ads work! UNCLASSIFIEDS 9 Hidden Perks of Your Amazon Prime Membership. Are you taking advantage of your Amazon Prime perks? Most Prime members miss out on perks! Recomendo is an authentic, hand-crafted, human-written weekly newsletter that is free, but not cheap. Consider supporting our work with a paid option, now at the low price of $45 per year. Paid subs enable us to keep making it free for others. Recomendo is published by Cool Tools Lab, a small company of three people. We also run the Recomendo is copyrighted by Cool Tools Lab, LLC. Commissions may be earned from the links above. |