---
subject: "Trade Escalation, Supply Chain Vulnerabilities and Rare Earth Metals"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-10-14 15:28:40
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
What is going on with, and what should we do about, the Chinese China also took other actions well beyond only rare Earths, China now has issued reassurances that it will allow all civilian uses of rare earths and not to worry, but it seems obvious that America cannot accept a Chinese declaration of extraterritorial control over entire world supply chains, even if China swears it will only narrowly use that power. In response, Trump has threatened massive tariffs and cancelled our APAC meeting with China, while also trying to calm the markets rattled by the prospect of massive tariffs and the cancellation of the meeting with China. World geopolitics and America-China relations are not areas where I am an expert, so all of this could be highly misguided, but I’m going to do my best to understand it all. Was This Provoked?
If you buy the most pro-China argument being made here (which I don’t), Whereas the right move if this did happen would have been to loudly call out the moves as having been done behind his back and give Trump a chance to look good, and only retaliate later if that fails. And even if China did feel the need to retaliate, the audacity of what China is trying to do is well beyond a reasonable countermove. What Is China Doing?
The export controls on chips presumably aren’t China’s primary goal here in any case. I assume they mostly want tariff relief, this is a reasonable thing to want, and on that we should be willing to negotiate. They get to play this card once before we (I hope) get our own production house in order on this, the card was losing power over time already, they played it, that’s that. How Is America Responding?
That threat was always going to be part of the initial reaction, and thus does not itself provide strong evidence that China overreached, although the exact degree of The question is what happens next. China’s move effectively bets that China holds all the cards, and on TACO, that they can escalate to de-escalate and get concessions, and that Trump will fold and give them a ‘great deal.’ We are We also are announcing this:
I am excited to do the equivalent of by far the most successful government program of the past decade and Trump’s greatest success.
How Is China Responding To America’s Response?China quickly
Beijing is emphasizing that this is ‘not a ban’ except for military use. Thinking this is what needs to be emphasized indicates they misunderstand the dynamics involved. This was not something that was misunderstood. What To Make Of China’s Attempted Reassurances?Perhaps it was intended as a warning that they could have done a ban and chose not to? Except that implicit threat is exactly the most unacceptable aspect of all this. The argument that others need not worry does not hold water. Any reasonable business would worry. As for governments, you can’t be permitted by others to remain the sole supplier of vital military supplies if you don’t let them go into others military equipment, even if the rules are only ever enforced as announced. Nor is America going to let China demand unlimited information transfer about everything that touches their rare earths, or accept China having a legal veto point over the entire global supply chain even if they pledge to only use it for military applications. As in, this is not merely ‘Trump wants this regime withdrawn.’ This is an unacceptable, dealbreaker-level escalation that America cannot reasonably accept. So we are at an impasse that has to give way in some fashion, or this escalates again. How Should We Respond From Here?
We must use this as an impetus to finally pay the subsidies and give the waivers needed and do whatever else we need to do, in order to get rare earth production and refining in the West. It’s not like all the deposits happen to be in China. America used to be the top producer and could be again. I strongly Note the justification China used for this new restriction, which is that any chip below 14nm or 256 layer memory has ‘military applications.’ Well then, where should we put the limit on our chip sales to them? They certainly have military applications.
It Looks Like China Overplayed Its HandThe way this is playing out now does update us towards China having miscalculated and overplayed their hand, potentially quite badly if they are unable to offer an acceptable compromise while saving face and dealing with internal pressures. Asserting control over supply and terms of trade is a trick you hopefully can only pull once. Demonstrate you have the world over a barrel because no one else was willing to pay a modest price to secure alternative supplies, and everyone is going to go pay a modest price to secure alternative supplies, not only of this but of everything else too, and look hard at any potential choke points. That dynamic is indeed also one of the big problems with Trump’s tariff shenanigans. If you prove yourself willing to use leverage and an unreliable trading partner (provoked, fairly or otherwise) then everyone is going to look to take away your leverage and stop depending on you. Hold up problems that get exploited get solved. We Need To Mitigate China’s Leverage Across The BoardIn this sense, the response must inevitably go well beyond rare earths, even if a deal is reached and both sides back down.
That is very hard under our current equilibria, but is eminently solvable given political will. You can overcome the permitting. You can pass reforms that bypass or greatly mitigate the lawsuits. You can use advance market commitments to lock in profitability. The strategic value greatly exceeds the associated costs. If you care enough. What About The Chip Export Controls?What about the parallel with advanced AI chips themselves, you ask? Isn’t that the same thing in reverse? There are some similarities, but no. That is aimed squarely at only a few geopolitical rivals, contained to one particular technology that happens to be the most advanced and difficult to duplicate on Earth, and one that China is already going full speed ahead to get domestically, and where share of global chip supply is a key determinant of the future. Yes, there are elements of ‘China doesn’t get to do extraterritorial controls on strategic resources, only America gets to do extraterritorial controls on strategic resources.’ And indeed, to an extent that is exactly our position, and it isn’t new, and it’s not the kind of thing you give up in such a spot. This May Be A Sign Of WeaknessWe also should consider the possibility that China has a huge slow moving demographic problem and youth that are by all reports struggling, which is both a crisis and indicates that many things are deeply wrong, mounting debt and a large collapsed real estate sector. Recently China started clamping down on ‘negative emotional contagion’ on social media. What Next?I would presume the default outcome is that a detente of some form is reached before massive escalations actually get implemented. The market is concerned but not freaking out, and this seems correct. There is still a lot of risk in the room. When cards like this are put on the table, even with relatively conservative negotiation styles, they sometimes get played, and there could end up being a fundamental incompatibility, internal pressures and issues of loss of face here that when combined leave no ZOPA (zone of possible agreement), or don’t open up one without more market turbulence first. I would not relax. Is there risk that America could fold here and give up things it would be highly unwise to give up? Not zero, and when powerful cards like this get played it is typical that one must make concessions somewhere, but I expect us to be able to limit this to places where compromise is acceptable, such as tariffs, where our position was always in large part a negotiating tactic. If anything, this move by China only emphasizes the importance of not compromising on key strategic assets like AI chips, and tightening our grip especially on the manufacturing equipment and component sides. Even if we end up making substantial concessions on tariffs and other negotiable fronts, in places China sensibly finds valuable, this whole exchange will still be a win. This was a powerful card, it is much harder to play it again, and we are going to make much stronger efforts than before to shore up this and other strategic weaknesses. If this causes us to take a variety of similar vulnerabilities properly seriously, we will have come out far ahead. While in general, I strongly dislike industrial policy, inputs that create holdup problems and other narrow but vital strategic resources can provide a clear exception. We should still strive to let markets handle it, with our main goal being to pay providers sufficiently and to remove restrictions on production. You're currently a free subscriber to |