---
subject: "Longreads + Open Thread"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <diff@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-11-26 17:01:04
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
This is the weekly longreads roundup and open thread for The Diff. LongreadsJames B. Stewart in the NYT on [the AT&T acquisition of Time Warner](https://substack.com/redirect/a940adb0-8c3f-4a78-968d-aa3688191a80?r=8o54n): "The Worst Merger Ever?" The piece details the extreme culture clash between a media organization and a telecom business, and the narrower personality differences between Time Warner and AT&T's management. (In the opening scene, AT&T's head presents Time Warner executives with a memo detailing how he wants them to communicate with him.¹) A good look at why merger synergies don't always add up.Meghna Rao at Meridian [profiles Carolynn Levy, inventor of the SAFE](https://substack.com/redirect/4d36cc4d-ee51-4793-a392-68d9a0bf1f35?r=8o54n). Early-stage investing has grown in part because it's become extremely standardized, and the SAFE is an important part of that. It's a nice example of productivity growth in a service industry: instead of inventing new legal terms for every startup (which in practice meant either repeating existing work or finding a clever way to structure an unfair contract), a single product has been mass-produced at high quality and low cost.Matthew Tejo: [Why Twitter Didn’t Go Down: From a Real Twitter SRE](https://substack.com/redirect/dcd2cf75-a63c-4406-9ccf-ac4e97fdba19?r=8o54n). It's hard to develop intuitions on roughly what order of magnitude the required headcount is to run a given service. It's much more common to cite a company as overstaffed than to point to examples of low-headcount services that were still able to scale (the two classic case studies are WhatsApp and Instagram). This piece goes into some detail on what happens automatically and what requires human intervention—which is a good start for thinking about where the tradeoff favors the latter, even at Twitter scale.Quantian on [physics hacks that can be applied to quantitative finance](https://substack.com/redirect/7d2c58b5-d9b3-4ced-b0e1-26d8bb0bbfb1?r=8o54n). Highly, highly recommended; it's a great case study in taking a fairly abstract idea, in this case the fact that answers need to be in specific units, and applying it to a novel topic. (And don't miss the coda, about using parallel construction to disclose information you already have but aren't supposed to share—also a fun topic!)Just in case that post leaves you wildly excited to apply metaphors across disciplines, [this piece from](https://substack.com/redirect/30a35da4-a827-438d-a688-8d1aafce7f3c?r=8o54n)[SubAnima](https://substack.com/redirect/30a35da4-a827-438d-a688-8d1aafce7f3c?r=8o54n)[is a great case study in a model that](https://substack.com/redirect/30a35da4-a827-438d-a688-8d1aafce7f3c?r=8o54n)[doesn't](https://substack.com/redirect/30a35da4-a827-438d-a688-8d1aafce7f3c?r=8o54n)[apply in a different field](https://substack.com/redirect/30a35da4-a827-438d-a688-8d1aafce7f3c?r=8o54n): as it turns out, cells should not be thought of as machines. This is a great piece on a topic that's fractally complicated.
Books[The Money Noose](https://substack.com/redirect/c3f2cd35-ce31-40f4-a41e-1ad55433fd77?r=8o54n): Before FTX, the big story of a broker/prop trading firm collapsing because they dipped into customers' accounts was the collapse of MF Global. This book is less of an "I interviewed all the participants and got the real story, or at least a few plausible stories" book, and more of an "I read the legal documents, SEC filings, and news reports so you don't have to" kind of book. Decent if you want to know what happened to MF Global, but not destined to be on the list of great books about big frauds. The mechanics of the collapse were deeper than just misappropriating customer funds. MF Global had the motivation to do that in part because there was a trade they could run that would allow them to book profits upfront on trades that would take a year to resolve. (This happens surprisingly often; one thing that did Enron in was booking mark-to-market profits on long-term deals. And in the 1980s, Lehman ran into trouble in the opposite direction, from trades whose losses didn't have to be booked upfront.) As happens a lot with leveraged firms, the trades that bankrupted them all turned out fine in the end. What killed them wasn't being wrong about the direction of asset prices, but being unable to withstand a margin call.
Open ThreadDrop in any links or comments of interest to Diff readers. I'm interested in learning about the mechanics of layoffs. How do companies decide how much to cut, or who goes and who stays? There is clearly a process that starts with someone saying "We should reduce our headcount" and ends with specific people having a fairly unpleasant meeting with HR, but what happens in between? (If you'd prefer to discuss this off the record, please feel free to reach out by email.)
Reader FeedbackCalvin McCarter
A Word From Our SponsorsTegus is the first port of call for M&A professionals and institutional investors ramping up on an industry or company. Get access to a database of 35,000+ expert call transcripts, spanning 5+ years, or schedule expert calls through the platform for a fraction of the usual cost. When thousands of research analysts are pooling their expert calls into an on-demand database, using Tegus is table stakes. It's the leading platform for due diligence and primary research. See the power of a Tegus subscription, and get up to data parity with your competitors, with a two week free trial through the Diff. Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively seeking talent! If you're interested in exploring growth opportunities at unique companies, please reach out. Some top current roles: A company building ML-powered tools to accelerate developer productivity is looking for a mathematician. (Washington DC area) A fintech startup that basically lets investors trade any theme as if there were an ETF for it is looking for a senior backend engineer. (NYC) A company that helps emerging tech businesses identify and hire top talent—and that gets paid in equity—is looking for new team members. A great way to build a startup portfolio and a great network without an in at a VC firm. (US, multiple locations) A company that's building a new hyperlocal bricks-and-clicks business seeks a market launcher who can close deals with small businesses and handle rapid scaling. (If you've ever wished you could have launched markets for Airbnb or Uber/Lyft in the early days, this is your shot...) A Web3 project with a thriving community of developers and users (it's outlasted more than one crypto cycle!) is looking for a Director of Finance. (Remote)
If you’re looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. We're especially interested in talking to companies interested in remote contractors with finance and operations experience. If your startup needs half of a Head of Strategy or Director of Finance, please reach out. 1 It's an interesting look at class and power. There are wealthy and powerful people, and they can no doubt hire extremely deferential assistants, domestic help, etc. But there is apparently no amount of money or power that lets someone get away with making such demands of anyone they want to. You’re a free subscriber to |