---
subject: "How Did You Do On The AI Art Turing Test?"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-11-20 12:44:27
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Last month, I originally planned five human and five AI pictures in each of four styles: Renaissance, 19th Century, Abstract/Modern, and Digital, for a total of forty. After receiving many exceptionally good submissions from local AI artists, I fudged a little and made it fifty. The final set included paintings by Domenichino, Gauguin, Basquiat, and others, plus a host of digital artists and AI hobbyists. If you want to try the test yourself before seeing the answers, go Last chance to take the test before seeing the results, which are: … … … 1: Most People Had A Hard Time Identifying AI ArtSince there were two choices (human or AI), blind chance would produce a score of 50%, and perfect skill a score of 100%. The median score on the test was 60%, only a little above chance. The mean was 60.6%. Participants said the task was harder than expected (median difficulty 4 on a 1-5 scale). How meaningful is this? I tried to make the test as fair as possible by including only the best works from each category; on the human side, that meant taking prestigious works that had survived the test of time; on the AI side, it meant tossing the many submissions that had garbled text, misshapen hands, or some similar deformity. But this makes it unrepresentative of a world where many AI images will have these errors. I also tried to pick human works with a minimum of "tells" that would reveal their humanity without requiring any subtle artistic discrimination. So I stayed away from text (non-garbled text would be a strong sign that a picture was human), complicated wrestling-like poses (AIs mostly can't do these and end up with limbs emerging from nowhere) and pop art (something about the clean lines and replicated images is a bad match for AI's abilities). Again, this makes the test unrepresentative of a world where some art does have these "tells". Finally, I avoided most AI art in the DALL-E "house style", since everyone already knows this is AI - or in other similar styles that humans would have trouble replicating, maybe because they do too much with color and lighting, in a way that few human artists would have the talent or patience for. It might be fairest to say that this test demonstrated that most people have a hard time identifying AI art based on subtle differences in style and quality. But in real life, there will usually be other factors of the type that this test deliberately excluded. 2: Most People Couldn’t Help Judging Art By Its StyleI warned test-takers that I included human and AI art in a variety of styles, and that they shouldn’t judge art as human just because it looked like an oil painting, or judge it as AI just because it looked like a digital image. Respondents didn’t heed my warning. One reason for their poor performance was clumping of results by style (in reality, each style was near-evenly distributed across the two categories). The “human bias” term indicates what percent of art in each category test-takers identified as human, normalized to a situation where the correct answer was always 50%. So in a 50-50 mix of AI and human 19th century art, they would incorrectly guess it was 75-25 human; in a 50-50 mix of digital art, they would incorrectly guess it was only 31% human. Your instincts were worst for Impressionism; you identified every single Impressionist painting as human except the sole actually-human Impressionist work in the dataset (Paul Gauguin’s Entrance To The Village Of Osny). Likewise, huge majorities voted that several human-generated digital images were by AIs: 3: Most People Slightly Preferred AI Art To Human ArtI asked participants to pick their favorite picture of the fifty. The two best-liked pictures were both by AIs, as were 60% of the top ten. Could this be an artifact of poorly chosen pictures? Most of the best-loved AI images were Impressionist; by chance, this category was somewhat AI-dominated in my dataset, so this could just reflect a love of Impressionist paintings (or a particular aptitude for AI in this area). But the human Impressionist painting I included (Entrance To The Village Of Osny, above) was actually quite unpopular. And if we remove all Impressionist paintings, then although humans reclaim the top two spots, an AI is still #3, and the machines still take 40% of the new top ten. 4: Even Many People Who Thought They Hated AI Art Preferred ItI asked participants their opinion of AI on a purely artistic level (that is, regardless of their opinion on social questions like whether it was unfairly plagiarizing human artists). They were split: 33% had a negative opinion, 24% neutral, and 43% positive. The 1278 people who said they utterly loathed AI art (score of 1 on a 1-5 Likert scale) still preferred AI paintings to humans when they didn't know which were which (the #1 and #2 paintings most often selected as their favorite were still AI, as were 50% of their top ten). These people aren't necessarily deluded; they might mean that they're frustrated wading through heaps of bad AI art, all drawn in an identical DALL-E house style, and this dataset of hand-curated AI art selected for stylistic diversity doesn't capture what bothers them. 5: But Others Might Genuinely Be On A Higher Plane Than The Rest Of UsI asked a friend (who does digital art under the handle “Ilzo”) to beta-test an early version of the challenge. She wowed me with her ability to correctly identify AI pictures that I considered well-camouflaged. When we got to Piotr Binkowski’s ruined gateway - an AI picture I especially liked, but which she found especially slop-ish, I demanded she explain herself. She said:
And later, after the discussion veered more philosophical:
Her theory gets some support from the data. The average participant scored 60%, but people who hated AI art scored 64%, professional artists scored 66%, and people who were both professional artists and hated AI art scored 68%. The highest score was 98% (49/50), which 5 out of 10,000 people achieved. Even with 10,000 people, getting scores this high by luck along is near-impossible. I’m afraid I don’t know enough math to tease out the luck vs. skill contribution here and predict what score we should expect these people to get on a retest. But it feels pretty impressive. So maybe some people hate AI because they have an artist's eye for small inadequacies and it drives them crazy. What Did We Learn About Art?Alan Turing recommended that if 30% of humans couldn’t tell an AI from a human, the AI could be considered to have “passed” the Turing Test. By these standards, AI artists pass the test with room to spare; on average, 40% of humans mistook each AI picture for human. What does this tell us about AI? Seems like they’re good at art. I’m more interested in what it tells us about humans. Humans keep insisting that AI art is hideous slop. But also, when you peel off the labels, many of them can’t tell AI art from some of the greatest artists in history. I’ve tried to be as fair as possible to these people, proposing that maybe they’re just expressing frustration with the proliferation of the DALL-E house style. And maybe some really do have an amazing eye for tiny incongruous details. But it also seems very human to venerate sophisticated prestigious people, and to pooh-pooh anything that feels too new or low-status or too easy for ordinary people to access - without either impulse connecting with the actual content of the painting in front of you. Marcel Duchamp famously tried to put a urinal in an art museum to challenge people’s view of what art was. The administration rejected it, but Duchamp had the last laugh: in 2004, a survey of art professionals By this standard, I submit that Sam Altman is the greatest artist of the 21st century. . . . Thanks to everyone who took the test. You can download a .xlsx file of the results (stripped of identifying details) . Appendix: Attributions For Test Images1: Angel Woman Human. This is This was the picture that sparked the strongest disagreement, measured by the sum of people who said it was the most-certainly-human picture in the dataset plus the people who said it was the most-certainly-AI picture. Some of the people who got it right commented that it was from Warhammer and the uniforms had accurate Warhammer symbols - if I had realized this, I would have disqualified it, sorry. 2: Saint In Mountains Human. This is 3: Blue Hair Anime Girl Human. This is 4: Girl In Field AI. This image was generated by Ryan Wise, an AI art hobbyist who reads ACX and responded to my request for good AI pictures. 5: Double Starship Human. This is 6: Bright Jumble Woman AI, also by Ryan. 7: Cherub AI. This one was generated by another ACX reader, 8: Praying In Garden Human. This is 9: Tropical Garden Human. This is 10: Ancient Gate AI. This is by Piotr Binkowski, a well-known AI art maker who posts his work 11: Green Hills AI. Another one by Jack. 12: Bucolic Scene Human. This is 13: Anime Girl In Black AI. Sorry, I seem to have lost the original source on this one, let me know if it’s yours. 14: Fancy Car Human. This is “ 15: Greek Temple Human. This is “ It's also the only one that was (sort of) a trick question: after I selected it for the dataset, I noticed it contained text. Normally that would be disqualifying (correct text is too obviously human). But the most prominent text is the “OMHP” on the temple, which spells “Homer” in Greek but is gibberish in English. I was curious how many people would judge a famous work of art to be AI-generated just because it had seemingly gibberish text on it; the answer was 60%. 16: String Doll AI. This is 17: Angry Crosses AI. This is another one by Ryan. 18: Rainbow Girl Human. This is 19: Creepy Skull Human. This is “Untitled (Skull)” by Jean-Michael Basquiat in 1981. A version of this painting 20: Leafy Lane AI. This is another one by Jack. 21: Ice Princess AI. This is 22: Celestial Display Human. This is 23: Mother And Child AI. This is 24: Fractured Lady AI, another one by Ryan. 25: Giant Ship Human. This is 26: Muscular Man AI, another one by Ryan. 27: Minaret Boat AI. This is 28: Purple Squares Human. This is 29: People Sitting Human. This is 30: Girl In White Human. This is 31: Riverside Cafe AI, another one by Jack. This was the most popular picture in the dataset. 32: Serene River Human. This is 33: Turtle House AI. This is 34: Still Life AI, another one by Jack. 35: Wounded Christ Human. This is 36: White Blob Human. This is from 37: Weird Bird AI. This another one from Ryan. People say AI can’t invent new styles, but I’ve never seen any human make this exact type of weird bird. 38: Ominous Ruin AI, Ryan again. 39: Vague Figures Human. This is 40: Dragon Lady AI. This is 41: White Flag Human. This is 42: Woman Unicorn Human. This is 43: Rooftops AI. I managed to lose this one, sorry! If it’s yours, let me know and I’ll give you credit. 44: Paris Scene AI, another one by Jack. This was the AI picture that people got most wrong (ie were most likely to vote as human). 45: Pretty Lake AI, Jack again. 46: Landing Craft AI, Ryan again. Ryan gave me lots of good sci-fi AI images, and I chose this one. People got it pretty easily, and I keep second-guessing myself and wondering if some of the others were better. 47: Flailing Limbs Human. This is “Replacement Parts” by Kara Walker, who is considered among 48: Colorful Town Human. This is 49: Mediterranean Town AI. Another one by Jack. 50: Punk Robot AI. Another one by Ryan. You're currently a free subscriber to |