---
subject: "FIT21 passes, all about chains, the hard things about…"
from: "web3 letter from a16zcrypto <a16zcrypto@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-05-24 09:00:54
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "a16zcrypto"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_2535365729249697677"]
---
🗞️🗳️News & updates: An important milestone for the crypto industry, and for U.S. innovationThe House of Representatives We covered this bill — and why it matters for the crypto industry and beyond — in our There’s more work to be done as the bill moves to the Senate, so we ask you and your networks to continue reaching out to your senators and sharing your voice on social media and elsewhere. For more on how to support, share: plus: The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission also approved listings for eight spot Ethereum ETPs (exchange-traded products) on Thursday. The decision helps ensure a pathway remains open and safe for blockchain-based projects to develop in the U.S. (The S-1 registration statements for the spot products still need to be declared effective, so trading has not yet begun.) share: 🔗 🔧Special feature: Chains, chains everywhere, and going onchainwith Eddy Lazzarin, Guy Wuollet, Jesse Pollak, Jing Wang, Noah Citron, Robert Hackett, Sonal Chokshi "Layer 2” rollups are computer networks that are designed to help scale “layer 1” blockchains such as Ethereum — and they've been bustling with activity recently, especially since Ethereum implemented its So in this pair of recent The two episodes cover broader themes — bottom-up vs. top-down innovation; open source incentives, processes, and challenges; business models; software development roadmaps — as well as themes specific to building an onchain economy and a composable, unified network of blockchains that can support internet-level activity.
share: related videos: also check out: 🎧 🛠️ 🔬Trend guidance: 8 reasons why blockchain mechanism design is hardby Tim Roughgarden The field of mechanism design goes back more than 60 years, but its tools and lessons have been especially useful in auction theory, market design, social choice theory, and now, blockchains/ crypto/ web3. As opposed to game theory — which establishes the dimensions of a strategic interaction and then explores the most behaviorally plausible outcomes — the field of mechanism design begins not with the game, but with a desired outcome. Mechanism design aims to reverse-engineer a game of some form so that this desired outcome is an equilibrium. Opportunities to apply mechanism design abound in web3, but the unique constraints of permissionless blockchains often forces a rethinking from first principles. Such challenges include no centralized trusted party, risks of collusion, inability to rely on rule of law, technical constraints, and much more. It’s an immature and still evolving space, which presents both challenges… and also represents a unique opportunity for mechanism designers, researchers, and other builders.
… You’re receiving this newsletter because you signed up for it on our websites, at an event, or elsewhere (you can opt out any time using the ‘unsubscribe’ link below). This newsletter is provided for informational purposes only, and should NOT be relied upon as legal, business, investment, or tax advice. Furthermore, the content is not directed at nor intended for use by any investors or prospective investors in any a16z funds. Please see a16z.com/disclosures for additional important details, including link to list of investments. subscribe to our podcast ' |