---
subject: "Why The Answer Is So Often Ads"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <byrne@thediff.co>"
to: ""
date: 2023-04-24 12:53:50
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
|
Welcome to the weekly free edition of The Diff. Paying subscribers—many of whom expense their subscription at work—get more company profiles and strategy breakdowns. In this issue: - Why The Answer Is So Often Ads
- Strategic Shutdowns
- Verification, Ads, and Membership
- The China Cap Table
- Very Long-Term Investing
- Branding a Bank
- Diff Jobs
Why The Answer Is So Often AdsOf the ten largest companies in the world by market capitalization, two, Alphabet and Meta, are primarily in the business of selling ads. Two others, Microsoft and Amazon, have significant ad businesses that are meaningful contributors to long-term growth assumptions. And now Apple, the largest company in the world by market cap, is That should be surprising. Over the last century, ad spending And yet, fortunes are being created; companies go from dorm room projects to testifying before Congress about their overwhelming dominance in less than a generation, powered by a business that, over the last hundred years, hasn't grown its share of spending. This naturally leads to some discomfort. As - There's making stuff.
- There's selling it—i.e. matching physical stuff to the buyer most likely to want it.
- There are services-other-than-ads.
As a general sketch, service businesses tend to see slow gains in productivity, while manufacturing businesses see high gains. But a corollary of this is that service businesses that are complements to manufacturing can ride on the coattails of higher manufacturing efficiency, at least indirectly. If you measure the value-add of a car dealership in terms of how many vehicles it sells compared to how long employees work, you will see gradual change. But if you compare the labor input from the dealership to the number of safe vehicle-miles driven, and the cost thereof, dealerships have gotten far better at adding value to the economy. There's no field that better illustrates this than software, because it's a complement to transistors, which have seen insane improvements in productivity over long periods: most of the discrete objects humans have manufactured in our history are transistors, and the continuous drop in their cost has continually increased the value of labor that's complementary to cheap memory and processing power. Businesses don’t exist in a vacuum, and especially when we’re talking about the long-term drivers of productivity—i..e the drivers of economic growth beyond just deploying known technologies at bigger scale—it’s useful to put things in a macro context. In a global economic system with fluctuating exchange rates, a natural consequence of high growth in one export sector is a higher currency value, which tends to make other exports unattractive. This has a name, " And this environment happens to be very conducive to tech companies that monetize through ads: there's abundant consumer demand in the US for products that the US has a comparative advantage in consuming but not producing, i.e. anything that can create a dollar-denominated revenue source in a country that can't print dollars. The growth of global manufacturing in the last thirty years, mostly in China, has led to massive deflation in the price of physical goods, and has made the manufacturing sector more agile. So ad-driven software companies in the US have, depending on how you count, two or three separate complements that are all subsidizing their growth: more diversity in products people could want, creating a more challenging problem matching supply to demand (and creating more rewards for matching them If ad spending as a share of GDP hasn't moved up much, but the market value of ad-driven companies is up a lot, it presents a few different possibilities: the market might be overestimating the potential of these models (but the P/E ratios of big tech companies really aren't much of a stretch given their historical growth); the market might be pricing in unprecedented growth in ad spending as a share of GDP (it doesn't take much extrapolation to get there, but nobody values Google based on a top-down model of GDP, ads' share of that, and Google's share of that); or, the ad industry could be a lot better than it used to be at cost-effectively matching supply and demand—it could be so much better, in fact, that it can support multiple high-margin intermediaries, all of whom actually report artificially low margins because they also invest heavily in unrelated R&D projects. There are plenty of other reasons why the US was where many of these ad-based companies started—the US had a strong tech sector back before ads were a major driver, of course, but when that existing comparative advantage collided with new sources of growth, it accelerated the ad business more than all the rest. Which makes it interesting to read things like Just as there are enterprise search products that don't generalize the way Google does (but are much smaller), there will be plenty of specialized services that leverage AI, as there already are. But don't be surprised if the average person's experience of a chatbot in a few years is that it's a free product, it's consumer-friendly, and when appropriate it finds answers to users' questions that happen to entail making a purchase. Disclosure: Long META, AMZN, and MSFT. [Before the Industrial Revolution](https://www.thediff.co/r/27cf6695?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)notes that clothing was so expensive during the renaissance that a major problem for hospitals was the theft of clothes from the deceased, and that this contributed to the spread of plague.[↩︎](#fnref1)Which raises an interesting question: if chips have gotten so cheap, and there are so many more programmers, and programming-related fields have set such a high price on talent that the industry at least get a chance to hire anyone who is qualified and even slightly motivated by money—why is the average software experience so far from perfect? One possibility is that we're running through a society-wide version of [Brook's Law](https://www.thediff.co/r/1dcb7b49?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99): adding people to the project of digitizing the economy makes that project later. As the share of software built to interact with other software approaches 1, there will be a higher premium for extremely well-considered design decisions, but an industry geared towards growth is not designed to make those decisions naturally.[↩︎](#fnref2)If you ever want to see this in action, look for a product on Amazon and then track it down on Alibaba and compare the prices. That price gap is partly Amazon's own vig for expediting the purchase, but the rest of the gap is basically the amount a manufacturer pays for a distributor/retailer/marketer to find ways to get the product to the specific end customers who want it. [↩︎](#fnref3)
You're on the free list for The Diff. Paying subscribers—many of whom expense their subscription at work—get more company profiles and strategy breakdowns. A Word From Our SponsorsElevate your investment research with Tegus Designed to keep you ahead of the curve, our research platform empowers you to source new opportunities, map markets, and pressure test your investment theses at a fraction of the cost of other tools. With custom-sourced expert calls at an average of $300 per call and the flexibility to customize call lengths, deep private company data that spans seed stage to mature companies and robust benchmarking, charing and comps, Tegus delivers the competitive edge you need to make informed decisions with confidence. ElsewhereStrategic ShutdownsThursday's subscribers-only post was on Verification, Ads, and MembershipTwitter continues its hectic series of experiments with paid verification, and is now The China Cap TableForeign bondholders of Chinese property companies are Very Long-Term InvestingA new investment club, subsidized by the CEO of value investing darling Markel, is Valuation certainly matters a bit in both cases, but the converse of the fact that it fluctuates a lot more than fundamentals in the short term is that it can't contribute much in the long term. If a company's P/E collapses by half over the course of the investment, that's a 2.7% headwind to annual returns, which is nothing to sneeze at, but it is dwarfed by the long-run dispersion in how much companies can grow and how durable their margins are. Branding a BankFirst Citizens, the bank that acquired SVB, is The Diff Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. A sampling of current open roles: - A company building zero-knowledge proof-based tools to enable novel financial arrangements is looking for a senior engineer with a research bent. Ideal experience includes demonstrations of extraordinary coding and/or math ability. (NYC or San Diego preferred, remote also a possibility.)
- A well funded seed stage startup founded by former SpaceX engineers is building software tools for hardware engineering. They're looking for a full-stack engineer who enjoys working with customers to design and build software. (Los Angeles)
- A VC firm using data science and ML to source and evaluate opportunities is looking for a software engineer to lead their data engineering efforts. (Menlo Park, CA or NYC)
- A high-growth provider of market data to both retail investors and institutions is looking for an account executive. A background in finance and experience working with RIAs/FAs is ideal. (US, remote)
- A startup that connects companies' sources of financial data across different systems, helping engineers build workflows and offering a no-code interface for finance teams, is looking for a new team member to focus on growth and operations. (Bay Area, hybrid)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. |
||
|
|
|
|||
|