---
subject: "Weekly Dose of Optimism #84"
from: "Not Boring <notboring@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-03-08 13:41:46
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Not Boring", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2982495070691762429", "UNREAD"]
---
Hi friends 👋, Happy Friday and welcome back to our 81st Weekly Dose of Optimism. Packy here. Dan’s out this week and next Let’s get to it. Today’s Weekly Dose is brought to you by…
Secureframe empowers businesses to build trust with customers by simplifying information security and compliance through AI and automation. By automating manual tasks related to security, risk, and compliance, Secureframe allows them to focus on growing their business. That’s why thousands of fast-growing businesses including AngelList, Ramp, Remote, and Coda trust As a long-term partner on my newsletter and podcast, and a fan of the team, I recommend it to all my portfolio companies. Sign up for
Dave Swinhoe for Data Center Dynamics
Welcome to the Data Center Dynamics reported that the bookseller has acquired a 960MW data center at a nuclear power station in my home commonwealth of Pennsylvania for $650 million. While it’s not new nuclear, this is big news for a few reasons. As Those companies — Amazon, Google, Meta, and Microsoft — consume over 22 gigawatts of electricity in the US each year, and S&P conservatively estimates that number will Data centers may represent a huge catalyst for nuclear energy. Utilities are pretty terrible buyers for nuclear reactors, but hyperscalers are faster-moving and more economically motivated. Their soaring hunger for electricity may kickstart the process of building more reactors and And not a moment too soon… the Russians and Chinese are discussing a partnership to Look, I’m all for a little international competition, but if anyone’s Putin the first nuclear reactor on the Moon, I want it to be the US of A. (2) I love all clean, cheap energy sources, and solar’s ride down the learning curve has been a thing of beauty. It’s that learning curve that convinced Not Boring favorite Casey Handmer to start On the second episode of First Principles, My favorite part about Terraform is that if it’s successful, it will create even more demand for solar, driving down the price of one of its key inputs even further, and making solar a more abundant energy source for the world. Plus, it takes advantage of solar’s advantages without overloading the grid. Smart.
Jonah Kaplan for CBS News
OK OK fine we’re getting really good at producing cheap, clean energy, but we can’t continue to grow because we’ll run out of resources, right? Wrong. We just keep finding more of the things we need. Like the 2.34 billion metric tons of And now, helium in Minnesota. This week, Pulsar Helium announced the discovery of what might be the largest helium deposits ever discovered in North America. Helium is best-known for its pivotal role in making balloons float and voices squeak, but it’s also a fantastic coolant, something that’s going to get more important as we build more big, hot things. Helium is used in MRI machines (which might help The combination of human ingenuity, capitalism, and America’s blessed natural resources keeps winning. (4)
Anna paints a compelling vision for user-owned foundation models: “Users who contribute to the model would collectively own and govern it. They could get paid when the model is used, or even paid proportionally to how much their data improved the model.” And she brings the facts. Models need a lot of two things to work: data and compute. Collectively, people have a ton of data and a ton of compute. Data: 453 trillion words locked as our private data across big platforms (with an order of magnitude more as we start recording more of our lives). Compute: Ethereum miners ran 16.4 million GPUs when the chain was proof of work, many multiples of the amount used to train GPT-4. When the incentives are right, people can pool vast resources. There are challenges, of course. Not all data is high quality, and models perform better with high quality data. And distributed GPUs aren’t optimized for training the way a purpose-built data center is. But with the * Speaking of AI getting better, you should really check out
Saikat Kumar Bose for India News
Four years ago, a 45-year-old Indian painter lost both of his hands in a train accident. That’s a devastating accident for anyone, let alone a painter from an underprivileged background. And until recently, it would have been permanent. But this week, a team of doctors at Sir Ganga Ram Hospital completed the first successful bilateral hand transplant in Delhi’s history. “The surgery, which took more than 12 hours, involved connecting every artery, muscle, tendon and nerve between the donor's [Meena Mehta] hands and the recipient's arms.” I mean, that’s just an unbelievable W for the painter, and for humanity. Give those doctors a hand! (I’m sorry. Time to wrap it up.) We’ll be back in your inbox on Tuesday. Until then, spread the good news: Thanks for reading, Packy + Dan |