---
subject: "Aristotelian Intelligence"
from: "Maxim Raginsky from The Art of the Realizable <realizable@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-05-05 00:29:06
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Maxim Raginsky"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3440436245007788095"]
---
I just finished reading Deobrah Modrak’s excellent (and difficult) book Aristotle: The Power of Perception. Modrak’s project in that book is to demonstrate that one can extract a coherent philosophy of mind and a coherent epistemology from the Aristotelian corpus, and that both are based on Aristotle’s integrated model of perceptual activity and (in the case of humans) thinking, or noetic, activity. Apart from the book’s contribution to our understanding of Hellenistic philosophy of mind (Julia Annas’ Generative and architectural thinkersIt will be useful to frame the discussion that follows in terms of the dichotomy between generative vs. architectural style of reasoning, proposed in the context of AI by Philip Agre in
while
Herbert Simon, Alan Newell, and Noam Chomsky are generative thinkers, whereas Marvin Minsky (when he wrote The Society of Mind) is an architectural thinker. The core distinction between generativists and architeturalists hinges on the role of abstraction:
The same tension can be found in the twentieth-century philosophy of science, where logical empiricists (a.k.a. logical positivists) are firmly in the generativist camp, whereas the proponents of the so-called Aristotle’s foundational principlesModrak begins by stating, in modern terms, what she believes are five foundational principles underlying Aristotle’s theory of perception. These principles, comprising three descriptive principles and two prescriptive ones, “inform Aristotle’s treatment of the perceptual faculty and account for its unity and coherence.” Here they are, in Modrak’s words:
The key notion associated with Aristotle is hylomorphism, or the organizational unity of matter (hyle) and form (morphe). The above foundational principles instantiate this doctrine in the context of perception, referring to Aristotle’s idea that the soul (psyche) gives form to (or enforms) the body, as well as to the interplay between formal and material causes. Aristotle’s project is ambitious: Starting with the five senses, he wants to develop a cohesive account of perception, including apperception, or the ability to synthesize complex judgments based on multiple senses; imagination or phantasia, an umbrella term under which he includes sensory illusions, memory, dreaming, voluntary action, and even some forms of discursive reasoning; and, finally, the rational faculty, or the noetikon, which he attributes exclusively to humans. This emphasis on not just what the perceptual activity is, but also on how it is produced and what role different senses and faculties play in its production, is what makes Aristotle an architectural thinker, rather than a generativist like his mentor Plato. On Modrak’s account, the Psychophysical Principle tells us that psychophysical states have both a functional description as mental states and a physical realization as states of the central nervous system. However, Aristotle’s functional description is closer to that of the biologists’ rather than that of the cognitive scientists’ since his psychophysical account does not decouple the functional view from the physical realization view. This is consistent with the hylomorphism doctrine and is very different from the The two prescriptive principles are explicitly architectural in nature. The Analytic Principle asks for explanations in terms of mechanisms that are constructed from basic constituent parts to form more complicated arrangements (e.g, when Aristotle begins witth the analysis of the five basic senses and then proceeds to build up an explanatory framework for more complex perceptual phenomena). However, the psychophysical nature of the mental states has to be emphasized throughout, as demaned by the Normative Psychophysical Principle, so the resulting account does not amount to reducing mental states to nothing but neurophysiology (as eliminativist accounts along the lines of Paul and Patricia Churchland would do). Multimodal perception and koine aisthesisAristotle’s account of the senses centers on the idea of logos, or rational mean. Sensory representations are given relative to opposing pairs (e.g., quite vs. loud, dark vs. bright, bitter vs. sweet). The processing of composite percepts, when multiple sensory modalities provide information about a given object, is the function of what Aristotle called koine aisthesis, or the common sense. In accordance with the Analytic Principle, Aristotle aims for economy of explanation and avoids introducing another faculty where a perceptual faculty would do the work. Moreover, in line with his empiricist epistemology (e.g., he argues that knowledge is impossible without perception), learning plays a role in forming apperceptual judgments or in using the input of one sense to infer the input of another. For example, a stable association of “white” and “sweet” could arise in certain contexts — if I see a white object presented on a dessert plate and if I had seen and eaten similar-looking desserts in the past, then I may reliably infer that this object will be sweet to the taste without having tasted it. In some way, this view of multiple sensory modalities acting in concert and reinforcing each other, with the aid of experience and learning, is reminiscent of Gerald Edelman’s ideas on Imagination, or phantasiaAristotle wants to explain how perceptual activity is produced and how it contributes to the functioning of the organism in its environment. As he writes in De Anima,
Being an empiricist, Aristotle acknowledges that not every instance when these faculties are exercised involves perception of an external object — for example, when we anticipate or plan or dream. Guided by the Analytic Principle, Aristotle still associates perceptual objects with these types of activities, the phantasmata that are generated by the imaginative faculty or phantasia. As I pointed out earlier, Aristotle makes phantasia do a lot of work. To assimilate imagination into Aristotle’s general framework, Modrak formulates the following important idea:
This covers sensory illusions, which arise when coherence among multiple senses breaks down; dreams; mental simulation and planning before taking an action (e.g., deciding where and how to move to avoid a predator); and certain forms of discursive reasoning that are nonpropositional in nature. All of these, according to Aristotle, involve manipulation of phantasmata, and it is not hard to see echoes of this in modern neurophysiological theories (e.g.., the role of Thought, or the noetic facultyIn Aristotelian epistemology, both the external objects of perception and their psychophysical correlates are particulars. Each of them is tied to a concrete instantiation either as part of objective external reality (Aristotle was a realist about objects of perception under standard conditions) or as a concrete psychophysical state. The internal sensory representations Aristotle has in mind are nonsymbolic, and both humans and nonhuman animals have the ability to manipulate them as they interact with their environment. However, humans, according to Aristotle, have the unique ability for rational thought, which involves manipulation of universals by the noetic faculty. Modrak explicitly says that “the mode of representation employed by the noetic faculty is properly described as symbolic.” However, these symbolic representations cannot exist by themselves, but require nonsymbolic (specifically, phantasmatic) vehicles. For example, when a geometer contemplates a problem involving trinagles, the underlying thought process makes use of images of triangles as well as a considerable degree of abstraction:
Aristotle’s noetikon is a manipulator of sentences in “mentalese,” which crucially relies on the perceptual faculty; this is exactly what Dennett had in mind when he spoke of theorem provers wrapped in an overcoat of transducers and effectors in The Intentional Stance. The universals figure prominently in Plato’s thought as well; however, what distinguishes Aristotle from Plato is that, for him, the universals (or syntactic objects, as we would say now) are formed in two ways: By induction from the particulars, which requires perception, or by valid logical inference, which requires ratiocination. Aristotle uses a curious military metaphor to describe the formation of universals out of a corpus of particular perceptions in The Posterior Analytics:
The first paragraph is almost Humean in spirit, arguing for the pragmatic inference of necessary connection from constant conjunction. The second paragraph, with the invocation of a rout in a battle, almost gestures at the Hebbian mechanism for learning. The overall picture that emerges is reminiscent of Aaron Sloman’s New Mechanist Philosophy and the importance of architectureI will close by mentioning a close link between Modrak’s modern take on Aristotelian hylomorphism and the New Mechanist Philosophy. A good source for this is Daniel De Haan’s
This is the essence of the architectural style of reasoning about complex systems, although here I agree with John Doyle about the 1 This touches upon Aristotle’s distinction between mneme, or memory, and anamnesis, or recollection. The former is just a form of pattern recognition, while the latter is a conscious act, a delieberate search for an object perceived or learned in the past. Modrak argues that, while Aristotle is vague on how anamnesis can be fit into a purely perceptual framework, it is plausible to view it as an emergent property of the human perceptual capacity, arising due to its organizational complexity. Gerald Edelman’s distinction between primary and The Art of the Realizable is free today. But if you enjoyed this post, you can tell The Art of the Realizable that their writing is valuable by pledging a future subscription. You won't be charged unless they enable payments. |