---
subject: "Between Mandala and Machine"
from: "Contraptions <contraptions@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-11-11 09:43:07
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Contraptions", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_5493170773715678215", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
I’ve been in Thailand for a week, and will be here for another week. I am reading J. Rotheray’s Thailand: Essential Guide to Customs and Culture. It’s a rather workmanlike and lightweight ethnography for tourists, rather than the kind of meaty historical deep dive I like, but I couldn’t find a good book of the latter sort (suggestions welcome), so this will do for now. I’m paying particular attention to the discussion of the mandala political system underlying Thai society, which I first learned about earlier this year in a broader Southeast Asia context. I’m also reflecting on the US election outcome, but with particular emphasis in my case on the idea of machine politics. In this essay, I want to offer you a particular analytical lens, based on a balance of power between the mandala and machine aspects of politics. Mandalas, as I will argue, are political un-machines, characterized but not defined by neopatrimonialism, and with significantly more internal structure and institution-building capacity than mere populism. I will explain them more in a minute, but for now think of them as un-machines. Not anti-machines based on nonsensical magical thinking, or inchoate churns with no internal order to their functioning, but things that work by a non-mechanistic functional logic, deriving their first principles from human relations, particular values derived from particular understandings of conflict, honor, harmony, and social stability, rather than physics. We can borrow a term from Asimov and call this constellation of concerns humanics. However they cash out their humanics concerns, mandalas always center some element of human caring. By contrast, true machines typically center some sort of knowing. Machines want to know about the world — ingest information and internalize it, but without being destroyed in the process. This is clearest with societal machines, especially ones explicitly devoted to discovery, but all but the simplest machines, including ones that involve no human moving parts, typically transform inputs into evolving states. The tension I want to set up between machines and mandalas is a primarily a tension between the drive to know and the drive to care. In theory, mandalas systems are dasein engines based on a particular set of speculative laws of humanics (often constructed as being a “natural order”), continuously solving for some notion of meaningfulness and authenticity through changing conditions in the world. Heidegger would have loved them. Most mandala systems are based on localized family/kinship patterns of caring, but we can overload the idea to also describe speculative socialist/mutualist societal models, which also center caring, just within fictive kinship groups that may be biologically expansive and planet-scale. Though it isn’t based on a religion or monarchy, the idea of Gaia is a mandala-flavored idea, as is a hippie commune. Trumpism and rhyming movements worldwide (including the stillborn Bernie-AOC movement in the US) are rudimentary new mandala systems that are destroying machine politics establishments worldwide, across political spectra. As a result the world is shifting from a systematic bias towards knowing to a systematic bias towards caring. The salient fact about Trumpism is that it did not just take down machine Democrats; it took down machine Republicans as well. And rendered the two indistinguishable in the process. This fact alone tells us we’re in a something-vs-machine conflict, not Left vs. Right. That something, I want to argue, is an emerging mandala order. That the Bernie-AOC rebellion was effectively squashed with extreme prejudice suggests it too was a mandala-vs-machine movement. It is probably not dead yet, and will enjoy a resurgence of some sort, given the current political climate. Though it is tempting, I won’t call these movements neo-mandala because there’s nothing really neo about them that makes them qualitatively different from ancient examples. They just happen to have been born in a modern environment that is more machinic¹ than organic, which has implications for the visible forms the mandala systems must take in order to function at all. We can construct the following 2x2 of the mandala and machine aspects of a society. The 2x2 captures what I think is a resolution of the central tension of modernity. Is is to be humans over machines or machines over humans? Are we about knowing or about caring? The answer is both at once, realized as a robust balance of power between a machine aspect and a mandala aspect. In modernity, our technological environment is complex enough that if we don’t construct collective human agency oriented around knowing in somewhat mechanistic forms — ie embrace a clearly machinic character for our societies and individual lives — societies break in one way. If we don’t make room for the human, and orient around caring, societies break in another way. When both human-over-machine (or mandala aspect) and machine-over-human (machine aspect) of society are functional, we get technological thriving driven by a dynamic tension between the two. When one breaks and the other remains functional, the functioning survivor aspect rapidly turns overgrown and heads into cancerous regimes, giving us either an organic dystopia or a machinic dystopia. These are both unsustainable. One is irrational, the other is uncaring. One knows more and more, and cares less and less. The other knows less and less, but cares more and more. The world has been on a decades-long swing from a machinic dystopia of faceless organization men towards an organic dystopia where all humans must appear masked in rigidly choreographed ceremonial public lives, with inner lives withering away to nothing. Even as care is performed in ever-more elaborate ways through external behaviors. We can envisage four possible futures from here: An organic-dystopian steady state, leading to a stable mandala-dominated world. A swing back to a new kind of machinic dystopia as our current organic dystopia overreaches and collapses from internal contradictions, and the currently broken machine gets unimaginatively rebuilt with cosmetic differences. A dual collapse into savagery, as both machine and mandala aspects of society stop functioning, leaving us with a world that is both uncaring and irrational. Rapid evolution of a creative new kind of global societal machine (with a new machine politics arising from it), which forces a corresponding creativity to emerge in the currently ascendant mandala aspect, leading to technological thriving.
Obviously, the only good outcome here is the last one. It is one that calls for courage, clarity, and creativity to engineer. Courage to recognize that a functional machinic aspect to society is not just a good thing, but a necessary and generative thing. Far from being opposed to humanism, it is a precondition for it. Suppression of this aspect by an over-muscular reactionary humanism from either the left or right is a recipe for exactly the kinds of essentialist self-dehumanization we are seeing today, driven by fetishization of particular historically frozen ways of being human. Unless you want to live in a planet-scale hyperlocal organic farmer’s market, or a planet-scale landscape of trad cities full of narrow streets and statue-heads, you have to have the courage to want the evolving machinic element in our world. To want the drive to know expressed, even if it means a less caring world. Clarity to recognize that the current societal machine has broken (not just US party political machines on both the left and right, but the entire industrial-era global machinic fabric). Including, for instance, the so-called rules-based international order, which is also a machine on the verge of collapse. It may rattle and clank on for a while, but it is broken. If you are clinging nostalgically to dated notions of expertise, institutional authority, and state capacity, you’re not seeing the brokenness clearly. And you’re likely attributing the damage it has taken to vandalism rather than sheer age and dysfunction. But you don’t have to leap to the conclusion that just because the current machine is broken, the mandala un-machine is the answer. Creativity to try and imagine and construct new machines that harness the logic of contemporary rather than industrial technology. I have one proposal for a creative new direction for building new societal machines that I’ll say more about later— protocols— but the important thing is to try a lot of creative approaches to building new kinds of machines. To these three, I’ll add my favorite new idea as a fourth: contraptionism. So that’s the 4Cs of the imperative: Courage, Clarity, Creativity, Contraptionism. The aesthetic and ethos that we need to guide the construction of a new machine is contraptionism. Because any new societal machine will inevitably be a janky affair, not just at inception, but throughout its lifecycle. The larger and more complex an engineered artifact — and “society” is the largest kind we build — the less it is going to look like either an iPhone or a beautiful natural forest, and the more it’s going to look like a really complicated After all, even at its peak of perfection in the 70s, before the Reagan-Thatcher era began the process of dismantling it, the global societal machine never exceeded the design integrity of a Rube Goldberg machine. There was never a time when it wasn’t clanking and clattering along, slowly falling apart, needing constant restorative efforts to keep it together and going. Particular societies, like the Soviet Union, or Johnson era Great Society, which tried to force too much aesthetic tightness and design integrity, tended to collapse faster. The machine was conceived as too much of a This last point is also why we cannot expect ideas for a new machine aspect of society to emerge from the currently ascendant mandala aspect. As we’ll see in a minute, the mandala aspect is entirely about aesthetically coherent and tightly choreographed external appearances of excellence, with the messiness of both human and technological elements swept behind the societal facade mandalas create to mask themselves from themselves. This surface coherence and aesthetic integrity can create the illusion of a machinic order at work, but that’s all it is. It cannot sustain a drive to know. But though mandalas cannot create or sustain the machinic drive to know, they can do quite a lot... Keep reading with a 7-day free trialSubscribe to Contraptions to keep reading this post and get 7 days of free access to the full post archives. A subscription gets you:
|