---
subject: "Energy Cheat Sheet"
from: "Construction Physics <constructionphysics@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-12-20 13:01:10
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Construction Physics", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8588207018748827248", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Because I write about infrastructure, and there’s an enormous amount of energy infrastructure that needs to be built for the US to decarbonize, I’m spending an increasingly large amount of time writing about energy and energy-related topics. One challenge I have with this is that thinking about energy doesn’t come especially naturally to me. I have an engineering background, but it’s in structural engineering, which only requires analyzing things that are sitting perfectly still. To improve my thinking around energy and to try and build some better intuitions around it, I put together a little “cheat sheet” of various energy infrastructure facts. Energy basicsIf you’re not a physicist, it’s actually not amazingly straightforward to precisely define energy. Wikipedia Per the For a clearer picture of energy transformation, let’s dive a few miles below the Earth’s surface to a natural gas reservoir beneath the In the power plant, the gas is burned in a gas turbine. The burning converts the energy in the chemical bonds into heat and then turns that heat into kinetic energy of the rotating turbine blades. A generator connected to the turbine turns this kinetic energy into electrical energy, which takes the form of electrons moving back and forth in an alternating current. This electrical energy then moves through the Inside the home, the electrical energy flows through the house’s wiring and into a phone charger, where it’s used to force We’ve just followed a small amount of energy thousands of miles, from deep within a natural gas reservoir to a slightly warmed-up cell phone, and over a dozen transformations. Of course, there are innumerable paths for a given quantity of energy to take. Natural gas alone could get piped directly to consumers to burn in stoves or water heaters get piped to a chemical factory that uses it to generate heat, or get The purpose of our energy infrastructure is to create paths for the mass movement of energy and to change its form depending on what makes it easiest to move and what sort of work needs to be done at its destination. Energy unitsThe range of different units we use to quantify energy can make it hard to build intuitions about energy. Different industries and sectors use their measurements of choice: joules, kilowatt-hours, British thermal units, and so on. Sometimes even the same type of device will use different units in different places. In electric vehicles, lithium-ion batteries give their capacities in kilowatt-hours but in smartphones, they use milli-ampere hours. Other times, the energy content will only be implicit: a barrel of oil, a cubic foot of natural gas, and a gallon of gasoline are all volumes of a particular substance, but they’re also acceptable measures of energy content. One way to help our energy intuition is to do some simple unit conversions and review some reference values of what various amounts of energy represent The basic metric unit of energy is the joule, which is the amount of energy needed to accelerate a 1-kilogram mass at 1 meter/second over a distance of 1 meter. Wikipedia gives some nice The typical energy released as heat by a person at rest every 17 milliseconds The kinetic energy of a 2-kilogram mass traveling at 1 meter per second The energy required to lift an apple 1 meter The heat required to raise the temperature of 0.239 grams of water from 0 °C to 1 °C The kinetic energy of a 50 kg human moving very slowly (0.2 m/s or 0.72 km/h) The kinetic energy of a 56 g tennis ball moving at 6 m/s (22 km/h) The food energy (kcal) is slightly more than half of an ordinary-sized sugar crystal (0.102 mg/crystal)
Related to energy is One problem with using joules is that a joule is a tiny amount of energy, and using it to describe quantities of energy used in everyday life results in huge figures: burning a gallon of gas releases about 121 million joules. For intuition building, it's useful to use a unit that doesn’t have so many trailing digits. One common unit is the kilowatt-hour (kWh), the quantity of energy moved by a 1000-watt power source over an hour (ie: 1000 joules a second, or 3.6 million joules). A kilowatt-hour is an aesthetically unpleasing unit since it defines energy in terms of power, which is itself defined in terms of energy — but it turns out to be a nice unit for working with sort of “everyday” quantities of energy. The numbers aren’t too big, so kWh gets used in a lot of common energy cases, like your energy bill and EV battery sizes. kWh are also easily convertible to megawatts, the most common measure of power plant capacity. For larger quantities of energy, we can use additional prefixes: 1 megawatt-hour = 1000 kilowatt-hours 1 gigawatt-hour = 1000 megawatt-hours (1 million kilowatt-hours) 1 terawatt-hour = 1000 gigawatt-hours (1 billion kilowatt-hours)
Here’s a table with various activities and quantities converted to kilowatt-hours, megawatt-hours, and gigawatt-hours: So a gallon of gasoline is about 33.7 kilowatt-hours, a barrel of oil is about 1700 kilowatt-hours, a tanker truck is about 300,000 kilowatt-hours, and an LNG carrier is about 1 billion kilowatt-hours (1000 gigawatt-hours). When I look at this table, what stands out to me is how much energy hydrocarbons (gasoline, oil, coal, natural gas) can store. 1 gallon of gas stores more energy than 2 weeks worth of food. The energy in a barrel of oil is only slightly less than what’s required to move a multi-ton shipping container thousands of miles across the ocean and more than what’s in a ton of TNT. A tanker truck contains the equivalent of almost 30 YEARS of average US household electricity use. An LNG carrier has roughly as much energy as a hydrogen bomb explosion. An oil supertanker has roughly the equivalent energy needed to heat and cool almost half a million California homes for a year. But as we’ll see, a major limitation of hydrocarbons is that much of this energy will be lost as heat in the transformation into other types of energy or to useful work. For truly enormous quantities, like the amounts of energy used by entire countries, it’s useful to introduce one more unit: the quad. A quad is short for “a quadrillion British Thermal Units,” and it's how country-level energy consumption is often measured. 1 quad is about 293 terawatt-hours or 293 billion kilowatt-hours. Here are the top 20 countries by energy consumption in terms of both terawatt-hours and quads: Power unitsFor power, we can likewise build some intuition by converting various rates of energy consumption into a single set of units. We used kilowatt-hours, megawatt-hours, and gigawatt-hours to quantify energy, but for power, we’ll use kilowatts, megawatts, and gigawatts. The table below gives some common activities and pieces of energy infrastructure and what their power capacity is: Here again we see the huge energy capacity of hydrocarbons. Moving oil, gasoline, or natural gas around results in very high effective power output because you’re moving a lot of energy in a relatively short period. A typical US gas pump operates at 10 gallons per minute (600 gallons an hour). At 33.7 kilowatt-hours per gallon of gas, that’s a power output of over 20 megawatts, greater than the power output of an 800-foot tall offshore wind turbine. The US energy production and consumptionLet’s zoom out from individual pieces of energy infrastructure and their capacities to see where our energy comes from, and how it flows to various uses. A good place to start is this Sankey diagram by There are a few obvious facts here. One is that most energy we consume gets wasted. Of the 93.6 quads (~27,400 TWh) the US consumed in 2023, only around 1/3rd of that went towards producing useful work. The rest was lost due to various inefficiencies, such as heat engine and transmission losses (we’ll look at losses and inefficiencies more deeply below). Another obvious fact is that despite the Related to this fact is that electricity generation is a relatively small fraction of our energy system: roughly ⅓ of energy inputs go towards generating electricity. For residential and commercial consumption, only around half of energy use comes from electricity. For industrial and transportation energy (the two largest sources of consumption), electricity is around 13% and less than 0.1%.³ What this chart makes clear, but also sort of abstracts away, is the enormous amount of infrastructure we’ve built for moving around hydrocarbons. The US has close to 1 This is why environmental advocates often focus on We can also dive deeper and look at a sector-by-sector breakdown of energy use. The residential sector uses around 11.5 quads (3370 TWh) of energy, a little over 12% of total US energy consumption. This table breaks it down: One major takeaway here is that most residential energy consumption goes into heating things up: Space heating (5.74 quads), water heating (1.69 quads), and clothes dryers (0.26 quads) together account for ⅔rds of residential energy consumption.⁴ You sometimes see air conditioners For transportation, we can break down energy consumption by the type of fuel used. Most transportation energy in the US is consumed in the form of gasoline and diesel fuel, with a relatively small amount of jet fuel. If we look at it by transportation mode, most energy (~78%) is consumed by cars, trucks, and motorcycles. The huge amount of energy used by transportation also means that households are using a lot of energy that isn’t captured by the residential energy consumption statistics above. In fact, in a year, the average US household consumes more energy from burning gasoline (~24,000 kilowatt-hours) than what’s used by the entire rest of the house (~22,500 kilowatt-hours). The commercial sector is not that different from the residential sector, with heating air and water using the largest fraction, with cooling and ventilation (ie: moving air around) also using large fractions.⁵ As with residential, its energy consumption is roughly split between electricity and natural gas. And last, here’s industrial energy use. With industrial energy use, we see a lot of the same patterns that we see in other sectors. One is that utility electricity is a relatively small amount of industrial energy consumption (less than 20%). Most industrial energy comes from burning fuel (mostly natural gas) directly. Once again, we see that heating things up accounts for a huge fraction of energy consumption: roughly half of all manufacturing energy goes into Conversions and efficiencyGoing back to the overall US energy flow Sankey diagram, it's clear that most energy used in the US is ultimately wasted, with only a small fraction being used to perform useful work (moving cars, heating homes, operating electronics, and so on). Moving energy around and changing its form can’t be done perfectly efficiently (thanks in part to the (In some cases, however, you can cleverly move energy around in ways that avoid these losses. Heat pumps, for instance, which move heat from place to place, can operate at The biggest source of losses is probably The thermal efficiency of an engine is the fraction of heat energy it can transform into useful work. Coal power plant typically operates at Most other losses aren’t so egregious, but they show up at every step of the energy transportation chain. Moving electricity along transmission and distribution lines results in losses as some electrical energy gets converted into heat. Electrical transformers, which minimize these losses by transforming electrical energy into high-voltage, low-current before transmission, operate at around Energy conversion efficiency Conversion or transmission efficiencies of various pieces of energy infrastructure. The low thermal efficiency of ICE cars and heat engines in general and the high efficiency of electrical equipment (especially things like heat pumps) are the biggest counterweight to the high energy capacity of hydrocarbons. The gas tank on an ICE car technically stores much more energy than a Tesla battery back but only a small fraction of that gasoline energy can be converted into useful motion. Switching to EVs, even if that electricity is still provided by burning fossil fuels, could save large amounts of energy (and thus carbon emissions), as it could mean switching from a 25% efficient gasoline engine to a 60% efficient combined cycle gas turbine. And of course, with electric vehicles, there’s the possibility of powering them by non-carbon emitting sources of electricity like solar or wind. There’s a similar calculus at work for replacing gas furnaces with heat pumps. Footnote: Solar and wind do only convert a portion of input energy into electrical energy, but because this energy would be expended regardless (the sun shines and the wind blows whether solar cells and wind turbines are there or not), their low conversion efficiencies don’t have the same meaning, even aside from questions of carbon emissions. Variability and storageThe energy system needs to supply enough energy to meet demand at any given time. And whenever a system supplies something to meet demand, it’s helpful for it to have storage for excess supply. Demand might fluctuate greatly over time, and storage can act as a buffer to smooth out the demand peaks, meaning you only need to build infrastructure to meet average demand. Without storage, meeting demand might mean overbuilding infrastructure, much of which would only be necessary at brief moments of peak demand. Conveniently, hydrocarbons are very easy to store. Coal power plants have However, electricity historically couldn’t be stored easily or cheaply. While hydrocarbons can be stored in a big tank, for electricity you need huge, special pumped hydroelectric facilities or comparatively expensive batteries.⁶ Total US grid energy storage, mostly in the form of The requirement to balance supply and demand in electricity consumption gets more challenging with renewables like solar and wind (and even, to some extent, hydroelectric power) where the supply of it varies outside our control. Unlike a nuclear reactor, which can run almost continuously and have a very high capacity factor, or a gas turbine, which can quickly be turned off and on as needed, solar and wind power supply is a function of a varying environment. Replacing hydrocarbons with electricity on a large scale requires us to solve this storage problem, which is why things like cheaper batteries, and perhaps startups like ConclusionMy not-especially-groundbreaking takeaway from this exercise in honing my energy intuitions is that we built our energy infrastructure primarily around hydrocarbons, a technology with a particular set of capabilities and constraints. Hydrocarbons are very energy-dense, easy to move around, and easy to store, which to some extent makes up for the fact that it’s hard to convert them into other types of energy without incurring large losses. The technology we’ll replace it with will likely not share those particular capabilities: electricity can be converted to different forms of energy with fewer losses, but it's not as easy to store and move around as hydrocarbons are. Decarbonizing doesn’t just mean building lots of solar power and wind — it probably means completely rethinking how our energy infrastructure works. Another takeaway is that it’s very important to pay attention to growth rates in the deployment of things like solar and batteries. Right now solar generates around 1% of total energy consumed in the US, but US solar installations are growing at 1 To add to the confusion, Wikipedia recursively 2 This gas in turn is ultimately the result of sunlight providing energy to plants and animals, which died and were gradually chemically transformed beneath layers of sediment for millions of years. 3
4 Another difficulty with energy is that estimates aren’t necessarily consistent: The LLNL energy estimates seem slightly different than the EIA energy estimates. 5 This will somewhat underestimate heating energy consumption because “other uses” will include some heating operations, like combined heat and power systems. 6 Neither pumped hydro nor batteries are technically electrical energy storage; the former is gravitational potential energy and the second is chemical energy. But they can be quickly and efficiently converted to electricity and back. Construction Physics articles will always remain free, but if you find this work valuable, I encourage you to Construction Physics is produced in partnership with the Institute for Progress, a Washington, DC-based think tank. You can learn more about their work by visiting their You can also contact me on |