---
subject: "Links For January 2024"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-01-18 01:16:42
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX"]
---
[Remember, I haven’t independently verified each link. On average, commenters will end up spotting evidence that around two or three of the links in each links post are wrong or misleading. I correct these as I see them, and will highlight important corrections later, but I can’t guarantee I will have caught them all by the time you read this.] 1: Did you know: the US government maintains 2: 3: What beliefs correlate with low fertility rates? You might expect to find socially liberal beliefs (like that women need to focus on their careers), but Aria Babu says 4: Related: 5: Related: it’s much easier to genetically engineer gametes than adults - but if you wanted to do the latter, 6: Cult of the month: 7: Related - the 8: 9: Related: 10: Alex Tabarrok: (This is especially important because if it happens, it will never be rolled back; once the FDA has been regulating lab tests for even one week, everyone will assume that if they ever stopped regulating lab tests then all lab tests would instantly become fraudulent and everyone would die) 11: Poll: AI accelerationism (“e/acc”) 12: Related: 13: Related: 14: Lars Doucet (previous ACX guest blogger about Georgism) 15: Ancient Germanic kingdoms used to devise mythical genealogies linking their royal families to Odin. And lots of ethnically-Northern-European people are descended from ancient Germanic kings. Combine these facts, and you can chart 16: Claim: AIs 17: Related: Grok (by Elon Musk’s x.ai, not by OpenAI) 18: 19: If Manifold is too social for you, there’s also 20: In Germany, saying “from the river to the sea, Palestine will be free” 21: Related ( 22: Did you know: 23: The town of 24: The USSR wanted to launch an especially dramatic Soyuz mission to celebrate the 50th anniversary of Soviet communism. Everyone in the space program knew the craft had cut too many corners and was doomed, but anyone who complained or protested got fired. Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov was picked to pilot the craft, and knew it was a one-way trip, but agreed to go so that his friend Yuri Gagarin wouldn’t have to. When the spaceship predictably broke down, 25: 26:
Would it be trivial to rewrite this joke for an American audience? Certainly the basic structure would carry over nicely (it would end with Biden nuking Missouri). But I don’t know how to capture the ambiguity of “any city in the west”. 27: Back in November 28: Related - back in November some people asked whether Bill Gates counted as EA, or supported it, or was opposed to it, or what. There wasn’t a clear answer then, and still isn’t, but for what it’s worth, 29: The 30: Cremieux: 31: Tattoo (h/t 32: The charity GiveDirectly
This study is especially important because one common previous objection to optimistic UBI studies was that sure, people didn’t quit work, but that was because they knew the UBI study would end in a year and knew they needed to maintain savings / career capital for when that happened. To test for that, this study promised a twelve-year UBI. Still, people continue to work as much as ever. I’m surprised by this result; is the claim that people still work exactly as much when they don’t need the money? Why? The 33: Related: Swedish study ( This could suggest that the poverty-crime correlation isn’t directly and obviously causal - ie some third factor makes people both more poorer and more likely to commit crime (the paper says that “Our estimates allow us to rule out effects [down to] one-fifth as large as the cross-sectional gradient between income and crime”). For example, maybe a tendency towards impulsivity makes people both poorer and more crime-prone. But I’m not sure how much this study adds once you already know that 34: If you haven’t seen X joke triple Venn diagrams before, this ( 35: Prediction site Manifold Markets is running a 36: Paste a Wikipedia category into 37: TracingWoodgrains: 38: Related: Oakland teachers union stages “teach-in” where teachers urge students to support Palestine and protest Israel during class time; Jewish students / families feel unsafe 39: Also in local Bay Area news: 40: Did you know - 41: In December, You're currently a free subscriber to |