---
subject: "DeepMind's ChatGPT rival 🤖, 2023 salary expectations 💰, senior engineer FAANG interviews 👨‍💻"
from: "TLDR <dan@tldrnewsletter.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-06-27 10:16:49
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "TLDR"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_795315172960844453"]
---
[DeepMind claims its next chatbot will rival ChatGPT (2 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftechcrunch.com%2F2023%2F06%2F26%2Fdeepmind-claims-its-next-chatbot-will-rival-chatgpt%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000188fc5b1dfa-52ade569-e4d7-4674-b6ac-11b7768ef8c5-000000/TrHa_-nsfRIaLeGNdYLUC4VJ6Awt2m5DvW9UYhRYyzQ=307)
DeepMind's Gemini large language model was trained using techniques from AlphaGo, the first AI system to defeat a professional human player in the board game Go. Gemini can plan, solve problems, and analyze text. It combines the strengths of AlphaGo-type systems with the capabilities of large language models. Gemini's development was spurred by the failures of Bard, Google's chatbot project. Jeff Dean, Google's most senior AI research executive, directly participated in the project. |
[Amazon will now pay your coffee shop to deliver packages (2 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.theverge.com%2F2023%2F6%2F26%2F23773814%2Famazon-hub-delivery-network-small-businesses-launch%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000188fc5b1dfa-52ade569-e4d7-4674-b6ac-11b7768ef8c5-000000/NIMKv10ELmTDmb7qiMzDJIjPnuTIpdjCApDpglyc96I=307)
Amazon is connecting with a range of small businesses across the US to build out its package delivery network. Participating businesses are required to have a physical location and be available for delivery seven days a week. There are no long-term contracts and businesses bring their own staff, vehicles, and devices. Amazon hopes to connect with 2,500 drivers operating out of these small businesses by the end of the year. Small businesses can apply to become an Amazon Hub Partner online. |
Science & Futuristic Technology
|
[This drug can give us an edge in the bacteria-antibiotics arms race (2 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fnewatlas.com%2Fmedical%2Fdeq-bacteria-resistant-arms-race%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000188fc5b1dfa-52ade569-e4d7-4674-b6ac-11b7768ef8c5-000000/BgSeHeDmSLPltA0KiBsTKuDkT9u3jbfN4HigxtHsI0M=307)
Bacteria can evolve genetic survival tactics much faster than humans can find new drugs to kill them. Scientists from Baylor College of Medicine discovered that a drug commonly used as a topical antiseptic significantly slows the evolution of bacteria and makes cipro, the second most prescribed antibiotic in the US, much more effective at fighting infection. Their study suggests that it may be possible to slow down pathogen evolution to the point where the body's immune system can deal with the infection without antibiotics. Global antibiotic resistance was responsible for nearly 1.3 million deaths in 2019. |
[These 'chip-scale' atomic clocks extend precise timing beyond GPS limits (5 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Finterestingengineering.com%2Finnovation%2Fchip-scale-atomic-clocks-accuracy-gps%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000188fc5b1dfa-52ade569-e4d7-4674-b6ac-11b7768ef8c5-000000/Sdi6_bOWc1JK5Corb2hQXyUiFK41ehNh-qgtfyWC2hc=307)
Researchers at NIST and Georgia Tech have developed a new type of miniature atomic clock called a chip-scale beam clock. The technology promises improved timing over weeks and months compared to existing chip-scale atomic clock systems. The device, currently still in a prototype stage, is the size of a postal stamp and initial tests show scarcely worse performance than existing chip-scale atomic clocks. The team is confident that they will be able to increase precision by a factor of 10 and stability by a factor of 100 over weekly periods. |
Programming, Design & Data Science
|
[Mycelite (GitHub Repo)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fmycelial%2Fmycelite%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000188fc5b1dfa-52ade569-e4d7-4674-b6ac-11b7768ef8c5-000000/S9-R_sUqGgVwYpsKSlai8WKgaaGwHnuitctGq64DbO8=307)
Mycelite was created to make it easier to build local-first applications that sync across devices. It allows developers to synchronize changes from one instance of SQLite to another. Mycelite currently only supports one-way synchronization, but the team is working on integrating two-way synchronization. |
[A Senior Engineers Guide to FAANG Interviews (20 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Finterviewing.io%2Fguides%2Fhiring-process%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000188fc5b1dfa-52ade569-e4d7-4674-b6ac-11b7768ef8c5-000000/0BwnuXHRjjbqKwvEOoEOa6yIdZZRTXWKY8f8qZbHWpk=307)
This guide to FAANG interviews was created by interviewers for candidates. The authors spent hundreds of hours talking to current and former FAANG interviewers about their processes. While FAANG interviews can seem daunting, they are much easier once you learn a company's operating metaphors: what they reward, what they punish, and what they're blind to. Learning a company's metaphors shows interviewers that you're part of their tribe. |
[2023 Engineering Salary Expectations Trends Report (10 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.teamblind.com%2Fblog%2Findex.php%2F2023%2F05%2F22%2F2023-engineering-salary-expectations-report%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000188fc5b1dfa-52ade569-e4d7-4674-b6ac-11b7768ef8c5-000000/ZzBfe53XYe06MbGAc0zY5MgjNoJYsLHj7UT1dchH7pc=307)
This report focuses on the impact of minimum salary requirement trends on software engineers. Ongoing layoffs have created a saturated job market, making it easier for employers to attract candidates at a reduced cost. Workers are now emphasizing the importance of culture, career growth, work-life balance, and stability. Employees are likely to continue to place equal or more importance on these non-monetary benefits as the economy rebounds. |
[AI is killing the old web, and the new web struggles to be born (11 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.theverge.com%2F2023%2F6%2F26%2F23773914%2Fai-large-language-models-data-scraping-generation-remaking-web%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000188fc5b1dfa-52ade569-e4d7-4674-b6ac-11b7768ef8c5-000000/WlFyrUVhc0pg3afjFips2-tRUmdWS1HQRm0GbDe_VTE=307)
This article looks at the potential effects AI will have on the future of the internet. The web used to be a place where individuals made things, but then companies took over and created platforms. Layoffs and AI-generated content are killing these platforms. AI systems can scale effortlessly and their output may potentially overrun the platforms people use for news, information, and entertainment. The decisions that we make now will determine who makes information in the future, how it is accessed, and who gets paid for it. |
[TLDR is hiring a curator for TLDR Marketing](mailto:jobs@tldr.tech)
TLDR is hiring a part-time curator to join our TLDR Marketing newsletter curation team. The newsletter already has over 300,000 subscribers pre-launch. It's a great way to build a personal brand within the marketing community.The ideal candidate would work in marketing and enjoy keeping up with marketing news and growth tactics through channels like Twitter, Reddit, blogs, podcasts, and online communities. Time commitment is ~5-10 hours/week (Sunday through Thursday). To apply please send your LinkedIn or resume to [jobs@tldr.tech](mailto:jobs@tldr.tech) along with a couple sentences on why you'd be a good fit! |
[TLDR Talent](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fdanni763618.typeform.com%2Fto%2FrSL4lOH3/2/01000188fc5b1dfa-52ade569-e4d7-4674-b6ac-11b7768ef8c5-000000/DR6-nnQSNO7MIjDhrfDjJYtraOMipLwoQQCtMks3TtY=307) is our exclusive community where we help world-class tech talent and get intros to companies of their choice, along with a number of exciting startups and tech companies curated by TLDR.
We give you full control of the process, you can specify if you’re actively searching or passively interested only if something amazing comes along. Set your preferred compensation, seniority/title/role, specific companies (or types of companies) you’d like to work for and more. [Click here to apply](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fdanni763618.typeform.com%2Fto%2FrSL4lOH3/3/01000188fc5b1dfa-52ade569-e4d7-4674-b6ac-11b7768ef8c5-000000/qUeXTsc54fiupbhw21TlLoffCr_X2NCb5nv5-7M9wVE=307).
|
If your company is interested in reaching an audience of tech executives, decision-makers and engineers, you may want to [advertise with us](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fshare.hsforms.com%2F1OxvmrkcFS4qsxKpNXCi76wee466%3Futm_source=tldr%26utm_medium=newsletter/2/01000188fc5b1dfa-52ade569-e4d7-4674-b6ac-11b7768ef8c5-000000/BTAD76kEhY9-aSFJpvV0SzJlWzv8ceCh5WMMShLq7Ng=307).
If you have any comments or feedback, just respond to this email!
Thanks for reading,
[Dan Ni](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2Ftldrdan/1/01000188fc5b1dfa-52ade569-e4d7-4674-b6ac-11b7768ef8c5-000000/tu4Ws4IFBTVNr4vkta2NvpLtvvW87BEqVV4dhVTMfvg=307) and [Stephen Flanders](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2FSteveFlanders22/1/01000188fc5b1dfa-52ade569-e4d7-4674-b6ac-11b7768ef8c5-000000/bBbo87BdFz-WpO3WbVWMns5CILdiIVb7Snu4-oanyiY=307)
|
|
|
|