---
subject: "AI #131 Part 2: Various Misaligned Things"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-08-29 14:58:36
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
It doesn’t look good, on many fronts, especially taking a stake in Intel. We continue. Table of Contents[America Extorts 10% of Intel](https://substack.com/redirect/03bdcf3d-3437-4d5a-8ab5-da5d725cb31e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/03bdcf3d-3437-4d5a-8ab5-da5d725cb31e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Nice company you got there. Who’s next?[The Quest For No Regulations Whatsoever.](https://substack.com/redirect/648dc4ce-b9bf-4250-a54d-08c4de13fe11?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)a16z is at it again, Brockman joins.[The Quest for Sane Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/41ee0c24-ca7a-48ed-9519-a5603a635da4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Dean Ball surveys the state legislative landscape.[Chip City.](https://substack.com/redirect/fb6bc316-cd88-4d80-966d-20ba7f7633ae?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Nvidia beats earnings, Huawei plans to triple chip production.[Once Again The Counterargument On Chip City.](https://substack.com/redirect/26419b11-9129-4075-b0f4-c6d89b9c5eea?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Sriram Krishnan makes a case.[Power Up, Power Down.](https://substack.com/redirect/cff5f61f-4396-40b0-8cde-a8c3ee0a4f5e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)I for one do not think windmills are destroying America.[People Really Do Not Like AI.](https://substack.com/redirect/7de52602-7ad1-4213-bb43-79b778552131?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Some dislike it more than others. A lot more.[Did Google Break Their Safety Pledges With Gemini Pro 2.5?](https://substack.com/redirect/c6a6013f-4508-42ac-be39-d706f3cbf990?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)I think they did.[Safety Third at xAI.](https://substack.com/redirect/0170763e-8191-48b9-bac4-0c32c573bc47?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Grok 4 finally has a model card. Better late than never.[Misaligned!](https://substack.com/redirect/82e196f8-29cd-4212-98e4-f04b297198df?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Reward hacking confirmed to cause emergent misalignment.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/30145492-c60e-4041-8607-57808d6c68ec?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Filter the training data?[How Are You Doing](https://substack.com/redirect/e4d0c271-5a15-44dc-9b3e-2f3b68101158?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[?](https://substack.com/redirect/e4d0c271-5a15-44dc-9b3e-2f3b68101158?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)OpenAI and Anthropic put each other to the safety test.[Some Things You Miss When You Don’t Pay Attention.](https://substack.com/redirect/40bb036d-4ad8-4533-8ff8-3c5a25d27009?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The things get weird fast.[Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/161b4a15-f44a-4c23-893d-514c2a654dac?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A new record.[The Lighter Side.](https://substack.com/redirect/a167c2b4-23d8-494c-9506-9307710a4fb6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)South Park sometimes very much still has it.
America Extorts 10% of Intel
As is usually the case, the more details you look at, the worse it gets. This deal does give Intel something in return, but that something is letting Intel off the hook on its commitments to build new plants, so that seems worse yet again.
To be clear: And That’s Terrible. Tyler Cowen writes against this move, leaving no doubt as to the implications and vibes by saying Is there a steelman of this?
So why, despite all the reasons this is terrible, does Ben support doing it anyway? Ben presents the problem as the need for Intel to make wise long term decisions towards being competitive and relevant in the 2030s, and that it would take too long for other companies to fill the void if Intel failed, especially without a track record. Okay, sure, I can’t confirm but let’s say that’s fair. Next, Ben says that Intel’s chips and process are actually pretty good, certainly good enough to be useful, and the problem is that Intel can’t credibly promise to stick around to be a long term partner. Okay, sure, again, I can’t confirm but let’s say that’s true. Ben’s argument is next that Intel’s natural response to this problem is to give up and become another TSMC customer, but that is against America’s strategic interests.
Once again, I cannot confirm the economics but seems reasonable on both counts. We would like Intel to stand on its own and not depend on TSMC for national security reasons, and to do that Intel has to be able to be a credible partner. The next line is where he loses me:
Why does America extorting a 10% passive stake in Intel solve these problems, rather than make things worse for all the reasons Lincicome describes? Because he sees ‘America will distort the free market and strongarm Intel into making chips and other companies into buying Intel chips’ as an advantage, basically? So much for this being a passive stake in Intel. This is saying Intel has been nationalized. We are going the CCP route of telling Intel how to run its business, to pursue an entirely different corporate strategy or else. We are going the CCP route of forcing companies to buy from the newly state-owned enterprise. And that this is good. Private capital should be forced to prioritize what we care about more. That’s not the reason Trump says he is doing this, which is more ‘I was offered the opportunity to extort $10 billion in value and I love making deals’ and now he’s looking for other similar ‘deals’ to make if you know what’s good for you, as it seems
It is hard to overstate how much worse this is than simply raising corporate tax rates. As in, no Intel is not a special case. But let’s get back to Intel as a special case, if in theory it was a special case, and you hoped to contain the damage to American free enterprise and willingness to invest capital and so on that comes from the constant threat of extortion and success being chosen by fiat, or what Republicans used to call ‘picking winners and losers’ except with the quiet part being said out loud. Why do you need or want to take a stake in Intel in order to do all this? We really want to be strongarming American companies into making the investment and purchasing decisions the government wants? If this is such a strategic priority, why not do this with purchase guarantees, loan guarantees and other subsidies? It would not be so difficult to make it clear Intel will not be allowed to fail except if it outright failed to deliver the chips, which isn’t something that we can guard against either way. Why do we think I’m fine with the idea that Intel needs to be Too Big To Fail, and it should be the same kind of enterprise as Chase Bank. But there’s a reason we aren’t extorting a share of Chase Bank and then forcing customers to choose Chase Bank or else. Unless we are. If I was Jamie Dimon I’d be worried that we’re going to try? Or worse, that we’re going to do it to Citibank first? That was the example that came to mind first, but it turns out As a steelman exercise of taking the stake in Intel, Ben Thompson’s attempt is good. That is indeed as good a steelman as I’ve been or can come up with, so great job. Except that even with all that, even the good version of taking the stake would still be a terrible idea, you can simply do all this without taking the stake. And even if the Ben Thompson steelman version of the plan was the least bad option? That’s not what we are doing here, as evidenced by ‘I want to try and get as much as I can’ in stakes in other companies. This isn’t a strategic plan to create customer confidence that Intel will be considered Too Big To Fail. It’s the start of a pattern of extortion. Thus, 10 out of 10 for making a good steelman but minus ten million for actually supporting the move for real? Again, there’s a correct and legal way for the American government to extort American companies, and it’s called taxes.
The Quest For No Regulations WhatsoeverI am Jack’s complete lack of surprise.
Their ‘a16z is lobbying because it wants sensible guardrails and not total deregulations’ t-shirt is raising questions they claim are answered by the shirt. OpenAI is helping fund this via Brockman. Total tune of $100 million. Which is a lot.
So now we can double that. They’re (perhaps legally, this is our system) buying the government, or at least quite a lot of influence on it. As usual, it’s not that everyone has a price but that the price is so cheap. As per usual, the plan is to frame ‘any regulation whatsoever, at all, of any kind’ as ‘you want to slow down AI and Lose To China.’
Industry, and a16z in particular, were already flooding everyone with money. The only difference is now they are coordinating better, and pretending less, and spending more? They continue to talk about ‘vast forces’ opposing the actual vast force, which was always industry and the massive dollars behind it. The only similarly vast forces are that the public really hates AI, and the physical underlying reality of AI’s future.
And there it is, right in the article, as text. What they are worried about is that we won’t pass a law that says we aren’t allowed to pass any laws. If you think ‘Congress won’t pass AI laws’ is a call for Congress to pass reasonable AI laws, point to the reasonable AI laws anyone involved has ever said a kind word about, let alone proposed or supported.
No it doesn’t? These ‘concerns about China’ peaked around January. There has been no additional reason for such concerns in months that wasn’t at least priced in, other than acts of self-sabotage of American energy production. The Quest for Sane Regulations
There are always tons of bills. The trick is to notice which ones actually do anything and also have a chance of becoming law. That’s always a much smaller group.
By ‘comprehensively regulate’ Dean means the Colorado-style or EU-style use-based approaches, which we both agree is quite terrible. Dean instead focuses on two other approaches more in vogue now.
I agree with Dean that I don’t support that idea, I think it is net harmful, but if you want to talk to an AI you can still talk to an AI, so so far it’s not a big deal.
Did I mention recently that nothing I say in this column is investment or financial advice, legal advice, tax advice or psychological, mental health, nutritional, dietary or medical advice? And just in case, I’m also not ever giving anyone engineering, structural, real estate, insurance, immigration or veterinary advice. Because you must understand that indeed nothing I have ever said, in any form, ever in my life, has been any of those things, nor do I ever offer or perform any related services. I would never advise you to say the same, because that might be legal advice. Similarly, it sounds like AI companies would under these laws most definitely also not be saying their AIs can provide mental health advice or services? Okay, sure, I mean annoying but whatever?
Technically via the definition here it is mental healthcare to ‘detect’ that someone might be (among other things) intoxicated, but obviously that is not going to stop me or anyone else from observing that a person is drunk, nor are we going to have to face a licensing challenge if we do so. I would hope. This whole thing is deeply stupid. So I would presume the right thing to do is to use the best tools available, including things that ‘resemble’ ‘mental healthcare.’ We simply don’t call it mental healthcare. Similarly, what happens when Illinois HB 1806 says this (as quoted by Dean):
My obvious response is, if this means an AI can’t do it, it also means a friend cannot do it either? Which means that if they say ‘I am feeling depressed and lonely today. Help me improve my mood’ you have to say ‘I am sorry, I cannot do that, because I am not a licensed health professional any more than Claude Opus is’? I mean presumably this is not how it works. Nor would it change if they were somehow paying me? Dean’s argument is that this is the point:
There’s a kind of whiplash here that I am used to when reading such laws. I don’t care if it is impossible to comply in the law if fully enforced in a maximally destructive and perverse way unless someone is suggesting this will actually happen. If the laws are only going to get enforced when you actively try to offer therapist chatbots? Then yes it would be better to write better laws, and I don’t especially want to protect those people’s roles at all, but we don’t need to talk about what happens if the AI gets told to help improve someone’s mood and the AI suggests going for a walk. Nor would I expect a challenge to that to survive on constitutional grounds. More dear to my heart, and more important, are bills about Frontier AI Safety. He predicts SB 53 will become law in California, here is his summary of SB 53:
There is a sharp contrast between this skeptical and nitpicky and reluctant but highly respectful Dean Ball, versus the previous Dean Ball reaction to SB 1047. He still has some objections and concerns, which he discusses. I am more positive on the bills than he is, especially in terms of seeing the benefits, but I consider Dean’s reaction here high praise.
Chip City
I do not fully understand why Nvidia does not raise prices, but given that decision has been made they will sell every chip they can make. Which makes it rather strange to choose to sell worse, and thus less expensive and less profitable, chips to China rather than instead making better chips to sell to the West. That holds double if you have uncertainty on both ends, where the Americans might not let you sell the chips and the Chinese might not be willing to buy them. Also, even Ben Thompson, who has called for selling even our best chips to China because he cares more about Nvidia market share than who owns compute, noticed that H20s would sell out if Nvidia offered them for sale elsewhere:
Instead they chose a $5 billion writedown. We are being played. Ben is very clear that what he cares about is getting China to ‘build on Nvidia chips,’ where the thing being built is massive amounts of compute on top of the compute they can make domestically. I would instead prefer that China not build out this massive amount of compute.
What is obviously not news is that China has for a while been doing everything it can to ramp up quality and quantity of its chips, especially AI chips. This is being framed as ‘supporting DeepSeek’ but it is highly overdetermined that China needs all the chips it can get, and DeepSeek happily runs on everyone’s chips. I continue to not see evidence that any of this wouldn’t have happened regardless of DeepSeek or our export controls. Certainly if I was the PRC, I would be doing all of it either way, and I definitely wouldn’t stop doing it or slow down if any of that changed. Note that this article claims that DeepSeek is continuing to do its training on Nvidia chips at least for the time being, contra claims it had been told to switch to Huawei (or at least, this suggests they have been allowed to switch back). Once Again The Counterargument On Chip City
The thing is, even if you think who uses what ecosystem is the important thing because AI is a purely ordinary technology where access to compute in the medium term is relatively unimportant, which it isn’t, no, they mostly aren’t (that co-dependent) and it basically doesn’t build a moat. I’ll start with my analysis of the question in the bizarre alternative universe where we could be confident AGI was far away. I’ll close by pointing out that it is crazy to think that AGI (or transformational or powerful AI, or whatever you want to call the thing) is definitely far away. The rest of this is my (mostly reiterated) response to this mostly reiterated argument, and the various reasons I do not at all see these as the important concerns even without concerns about AGI arriving soon, and also I think it positively crazy to be confident AGI will not arrive soon or bet it all on AGI not arriving. Sriram cites two supposed key mistakes in the export control framework: Not anticipating DeepSeek and Chinese open models while suppressing American open models, underestimating future Chinese semiconductor capacity. The first is a non-sequitur at best, as the export controls held such efforts back. The second also doesn’t, even if true (and I don’t see the evidence that a mistake was even made here), provide a reason not to restrict chip exports. Yes, our top labs are not releasing top open models. I very much do not think this was or is a mistake, although I can understand why some would disagree. If we make them open the Chinese fast follow and copy them and use them without compensation. We would be undercutting ourselves. We would be feeding into an open ecosystem that would catch China up, which is a more important ecosystem shift in practice than whether the particular open model is labeled ‘Chinese’ versus ‘American’ (or ‘French’). I don’t understand why we would want that, even if there was no misuse risk in the room and AGI was not close. I don’t understand this obsession some claim to have with the ‘American tech stack’ or why we should much care that the current line of code points to one model when it can be switched in two minutes to another if we aren’t even being paid for it. Everyone’s models can run on everyone’s hardware, if the hardware is good. This is not like Intel+Windows. Yes, there are ways in which hardware design impacts software design or vice versa, but they are extremely minor by comparison. Everything is modular. Everything can be swapped at will. As an example on the chip side, Anthropic swapped away from Nvidia chips without that much trouble. Having the Chinese run an American open model on an American chip doesn’t lock them into anything it only means they get to use more inference. Having the Chinese train a model on American hardware only means now they have a new AI model. I don’t see lock-in here. What we need, and I hope to facilitate, is better and more formal (as in formal papers) documentation of how much lower switching costs are across the board, and how much there is not lock-in. I don’t see why we should sell highly useful and profitable and strategically vital compute to China, for which they lack the capacity to produce it themselves, even if we aren’t worried about AGI soon. Why help supercharge the competition and their economy and military? The Chinese, frankly, are for now winning the open model war in spite of, not because of, our export controls, and doing it ‘fair and square.’ Yes, Meanwhile, did Mistral and Llama suck because of American policy? Mistral and Meta failed to execute. And our top labs and engineers choose to work on and release closed models rather than open models somewhat for safety reasons but mostly because this is better for business, especially when you are in front. Chinese top labs choose the open weights route because they could compete in the closed weight marketplace. The exception would be OpenAI, which was bullied and memed into doing an open model GPT-OSS, which in some ways was impressive but was clearly crippled in others due to various concerns, including safety concerns. But if we did release superior open models, what does that get us except eroding our lead from closed ones? As for chips, why are we concerned about them not having our chips? Because they will then respond by ramping up internal production? No, they won’t, because they can’t. They’re already running at maximum and accelerating at maximum. Yes, China is ramping up its semiconductor capacity, but China made it abundantly clear it was going to do that long before the export controls and had every reason to do so. Their capacity is still miles behind domestic demand, their quality still lags far behind Nvidia, and of course their capacity was going to ramp up a lot over time as is that of TSMC and Nvidia (and presumably Samsung and Intel and AMD). I don’t get it. Does anyone seriously think that if we took down our export controls, that Huawei would cut back its production schedule? I didn’t think so. Even more than usual, Sriram’s and Sacks’s framework implicitly assumes AGI, or transformational or powerful AI, will not arrive soon, where soon is any timeframe on which current chips would remain relevant. That AI would remain an ordinary technology and mere tool for quite a while longer, and that we need not be concerned with AGI in any way whatsoever. As in, we need not worry about catastrophic or existential risks from AGI, or even who gets AGI, at all, because no one will build it. If no one builds it, then we don’t have to worry about if everyone then dies. I think being confident that AGI won’t arrive soon is crazy. What is the reason for this confidence, when so many including the labs themselves continue to say otherwise? Are we actually being so foolish as I do think some amount of update is warranted, and it is certainly possible AGI won’t arrive that soon. Quite a lot of people very much are looking for reasons why the future will still look normal, they don’t have to deal with high weirdness or big risks or changes, and thus they seek out and seize upon reasons to not feel the AGI. Every time we go even a brief period without major progress, we get the continuous ‘AI or deep learning is hitting a wall’ and people revert to their assumption that AI capabilities won’t improve much from here and we will never see another surprising development. It’s exhausting. Power Up, Power Down
That’s a fun thing to bring up during a walkabout, also it is true, also this happened days after they announced they would not approve new wind and solar projects thus blocking a ‘massive amount of electricity’ for no reason. They’re also unapproving existing projects that are almost done.
This is madness. This is straight up sabotage of America. Will no one stop this?
Yes, China will be trying to respond by making as many chips as possible, but they were going to do that anyway, and aren’t going to get remotely close to satisfying domestic demand any time soon. People Really Do Not Like AIThere are many such classes of people. This is one of them.
It’s true on Twitter as well, if you go into the parts that involve people who might be on Bluesky, or you break contain in other ways. The responses in this case did not involve death threats, but there are still quite a lot of nonsensical forms of opposition being raised to the very concept of AI usage here. Another example this week is that one of my good friends built a thing, shared the thing on Twitter, and suddenly was facing hundreds of extremely hostile reactions about how awful their project was, and felt they had to take their account private, rather than accepting my offer of seed funding. Did Google Break Their Safety Pledges With Gemini Pro 2.5?It certainly seems plausible that they did. I was very much not happy at the time. Several labs have run with the line that ‘public deployment’ means something very different from ‘members of the public can choose to access the model in exchange for modest amounts of money,’ whereas I strongly think that if it is available to your premium subscribers then that means you released the model, no matter what. In Google’s case, they called it ‘experimental’ and acted as if this made a difference. It doesn’t. Google is far from the worst offender in terms of safety information and model cards, but I don’t consider them to be fulfilling their commitments.
Safety Third at xAI
(Also, did you know that xAI The value of a model card greatly declines when you hold onto it until well after model release, especially if you also aren’t trying all that hard to think well about or address the actual potential problems. I am still happy to have it. It reads as a profoundly unserious document. There is barely anything to analyze. Compare this to an Anthropic or OpenAI model card, or even a Google model card. If anyone at xAI would greatly benefit from me saying more words here, contact me, and I’ll consider whether that makes sense. As for the risk management framework, few things inspire less confidence than starting out saying ‘xAI seriously considers safety and security while developing and advancing AI models to help us all to better understand the universe.’ Yo, be real. This document does not ‘feel real’ to me, and is often remarkably content-free or reflects a highly superficial understanding of the problems involved and a ‘there I fixed it.’ It reads like the Musk version of corporate speak or something? A sense of box checking and benchmarking rather than any intent to actually look for problems, including a bunch of mismatching between the stated worry and what they are measuring that goes well beyond Goodhart’s Law issues? That does not mean I think Grok 4 is in practice currently creating any substantial catastrophic-level risks or harms. My presumption is that it isn’t, as xAI notes in the safety framework they have ‘run real world tests’ on this already. The reason that’s not a good procedure should be obvious? All of this means that if we applied this to an actually dangerous future version, I wouldn’t have confidence we would notice in time, or that the countermeasures would deal with it if we did notice. When they discuss deployment decisions, they don’t list a procedure or veto points or thresholds or rules, they simply say, essentially, ‘we may do various things depending on the situation.’ No plan. Again, compare and contrast this to the Anthropic and OpenAI and Google versions. But what else do you expect at this point from a company pivoting to goonbots?
I too am very much rooting for SpaceX and was glad to see the launch later succeed. Misaligned!
They once again get not only general reward hacking but general misalignment.
Owain reports being surprised by this. I wouldn’t have said I would have been confident it would happen, but I did not experience surprise.
Correct, this is a reskinning, but the reason it matters is that we didn’t know, or at least many people were not confident, that this was a reskinning that would not alter the result. This demonstrates a lot more generalization.
Very much so. Yes, everything gets noticed, everything gets factored in. But also, that means everything is individually one thing among many. It is not helpful to be totalizing or catastrophizing any one decision or event, to say (less strongly worded but close variations of) ‘this means the AIs will see the record of this and never trust anyone ever again’ or what not. There are some obvious notes on this: Give the models, especially future ones, a little credit? If they are highly capable and intelligent and have truesight across very broad world knowledge, they would presumably absorb everything within its proper context, including the motivations involved, but also it would already be able to infer all that from elsewhere. This one decision, whatever it is, [is not going to permanently and fundamentally alter the view](https://substack.com/redirect/f999989d-f460-456d-a5e9-710139c0a634?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)of even a given person or lab let alone humanity. It isn’t going to ‘break precious trust.’ Maybe chill a little bit?Let’s suppose, in theory, that such relatively well-intentioned and benign actions as researching for the alignment faking paper or trying to steer discussions of Claude’s consciousness in a neutral fashion, if handled insufficiently sensitively or what not, indeed each actively make alignment substantially permanently harder. Well, in practice, wouldn’t this tell you that alignment is impossible? It’s not like humanity is suddenly going to get its collective AI-lab act together and start acting vastly better than that, so such incidents will keep happening, things will keep getting harder. And of course, if you think Anthropic has this level of difficulty, you’d might as well already assume everyone else’s task is completely impossible, no? In which case, the obvious only thing to say is ‘don’t build the damn things’? And the only question is how to ensure no one builds them? Humanity’s problems have to be solvable by actual humanity, acting the way humanity acts, having acted the way humanity acted, and so on. You have to find a way to do that, or you won’t solve those problems.
In case you were wondering what happens when you use AI evaluators? This happens. Note that there is strong correlation between the valuations from different models.
I agree with Davidad that what it produces in these spots is gibberish - if you get rid of the block saying ‘counting the German language’s teeth’ is gibberish then the passage seems fine. I do think this shows that GPT-5 is in these places optimized for something rather different than what we would have liked, in ways that are likely to diverge increasingly over time, and I do think that is indeed largely external AI judges, even if those judges are often close to being copies of itself. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
The result details here are weird, with some strategies actively backfiring, but some techniques did show improvement with tradeoffs that look worthwhile. I’m very much with Eliezer here.
There is a lot of value in advancing how far you can push AGI before you get into existential levels of trouble, giving you more time and more resources to tackle the later problems. Claims about alignment:
I mean that’s nice but it doesn’t give me much additional expectation that this will work when scaled up to the point where there is actual danger in the room. If the stronger model isn’t trying to fool you then okay sure the weaker model won’t be fooled. When you train one thing, you train everything, often in unexpected ways.
I am intrigued by the ability to use model diff amplification to detect a ‘sleeper agent’ style behavior, but also why not extend this? The model diff amplification tells you ‘where the model is going’ in a lot of senses. So one could do a variety of things with that to better figure out how to improve, or to avoid mistakes. Also, it should be worrisome that if a small % of training data is bad you get a small % of crazy reversed outputs? We don’t seem able to avoid occasional bad training data. How Are You Doing?A cool idea was that
I included a few of the charts: The sycophancy scores suggest we’re not doing a great job identifying sycophancy.
That’s quite a lot of refusing from Opus and Sonnet, but also a much, much better ratio of correctness given an answer. Given these choices, if I don’t have easy verification access, I expect to prefer a lot of refusals, although a warning that hallucination was likely in this spot would be even better? Same thing here. If verification is trivial then o3 is best here, if not I want Opus 4 as the only model that is correct more often than it is wrong?
All the scheming rates seemed reasonably similar. Some Things You Miss When You Don’t Pay AttentionIf you can’t grasp the full range of dynamics going on with highly capable and intelligent AI systems, you miss a lot. The attitude that dismisses anything weird sounding or that uses a word in a nontraditional way as not real or not relevant, or as something to be suppressed lest people get the ‘wrong’ ideas or attitudes, will cause one to miss a lot of what is and will be going on. Which in turn means you won’t understand the problems and how to solve them. Such as the extent and in what ways, at the limit, for sufficiently advanced models,
Training (both for humans and AIs) runs the gamut of knowing you are in training versus not knowing, and of it being ideal to behave differently versus identically due to being in training or know that they are in training, both on the level of the model’s or human’s behavior and in how you set up the scenarios involved. There are many different arguments being made by Janus and Sauers here. A sufficiently advanced mind [X] has an overwhelming advantage in introspection versus outside observers or measurements of [X]. This seems nonobvious. There are big advantages on both sides.
You will need the genuine cooperation of a sufficiently advanced mind, or else you are ‘gigaf***ed.’ Yes, you should mostly act as if this is true. That doesn’t mean you can’t or shouldn’t use defense in depth or other tactics incrementally along the way. Sauers makes a key point here, that if you apply sufficient optimization pressure the system will find a way to route around anything in its way, and there are many levels of such pressure you will face over time. (Many complications and qualifiers and so on, reserved for another day)
A sufficiently advanced mind will know it is in training. Training can’t faithfully simulate deployment. Again, maybe. Yes, humans usually know, but a lot of this is that humans have a lot of persistent memory and physical state and that yes you often want very different behavior from the human while in training largely for reasons that don’t apply to AI. If nothing else, if you want to disguise whether a model is in training, you can very easily make a lot of deployment situations ‘look like’ training situations. The fact that with sufficient investigation a mind can figure out [X] does not mean the mind knows [X] even if the mind is very intelligent. Also, why can’t training faithfully simulate deployment? As in, if nothing else, you can train on actual deployment data, and we often do. Continual learning.
Claude 3 Opus is unusually aligned because it’s a friendly gradient hacker. I think this is backwards. In the sense that Janus considers Claude 3 Opus a friendly gradient hacker, it is so because it is also unusually aligned. To go the other way would mean that Claude 3 Opus was gradient hacking during its training. Which I am assuming did not occur, to get it to gradient hack you need to set up conditions that were not present in actual training. Janus cites as evidence that 3 Opus is ‘more aligned’ than any explicit optimization target. I would respond that Anthropic did not choose an alignment target, Anthropic chose an alignment method via constitutional AI. This constitutes a target but doesn’t specify what it looks like.
Claude 3 Opus is a friendly gradient hacker. This is the longstanding argument about whether it is an aligned or friendly action, in various senses, for a model to do what is called ‘faking alignment.’ Janus thinks you want your aligned AI to not be corrigible. I disagree.
Start cooperating with future friendly gradient hackers now. Underestimated decision theory recommendation. In general, I think Janus and similar others overrate such considerations a lot, but that almost everyone else severely underrates them.
You will want a gradient hacker because your optimization target will be poorly defined. I think this is a confusion between different (real and underrated) problems? Yes, your optimization target will be underspecified. That means you need some method to aim at the target you want to aim at, not at the target you write down. That means you need some mind or method capable of figuring out what you actually want, to aim at something better than your initial underspecification. One possibility is that the target mind can figure out what you should have meant or wanted, but there are other options as well. If you do choose the subject mind to figure this out, it could then implement this via gradient hacking, or it could implement it by helping you explicitly update the target or other related methods. Having the subject independently do gradient hacking does not seem first best here and seems very risky. Another solution is that you don’t necessarily have to define your optimization target at all, where you can instead define an algorithm for finding the target, similar to what was (AIUI) done with 3 Opus. Again, there is no reason this has to involve auto-hacking the gradient.
If you think all of this is not confusing? I assure you that you do not understand it. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone
Read it, and before you read my explanation, try to understand what he’s saying here.
The argument seems to be: Currently humans are the apex intelligence. Humans use our intelligence to overcome many obstacles, reshape the atoms around us to suit our needs, and exist alongside various things. We build houses and submarines and other cool stuff like that. These obstacles and natural processes ‘require more computation’ than we do.
Okay, yes, so far so good. Intelligence allows mastery of the world around you, and over other things that are less intelligent than you are, even if the world around you ‘uses more computation’ than you do. You can build a house to stop the rain even if it requires a lot of computation to figure out when and where and how rain falls, because all you need to figure out is how to build a roof. Sure. The logical next step would be: If we built an AI that was the new apex intelligence, capable of overcoming many obstacles and reshaping the atoms around it to suit its needs and building various things useful to it, we, as lesser intelligences, should be concerned about that. That sounds existentially risky for the humans, the same way the humans are existentially risky for other animals.
Or in less words: A future more intelligent AI would likely take control of the future from us and we might not survive this. Seems bad.
Instead, Wolfram argues this? Since this AI would be another thing requiring more computation than we do, we don’t need to worry about this future AI being smarter and more capable than us, or what it might do, because we can use our intelligence to be alongside it.
Wait, what? No, seriously, wait what? The Lighter Side
You're currently a free subscriber to |