---
subject: "The Nutgraf: The melting ice-cream curve"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-04-26 05:03:10
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
First, I want to say a big thank you to everyone who attended The Ken’s event on Career Lattices. The event itself was fun—Harshil Mathur, co-founder and CEO, Razorpay; Vasuta Agarwal, chief business officer, Inmobi; and Prof. Sourav Mukherji, IIM Bangalore, were sharp, smart, and contrarian. My co-moderator Rohin was fantastic and confident—it really didn’t feel like he was doing this for the first time. And above all, The Ken’s organising team of volunteers were enthusiastic, energetic, and simply amazing. I’m the sort of person who sees all the mistakes and not the good stuff, but even I caught myself thinking at the end, “that went rather well”.
Also, a big, big thanks to everyone who showed up, despite knowing that we’re still figuring out events, and that our first event was bound to be imperfect. Thank you for trusting that we’d do our best, and for forgiving the countless lapses we were inevitably going to make. I was quite thrilled to see so many subscribers in person, even if I didn’t get a chance to do a proper meet and greet. I managed to put faces to names of several who have been writing to me for months, and even years.
Frankly, on reflection, I still can’t believe that we had a full house on a Monday evening in Bengaluru. In fact, we had sold out all tickets by the morning of the event, and even had to turn away several disappointed subscribers who really wanted to attend it. We’re exploring ways to make it easier next time around—maybe we’ll experiment with prebookings, or advance reservations. Let’s see. If you couldn’t attend the event, we’ll probably publish some kind of a post-event story in the upcoming week to subscribers. Again, we’re still figuring this out.
There’s a lot that’s unknown, but the one thing we know for sure is that we’re going to do more events.
Like everything at The Ken, we take our time to decide when and how to do things that others have made tedious, dull, and predictable. Newsletters. Podcasts. B-school Case Competitions. And now events. Their monotony is our opportunity. We pick our battles deliberately. But when we choose to fight them, we try to keep at it for a long time, and try to make the next version just a bit better than the previous one. This newsletter began as a whim. Today, six years later, after nearly 250 editions, on yet another Saturday morning, I’m still here.
Events are going to be like that too. Our next event is in May. We’ll see you there.
I can’t promise that it’ll be perfect, but I can promise it’ll be better.
Listen to The Nutgraf’s Premium Podcast!
If you are a Premium subscriber to The Ken, you already have access to all our premium podcasts, available exclusively via our subscriber apps for iOS, Android, and iPad. They support Apple CarPlay and Android Auto, so you can listen to us while driving too. [Stream the latest edition of The Nutgraf here](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/the-nutgraf/the-melting-ice-cream-curve/).
If you are not a Premium subscriber, you can subscribe to [The Ken Premium](https://podcasts.apple.com/in/channel/the-ken-premium/id6744577070) channel on Apple Podcasts for a really affordable monthly price (Rs 299 in India). It contains The Nutgraf, and other premium podcasts such as Make India Competitive Again and First Principles.
Sometimes, when I talk to people who work in tech (or want to work in tech), I feel like they don’t really grasp that we’re living in a different era. Most of their frameworks, models, and ways of building and growing products don’t really fit into the real world anymore. This is a recent development which became apparent last year. Last year, I wrote a [trilogy](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/product-managers-used-to-be-creators-now-they-are-mostly-bureaucrats/) [about](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/who-killed-the-art-of-product-management-in-india/) product management careers (which I ended with a special [survey](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/who-made-the-frauduct-manager/) edition that 1,000+ product managers participated in) where this divergence became quite stark.
I think the fundamental reason why this is happening is because the real world is changing much more rapidly than our heuristics, especially in startups and tech. More importantly, the pace of this change has radically picked up, and thus, all the accumulated knowledge of how the world works is becoming more quaint and irrelevant. As an example, Peter Thiel first published Zero to One in 2014. For a long time, it was seen as one of the foundational books about how to build startups. For nearly a decade, entrepreneurs everywhere would religiously read Thiel’s book, or those by others like him, as a way to figure out how to build great products. In 2025, when I reread the book, I stumbled on insights such as, “progress comes from monopoly.” Really? In today’s economy?
Thiel’s book is just one example where the real world has moved past the wisdom we’ve long held to be true. All the ways in which we think about how startups find product-market fit, scale, and reach the metaphorical paradise seem so dated. One of these is a tenet that startups have held as dogma—the pursuit of a hockey stick curve.
For as long as I can remember, startups and the people working there have been told that they needed to do things that resulted in a curve that looks something like this.
This was what growth was supposed to look like in tech. It had to be flat for a while as you were figuring things out, and the sign that you’d hit upon something was if your product metrics went up rapidly until it looked nearly vertical on a chart. Linear steady growth was for losers.
For over a decade, startups have been religiously pursuing hockey-stick growth. For most founders, product managers, and growth marketers, that’s the only shape they know. And that’s not because they are dumb people. It’s because they lived in a world where upward growth was the only thing they were familiar with.
But in 2025, we’ve discovered that’s not true anymore. Startups aren’t growing like they used to—so we’re discovering newer, more unfamiliar curves. Most strikingly, we now know what the shape of the downward curve looks like.
To stay true to the metaphor, I call it the ‘melting ice-cream curve’.
The way up is fast, steep, and exciting. The way down is the exact opposite. Just like an ice cream cone on a hot summer day, this graph slowly and inevitably drips away—messy, disappointing, and impossible to stop. Companies that are going through a melting ice-cream curve don’t die overnight with a big explosion. They melt away, and each passing moment takes a little more until there’s nothing left but a puddle.
It’s the sad, sticky antithesis of the hockey stick.
For decades, we’ve read examples of companies and startups discovering their hockey-stick growth. In the recent past, we’re now witnessing the other side—how startups and companies respond to the pressures of a new environment where growth is no longer easy or inevitable. That’s the melting ice-cream curve. And it has three distinct stages.
The first stage of the melting ice-cream curve begins at the highest point—in this stage, the biggest obstacle the startup faces in raising capital is its valuation. The optimism of future growth has pumped it up so much that the startup can no longer justify it. And the future that it dreamed of is vastly divergent from the reality it exists in today.
An early sign that a startup may be going through the melting ice-cream curve is that the founders of the company try to wriggle their way out. Just like how founders can see hockey-stick growth before others, they can also see the melting ice-cream curve earlier. And from their vantage point, if they see an opportunity to get out and start afresh, they will.
In fact, I wrote about this in an earlier edition of The Nutgraf, from back in 2023, which I titled: Founders are choosing respawning over resistance.
As the realisation dawns that many companies will never go back to the valuations they received in the last couple of years, founders will choose to respawn rather than resist. In video game parlance, a respawn happens when your character reenters the game after being killed or removed from play.
Usually, respawns happen against your will, but in this case, founders are actively choosing to restart and build something new while abandoning what they’ve built earlier, which is often worth tens or even hundreds of millions of dollars. As a result, several companies right now are zombies—they are dead, and yet alive.
But I haven’t even come to the strangest part of the story.
This is not a question of money in the bank. Most of these companies are well-capitalised. In the words of one of the founders I spoke to, “I know people who are sitting on five or six years of runway.”
Founders aren’t walking away because they’ve run out of money.
They’ve run out of incentives.
While most founders are still sticking to resistance, the early signs of founders quitting startups they’ve founded has already begun. Aditya Kothari, who founded the short-video app Chingari, recently announced his decision to move on from the company. Around the same time, Anshuman Kumar, who founded the edtech company Teachmint, also walked away to start something else entirely from scratch.
Founders are choosing respawning over resistance, [The Nutgraf](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/founders-are-choosing-respawning-over-resistance/)
When founders realise it makes much more sense to quit and restart than to continue to play, that’s the sign that they don’t expect much more growth for the company in the near future. Better to start from the bottom somewhere else to seek for the elusive hockey-stick curve.
The second stage of the melting ice-cream curve is when CXOs start jumping around. Again, the reasons for this are similar—the heat is on, and many executives who work well in winter with ice hockey sticks simply aren’t suited for summer when ice-creams are melting everywhere. Combine the pressures of driving growth with the reality of the world outside, plus lower incentives to stick around, and you see a season of CXOs yearning to try out different things.
In the last 24 months, leaders at the highest levels across most major startups—Flipkart, Swiggy, Cleartrip, Google, Angel One, Meesho, Paytm, and Zomato have either switched to other firms or simply started new companies. I’d argue that the last year in particular represents the most chaotic periods of leadership churn in startups. Barring a few companies, most of them have seen big, sweeping changes in personnel.
Finally, over the last few weeks, it’s become apparent that we’ve entered the next stage of the melting ice-cream curve. And this time, the casualties are none other than… CEOs themselves.
Just in the last week, multiple companies replaced their CEOs. Zomato’s food-delivery CEO Rakesh Ranjan stepped down, and Deepinder Goyal took charge. I’m guessing that the slowdown in its food delivery business was a contributing factor. Firstcry [also](https://entrackr.com/news/globalbees-ceo-nitin-agarwal-resigns-anuj-jain-takes-over-9001555) replaced the CEO of Globalbees Brands—a house-of-brands subsidiary. Again, I don’t need to tell you how the house-of-brands thesis is playing out. This isn’t just a tech phenomenon. Britannia CEO Rajneet Singh Kohli stepped down last month.
The pressure has reached its highest point, and well, a change of leadership at the very top is becoming more viable for everybody involved. As a [story](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/jobs/c-suite/more-ceos-eye-exit-as-going-gets-tough-options-spring-up/articleshow/120462541.cms) from The Economic Times points out, there have been 41 CEO exits at NSE-listed companies in the March quarter—the highest in nearly ten years. This isn’t just specific to India. To quote a story from the Silicon Valley Business Journal, a Chicago outplacement firm that was [tracking](https://www.bizjournals.com/sanjose/bizwomen/news/latest-news/2025/03/ceo-exits-challenger-resign-government-retire.html?page=all) this “found 222 CEOs left their jobs in January. While that’s down slightly from the 230 exits recorded in December, it is the highest number of January CEO departures since the firm began tracking CEO turnover in 2002”.
It also follows a record-breaking 2024, when 2,221 CEOs announced their departures, up 16% from 2023. Last year’s CEO exit rate was the highest since the company began recording CEO turnover.
A melting ice-cream curve is not to suggest that these companies are going to die.
It’s an indication that things are heating up, and people are prepared to take all kinds of measures that previously appeared unthinkable.
Expect more of this to continue and accelerate as the uncertainty continues to loom, and summer continues to beat down Indian companies and startups.
It’s just going to be messy.
Regards,
Praveen Gopal Krishnan