---
subject: "AI #51: Altman's Ambition"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-02-15 14:22:21
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Sam Altman is not playing around. He wants to build new chip factories in the decidedly unsafe and unfriendly UAE. He wants to build up the world’s supply of energy so we can run those chips. What does he say these projects will cost? Oh, up to seven trillion dollars. Not a typo. Even scaling back the misunderstandings, this is what ambition looks like. It is not what safety looks like. It is not what OpenAI’s non-profit mission looks like. It is not what it looks like to have concerns about a hardware overhang, and use that as a reason why one must build AGI soon before someone else does. The entire justification for OpenAI’s strategy is invalidated by this move. I have spun off reactions to Gemini Ultra Table of ContentsIntroduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. Can’t go home? Declare victory. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. Is AlphaGeometry even AI? The Third Gemini. Is it up for the challenge? Reactions are mixed. GPT-4 Real This Time. Do you remember when ChatGPT got memory? Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. Bot versus bot, potential for AI hacking. They Took Our Jobs. The question is, will they also take the replacement jobs? Get Involved. A new database of surprising AI actions. Introducing. Several new competitors. Altman’s Ambition. Does he actually seek seven trillion dollars? Yoto. You only train once. Good luck! I don’t know why. Perhaps you’ll die. In Other AI News. Andrej Karpathy leaves OpenAI, self-discover algorithm. Quiet Speculations. Does every country need their own AI model? The Quest for Sane Regulation. A standalone post on California’s SR 1047. Washington D.C. Still Does Not Get It. No, we are not confused about this. Many People are Saying. New Yorkers do not care for AI, want regulations. Roon Watch. If you can. How to Get Ahead in Advertising. Anthropic super bowl ad. The Week in Audio. Sam Altman at the World Government Summit. Rhetorical Innovation. Several excellent new posts, and a protest. Please Speak Directly Into this Microphone. AI killer drones now? Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. Oh Goody. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Timothy Lee. The Lighter Side. So, what you’re saying is…
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
That makes sense, IMO geometry is a compact space. One could still also ask, how often will it turn out that our problems have that look hard turn out to be solvable simple or brute force ways? And if AI then figures out what those ways are, or the use of AI allows us to figure it out, or the excuse of AI enables us to find it, what are the practical differences there? The comments have some interesting discussions about whether IMO problems and experiences are good for training human mathematicians and are a good use of time, or not. My guess is that they are a very good use of time relative to salient alternatives, but also the samples involved are of course hopelessly confounded so there is no good way to run a study, on so many levels. The network effects likely are a big game too, as are the reputational and status effects. GPT-4 Real This Time
What does ‘smart’ mean in this context? It will vary depending on who you ask. Kevin’s opinion is definitely not universal. But I am guessing that Kevin is right that, while Arena is far better than standard benchmarks, it is still not properly taking raw model intelligence into account.
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
The photo in question isn’t merely ‘I can tell it is AI,’ it is ‘my brain never considered the hypothesis that it was not AI.’ That style is impossible to miss. Regular people, it seems, largely did not see it. But also they did not have to, so they were not on alert, and no one found it important to correct them. And they haven’t yet had the practice. So my inclination is probably not too worried? Meanwhile,
Alas, the actual account looks like it is a person and is mostly in what I presume is Arabic, so not that exciting.
Research consistently says that, for previous human levels of porn, the net effect has been to reduce incidence of anti-social sexual behaviors. The direction of porn access in general on pro-social activities in general is a question I have not seen good data on? I did an Elicit search and there was nothing on point at all, pornography is ‘associated’ with more sexual behavior but that is not causal, and mostly it is people warning about behavior shifts they can label as problematic. File under questions that are rarely asked? My prediction continues to be that AI girlfriends and other related offerings will not be net negative for actual dating any time soon.
This could be scam versus scam violence, but my guess is it is not. This is more likely to be a classic honeypot strategy. If a bot responds, you can report it or block it. If the ‘you’ in question is Twitter, then you can ban it, or have it universally muted into the void, or you can try to toy with it and waste its time and maybe turn the tables, as desired. The sky is the limit. Can the good guy with an AI stop the bad guy with an AI? Sometimes yes, sometimes no, same as the same guys without AIs. In the case where the bad AI is optimizing to target absurdly stupid people, I would presume that defenses would be relatively more effective.
The jump from GPT-3.5 to GPT-4 is huge there. The failure of the open source models to succeed is one more reminder that they have universally failed to exceed or perhaps even reach the 3.5 threshold. In the world’s least newsworthy headline, In more meaningful news, They Took Our Jobs
Within that framework his core concept is that AI is fundamentally a way of creating supply of certain kinds of expertise, and that this combined with demographic trends will be very good for the middle class. There will be high demand for what they can provide. As usual, economists assume that technological improvement will always create jobs to replace the ones taken away, which has been true in the past, and the question is what types and quality of jobs are created and destroyed. Economists continue to be very good at thinking about the next few years in terms of mundane utility and the practical implications, while refusing on principle to consider the possibility that the future beyond that will be fundamentally different from the present. Meanwhile Nvidia hit another all-time high as I typed this.
Once more with feeling: The reason why new jobs always resulted from old jobs was because humans were the strongest cognitive beings and optimization engines on the planet, so automating or improving some tasks opened up others. If we built AGI, that would cease to be the case. We would create new tasks to compete and find new ways to provide value, and then the AGI would do those as well. Which, of course, could be amazing, if it means we are free to do things other than ‘jobs’ and ‘work’ and live in various forms of abundance while dealing with distributional impacts. The obsession with jobs can get quite out of hand. It is also, however, a sign that humans will by default stop being competitive or economically viable. It is also strange to say that X makes a sacrifice in order to get Y, but unintentionally. I did not think that was how sacrifice works? If it was not intentional it is simply two consequences of an action. Get Involved
Introducing
Love it. Google is big enough that the advantage of having a better LLM and better coding abilities than the rest of the word could plausibly exceed the value of offering those skills on the market. Let’s (not) go. Now, let’s talk about all those papers. Altman’s Ambition
We should be careful not to take this 7 trillion dollar number too seriously. He is not attempting to raise that much capital right away. Which is good news for him, since that is not a thing that is possible to do.
Even in terms of the full project, notice that there are two things here, the chips and the power. If you are going to spend Chips are not on that list. Electrical power potentially is on that list. It is a much, much bigger industry, with much bigger potential to usefully spend. The power part of the plan I can get behind. The world could use massively more clean energy faster for so many reasons. I have not seen a cost breakdown, but the power almost has to be most of it? Which would be trillions for new power, and all of the realistic options available for that are green. Wouldn’t it be wild if Sam Altman used the fig leaf of AI to go solve climate change with fusion plants?
Garrison writes a short post explaining this: Sam Altman’s The chip plan seems entirely inconsistent with both OpenAI’s claimed safety plans and theories, and with OpenAI’s non-profit mission. It looks like a very good way to make things riskier faster. You cannot both try to increase investment on hardware by orders of magnitude, and then say you need to push forward because of the risks of allowing there to be an overhang. Or, well, you can, but we won’t believe you. This is doubly true given where he plans to build the chips. The United States would be utterly insane to allow these new chip factories to get located in the UAE. At a minimum, we need to require ‘friend shoring’ here, and place any new capacity in safely friendly countries. Also, frankly,
Hey, hey, I’m grinding here, no one pretend otherwise. Still unhappy that Tyler Cowen passed me up at the writing every day awards. What exactly does he think someone is doing, when they are trying to figure out and explain to others how we are going to fail? We are trying to ensure that we do not fail, that’s what. Or, if we were already going to succeed, to be convinced of this. If I thought that accelerating AI development was the way to secure our collective future, I would be doing that. There is way more money in it. I would have little trouble getting hired or raising funds. It is fascinating and fun as hell, I have little doubt. I am constantly having ideas and getting frustrated that I do not see anyone trying them - even when I am happy no one is trying them, it is still frustrating. Of course, English is strange, so you can interpret the statement the other way, the actually correct way: That some of you should do one thing and some of you should do the other. Division of labor is a thing, and we need both people building bridges and people trying to figure out the ways those bridges would fall down so we can modify the designs of the bridges, or if necessary or the economics don’t make sense to not build a particular bridge. Yoto
When is it more efficient to do a Yoro, versus a standard approach, in AI or elsewhere? That depends on how likely it is to work given your ability to guess the new parameters, how much time and money it costs to run each iteration, and how much you can learn from what results you get from each approach. What are your scarce resources? To what extent is it the time of your top talent? Yoro also allows you to do multiple things that rely on each other. If you have to hill climb on each change, that is not only slow, it can cut off promising approaches. I have definitely pulled off Yoro in various capacities. My Aikido model of baseball was a Yoro. Many of my best Magic decks, including Mythic, were Yoro. There is an obvious downside, as well. Training new state of the art models by changing tons of things according to intuition and seeing what happens does… not… seem… especially… safe?
Roon could easily be right. I do think a lot of things are discovered by big bets and cowboy attitude. Trying out bold new safety ideas, in a responsible manner, could easily involve big (resource or financial) bets. There is also such a thing as bankroll management. If you place a big cowboy bet, and you are betting the company, then any gambler will tell you that you do not get to keep doing that, there is a rare time and a place for it, and you better be damn sure you are right or have no choice. But sometimes, If you place a big cowboy bet, and the cost of losing it is human extinction, then any gambler will tell you that this is not good bankroll management. There are of course different kinds of Yoro runs. In Other AI News
Here is the abstract:
I have indeed bought some of the obvious things, and that part of my portfolio is doing fine. But oh my could things have gone so much better if I’d gone for it.
There has been a strange lack of enthusiasm about strategies of the form ‘use technique that queries the model lots of times to make the answer better.’ Until we have explored such spaces more there might be a lot of room for improvement of output quality, although it would come at a cost in efficiency. The results here show a very large leap from zero agents to ten, such that we need to see the answers for one, or for three. The gains from there are smaller. I am suspicious of the gains from 30 to 40 being even as large as they are here, this is not a log scale. They note that the harder the task the larger the efficiency gains here, up to a point where the problem gets too difficult and the gains taper off. Makes sense. I do not think this shows that ‘more agents are all you need.’ It does show that you can get a substantial boost this way if you can spare the compute. I would have predicted the effect, agents have large issues with failure on individual steps and going in circles and making dumb mistakes and a consensus seems likely to help, so it almost has to be helpful, but I would have had no idea on the magnitude. I also want to call out the ‘impact statement’ at the end, because it is so disconnected from the topic at hand.
They are attempting to develop the ability to scale the skills of AI agents. I am not saying their research is unethical to publish, but this statement does not scratch the surface of even the mundane risks of improving AI agent performance, let alone mention the existential dangers if applied to sufficiently advanced and capable models.
He asks how we would know if an AI could compose genuinely different music the way The Beatles did, noting that they carried along all of civilization so the training data is corrupted. Well, it is not corrupted if you only feed in data from before a given date, and then do recursive feedback without involving any living humans. That is severely limiting, to be sure, but it is the test we have. Or we could have it do something all of us haven’t done yet. That works too. His brainstorming suggestion for ensuring a good future is that perhaps we could focus on minds that operate in ways that make them impossible to copy, via ‘instilling a new religion’ into them. The theory is that if an AI can be copied, then it does not matter, it is one’s uniqueness that makes you special. He ends this way:
I do not think that would work for overdetermined reasons. It is still better thinking than most similar proposals. Quiet Speculations
I like the overall idea of pointing out there are lots of places things can go haywire and fail, many of which are extremely hard, whereas even one failure could be fatal, or sufficient to turn the situation quite bleak. Are these the right things to be concerned about? Did we pick a good ten? Looking above, I would say that this focuses heavily on intra-human distributional questions. Who will have a job? Who will get benefits and ‘access’ and ‘a say’? What will happen to social infrastructure? These both highly relate to each other, and to me are missing the point, which is whether humans get the benefits and stay in control and even survive, generally, at all. Similarly, assurance’s goals (of safety, security, robustness and reliability) are important, and taking responsibility generally is a necessary if you want something to happen and go well. But the goal is the outcome, not the mechanism. I care about assurance and responsibility in this context only instrumentally in order to get the outputs. This could still be a useful distinction, but it could also be distracting. And of course, I would say that opportunities is not really so hard a problem, if you have capabilities. Quite the opposite. The hard problems I see missing here are some of the ones I most worry about, that AI might greatly exceed human capabilities, and that competitive and capitalistic and evolutionary style dynamics among AIs could lead places we do not want even if each individual move is ‘safe.’ If we are worried about whether humans even matter in #10, this list does not feel like it is appreciating the practical implications properly. This could be thought of as addressed partially in problem eight, but I think mostly it is not. I see these problems as being less foundational, more symptoms than roots. From what I can tell, however, this is still a highly thoughtful, thorough work that moves the conversation forward. I like the question in section 4, asking whether the problems are wicked, inherently defying a solution. They say they are not wicked problems if defined properly and ‘realistically,’ I am not so sure, and am worried that the parts that are wicked were excluded in part because they are indeed wicked.
Tyler Cowen offers ‘
Quite so. Even if the AI cannot beat you at your exact job in particular, that does not mean it will win in a competition for attention, or a competition for dollars spent. I often see such very good predictions, especially from Tyler Cowen in particular, and wonder how one can get this right and then fail to extrapolate to the logical conclusions. Even if AI never goes Full Superintelligence (perhaps because we somehow realize you never go full superintelligence), and a few spheres remain uniquely human when evaluated by humans, have you solved for the equilibrium when the AI is better than us at all the important economic activities and at executing all positions of power, and those who do not hand them over get outcompeted? Have you actually thought about what such worlds look like, while keeping in mind that we are considering the best case scenarios if civilization chooses this line of play? I also wonder about the economics of the desalination example. If the AI figures out how to make the desert bloom cheaply, wouldn’t standard economics say that this creates an economic boom and also lowers the cost of housing as people get to move into the new areas, and shouldn’t it tighten the labor market? Yes, it draws investment away, but not in a way that anyone should feel threatened. If those dynamics shift to where this is bad news for the value of your labor, you were already obsolete, no?
If generative AI is a top priority for your company this year, that does not sound like all hype. Nor is it, as highly useful products have already shipped. I know because I use them. The actual WSJ article centers on companies not sure they want to pay $30/month per user for Microsoft Copilot. I am not going to buy it because I prefer other methods and do not use Microsoft’s office products, but for those doing so in an office this seems like it is very obviously worthwhile. The Quest for Sane RegulationsEarlier this week I had a chance to speak with Dean Bell,
Washington DC Still Does Not Get It
In particular, that that national security apparatus, with notably rare individuals as exceptions, continues to be unable to comprehend any threat that is not either another nation or a ‘non-state actor.’ To this line of thinking only foreign humans can be threats. The ideas we consider do not parse in that lexicon.
So the work continues. Presumably if you are reading deep into my posts you are aware that the work continues, but it is good to offer periodic reminders.
Many People are SayingThe people, of course, continue to strongly support the policies in question.
Acceleration is deeply unpopular, and people do not trust the labs to self-regulate. Note the complete lack of a partisan split here: Open source? No thanks, says public, I think this wording is mostly fair? Notice that this time the partisan split is that more Republicans know not to release the kraken. On the question of whether to focus on today’s risks or future risks, people are not buying the ‘focus on today’ arguments, despite that seeming like it should appeal to regular people. I think this framing is slightly unfair, but look at the splits: People are actually far stronger on liability than I am. Notice that this is 87% support for a policy that in practice bans quite a lot of AI use cases. And here it is, the straight up question of whether New York should stick its nose in a place that in a sane civilization it would not belong, this is a federal job, but good luck getting them to do anything, so… Again, regulation with a 52-14 split among Republicans is something that you would expect to become law over time. I very much do worry about what happens if you have a different license requirement for your AI in each of 50 states, unless they are restricted to only apply to the very top companies - Microsoft and Google can handle it, but yes that starts to be an unreasonable burden for others. Here’s another one that shows how people are way more opposed to AI than I am: That second question is the only one in the whole survey where AI had majority support for anything. People really, really do not like AI. China WatchRemember the people who will ‘beat’ us if we ever take a single safety precaution?
Yes, if we were to halt all AI work forever then eventually someone would surpass us, and that someone might be China. We still have to be consistent. If X would kill AI, and China has already done things far harsher than X, then is AI killed there or not? Roon WatchIt has been quiet. Too quiet.
How to Get Ahead in AdvertisingIn any case, he’s so back.
I do think the logic on this was sound for crypto. Once you advertise at the Super Bowl you are saturating the market for suckers, which is what was driving the crypto prices at the time. And indeed, it does not seem implausible that AI stock market valuations are perhaps ‘a bit ahead of themselves’ given the dramatic rises recently. I still expect such investments to turn out well, I think there is a huge persistent mispricing going on, but that mispricing can persist while a different upward pressure temporarily peaks. Who knows. I do think Super Bowl ads are somewhat EA-coded, because EA is about doing the thing that is effective, and this counts. Anton is anti-EA and presumably sees this as a negative. I see this association as mostly a positive. I believe that Super Bowl ads are likely underpriced even at $7 million for 30 seconds. They provide a cultural touchstone, a time when half of America will actually watch your damn advertisement seeking to be entertained and part of the conversation. I do not think that you should buy 4 copies of the same generic spot as one e-commerce business did, that is a waste of money, but buying one well-considered spot seems great. For 2025, The Week in Audio
Comes out in favor of mundane utility. Talks early about how in education they moved to ban ChatGPT then walked it back, clear implication of don’t make the mistake of touching my stuff. But I see that as a hopeful tale, people (correctly) came around quickly once they had enough information. He says the reason more people haven’t used ChatGPT is because it’s still super early, it’s like the first primitive cell phones. He says timeline requires patience to reach the iPhone 16, but in a few years it will be better, in a decade it will be remarkable. I think even without improvement, the main barrier to further adaptation is purely time. Why should we be excited for GPT-5? Because it will be smarter, so it will be better at everything across the board. Well, yes. When asked what regulation he would pass for the UAE, he says he would create a regulatory sandbox for experimentation. I notice I am confused. Why do we need a sandbox when you can do whatever you want anyway? How will you ‘give people the future’ now? He then says we will need a global regulatory system like the IAEA for when people might deploy superintelligence, so he would host a conference about that to show leadership, as the UAE is well-positioned for that for reasons I do not understand. I do agree such an agency is a good idea. Asked about regulation, he says we’re in the discussion stage and that is okay, but in the next few years we will need an action plan with real global buy-in with world leaders coming together. He is pushed on what to actually do, he says that is not for OpenAI to say. The host says at 15:50 or so ‘I want to ask something that the fearmongers and opportunists ask’ and then asks what Altman is most worried and optimistic about. Sam Altman says what keeps him up at night is easy, it is:
Certainly this is much better than talking about unemployment or misinformation. I very much appreciate the idea that things can go horribly wrong without anyone’s ill intent, and that is indeed similar to my baseline scenario. That said, it is not ‘lights out for all of us’ and there is no mention of existential risks, other than bringing up the silly ‘Killer Robots walking down the street’ in order to dismiss it. So this is at best a mixed response to the most important question. Altman is very good at letting everyone see what they want to see, and adjusting his answers for the right setting. He is clearly doing both here. He then says that current young people are coming of age at the best time in human history, just think of the potential. This raises the question of how he thinks about the generation after, whether there will even be one, and what experience they will have if they do get to exist. The second half of the video is an interview with Yann LeCun. I did not listen. I do not have to and I suppose in theory you could make me but you’d have to pay. Rhetorical Innovation
Philosophy Compass publishes
It is concerning if you care about the survival of humanity. One way to look at it, I suppose?
I coined that last line (‘Earth is nothing without its people’) on Twitter. No AGI is the proof that there is always someone who takes a stronger position than you do. Pause AI wants to build AI once we find out how to make it safe, whereas No AGI is full Team Dune, and wants to build it never.
Please Speak Directly Into This Microphone
Also offered:
I want to be fully fair to Jezos, who kind of walked this back slightly afterwards, but also in the end mostly or entirely didn’t, so here is the rest of the thread for you to judge for yourself:
As I interpret this, Jezos is saying that we ought to do that which maximizes a thermodynamic function, and we should ignore any other consequences. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone
And I would reply that yes, perhaps we should think there is a rather large existential risk involved in making unknown things that are smarter and more capable than us, that behave in unknown ways, in a very different radically uncertain type of world? That what we value, and also our physical selves, are not that likely to survive that, without getting into any further details? I see far more epistemic humility among those worried about risk, than those who say that we definitely do not have risk, or we should proceed to this future as quickly as possible. And that seems rather obvious? His other point is that there is no point in George Washington hiring nuclear safety researchers. Which is strictly true, but: George Washington’s inability to usefully hire specifically ‘nuclear safety researchers’ is strongly related to his inability to realize that this is a future need at all. George Washington was directly involved in a debate over how to deal with the safe and fair distribution of weapons, settled on the Declaration of Independence, then tried the Articles of Confederation followed by the Constitution including among others the second amendment, and we have been dealing with the consequences ever since, with mixed results. It was designed to handle a radically uncertain future. Mistakes were made. More research, one might say, was needed, or at least would have been useful, and they did the best they could. George Washington was also directly involved in debates over the scope of governmental powers versus freedoms, state capacity, the conditions that justify surveillance, what constitutes proper authority and so on. All very important. The AI landscape would look radically different today without George Washington, and in a way very closely related to many things he knew mattered and for the reasons they mattered. The ideas of the founding fathers matter. George Washington was deeply involved in diplomacy, international treaties and international relations, all of which are highly relevant and could be usefully advanced. If you can’t hire nuclear safety engineers, you don’t build a nuclear power plant.
The Lighter Side
This has more insight than most people who think about such questions. You think that if the AIs (or robots) start doing X that you can instead do Y. But there is no reason they cannot also do Y. Of course, if you want to watch movies all day for your own enjoyment, the fact that a robot can watch them faster is irrelevant. Consumption is different. But consumption does not keep one in business, or sticking around.
1 I appreciate the echo, and note that the exact phrase here is supposed to be ‘YOUR periodic reminder,’ although I get not wanting to say ‘your’ twice here. You're currently a free subscriber to |