---
subject: "Strategy in four worlds"
from: "Gordon Brander from Squishy Computer <subconscious@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-01-11 14:33:02
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Gordon Brander", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8580891911269121157", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
I’m building The research methods that ground Why map multiple futures instead of making particular predictions? The answer boils down to uncertainty. When uncertainty is within bounds, we can deploy the tools of risk management; things like portfolio theory, forecasts, and Risk and uncertainty are two different thingsThe first thing to recognize is the distinction between uncertainty and risk. Risk is when you know the possible outcomes, and can assign probabilities to those outcomes. Uncertainty is when you don’t know the possible outcomes. These are two very different kinds of strategic situation.
Rolling a six on a die is a risk. All of the possible outcomes are known and quantifiable. Aligning AGI is an uncertainty. The possible outcomes are unknown, and unquantifiable. We’re not sure what the space of possible intelligences looks like. We don’t know the paths through the space that lead to alignment. We don’t even know if our concepts of alignment and intelligence are well-posed. A pivotal question here is if we can identify the set of all outcomes. If we can, we’re dealing with risk. We can calculate When we don’t know the possible outcomes, it is difficult to assign them meaningful probabilities. We have to grapple with uncertainty on its own terms. If we treat it like risk, we it becomes too easy to assign Uncertainty defines the strategic environmentIf we can’t quantify uncertainty, we can at least classify it. One useful heuristic is to divide uncertainty into four levels: Clear environments are defined by known-knowns. The relationship between cause and effect is obvious. Complicated environments hinge on known-unknowns. The important factors are knowable. There are direct relationships between cause and effect, but they might require expert knowledge and analysis to understand. Complex environments are full of unknown-unknowns. The behavior of the environment is nonlinear. The relationship between cause and effect is indirect. The set of all possible outcomes is unknown, and often [computationally irreducible](https://substack.com/redirect/7986e910-3cfa-42c6-98d7-5af1f9294d38?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).Chaotic environments are structureless. The relationship between cause and effect is untraceable. Future states are unknowable and [radically uncertain](https://substack.com/redirect/88ffab20-d15a-4744-9177-a02d685cc925?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).
Production lines are clear, rocket science is complicated, climate change is complex, stampeding crowds are chaotic. If you don’t know which one you’re dealing with, you’re confused. These quadrants correspond to distinct Different environments require different strategiesClear environments are dominated by risks. Complicated, complex, and chaotic environments are dominated by varying degrees of uncertainty. A clear environment is basically a closed system. The rigid structure of clear environments generates very predictable patterns of behavior. The relationship between cause and effect is well-known. Decision theory is a no-brainer here. The important system states are all known and quantified, and we can easily calculate the expected utility of various strategies. At the extreme, we might even be able to apply automated optimization strategies. Complicated space involves moderate amounts of uncertainty. The critical unknowns are mostly knowable in principle. However, putting bounds around these unknowns usually requires expert analysis. An important quality of complicated and clear environments is that they tend to be
Things start to get muddier in complex and chaotic environments. In chaos, all bets are off. Chaotic systems have no discernible structure, so prediction becomes almost useless. What we need are fast reflexes. Keep your eyes peeled, your ears open, and stay on your toes. This means expanding the Observe phase of Complex environments are also dominated by uncertainty. However, unlike chaotic systems, there are patterns here. These patterns are driven by interacting Because complex systems are driven by feedback, linear strategies that work in simple or complicated environments can generate unintended consequences in complex ones. To give a particularly stark example from The Great Leap Forward, when grain harvests didn’t meet expectations, sparrows were blamed for eating seeds and causing the shortfall. Therefore, the Party decided to
This man-made plague of locusts reduced harvests by 20%, leading to the deaths of It is an extreme example, but characteristic of the disasters that happen when linear optimizers plow headlong into complex situations. Complex systems do not react to linear force in linear ways. This is because feedback loops make the relationship between cause and effect circular. The harder we try to optimize toward the goal, the more energy we pump into feedback loops. Eventually, some loop spins out of control, and the system kicks back.
And it’s never just one loop. Imagine how multiple loops might feed into each other, damping or amplifying each other. You can see how the relationship between cause and effect becomes very complex indeed. Even small actions can produce big effects. The right move can generate exponential returns, or exponential collapse. The stakes are high. There is no way to be a passive observer in such a complex system, since probing the network can alter its patterns of behavior in dramatic and irreversible ways. Complexity is Scenario planning is for navigating complexity
To survive complexity, we need to embrace a bit of uncertainty. This means letting go of the optimal outcomes promised by expected utility. Instead of an optimal strategy, we want a robust strategy. We want to become This is where scenario methods come in. The first thing scenario planning helps us with is identifying major forces and ballparking their level of uncertainty and potential for impact. During scenario research, we systematically catalog the forces driving change, tracking trends across social, technological, environmental, economic, political, and other categories. Maybe we can’t pin exact numbers to everything, but we can identify many unknowns and put bounds around them. Systematically cataloging and grading forces like this often surfaces important strategic factors that would otherwise be missed. We especially want to keep an eye on weak signals that could have high potential impact. Using superforecasting techniques can be very high-leverage here, and in fact, the kind of cataloging and grading we do in this phase looks a lot like the kind of detailed estimation that a superforecaster does before making a forecast. Another thing that scenario planning helps with is mapping connections between forces and between actors in the environment. This surfaces many of the feedback loops that can generate nonlinear behavior in a complex environment. Spotting these feedback loops can give us a good sense of what might spin out of control, or, from another perspective, where the leverage points are. Using this map of our strategic environment, we can also generate numerous research-grounded scenarios. These scenarios emerge from the intersection of trends that we can point to in our environment. Rather than predicting one or the other outcome, we use scenarios, particularly divergent scenarios, to wind-tunnel strategies. This helps us develop strategies that are robust. We can even develop multiple contingency plans to deploy in one scenario or another. Most interesting to me, scenario planning can help us shape the future by articulating a range of possible futures. Used this way, a scenario isn’t descriptive, it’s prescriptive. The best way to predict the future is to create it, as they say. Instead of Reality is bigger than any one modelThese are all just heuristics. Reality is never just one thing. Real strategic challenges involve a wide range of problems and sub-problems, some clear, others complicated, complex, chaotic, or in-between. I was chatting with We’re developing Deep Future alongside a limited number of exclusive founding partners. Interested? Reply to this email, or Squishy Computer is free today. But if you enjoyed this post, you can tell Squishy Computer that their writing is valuable by pledging a future subscription. You won't be charged unless they enable payments. |