---
subject: "AI #44: Copyright Confrontation"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-12-28 14:20:43
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
The New York Times has thrown down the gauntlet, suing OpenAI and Microsoft for copyright infringement. Others are complaining about recreated images in the otherwise deeply awesome MidJourney v6.0. As is usually the case, the critics misunderstand the technology involved, complain about infringements that inflict no substantial damages, engineer many of the complaints being made and make cringeworthy accusations. That does not, however, mean that The New York Times case is baseless. There are still very real copyright issues at the heart of Generative AI. This suit is a serious effort by top lawyers. It has strong legal merit. They are likely to win if the case is not settled. Table of ContentsIntroduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. Entrepreneurial advice. GPT-4 Real This Time. What will we get in the coming year? Fun With Image Generation. MidJourney wants you to speak (creative) English. Copyright Confrontation. The New York Times versus OpenAI. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. ChatGPT used to spot plagiarism? Good. Going Nuclear. Wait, you don’t want AI involved in nuclear safety? In Other AI News. Nancy Pelosi buys Nvidia options. Quiet Speculations. Will scaling LLMs lead to AGI? Dwarkesh Patel ponders. The UN Reports. UN says UN things, most of you can skip this. The Week in Audio. Shapira, Lebenz,Bloom and the Crystal Society audiobook. Rhetorical Innovation. They are building a religion. They are building it bigger. AI With Open Model Weights Is Unsafe and Nothing Can Fix This. Them too. Aligning a Human Level Intelligence is Still Difficult. Chinese alignment paper. Please Speak Directly Into the Microphone. Daniel Faggella. The Wit and Wisdom of Sam Altman. Mostly being rather wise recently. Also rich. The Lighter Side. A warning in song.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
In previous studies, we consistently find an equalizing effect from use of LLMs. High performers improve, but low performers improve a lot more.
The paper is sweet. It is alas short on concrete examples, so one cannot search for patterns and check on various hunches. One hunch is that higher performing entrepreneurs know what the important questions and important details are, and also they face genuinely easier questions at the margin. Operating a business that is not going well is way harder than operating one that is working, the flip side being you could have massive low-hanging fruit. But trouble begets its own forms of trouble. And I suspect that most people in such situations do not turn in writing to others for help and get it, in ways that would make it into one’s training set. For them context becomes more important. Also, there is a background level of skill required to understand what information is important to include, and to identify which parts of the LLM’s answer are likely to be accurate and useful to you. When the AI is giving you advice, you need to be able to tell when it is telling you to shoot yourself in the foot or focus on the wrong thing, or is flat out making things up. So I suspect the task graph is not telling the central story. As they say, more research is needed. Another clear contrast is that here the AI is being used as a mentor, to learn. Whereas in other tasks, the AI is being used as more of an assistant and source of output. An alternative source that helps do your work is an equalizing force. The consultants use GPT-4 to write a draft of the report. If you suck at writing drafts, that’s very helpful. If you are good at it, it is not as helpful. A source of knowledge is different. Being able to be mentored, to learn, is a skill.
Justin Amash has suggested a rule that before you pass a bill you have to read the bill out loud. That might help. Mostly in such cases, the ‘real’ bill is one sentence or paragraph of intent. The rest is implementation and required technical language. In theory it should be fine to use a program to translate from one to the other, and also back again. But this is not something you want to sometimes get wrong. So, for now at least? Check your work.
Those were the two he found promising. If I was going to do more than 15 minutes of rambling, I would want not only repetitions removed and proper punctuation, but actual sorting of everything and logical interpretation. Otherwise does this really work? What are the actually good tools? This is one of many places where it seems like a good tool would be valuable, but it has to be very good to be worth anything at all. GPT-4 Real This TimeWhat do people want from GPT in 2024?
I am surprised ‘price cuts’ did not make the most wanted list. Number ten here is interesting. Quite the sign of a Big Tech company in the making. If you sign in with OpenAI, what can then be integrated into the website? Can you give it permission to use your API key to enhance your experience? Can they mediate trusted data in both directions? Could get very interesting. My number one mundane request isn’t on the list either. It is for better probabilities, estimation and guessing. GPT-4 is notoriously reluctant to engage in such activity right now even when explicitly asked to do so, which is super frustrating. Perhaps a GPT or a good prompt would do it, though. I very much agree that the browsing could use an update. I would also like better GPTs, better reasoning (for mundane utility tasks, and up to a point) and especially control over degree of wokeness/behavior. Video personalization and voice mode aren’t my areas, but sure, why not, and maybe I’d use them if they improved. And of course everyone loves higher rate limits, although I’ve never actually hit the current one. Then there are the other three requests. You think you want AGI in 2024? Let me assure you. You do not want AGI in 2024. Perhaps you will want AGI later, once we are ready. We are not ready. Altman did not ask for patience on GPT-5. I expect to be fine with GPT-5 once it is properly tested, and I expect life to get better in many ways once that happens. But it definitely makes me nervous. Then there’s Open Source. Of course Twitter is going to scream for it. They want OpenAI to give away its lead, believe open source does no wrong and don’t understand the dangers. Luckily I am very confident Altman knows better. Fun with Image GenerationMidJourney 6.0 is clearly much better at following directions. E There are also lots of examples of very cool pictures with exquisitely rich detail. It’s pretty great. It is especially great at particular famous people. It also rewards a different prompting style. Before you wanted a lot of keywords separated by commas.
The output still is not quite right on other details, but two out of four Is are perfect.
Note that these are not exact copies. They are very clear echoes, only small variants. They are not replicas. There are a number of examples, all of which are iconic. What is happening? As discussed above, I believe this is not overfitting. It is fitting. It is a highly reasonable thing for a powerful model to do in response to exactly this request. It is only overfitting if you see these particular things bleed into answers out of distribution, where no one asked for or wanted them. I have not seen any reports of ‘it won’t stop doing the iconic thing when I ask for something else.’ This is not something that v6.0 will do for every picture. It will only (as I understand it) do this for those that ended up copied over and over across the internet, such as movie promotional pictures or classic shots. The iconic. Then you have to intentionally ask for the thing, rather than for something new. The prompts are simple exactly because the images are so iconic. In which case, yes, most cases like this that it is working with do look very similar to the original, so the results will look like the original too. It seems likely MidJourney will need to actively do something to intercept or alter such prompts. If you ask for something else, you’ll get something else. One must notice that this does not actually matter. Why would you use an image generator to generate a near copy of an image that you can easily copy off of the internet, a capability you will have in 100% of such cases? Why would it matter if you did? Don’t you have anything better to do? That is not to dismiss or minimize the general issue of copyright infringement by image models. Under what conditions should an image model be allowed to train off of images you do not own? Who should have veto power? What if anything do you owe if you do that? How do we compensate artists? What restrictions should we place if any on creation or use of AI generations? Those and others are questions first our courts, and ultimately our society, must answer. The ability to elicit near copies of iconic movie stills should not even make the issue list. Copyright Confrontation
That seems like the right procedure. The two Worthy Opponents can battle it out. Whatever you think should be the copyright law, we need to settle what the copyright law actually says, right now. Then we can decide whether to change it to something else. So what is the NYT’s case?
The right plaintiff. The right argument. Much better to say ‘your outputs copy us’ than ‘your inputs come from us.’
How did the Times generate that output?
If you can get normal NYT passages this closely copied without any reference to The New York Times, without any request to quote an article, then I would be pretty surprised. In a handful of famous cases, there seems to be an exception. Exactly as in the MidJourney examples, why are we seeing NYT article text almost exactly (but not quite) copied anyway in some cases? Because it is iconic.
In practice, one can think of this as ChatGPT committing copyright infringement if and only if everyone else is committing copyright infringement on that exact same passage, making it so often duplicated that it learned this is something people reproduce.
This presumes that The New York Times is in a settling mood and will accept a reasonable price, in a way that sets a precedent that OpenAI can afford to pay out for everyone else. If that was true, then why were things allowed to get this far? So I presume that the two sides are pretty far apart. Or that NYT is after blood, not cash.
I think this is not all that spicy a hypothesis. Seems rather likely. I am sure, given they paid Politico, that OpenAI would settle with the New York Times if there was a reasonable offer on the table. Why take the firm risk? Why not be in business with the Times and set a standard? Because NYT is looking for the moon.
I would be careful if I was the Times. Their reputation and that of journalism and legacy media in general is not what it once was. ChatGPT provides a lot more value to more people than it is taking away from a newspaper. I am also amused by the Streisand Effect here, where Toner’s paper is now being quoted exactly because it was used as part of a boardroom fight. What harm is being done to the New York Times? Yes, there were times when ChatGPT would pull entire NYT articles if you knew the secret code. But those codes become invalid if a lot of people use them, so the damage will always be limited. The flip side is that the public is very anti-AI, and most people aren’t using ChatGPT.
Seems pretty flimsy to me. Yes, hallucinations happen, but that’s not copyright, and I find it hard to believe the NYT reputation is in any danger here. They are welcome to try I suppose but I would have left this out. Especially because, well, here’s how you get Bing to say that… In general, I find it unwise to combine good arguments with bad arguments.
As usual, open source people think they should not have to pay for things or obey the rules.
I get the claim that it is not ‘stealing’ because it is not a rival good and the marginal cost is zero. In a better world, things like The New York Times would be freely available to all, and would be supported via some other mechanism, with copyright only existing to prevent other types of infringement. We do not live in that world. What is ultimately the right policy? That depends on what you care about. I see good reasons to advocate for mandatory licensing at reasonable prices the way we do it in music. I see good reasons to say it is up to the copyright holder to name their price. I even see good reasons for setting the price to zero, although I think that is clearly untenable for our society if applied at scale. We need a way to support creators. Some disgree.
I mean… yes? Google said ‘I am going to take your intellectual property and give it away for free on the internet without your permission.’ That is… not okay? Quite obviously, completely, not okay? No, it is not ‘free money’ if the price is universal free access to your product? That is a lot more like ‘we sell the rights to all our products, forever’? The world would be a better place if Google were to pay the publishers and writers so much money that they were happy to make the deal, and then all the books were available online for free. That does not mean that Google’s offer was high enough. You need a way to support creators. You need to respect property. Ideally we find a way that works for all, both for books and for data.
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
An objection letter could scarcely be more self-damning. Why does it matter what search method identified the claimed plagiarism? Either the passage is the same, or it is not. If ChatGPT is hallucinating, check both sources and prove it, and that will be the end of that. If both check out, what are you complaining about? That you got caught?
That’s the thing. If you hallucinate 50% of the time, but you find the answer 50% of the time, and I can verify which is which and take the time to do that, then that is a highly useful search method.
The real existential risk from AI, power might decide, is that people might be able to discover all the crime power has been doing and all the lies it has been telling. In which case, well, better put a stop to that little operation. Also, does this give anyone else an idea?
If, as many of her defenders claim, Gay’s offenses are a case of ‘everyone does it all the time’ then we have the technology to know, so let’s test that theory on various top scholars. There are three possibilities. If this is not actually something that ‘happens to the best of them’ then that should be conclusive evidence. Presumably it would be insane to then allow her to remain President of Harvard. If this is actually something that ‘happens to the best of them,’ if indeed everyone is doing it, then one must ask, is this the result of inevitable coincidences and an isolated demand for crossing every T and dotting every I, or is it that much or most of academia is constantly committing plagiarism? If we decide this is not the true plagiarism and is essentially fine, then we should update the rules to reflect this, including for students, make it very clear where the line is, and then decide how to deal with those who went over the new line. If we decide that this indeed the true plagiarism, and it is not fine, then we will need some form of Truth and Reconciliation. Academia will require deep reform. Whether or not we have the technology now, we will have it soon. The truth is out there, and the truth will be getting out. More coverage of the fact that the President of Harvard seems to have done all the plagiarism, this fact is now known and yet she remains President of Harvard will likely be available in the next Childhood and Education roundup, likely along with a reprise of this section. Going NuclearLast week I noted with some glee that Microsoft was using a custom LLM to help it write regulatory documents for its nuclear power plants. I thought it was great.
Yes. No. The process in question is bullshit paperwork. My position remains closer to Alyssa’s here:
There is a big difference between ‘AI is used to run the nuclear power plant’ and ‘AI is used to file tens of thousands of pages of unnecessary and useless paperwork with the NRC.’ I believe this is the second one, not the first one. If this indeed a huge disaster? Then that will be a valuable lesson, hopefully learned while we still have time to right the larger ship. In Other AI News
As usual, my first thought is ‘why the hell would you publish that and let Google and Microsoft also have it, rather than use it.’ Getting a reasonable small distilled model, that will do ‘good enough’ practical inference relative to competitors, seems relatively easy. The hard part is making it do things that customers most value. That is much more of Apple’s department, so they definitely have a shot. One handicap is that we can be confident Apple will absolutely, positively not be having any fun. They hate fun more than Stanford.
Quiet Speculations
This was another commentary on Ngo’s original statement:
The best argument for scaling working is that scaling so far (at least until, perhaps, very recently) has matched predictions of the ‘scaling will work’ hypothesis scarily well, whereas the skeptics mostly did not expect GPT-4. The best argument against scaling working, from what I have seen, is the data bottleneck, both in terms of ‘you will run out of data and synthetic data might not work’ and ‘you will run out of data because your data is increasingly duplicative, and your synthetic data will be as well.’ Or perhaps it’s the ‘something genuinely new is difficult’ and yes Dwarkesh notes the FunSearch mathematical discovery thing from last week but I am not convinced it counts here. He notes the question of Gemini coming in only at GPT-4 level. I also think it’s worth noting the host of GPT-3.5 level models stalling out there. And no, basically no one predicted it in advance, but there is indeed a certain kind of logic to what GPT-4-level models can and cannot do. I think Dwarkesh’s 70% probability estimate is highly reasonable, if we count various forms of scaffolding and algorithmic innovations. It is in the range where I do not have the urge to bet on either side. Note that even if the 30% comes in, that does not mean that we can’t build AGI another way. It is a crux for some people’s timelines. Not everyone’s, though.
I would bet against that 2-6 year timeline heavily if we knew scaling was not available. I would consider betting against it without that assurance, but that would depend on the odds. Yes, new knowledge is created by inference from observations. That does not mean that the ‘create new knowledge’ complaint is not pointing at a real thing. The UN ReportsNOTE: Most of you should skip or at most skim this section.
That comes at point #70 in their full report. Alas, no, this does not reflect them actually understanding existential risk at all. Mostly they are instead the UN doing and pushing UN things:
That looks like seven steps to still not doing anything with teeth. Classic UN. They think that if they say what they would like the norms to be, people would follow them. And that policy needs to be ‘anchored in the UN charter, International Human Rights Law, and the Sustainable Development Goals.’ They emphasize that we should prioritize ‘universal buy-in.’ There is one and only one way your AI policy gets universal buy-in, and I do not think the UN would like it. The UN’s entire existence (and all of human history) falsifies these and their other hypotheses. That does not mean they cannot wishcast for worthwhile or harmful things, and maybe that would matter on the margin, It is what you would expect. Right off the bat they are clearly more worried about distributional effects than effects. Page three jumps to ‘the critical intersection of climate change and AI opportunity,’ which of course ignores AI’s important potential future impacts in both directions on the problem of climate change. They are ahead of many, but clearly do not know what is about to hit them:
Constantly people talk about how it is a difficult time. Yet would not any time earlier than now have been clearly worse, and has this not been true for every year since 1945? And of course, if AI does arrive for real in a positive way (or a negative way, I suppose, for different reasons), the Global South will rapidly have far fewer worries about electricity or broadband access. Already they have less such concerns every year. Even if AI does not arrive for real, mobile phones work everywhere, and I continue to expect AI to reduce effective consumption inequality, in addition to that inequality having been rapidly falling already for a long time. Here is how they view the risks, to be fair this is risks ‘today’ rather than future risks, but still it is a reminder of how the UN thinks and what it believes is important.
The entire section makes it continuously clear they do not get it, that they see AI as a tool or technology like any other and are rolling out the same stuff as always.
So close. And yet, wow, so far. Zero mention of existential risks in the risks section. In other so close and yet so far statement news:
Even in their wheelhouse of dreams, they fall short. Cannot rule out, really?
Tragedy as comedy. If only the risks were indeed clear to them, alas:
The Week in Audio
The book Crystal Society is now available in audiobook form, with AI voices playing various parts, Rhetorical InnovationI believe that
There are definitely humans who, if entrusted with such power, would get us all killed or otherwise create a universe that I thought lacked value. Andrew Critch has estimated that 10% of AI researchers actively support AI replacing us. Some advocate for it on the internet. Others actively want to wipe out humanity for various reasons, or have various other alien and crazy views. Keep such people away from the levers of power. But I believe that most people would, either collectively or individually, if given the power, choose - not only for themselves but for humanity as a whole - good things over bad things, existence over non-existence, humanity over AI, life over death, freedom over slavery, happiness over suffering. We would likely disagree a lot on what is the good, but for their view of the good to still be good. There are impossibly difficult problems to navigate here. From our current situation, what matters most is ensuring that it is people who get to make those choices, rather than it being left to AI or various runaway dynamics that our out of our control. I am highly flexible on exactly which humans are choosing.
The AI situation is different in the sense that most of the ‘everyone else’ has not yet paid any attention and don’t understand the problem, whereas many of those usually on the technology side have indeed noticed that this situation is different. AI With Open Model Weights Is Unsafe and Nothing Can Fix ThisA central problem with discussions that involve the words ‘open source’ is that advocates of open source are usually completely unwilling to engage with the concept that their approach could ever have a downside. Alas, it does have downsides, such as the inability to ever build meaningful safety into anything with open model weights. The good news is that open source work continues to be very much behind the major labs, does not seem to be innovating beyond interpretive compute efficiency, and useful AGI development looks to require massive amounts of compute in ways that make it possible (at least in theory) to do it safely.
Roon emphasizes, I believe correctly, that open source efforts should be concentrating on the tasks where they have comparative advantage, which is post-training innovations. All this focus on training slightly more capable base models is mostly wasted. Instead of trying to force new open models to happen, such builders should be figuring out how to extract mundane utility from what does exist, then apply their techniques to new models as they emerge over time. The ability to give the user that which the big labs don’t want to allow, or to give the user something specialized that the big labs do not have incentive to provide, is the big opportunity. Where are all the highly specialized LLMs? Where are the improved fine-tuning techniques that let us create one for ourselves in quirky fashion? Where are the game and VR experiences that don’t suck? Build something unique that people want to use, that meets what customers need. You know this in other contexts. It is The Way. Ethan Mollick (from earlier this month)
I would say that 3.5-level AI is out of the bottle, and that in 2024 we will presumably see 4-level AI out of the bottle. The important genies will still remain unreleased, and the usual of superior proprietary models should make us worry a lot less. I do my best not to quote Yann LeCun, but do note
There are a few positions one can take. Here is a potential taxonomy. What did I miss? Terrorists could use AI to do evil. We will ensure they don’t get to do that. We will monitor compute and ensure that model weights are secured, then put in defenses against misuse. We will allow model weights to be released, then monitor use of compute sufficiently to prevent misuse. A good guy with an AI will stop the bad terrorist with an AI.
That is the price of freedom. Your offer is acceptable. What? I’m a freedom fighter. Don’t put a label on me.
Terrorists can’t use AI to do evil (that matters on the margin). Terrorists already could do evil and mostly don’t bother. Terrorists are bad at technology, they won’t know what to do. Terrorists will fail because technology is always good. A good guy with an AI will stop the bad terrorist with an AI.
It sounds like LeCun is trying to live in 1a(ii)? The terrorists with open model weights are not an issue because they need access to a lot of GPUs that no one can detect. But that means far more monitoring of compute and GPUs and pretty much everything than exists today, in a far more stringent way than trying to prevent model training, with the threshold shrinking over time (why do you need 2k GPUs anyway even now?). What is the plan, sir? Daniel’s point about ‘Democracy’ is also well put. Either you are willing to put the power of powerful AI into the hands of whoever wants it without controlling what they do with it, allowing them to remove all controls, or you are not. I too thought the whole point of open source and open model weights was that indeed that anyone could do it? That you needed a lot less resources and talent to do things? The atom blaster points both ways. You either let people have one, or you don’t. Aligning a Human Level Intelligence is Still Difficult
I haven’t exactly noticed a torrent of utility coming out of China. He does link us to this paper.
Or, how about we actually say what is wrong with your answer, might be useful? That is obviously a good idea. It has much higher bandwidth, and avoids a bunch of problems with binary comparisons. The question is how to do it. As usual with Chinese AI, I am skeptical that their benchmark results represent anything. The implementation to try now seems obvious, if my understanding of the available training affordances is correct, and it does not seem to be what the paper does. As usual, this is a case of ‘I have no idea to what extent this has ever been tried or whether it would work, but it seems wise not to specify regardless.’ Please Speak Directly Into the Microphone
The Wit and Wisdom of Sam AltmanHe writes
Such statements are I could of course write a long post digging into the details and quibbles. One could likely do one for most of the individual points. The biggest danger I would say comes from #8. There is a true and important version that often applies in business, where people often follow the procedure rather than doing what would work, and treat this as an excuse for failure. It is hugely important to avoid that. The danger is that the opposite mistake is also easy to make, where you become results oriented. Instead, you need the middle path, where you ask whether you played it right and made good decisions, what changes and improvements to that need to be made, and so on. It is tricky. Also #12 is true as written but also often used as rhetoric by power and hostile forces, including folks like Altman, to get their way in a situation, so beware. I’d also note #3 is, even more than the others, shall we say, not reliably true. The important thing is that it can be true, and it is far more true than most people think.
This has not been my experience as a writer. I have suspected I have something good. I have known I am going to have something I think is good. That does not predict what others will think, or how well the piece will do. I think that this represents either overconfidence, or only caring about one’s own opinion. But all writers are different.
These are hints that suggest Sam Altman is not only rich, but that he may have what those in the gambling business call TMM, or Too Much Money.
The real estate seems excessive, but there is high value in having the right venues available when and where you want it. It lets you engineer events, meetings, communities. It gives you convenience and optionality. It matters. If I had billions, I can see spending a few percent on real estate. The other stuff is more alien to me. I would be plowing that extra money into my fusion companies instead of buying 15 million dollar (admittedly cool) cars and 480 thousand dollar watches, but then again my taste tops out at much cheaper prices. Also I don’t drive and I don’t wear a watch. I do think the car represents good taste and buying an actual great experience. The watch I cannot judge but I find it hard to imagine what makes it substantially better than a $50k watch And yes. It is his money. He gets to spend it on what he thinks are Nice Things. Notice he also does some very effective large investments that I would take over almost all altruism, like his investments in fusion power and medical innovations. You can of course criticize him for potentially getting everyone killed, but that is a different issue. Does Altman enjoying nice things actively help a little with AI safety? I on the other hand say yes. It is important for each of us to find value in the world. To have Of course, a fast car and an expensive watch are not first best choices for this role. Much better are people that you love. Coworkers and partners and friends help, there were an awful lot of heart emojis (who knows how sincere in various directions), and a spouse he loves is better still. It can be a complement, you want people you care about and for those people to have a future. Ideal, of course, would be children. There are some counterarguments around risk preferences or potential value misalignment. The most common argument for negative impact, however, was essentially ‘this is a person who likes money and spends it, so they must want more money, which is bad’ and that this must be his motive at OpenAI. I think that is wrong, this does not provide substantial evidence that Altman needs more money. He can already afford such things without trouble. There are personal expenses that would strain him, I suppose, but he is showing he has better taste than that.
As Altman would no doubt affirm, ideas are cheap. What matters is implementation. Will we be allowed to implement those ideas in ways that deploy or at least generate a lot of capital? Or will AI enable this to happen? If so, real interest rates should rise, although of course In (economic) theory, we can say that expecting transformational AI, or transformational anything, should raise interest rates due to consumption smoothing, and also rise them because most such scenarios increase returns on investment. I do not however think it is this simple. There are scenarios were capital becomes extremely valuable or necessary as our ability to profit from labor declines and opportunities open up, or people fear (or hope) that it will be so. The new ideas could require remarkably little total capital to implement, or the total amount of deployment available for capital could be small, or small relative to profits generated. Or, of course, things could change dramatically in ways that render these questions invalid before anyone knows what is happening. I also expect most people to instead execute their existing habits and patterns with little adjustment until things are on top of them. Remember Covid, and people’s inability to adjust prices based on an incoming exponential, or the lack of price adjustments during the Cuban Missile Crisis. What should you pay in interest to build a data center? Obviously we don’t have enough information. The answer depends on many things, including your confidence in the scenario. Most behaviors are very constrained by the need (or at least strong preference) of many to not fall over dead if one’s assumptions prove wrong. One cost of borrowing or taking financial risk will always be opportunity cost. If I borrow or gamble now, I cannot borrow or gamble with those resources later while the transaction is outstanding. Always be a good trader, and remember the value of optionality. A classic question that applies here is, do you expect to have to pay the money back, or care about that given the new situation? What is ‘powerful’ AI? Will data centers even be that valuable, or will the AI come up with superior methods and designs and render them irrelevant? And so on.
The Lighter SideYou're currently a free subscriber to |