---
subject: "AI #49: Bioweapon Testing Begins"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-02-01 15:23:51
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Two studies came out on the question of whether existing LLMs can help people figure out how to make bioweapons. RAND published a negative finding, showing no improvement. OpenAI found a small improvement, bigger for experts than students, from GPT-4. That’s still harmless now, the question is what will happen in the future as capabilities advance. Another news item was that Bard with Gemini Pro impressed even without Gemini Ultimate, taking the second spot on the Arena leaderboard behind only GPT-4-Turbo. For now, though, GPT-4 remains in the lead. A third cool item was Table of ContentsIntroduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. Bard is good now even with only Pro? Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. Thinking well remains hard. GPT-4 Real This Time. Bring GPTs into normal chats, cheaper GPT-3.5 Be Prepared. How much can GPT-4 enable production of bioweapons? Fun With Image Generation. How to spot an AI image, new MidJourney model. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. Taylor Swift fakes, George Carlin fake. They Took Our Jobs. If they did, how would we know? Get Involved. What we have here is a failure to communicate. In Other AI News. Who is and is not raising capital or building a team. Quiet Speculations. Is economic growth caused by inputs or by outputs? The Quest for Sane Regulation. Emergency emergency emergency. Meh. The Week in Audio. [Tyler Cowen goes on Dwarkesh Patel](https://substack.com/redirect/d115df67-9a8a-40c4-bc90-e19a8532dd17?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).Rhetorical Innovation. How to think about pattern matching. Predictions are Hard Especially About the Future. Contradictory intuitions. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. You’ll need access. Open Model Weights are Unsafe and Nothing Can Fix This. Except not doing it. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Misconceptions. The Lighter Side. Hindsight is 20/20.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
According to the system card, roughly, Gemini Ultimate is to Gemini Pro as GPT-4 is to GPT-3.5. If that is true, this is indeed evaluated on Gemini Pro and Bard gets a similar Elo boost as ChatGPT does when it leaps models, then the version of Bard with Gemini Ultimate could clock in around 1330, the clear best model. Your move, OpenAI. Some of the comments were suspicious that they were somehow getting Gemini Ultimate already, or that Bard was doing this partly via web access, or that it was weird that it could score that high given some rather silly refusals and failures. There are clearly places where Bard falls short. There is also a lot of memory of when Bard was in many ways much worse than it is now, and lack of knowledge of the places Bard is better. If you want your AI to step it up, nothing wrong with twenty bucks a month
I put creative ideas in air quotes because the thing that Ethan consistently describes as creativity, that he says GPT-4 is better at than most humans, does not match my central understanding of creativity. Here is the key technique and result:
Of course, this does not tell us if the ideas are any good. Nor does it tell us if they are actually creative. The most common examples are a Collapsible Laundry Hamper, a Portable Smoothie Maker and a Bedside Caddy. They also offer some additional examples. The task is difficult, but overall I was not impressed. The core idea is usually either ‘combine A with B’ or ‘make X collapsible or smaller.’ Which makes sense, college students have a distinct lack of space, but I would not exactly call this a fount of creativity.
Two simple guides for prompt engineering:
I mean, sure, I could do that. It sounds like work, though. Might as well actually think? That is the thing. It has been almost a year. I have done this kind of systematic prompt engineering for mundane utility purposes zero times. I mean, sure, I could do it. I probably should in some ways. And yet, in practice, it’s more of a ‘either you can do it with very simple prompting, or I’m going to not bother.’ Why? Because there keep not being things that can’t be done the easy way, that I expect would be done the hard way, that I want enough to do the hard way. Next time ChatGPT (and Bard and Claude) fall on their faces, I will strive to at least try a bit, if only for science. Maybe I am missing out.
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
In my small sample, two out of three LLMs made the mistake of not updating the probabilities of having chosen a different urn on drawing the red marble, and got it wrong, including failing to recover even with very clear hints. The third, ChatGPT with my custom instructions, got it exactly right at each step, although it did not get the full bonus points of saying the better solution of ‘each red ball is equally likely so 99/198, done.’
GPT-4 Real This TimeOpenAI offers latest incremental upgrades. GPT-3.5-Turbo gets cheaper once again, 50% cheaper for inputs and 25% cheaper for outputs. A new tweak on GPT-4-Turbo claims to mitigate the ‘laziness’ issue where it sometimes didn’t finish its coding work. There are also two new embedding models with native support for shortening embeddings, and tools to better manage API usage.
|