---
subject: "The Power of (and the Problem With) Names"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-01-08 14:16:52
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
As I’ve As always, if you want to support my work, you can subscribe to the newsletter as a free or paid subscriber. Paid subscribers get access to the archives and the satisfaction that comes from supporting all of the work that goes into this project. This post is all about naming plants and animals, so let’s start with an oddly-named plant: the Tree of Porphyry. Porphyry was a Greco-Roman philosopher who expanded on the philosophies of Plato and Aristotle. Like a lot of ancient philosophers, he wrote about all kinds of stuff: vegetarianism, epic poetry, why Christians should be executed. But he’s probably most famous for writing the Isagoge, a text about logic that became standard in the medieval Muslim and Christian worlds. In the Isagoge, Porphyry explains his method for sorting everything on earth into tidy categories. The medieval translators of his work diagrammed it like this: Porphyry instructed his readers to ask a series of two-pronged questions about an object; with each successive question, you’d hone in on the essence of the object. For It is, no doubt, an unpleasant and laborious way to identify Steve. But the act of taxonomic classification — assigning something a series of labels, with increasing specificity, until you’ve arrived at a precise identity, has fascinated a lot of thinkers over the years and, more importantly, it makes up the bedrock of a lot of human thinking. Our desire to classify everything we see seems baked into the structure of our brains (and the Our brains learn to sort everything we encounter into categories. So when we encounter something out in the world, we can quickly tag it, placing it in multiple buckets (mammal, dog, Jack Russell Terrier, friendly, cute, etc.) and move on. It only makes sense that philosophically- and scientifically-minded people would try to formalize the process. In fact, Porphyry wasn’t the first person to try this. His tree builds on Aristotle’s classification system, developed half a millennium earlier. Aristotle’s system had another of the hallmarks of human classification: he wanted to not only sort but rank. Aristotle helped to develop the idea of the “scala naturae” — a “ladder of being.” Every organism could be sorted into a category and placed on the ladder. The system provided both a series of containers into which to place every living thing. It also functioned as a hierarchy: plants are more sophisticated than rocks, “bloodless” animals are better than plants, “blooded” animals are better than bloodless animals, and humans are the best of all (Christians later threw angels and other supernatural beings in there for good measure). By the 1500s, the scala naturae was visualized like this, with plants at the bottom and heavenly beings on high: The related systems of Aristotle and Porphyry helped scholars classify everything around them for well over 1,000 years. But by the 1700s, European scholars began to believe that they could understand — and even master — the natural world through the systematic application of rational thought. Many of them decided that the first step in this process was to reclassify everything, this time on more scientific grounds. A lot of people set out to perform a sweeping reclassification of every living thing on the earth, but the guy whose system won out was Carl Linnaeus. Linnaeus’ biggest rival was Georges-Louis de Buffon, a wealthy French scholar. Buffon and Linnaeus disagreed on many things, but their biggest difference concerned how fixed classification categories should be. Buffon believed that, over time, species could change in relationship to their environment, while Linnaeus thought that each species could be nailed down according to its essential, unchanging characteristics. Historian Buffon’s system was better in some ways — it anticipated evolution, for starters — but it was more complex. Buffon spent 40 years on his magnum opus, which included lengthy descriptions of every species on earth, and died before it was finished. More people preferred Linnaeus’ simpler approach, and his binomial system came to form the backbone of modern biology. Though Linnaeus was trying to replace the ancient systems that dated back to Aristotle, he held on to their central ideas: that all life could be sorted into categories, and that some categories were superior to others. Both of these central ideas of Linnean classification have drawbacks, some severe. First, classification is always arbitrary to some extent. One of Buffon’s biggest criticisms of the Linnean system was the class Mammalia. Buffon found it silly that the distinguishing characteristic of an entire category of animals should rest on a single characteristic of the female sex. If mammaries made an animal a mammal, then what made men mammals? Buffon thought that mammals should instead belong to a larger category, Quadrupedia, based on the number of legs that they had. This makes some sense, but is equally arbitrary. Any system of classification is going to ignore subtle differences that exist along a spectrum, grouping individuals that aren’t all that similar and drawing firm boundaries between others that aren’t that different. Doing things Buffon’s way would have meant that salamanders, elephants, and lizards would all belong to the same category — which may seem odd to our Linnean-trained brains, but is it any stranger than mushing together humans, mice, whales, and giraffes into one category? Furthermore, the fact that Linnaeus not only grouped but ranked organisms — with humans at the pinnacle, and the animals that are most like us closest to the top — has created a world of suffering for many of the animals we’ve deemed inferior. We justify cruelty to animals if they’re sufficiently down the chain of being from us (killing and eating a pig is OK, but killing and eating a chimpanzee is not). Linnaeus’ system of classification also led to human suffering. Though he did not understand evolution, Linnaeus anticipated Darwin in one way by placing humans in the same genus, homo, as chimpanzees and orangutans. But by putting people into his hierarchical system, he also fanned the flames of racism and discrimination. Linnaeus didn’t just classify humans as being different from other animals. He also, in his desire to sort everything into its proper place, thought it wise to classify different types of humans. Linnaeus divided people into four
Linnaeus never used the word “race,” or thought of his different categories of humans as species or subspecies. When talking about these categories, he Instead, Linnaeus preferred the phrase “varieties of man,” and saw these varieties as having the potential to change. But, still, the damage was done. Linnaeus had “scientifically” sorted people into different categories. Over time, Linnaeus added what he thought were the essential traits of each of these subtypes of humans, linked to which of the four humours he thought were dominant in each population. Over time, he decided that Linnaeus clearly believed there was a hierarchy among non-human organisms, so it seemed that the order in which Linnaeus listed groups of humans at least implied a hierarchy. The group listed first (and therefore appearing to be the best) changed in the various editions of his Systema Naturae. Sometimes Europeans topped the list, sometimes Asians did, and sometimes Americans did. But Africans were always listed last; as the Even if Linnaeus’ decision to classify humans into subtypes hadn’t devolved into an awful hierarchy of races, his instinct to sort people would have caused problems. The truth is that aggressive categorization makes thinking about the world easier — sometimes too easy. When we lean too hard on categories, whether of people, animals, or anything else, we tend to overstate and reify even small differences between groups. We stereotype and jump to conclusions in situations where that doesn’t help us, or those we’re thinking about. The human mind wants to put everything around it into a tidy box, classified into categories to make thinking easier. We can’t avoid doing this entirely, but we can at least be aware of the drawbacks. The truth is that any system of categories, whether Aristotle’s, Porphyry’s, or Linnaeus’, can only partially describe the world. We run into trouble when we start to see the world entirely through our categories and not on its own terms. This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: Or you can share the newsletter with others: Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week! Adapted from You're currently a free subscriber to |