---
subject: "How Accurate Are Learning Curves?"
from: "Construction Physics <constructionphysics@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-12-24 13:02:40
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Construction Physics", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8588207018748827248", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
We’ve talked An obvious feature of the traditional learning model is that it uses a single learning rate: the amount that costs decrease every doubling stays the same. But a new paper published in the journal Advances in Applied Energy, “ To show this, the paper uses 87 learning curve datasets from the The paper starts by looking at how consistent learning rates are. They split each dataset into two halves, and calculate the learning rate for each half of the data. They find that there’s not much correlation between earlier and later learning rates: The authors also note that you get similarly low correlations if you just look at the half of the datasets with the largest number of datapoints. So the low correlation between early-production and late-production learning rates doesn’t appear to be an artifact of some datasets having just a few datapoints. I downloaded the data the authors used from the Performance Curve Database, and was able to pretty easily replicate both of these findings. There’s not a perfect match between the learning rates I calculated and what the paper authors calculated because I did a much simpler analysis, but it’s essentially the same result that there’s little correlation between past and future learning rates. You can also get a qualitative sense of this just by looking at graphed learning curve data. Here’s all 87 learning curves, graphed. You can see that lots of these datasets aren’t following any sort of straight line, and are full of what the paper calls “break points”: places where the learning rate changes. (Click to embiggen.) The authors propose an alternative model to the simple, one-learning rate formulation of the learning curve. They first do a piecewise linear regression (using multiple lines, each one fitting a portion of the data) on each dataset, using some math to balance the complexity (how many different lines you use) vs the accuracy (how closely the line fits the data) of the model. They use these regressions to construct probability distributions for possible learning rates and for the spacing between break points. They then use these probability distributions to make production cost forecasts for each technology. Starting with the most recent observed learning rate, you sample a production volume at which the next breakpoint will occur. The current learning rate is extended to that breakpoint, after which you sample both a new learning rate and another breakpoint location. Unlike Wright’s Law (which assumes learning rates are constant), this forecasting method assumes that learning rates change frequently, in a probabilistic fashion. The authors find that this forecasting method somewhat more accurately predicts future production costs than the simpler Wright’s Law model. For 30 of the technologies, the author’s piecewise linear model forecasts future costs better. For 36 technologies the forecasts are about equal, and for 21 Wright’s Law does better. But relative performance varies by category of technology. For energy technologies, about half are better predicted by the piecewise model, and about half are equally well-predicted by the two models. For consumer goods and genomics, the two models are also roughly equally accurate. And for what the paper calls “hardware” – transistors, laser diodes, DRAM, and hard drives — Wright’s Law does better. Interpreting this paperThere’re some interesting findings in this paper, but I think it’s useful to put it into context. First, as the authors note, it’s long been known that learning curves will often deviate from a nice straight line on a log-log graph. One of the earliest systematic studies of the learning curve, “ But I’m not aware of earlier work that takes a systematic look at the deviations across a large number of different learning curves like this paper does. The most interesting finding in this paper, to me, is the observation that there’s apparently little correlation between past and future learning rates. This doesn’t completely overturn the idea of learning curves — even without constant learning rates, you still have costs falling as a diminishing returns function of cumulative production volume, which to me is the most important idea behind learning curves. But it does suggest that a simple, straight-line extrapolation will do a worse job forecasting future production costs than I previously thought. Deviations from the predicted, straight-line curve are apparently more the rule than the exception. I’m somewhat less enthusiastic about the paper’s suggested alternative forecasting method of probabilistically selecting learning curve parameters, at least in its current form. I think the idea of drawing from a distribution of possible learning rates and distances to the next change in learning rate is interesting, but the proposed model doesn’t seem all that much better than the simpler, single learning rate model. The net advantage of the piecewise model — the number of technologies where piecewise does better, minus the number of technologies where Wright’s Law does better — is only 9 technologies out of the 87 analyzed. A lot of research has gone into turning learning curves into more of a predictive tool, so that economists and manufacturers can accurately predict what the learning rate for some particular technology will be (or at the very least, understand the cause of deviations from the curve). This research tends to take an “inside view” of learning curves – that is, it tries to predict learning rates based on specific features of the technology or the industry that produces it, or on specific events that impinge on production. Examples of this include James McNerney et al’s 2011 paper, “ This paper, by contrast, takes more of an outside view. Instead of trying to predict learning rates based on specific features of the technology or on specific events which might trigger a change, it simply assumes that a learning curve will behave like other, similar learning curves, that learning rates will change every so often in a probabilistic fashion. I like a lot of the inside-view efforts to try and understand what drives learning curve rates. But I’m a big fan of outside view-style reasoning. So even though in practice this sort of outside view model didn’t seem to be an amazing advance over the simpler Wright’s Law model, it nevertheless seems potentially fruitful to think about learning curves along these lines. 1 Some people make distinctions between some of these terms, but they broadly describe the same basic phenomenon. Construction Physics articles will always remain free, but if you find this work valuable, I encourage you to Construction Physics is produced in partnership with the Institute for Progress, a Washington, DC-based think tank. You can learn more about their work by visiting their You can also contact me on |