---
subject: "AI #83: The Mask Comes Off"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-09-26 11:58:15
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
We interrupt Nate Silver week here at Don’t Worry About the Vase to bring you some rather big AI news: OpenAI and Sam Altman We now know who they are and have chosen to be. We know what they believe in. We know what their promises and legal commitments are worth. We know what they plan to do, if we do not stop them. They have made all this perfectly clear. I appreciate the clarity. On the same day, Mira Murati, the only remaining person at OpenAI who in any visible way opposed Altman during the events of last November, OpenAI is nothing without its people… except an extremely valuable B corporation. Also it has released its Advanced Voice Mode. Thus endeth the Battle of the Board, in a total victory for Sam Altman, and firmly confirming the story of what happened. They do this only days before the deadline for Gavin Newsom to decide whether to sign SB 1047. So I suppose he now has additional information to consider, along with a variety of new vocal celebrity support for the bill. Also, it seems Ivanka Trump is warning us to be situationally aware? Many noted that this was not on their respective bingo cards. Table of ContentsIntroduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. People figure out how to use o1. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. Is o1 actively worse elsewhere? The Mask Comes Off. OpenAI to transition to a for-profit, Mira Murati leaves. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. A claim that social apps will become AI. They Took Our Jobs. Are you working for an AI? No, not yet. The Art of the Jailbreak. Potential new way to get around the cygnet restrictions. OpenAI Advanced Voice Mode. People like to talk to, but not on, their phones. Introducing. Gemini 1.5 Pro and 1.5 Flash have new versions and lower prices. In Other AI News. Ivanka Trump tells us to read up on Situational Awareness. Quiet Speculations. Joe Biden and Sam Altman see big AI impacts. The Quest for Sane Regulations. SB 1047’s fate to be decided within days. The Week in Audio. Helen Toner, Steven Johnson, a bit of Zuckerberg. Rhetorical Innovation. Another week, so various people try, try again. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. RLHF predictably fails. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Roon has words. The Lighter Side. Good user.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
Timothy Lee, who is not easy to impress with a new model,
How people’s AI timelines work, Mensa admission test edition.
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane UtilityIs o1 actively worse at the areas they didn’t specialize in? That doesn’t seem to be the standard take, but Janus has never had standard takes.
To get the utility you will often need to first perform One obvious response is that it is exactly because AI is insufficiently advanced that the Great Schlep remains a human task - for now that will slow everything down, but eventually that changes. For now, Sarah correctly notes that LLMs aren’t all that net helpful in data cleanup, but that’s because they have to pass the efficiency threshold where they’re faster and better than regular expressions. But once they get off the ground on such matters, they’ll take off fast.
The Mask Comes Off
Yeah, um, no. We all know what this is. We all know who you are. We all know what you intend to do if no one stops you.
I have no idea how this move is legal, as it is clearly contrary to the non-profit mission to instead allow OpenAI to become a for-profit company out of their control. This is a blatant breach of the fiduciary duties of the board if they allow it. Which is presumably the purpose for which Altman chose them. No argument has been offered for why this is a way to achieve the non-profit mission.
Remember all that talk about how this was a non-profit so it could benefit humanity? Remember how Altman talked about how the board was there to stop him if he was doing something unsafe or irresponsible? Well, so much for that. The mask is fully off. Good job Altman, I suppose. You did it. You took a charity and turned it into your personal for-profit kingdom, banishing all who dared oppose you or warn of the risks. Why even pretend anymore that there is an emergency break or check on your actions? I presume there will be no consequences on the whole ‘testifying to Congress he’s not doing it for the money and has no equity’ thing. He just… changed his mind, ya know? And as for Musk and the money he and others put up for a ‘non-profit,’ why should that entitle them to anything? If indeed OpenAI does restructure to the point where its equity is now genuine, then $150 billion seems way too low as a valuation - unless you think that OpenAI is sufficiently determined to proceed unsafely that if its products succeed you will be dead either way, so there’s no point in having any equity. Or, perhaps you think that if they do succeed and we’re not all dead and you can spend the money, you don’t need the money. There’s that too. But if you can sell the equity along the way? Yeah, then this is way too low. Also this week,
It indicated that Mira only informed him of her departure that morning, and revealed that Bob McGrew, the Chief Research Officer and Barret Zoph, VP of Research (Post-Training) are leaving as well.
At some point the departures add up - for the most part, anyone who was related to safety, or the idea of safety, or in any way opposed Altman even for a brief moment? Gone. And now that includes the entire board, as a concept. Presumably this will serve as a warning to others. You come at the king, best not miss. The king is not a forgiving king. Either remain fully loyal at all times, or if you have to do what you have to do then be sure to twist the knife. Also let that be the most important lesson to anyone who says that the AI companies, or OpenAI in particular, can be counted on to act responsibly, or to keep their promises, or that we can count on their corporate structures, or that we can rely on anything such that we don’t need laws and regulations to keep them in check. It says something about their operational security that they couldn’t keep a lid on this news until next Tuesday to ensure Gavin Newsom had made his decision regarding SB 1047. This is the strongest closing argument I can imagine on the need for that bill. Fun with Image GenerationDeepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
I don’t think these two have so much to do with each other. If there is demand for social apps then people will find ways to get them off the ground, including ‘have you met Android’ and people learning to click yes on the permission button. Right now, there are enough existing social apps to keep people afloat, but if that threatened to change, the response would change. Either way, the question on the AI apps is in what ways and how much they will appeal to and retain users, keeping in mind they are as bad as they will ever be on that level, and are rapidly improving. I am consistently impressed with how well bad versions of such AI apps perform with select users. They Took Our JobsSomeone on r/ChatGPT thinks they are working for an AI. The person in question is almost certainly not working for an AI. There are two things worth noticing here. First, one thing that has begun is people suspecting that someone else might be an AI based on rather flimsy evidence. That will only become a lot more frequent when talking to an AI gets more plausible. Second, it’s not like this person had a problem working for an AI. It seems clear that AI will have to pay at most a small premium to hire people to do things on the internet, and the workers won’t much care about the why of it all. More likely, there will be no extra charge or even a discount, as the AI is easier to work with as a boss. The Art of the JailbreakTwo of Gray Swan’s cygnet models survived jailbreaking attempts during their contest,
OpenAI Advanced Voice Mode
Mostly that all seems totally normal and fine, if more than a bit of a buzz kill, but there’s one thing to note.
Introducing
Also there’s a price reduction effective October 1, a big one if you’re not using long contexts and they’re offering They are also doubling rate limits, and claim 2x faster output and 3x less latency. Google seems to specialize in making their improvements as quietly as possible.
In Other AI News
And here we have a claim of confirmation that Your $20 chat subscription still gets you less than one minute of that. o1-preview costs $15 per million input tokens and $60 per million output tokens. If you’re not attaching a long document, even a longer query likely costs on the order of $0.10, for o1-mini it’s more like $0.02. But if you use long document attachments, and use your full allocation, then the $20 is a good deal.
Quiet Speculations
OpenAI CEO Sam Altman As in, note the contrast:
The downsides are mentioned, but Just Think of the Potential, and there is no admission of the real risks, dangers or challenges in the room. I worry that Altman is increasingly convinced that the best way to proceed forward is to pretend that most important the challenges mostly don’t exist. Indeed, in addition to noticing jobs will change (but assuring us there will always be things to do), the main warning is if energy and compute are insufficiently abundant humans would ration them by price and fight wars over them, whereas he wants universal intelligence abundance. Here is another vision for one particular angle of the future?
This estimate of superpower size seems off by approximately 10 million people, quite possibly exactly 10 million. The Quest for Sane RegulationsIf you are a resident of California and wish to encourage Newsom to sign SB 1047, you can Be sure to mention the move by OpenAI to become a B Corporation, abandoning the board’s control over Altman and the company, and fully transitioning to a for-profit corporation. And they couldn’t even keep that news secret a few more days. What could better show the need for SB 1047?
The LA times gets us this lovely quote:
So, keep calling, then, and hope this isn’t de facto code for ‘still fielding bribe offers.’
No no no, on the other hand his Big Tech donors hired his friends to get him not to sign it. Let’s be precise. But yeah, there’s only highly nominal pretense that Newsom would be vetoing the bill based on the merits.
Also from last week, if you’re looking to understand how ‘the public’ thinks about AI and existential risk,
No, seriously, those ratios are about right except they forgot to include the ad hominem attacks on Helen Toner. a16z reportedly spearheaded what some called
The obvious response is that if things smarter than us have sufficient rights to enter into binding contracts, hold property and sue, then solve for the equilibrium. Saying ‘contracts are positive sum’ does not change the answer. They are counting on ‘beneficial trade’ and humans retaining comparative advantages to ensure ‘peace,’ but this doesn’t actually make any sense as a strategy for human survival unless you think humans will retain important comparative advantages in the long term, involving products AGIs would want other than to trade back to other humans - and I continue to be confused why people would expect that. Even if you did think this, why would you expect such a regime to long survive anyway, given the incentives and the historical precedents? Nor does it actually solve the major actual catastrophic risk concerns. So I continue to notice I both frustrated and confused by such proposals. The Week in Audio
Rhetorical InnovationThere are a lot of details that matter, yes, but at core the case for existential risk from sufficiently advanced AI is indeed remarkably simple:
If someone confidently disagrees with #1, I am confused how you can be confident in that at this point, but certainly one can doubt that this will happen. If someone confidently disagrees with #2, I continue to think that is madness. Even if the entire argument was the case that Paul lays out above, that would already be sufficient for this to be madness. That seems pretty dangerous. If you put the (conditional on the things we create being smarter than us) risk in the single digit percents I have zero idea how you can do that with a straight face. Again, there are lots of details that make this problem harder and more deadly than it looks, but you don’t need any of that to know this is going to be dangerous. Trying again this week: Many people think or argue something like this. If sufficiently advanced AIs that are smarter than humans wipe out humanity, that means something specifically has gone wrong. In particular, it would only happen if [conditions]. However I don’t see any proof that [conditions] will happen. Therefore humanity will be fine if we create smarter AIs than us.
That is not how any of this is going to work. Human survival in the face of smarter things is not a baseline scenario that happens unless something in particular goes wrong. The baseline scenario is that things that are not us are seeking resources and rearranging the atoms, and this quickly proves incompatible with our survival. We depend on quite a lot of the details of how the atoms are currently arranged. We have no reason to expect those details to hold, unless something makes those features hold. If we are to survive, it will be because we did something specifically right to cause that to happen.
An example of [conditions] is sufficiently strong coordination among AIs. Could sufficiently advanced AIs coordinate with each other by using good decision theory? I think there’s a good chance the answer is yes. But if the answer is no, by default that is actually worse for us, because any such conflict will involve a lot of atom rearrangements and resource seeking that are not good for us. Or, more simply, to go back a step in the conversation above:
This seems mind numbingly obvious, and the ancients knew this well - ‘when the elephants fight it is the ground that suffers’ and all that. If at least one superintelligence cares about human life, there is some chance that this preference causes humans to survive - the default if the AIs can’t cooperate is that caring about the humans causes it to be outcompeted by AIs that care only about competition against other AIs, but all things need not be equal. If none of them care about human life and they are ‘running around’ without being fully under our control? Then either the AIs will cooperate or they won’t, and either way, we quickly cease to be. I have always found the arguments against this absurd. For example, the argument that ‘rule of law’ or ‘property rights’ or ‘the government won’t be overthrown’ will protect us does not reflect history even among humans, or actually make any physical sense. We rely on things well beyond our personal property and local enforcement of laws in order to survive, and would in any case be unable to keep our property for long once sufficiently intellectually outgunned. Both political parties are running on platforms now that involve large violations of rights including property rights, and so on.
The argument ‘the AIs will leave Earth alone because it would be cheap to do that’ also makes no sense.
I think some are making the move Arthur describes, but a lot of them aren’t. They are thinking the ASIs will compete with each other for real, but that this somehow makes everything fine. As in, no really, something like this:
What is their non-stupid ‘because of reasons’? Sorry, I can’t help you with that. I could list explanations they might give but I don’t know how to make them non-stupid.
Yes, but it’s harmless, he says, it cannot ‘have a will,’ because it’s ‘math.’ Once again, arguments that are ‘disturbingly relevant’ to people, as in equally true. Via Tyler Cowen, Indeed, even within AI, many of the calls for particular regulations or actions are exactly falling into the trap that John is decrying here, and his argument against those calls is valid in those cases too. The issue is that AI could rapidly become very different, and he does not take that possibility seriously or see the need to hear arguments for that possibility, purely on priors from other past failed predictions. And to be even more fair to John, the prompt he was given was ‘is AI a threat to democracy and what to do about it.’ To which, yes, the correct response is largely to mock the doomsayers, because they are talking about the threat from mundane AI. The central argument is that people have a long track record of incorrectly warning about doom or various dangers from future technologies, so we can safely presume any similar warnings about AI are also wrong. And the same with past calls for pre-emptive censorship of communication methods, or of threats to employment from technological improvements. And that the tool of regulation is almost always bad, it only works in rare situations where we fully understand what we’re dealing with and do something well targeted, otherwise it reliably backfires. He is indeed right about the general track record of such warnings, and about the fact that regulations in such situations have historically often backfired. What he does not address, at all, are the reasons AI may not remain another ‘mere tool’ whose mess you can clean up later, or any arguments about the actual threats from AI, beyond acknowledging some of the mundane harms and then correctly noting those particular harms are things we can deal with later. There is no hint of the fact that creating minds smarter than ourselves might be different than creating new tech tools, or any argument why this is unlikely to be so. Here is everything he says about existential risks:
That is not an argument against “the robots taking over,” or that AI does not generally pose an existential threat. It is a statement that we should ignore that threat, on principle, until the dangers ‘reveal themselves,’ with the implicit assumption that this requires the threats to actually start happening. And the clearer assumption that you can wait until the new AIs exist, and then judge costs vs. benefits retrospectively, and adjust what you do in response. If we were confident that we could indeed make the adjustments afterwards, then I would agree. The whole point is that you cannot make minds smarter than ourselves, on the assumption that if this poses problems we can go back and fix it later, because you have created minds smarter than ourselves. There is no ‘we’ in control in that scenario, to go back and fix it later. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
I find the ‘ghosts of your actions’ style warnings very Basilisk-like and also confusing. I mean, I can see how Janus and similar others get there, but the magnitude of the concern seems rather far fetched and once again if you do believe that then this seems like a very strong argument that we need to stop building more capable AIs or else. The ‘don’t do things now that won’t work later because you won’t stop’ point, however, is true and important. There is a ton of path dependence in practice, and once people find methods working well enough in practice now, they tend to build upon them and not stop until after they encounter the inevitable breakdowns when it stops working. If that breakdown is actively super dangerous, the plan won’t work. It would of course be entirely unreasonable to say that you can’t use any techniques now unless they would work on an ASI (superintelligence). We have no alignment or control techniques that would work on an ASI - the question is whether we have ‘concepts of a plan’ or we lack even that. Even if we did find techniques that would work on an ASI, there’s a good chance that those techniques then would utterly fail to do what we want on current AIs, most likely because the current AIs wouldn’t be smart enough, the technique required another highly capable AI to be initiated in the first place or the amount of compute required was too high. What should we do about this, beyond being conscious and explicit about the future failures of the techniques and hoping this allows us to stop in time? There aren’t any great solutions.
I continue to think that CEV won’t work, in the sense that even if you did it successfully and got an answer, I would not endorse that answer on reflection and I would not be happy with the results. I expect it to be worse than (for example) asking Roon to write something down as best he could - I’ll take a semi-fictionalized Californian Universalism over my expectation of CEV if those are the choices, although of course I would prefer my own values to that. I think people optimistic about CEV have a quite poor model of the average human. I do hope I am wrong about that. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone
The Lighter Side
You're currently a free subscriber to |