---
subject: "The Third Gemini"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-02-15 14:21:57
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
We have now had a little over a week with Gemini Advanced, based on Gemini Ultra. A few reviews are in. Not that many, though, compared to what I would have expected, or what I feel the situation calls for. This is yet another case of there being an obvious thing lots of people should do, and almost no one doing it. Should we use Gemini Advanced versus ChatGPT? Which tasks are better for one versus the other? I have compiled what takes I did see. Overall people are clearly less high on Gemini Advanced than I am, seeing it as still slightly to modestly behind ChatGPT overall. Despite that, I have not been tempted to switch back. I continue to think that Gemini Advanced is the better default for my typical queries. But your use cases and mileage may vary. I highly recommend trying your prompts in both places to see what works for you. Impressions of OthersMy I am not, however, as much a power user of LLMs as many might think. I mostly ask relatively simple queries, I mostly do not bother to use much prompt engineering beyond having customized ChatGPT, and I mostly don’t write code. What I definitely did not do was look to make Gemini Advanced fail. I figured correctly that plenty of others would work on that. I was looking for how it could be useful, not how it could be shown to not be useful. And I was focused on mundane utility, nothing theoretical. So I totally buy that both: When Google tested Gemini Advanced head-to-head against GPT-4, in terms of user preference going query by query, Gemini won. And that it aced the MMLU. When you run a series of wide-spanning robust tests, Gemini loses to GPT-4.
There is no incompatibility here. The logical errors he finds are still rather embarrassing. For example, at (3:50), I own three cars today, sold two cars last year, it says I own one car. Ouch. Perhaps it turns out the heuristics that cause you to fail at questions like that are actually really good if you are being set up to succeed, and who cares what happens if the user actively sets you up to fail? As in, the logical failure here is that Gemini has learned that people mention information because it matters, and in practice this shortcut is less stupid than it looks. It still looks pretty dumb. Whereas when he sets it up to succeed at (5:25) by offering step-by-step instructions on what to do, Gemini Advanced gets it right reliably, ChatGPT is only 50/50. In practice, I would much rather reliably get the right answer when I am trying to get the right answer and am putting in the work, rather than getting the right answer when I am trying to trick the bot into getting it wrong. Everyone has a different test. Here are some reactions:
I like Rcrsv’s test, and encourage others to try it as well, as it gives insight into what you care about most. Note that your chats are customized to GPT-4 a bit, so this test will be biased a bit against Gemini, but it is mostly fair.
I’ve definitely seen a bunch of rather stupid-looking fails on logic.
I would take some trade-offs of less accuracy in exchange for better explanations. I want to learn to understand what I am doing, and know how to evaluate whether it is right. So it is a matter of relative magnitudes of difference.
This is Google, so I am really frustrated on this question. Gemini both is unable to properly search outside of a few specific areas, and also has the nasty habit of telling you how to do a thing rather than going ahead and doing it. If Gemini would actually be willing to execute on its own plans, that would be huge.
GPT-4-Turbo seems to be increasingly no-fun in such realms rather than improving, so it makes sense that Gemini wins there.
This stuff matters. Not having a cap at the back of your mind is relaxing even if you almost never actually hit the cap, and speed kills.
The refusals are pretty bad.
A commenter notes, and I have noticed this too, that while Gemini refuses more overall, Gemini is more willing to discuss AI-related topics in particular than GPT-4.
I did two polls on which one is better, The consensus view is that GPT-4 is modestly better than Gemini for both purposes, a lot more people prefer GPT-4 than prefer Gemini, but with a majority seeing at least rough parity for Gemini. For now, it seems my preference is quirky. I am curious to take more polls after a month or two. What is clear is that these two models are roughly on the same level. You can reasonably say GPT-4 is better than Gemini, but not in the sense that GPT-4 is better than GPT-3.5. Pros and ConsSome clear advantages of Gemini Advanced over ChatGPT: Good at explanations, definitions, answering questions with clear answers. No message cap. I have literally never hit the message cap, but others often do. Faster response. In practice this is a big game, fitting into workflow far better. Google integration. Having access to your GMail, and to Google Maps, is big.
Some clear disadvantages of Gemini Advanced versus ChatGPT right now: It is less flexible and customizable. It has no current access to outside tools beyond its five extensions. It seems to do relatively worse on longer conversations. If you give it logic puzzles or set it up to fail, it often fails. It will give you a more stupid warnings and cautions and lectures. It will refuse to answer more often for no good reason. In particular, it is very sensitive to faces in photographs. It will refuse to estimate, speculate or guess even more than usual. It is bad at languages other than English. [Report that it is poor at non-standard coding languages too](https://substack.com/redirect/9716fe8b-03eb-49e9-af06-83d0916d7acb?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).Image generation is limited to 512x512. No PDF upload.
Some things that could go either way or speak to the future: They might review your queries, but are very clear about this unlike ChatGPT. They are working on getting Alpha Code 2 integrated into Gemini. Coding could radically improve once that happens. Same with various other DeepMind things. Your $20/month also gets you some other features, including more storage and longer sessions with Google Meet, that I was already paying $10/month to get. The effective cost here could be closer to $10/month than $20/month. People disagree on which model is ‘more intelligent’ as such, it seems close. As I have previously speculated and Ethan Mollick observes, this is probably because Google trained until they matched GPT-4 then rushed out the product, and we will continue to see improvements from both companies over time.
You're currently a free subscriber to |