---
subject: "From Pearl River to Gold Mountain"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-12-07 12:02:51
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
If you haven’t seen the previous installments in this series on the making of our ideas about the American West, check them out. So far, we’ve covered If you want to support this newsletter, I’m offering a discount right now — 35% off, which makes the price about $2 per month. Becoming a paid subscriber gets you access to the archives and the warm feeling that comes from supporting something you enjoy. If you value the work that goes into this newsletter, please consider signing up as a paid member by clicking this link: It was a big moment, the product of six years and over 1,900 miles of work. The Union Pacific pulled Locomotive 119 up to face the Central Pacific’s Jupiter at the point where the two railroads came together in Utah. Hundreds of workers, investors, and executives crowded around the final segment to see one last spike driven into the railroad that would finally unite the country, east to west. But the whole thing was a bit of a mess. The golden spike that commemorated the moment had been engraved with the date of May 8, 1869, but it was actually May 10 when the event happened — the ceremony had been delayed for a couple of days due to inclement weather and a conflict between Union Pacific officials and their workers. The crowd, impatient and somewhat drunk, pushed in to see Leland Stanford and his associates as they prepared to do the honors. When the big moment came, the rattled big shots missed the spike on their first swing. Even when they made contact, they couldn’t actually hit the final spike very hard because the whole thing was for show; the spike was made of gold, which was too soft to withstand actual hammering. So after the ceremonial gentle tapping and the celebratory photo below was taken, the real workers came in. They removed the ceremonial spike and drove in an iron one. That was the real moment that the country was connected East to West. The “driving” of the golden spike is part of the longstanding genre of ceremonies in which wealthy people pretend to do real workers’ jobs for a moment to commemorate the building of something important. Think of the groundbreaking at a new building in which a bunch of executives in formalwear ceremonially dig up a cup or two of dirt with a golden shovel in front of the cameras. Once they vacate the premises, the actual builders can really break ground. The famous golden spike photo is more misleading than most of its ilk, though, because it erases some very important people. Almost entirely missing from the scene are the 20,000 Chinese workers who provided Researchers have concluded that there are While the “golden spike” photo is the famous one that shows up in textbooks, this image, taken just a bit before, is more representative of the work that was really done and the people who did it. It shows Chinese workers laying the final rail before they were pushed out of the picture so the big shots could drive their golden spike: It’s a fleeting glimpse of people who were considered disposable by their bosses and unwelcome by many of their countrymen. Over the last few weeks, we’ve been looking at the way that Americans thought about and interacted with the natural areas of the West. But a lot of that would have been impossible without the unheralded work performed by workers like the now-anonymous men in the photos above. Chinese workers helped to turn the West from a distant and unreachable frontier into a part of the country that the For many white Americans, cartoons like this defined the Chinese workers who came to America. It’s from a magazine called The Wasp, and it replaces the Statue of Liberty with a caricature of a Chinese immigrant. Messages like “immorality,” “filth,” “diseases,” and “ruin to white labor” beam into the sky. Or this one from Harper’s Weekly, which features a trifecta of racist stereotypes: an Indian, an Irishman, and a Chinese immigrant with an opium pipe in his mouth. Many white Americans saw Chinese workers as dangerous, immoral, and detrimental to “real” American workers. So why did Chinese workers come to such a hostile place to do such difficult work? Most of the Chinese railway workers in America came from the Pearl River delta in southern China, especially the areas west of Canton (modern-day Guangzhou). This region of China bustled with trade, as this image from the 1840s shows: But if you look carefully at the picture of Canton, you will see French and American flags, symbols of the influence of foreign countries in this region. The city’s position as China’s connection point to the rest of the world also meant that it experienced the instability that came with that connection. The middle of the 19th century was particularly rough for Canton. The area was rocked by two Opium Wars and devastating droughts, followed by the devastation of the Taiping Rebellion in the 1850s and 1860s. So many of the young, ambitious men of the Pearl River Delta, seeing the wealth and power of foreigners, decided to cross the Pacific and try their luck. Recruiters enticed them with tales of the riches available on “Gold Mountain,” Life was incredibly difficult for these immigrants when they arrived in America. Among the helpful
Immigrants from China were often met in America by representatives of the Chinese Six Companies, which served as mutual-aid societies and connected migrants with people from their part of China: The Six Companies might also direct a migrant to a labor contractor who would steer them toward work on the Central Pacific. There, they would find some of the most difficult work on the planet. Laying the nearly 700 miles of the Central Pacific was incredibly treacherous. Workers (who came from a snowless part of China) endured snowstorms measured in feet, gasped for air at high altitude, worked with kegs of gunpowder and nitroglycerin (a substance that had been banned as unsafe on other railroads) to tunnel through mountains, and did all sorts of other dangerous, grueling labor — all for about half of what white workers got paid. Some white observers were stunned at what the Chinese laborers could accomplish. One
The conditions were beyond difficult. At Donner Pass, a location that gets 34 feet of Though not many photos were taken of Chinese workers, we do have some images of the workers and their work. This one captures men at work near the opening of the nearly 1,700-foot tunnel at the summit of the aforementioned Donner Pass, which was hollowed out by hand drills and explosives: Here, workers labor in a snowstorm that necessitated laborious shoveling before they could even do their real work: Their camps were bleak, pitched in forbidding landscapes: Other photos show workers carrying loads along rocky paths: Or laying track: But in none of these photos can we really make out anyone’s face. No one even kept a But that doesn’t mean that they didn’t have power. Two years before the golden spike, Chinese workers up and down the Central Pacific line decided they’d had enough. They made much less than their white counterparts, and, unlike other workers, had to pay for food on the job. A horrible nitroglycerin explosion had killed six workers, strewing their body parts across the landscape. Chinese immigrants had few rights in the United States — a California Supreme Court So, on the summer solstice in 1867, Chinese workers on a stretch of the railroad simply stopped working; the strike spread down the line the next day. They didn’t march or protest or chant. They just went back to their camps and quietly refused to work. The railroad superintendent, Charles Crocker, cut off food and other supplies to the workers, starving them in remote areas where they had no other source of food. We only have official news reports of the strike, which are generally biased toward the railroad. They say that the Central Pacific won, and the workers backed down after a week or so. |