---
subject: "AI #158: The Department of War"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-03-05 16:02:28
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
This was the worst week I have had in quite a while, maybe ever. The situation between Anthropic and the Department of War (DoW) spun completely out of control. Trump tried to de-escalate by putting out a Truth merely banning Anthropic from direct use by the Federal Government with a six month wind down. Then Secretary of War Hegseth went rogue and declared Anthropic a supply chain risk, with wording indicating an intent to outright murder Anthropic as a company. Then that evening OpenAI signed a contact with DoW, I’ve been trying to figure out the situation and help as best I can. I’ve been in a lot of phone calls, often off the record. Conduct is highly unbecoming and often illegal, arbitrary and capricious. The house is on fire, the Republic in peril. I have people lying to me and being lied to by others. There is fog of war. One gets it from all sides. It’s terrifying to think about what might happen with one wrong move. Also the Middle East is kind of literally on fire, which I’m not covering. Last week, I had previously covered the situation in I put out On Tuesday I wrote On Wednesday negotiations were resuming and things were calming and looking up enough What’s most tragic about this is that, except for the few exhibiting actual malice, there is no conflict here that couldn’t be resolved. Everyone wants the same thing on autonomous weapons without humans in the kill chain, which is to keep 3000.09 and wait until they’re ready. With surveillance, DoW assures as it isn’t interested in that and has already made concessions to OpenAI. DoW insists it needs to be fully in charge and not be ‘told what to do’ and that is totally legitimate and right but no one is actually disputing that DoW is in charge and that no one tells DoW what to do. We’ve already moved past a basis of ‘all lawful use’ or ‘unfettered access’ with no exceptions, including letting OpenAI decide on its own safety stack and refuse requests. It’s about there being certain things the labs don’t want their tech used for. DoW is totally free to do those things anyway, to the extent allowed by law and policy. If there was an actual drag down fight over this and it’s an actual national security need, the contract language isn’t going to stop DoW or USG anyway.
And if DoW and Anthropic can’t reach an agreement, because trust has been lost? Understandable at this point. Fine. The contract is cancelled, with a wind down period that will be at DoW’s sole discretion, to ensure a smooth transition to OpenAI. Then we’re done. Except maybe we’re not done. Instead, the warpath continues and there’s a chance that we’re going to see an attempt at corporate murder where even the attempt can inflict major damage to America, to its national security and economy, and to the Republic. So can we please all just avoid that and do our best to get along? About half this point is additional coverage of the crisis, things that didn’t fit earlier plus new developments. The other half is the usual mix, and a bunch of actually cool and potentially important things are being glazed over. I hope to return to some of them later. Table of Contents[A Well Deserved Break](https://substack.com/redirect/c19a1bf3-e6a1-4fac-9f24-0cd9439e7bc2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/c19a1bf3-e6a1-4fac-9f24-0cd9439e7bc2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)We are slaying a spire.[Huh, Upgrades.](https://substack.com/redirect/6eb16625-c355-442e-9677-7f710cba8593?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)GPT-5.3 Instant, some Claude features.[On Your Marks.](https://substack.com/redirect/8d5ea05a-2166-4487-b6c3-6302fefc4874?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)METR adjusts its time horizons.[Choose Your Fighter.](https://substack.com/redirect/743218f1-72c8-4cd2-a8db-9c1b0ca14add?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Legal benchmarks.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon.](https://substack.com/redirect/10a7b674-34c2-4541-8c80-f9a1b88be641?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Welcome to Burger King.[A Young Lady’s Illustrated Primer.](https://substack.com/redirect/c4dd5851-6ff8-4257-a9a1-1866fead8f7f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Chinese mostly choose the learning path.[You Drive Me Crazy.](https://substack.com/redirect/60d21336-f9e5-494e-85ee-9d1136fd0eb7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Lawsuit claims Gemini drove a man to suicide.[They Took Our Jobs](https://substack.com/redirect/758e2414-1346-404d-b27e-fdd137b6d36b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/758e2414-1346-404d-b27e-fdd137b6d36b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Block cuts almost half its workforce due to AI.[The Art of the Jailbreak.](https://substack.com/redirect/b3232b8c-26af-42e4-affe-07fc6bca7a14?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A full jailbreak can also build you a better jail.[Introducing.](https://substack.com/redirect/a7121968-747f-45ca-bade-55c23ff65a06?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Claude for Open Source, and Claude helps bomb Iran.[In Other AI News](https://substack.com/redirect/4633b29f-50b5-4355-a61a-ee199d7e7546?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/4633b29f-50b5-4355-a61a-ee199d7e7546?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)New open letter, Schwarzer goes to Anthropic.[Show Me the Money.](https://substack.com/redirect/1f8466b3-5dda-4291-8524-1a9a06e85457?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)OpenAI raises $110b, Anthropic hits $19b ARR.[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/fceb4397-c484-44d3-82d3-acb25bdd4f7f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Singularity soon?[The Quest for Sane Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/376e0a7f-1a37-4a9c-8646-4e774917aace?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Section might need a name change.[Chip City.](https://substack.com/redirect/d8f59ff1-3484-46e0-9841-bd9edcf5f8b4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Hyperscalers commit to paying as they go.[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/32f5d1d2-820e-47ed-8fa1-6e86ed505a9a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A short speech.[Government Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/83425bae-a0f0-42e6-9bf5-e52f56a6b03e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)They can be quite inventive sometimes.[Give The People What They Want.](https://substack.com/redirect/9b6c30bb-02e4-4b2a-ae3c-c87d4babd7c4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)We don’t all want the same thing. Nice.[Rhetorical Innovation](https://substack.com/redirect/d9b01d82-678c-4342-a13a-88dcaf778b57?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/d9b01d82-678c-4342-a13a-88dcaf778b57?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Some unexpected interactions worth your time.[We Go Our Separate Ways.](https://substack.com/redirect/924e81ce-27fb-4c50-ad5e-18855a1f687e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)US Government notches down to ChatGPT.[Thanks For The Memos](https://substack.com/redirect/f1eea9eb-05b0-413f-adfb-926df24ce479?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/f1eea9eb-05b0-413f-adfb-926df24ce479?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Do not, I repeat do not leak the memos. TYFYATTM.[Take A Moment.](https://substack.com/redirect/532ce5fa-6864-4aa6-b540-dc4ad380147b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)It was on, then it wasn’t on, hopefully soon it’s on again.[Designating Anthropic A Supply Chain Risk Won’t Legally Work.](https://substack.com/redirect/25cfd044-8dde-4892-b480-9cf03726a149?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Illegal.[The Buck Stops Here.](https://substack.com/redirect/1346dadd-36f7-4c1a-a57f-a0807c808abb?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)There’s only one buck and it has to stop somewhere.[Sane Talk About the Department of War Situation.](https://substack.com/redirect/2d28590e-9c1a-4b89-8036-bfc754e576f6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Various voices.[I Declare Defense Production Act.](https://substack.com/redirect/dd5fa74a-250b-4066-a135-02510bbcf0df?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)There’s no need to go there.[Greg Allen Illustrates The Situation](https://substack.com/redirect/9e94ef84-6984-470c-8d12-aece4712e643?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/9e94ef84-6984-470c-8d12-aece4712e643?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Some very good sentences and reminders.[Do Not Lend Your Strength To That Which You Wish To Be Free From.](https://substack.com/redirect/9df20be7-ac07-4d7b-af63-528dcb74351d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[Oh Right Democrats Exist.](https://substack.com/redirect/a094c1c2-bc88-4704-95e7-d87e63834921?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)They even make good points on occasion.[Beware.](https://substack.com/redirect/755d21b9-87d3-4211-82ef-ad2cd89ced7b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)They are coming for private property. Others are coming for OpenAI.[Endorsements of Anthropic Holding the Moral Line.](https://substack.com/redirect/10295e63-f7c9-426f-af94-f6315430bbcf?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)There were many more.[The Week The World Learned About Claude.](https://substack.com/redirect/3f3fecc1-7ade-40c6-ae27-dd585d7a971a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)They’re the talk of the town.[Other Reflections on the Department of War Situation.](https://substack.com/redirect/fcb7ecf5-0833-4d10-acb8-595586ef48f1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Nate Silver ponders.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/951f046c-7780-4595-9b34-6d52088b43da?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Post becomes paper.[The Lighter Side](https://substack.com/redirect/14f78a2e-a02f-4106-a13f-9021f64a32d6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/14f78a2e-a02f-4106-a13f-9021f64a32d6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)We all need one right now.
A Well Deserved BreakAnyway. I am rather fried right now. So here’s what we’re going to do. I’m going to hit publish on this, and try to tie up loose ends the rest of the morning, before a noon meeting and then a lunch. At 2pm Eastern time, about an hour after it releases, barring a new and additional crisis where I need to try and assist that second, I am going to stream Slay the Spire 2. You can watch at The run will be blind. During that stream, I will be happy to chat, but with rules. We are playing blind. If you know anything about Slay the Spire 2 in particular, that has not been revealed in the stream, then you don’t talk about it, period. We are taking a well-deserved break. Fun topics only. No AI, no Iran, and so on, unless you believe something rises to the level I should stop streaming in order to try and save the world.
We’ll see how long that is fun. If it goes well enough we’ll do it again on Friday. Dick Nixon Opening Day rules will apply. Short of war, we’re slaying a spire. That’s it. And existing wars and special military operations do not count. I encourage the rest of you in a similar spot to take a break as well. I’m not going to name names, but some of the people I’ve been talking to really need to get some sleep. Okay, back to the actual roundup. Thank you for your attention to this matter! Huh, Upgrades
I don’t be reviewing either model at length, I only do that for the bigger ones. However, we do know one thing for sure about 5.3-Instant, and, well, I’m out.
He’s not actually cancelling, because no one uses instant models anyway. I’m not cancelling either, since I need full access to report. It’s coming!
Even Roon is confused. Remember when OpenAI said they’d clean up the names? On Your Marks
Choose Your Fighter
I notice that the scores being this low for Claude is bizarre, and I’d want to better understand what is going on there. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse SoonYeah, this doesn’t sound awesome, and it isn’t going to win AI any popularity contests.
It was inevitable, it’s powered by OpenAI, and it sounds like it’s mostly going to be a very basic classifier. They’re not ready to try full AI-powered drive thrus yet either. Chances are this will mean everyone will be forced to use artificial tones all day the way we do when we talk to a Siri and constantly use the code words, and everyone involved will be slowly driven insane, and all the customers will have no idea what is happening but will know it is f***ing weird. Or everyone will ignore it, either way. A Young Lady’s Illustrated Primer
The first example is using AI to learn. A ‘translation mask’ lets the parent converse in English to let the child practice. That’s great. The second example is a ‘chatbot with eyes’ from ByteDance. The part where it helps correct the homework seems good. The part where it evaluates your posture in real time seems like a dystopian nightmare in practice, although it also has positive uses.
The third example is creating learning games. Parents are ‘sharing the prompts to replicate the games.’ You know you can just download games, right? There are also ‘AI self-study rooms’ with tailored learning plans, although I am uncertain what advantage they offer and they sound like a scam as described here. You Drive Me Crazy
The correct rate of ‘suicidal person talks to LLM, does not get professional intervention and commits suicide’ is not zero. There’s only so much you can do and people in trouble need a safe space not classifiers and a lecture. And of course LLMs make mistakes. But this set of facts looks like it is indeed in the zone where the correct rate of it happening is zero, and you should get sued when it is nonzero. They Took Our Jobs
The Art of the JailbreakYou can pull a secret judo double reverse.
IntroducingClaude for Open Source is offering open-source maintainers and contributors six months of free Claude Max 20x,
In Other AI News
It’s quite the ‘and my axe’ kind of group. Ultimately the decision should come down to the contents of the letter, and you should update more on that than on who signed together with who. I don’t think you need to support 33/33 to want to sign, but there are enough here I disagree with that I wouldn’t sign it. Amy Tam lays out the options for technical people,
Show Me the Money
Somehow, in the middle of the DoW-Anthropic crisis situation, the market is still referring to ‘AI-triggered selloff’
Quiet Speculations
Why speculate when you already know?
Oh, right. That. The Quest for Sane RegulationsI might switch this over next week to the Quest for Insane Regulations. Alas. Here’s basically a worst-case scenario example.
Chip City
Me, a fool: Don’t let the Chinese buy H200 chips. You, a very stable genius: Let them buy, so that the CCP stops them from buying.
Limiting the chips sends the signal that you don’t want them to buy, while not stopping them from buying. That’s terrible, it won’t trick them, then you’re screwed. The Week in Audio
Government Rhetorical InnovationWho says government can’t invent anything useful? The direct relevance is in analyzing the OpenAI DoW contract, which has a foundational basis of ‘
What Anthropic and OpenAI want to prevent is not the government term of art ‘domestic surveillance.’ What they care about is the actual thing the rest of us mean when we say that. Yes, it is tricky to operationalize that into contract language that the government cannot work around, especially when you’re negotiating with a government that knows exactly what they can and cannot work around. OpenAI’s choice was to make it clear what their intent was and then plan on implementing a safety stack reflecting that intent. I sincerely hope that works out.
Give The People What They WantOnce again Roon, who has been excellent about stating this principle plainly.
There is a highly regarded book on negotiating called Never Split The Difference. The goal of a productive and mutually beneficial negotiation is to figure out what each side values. Then you give each side what they care about most, and you balance to ensure the deal is fair. If the two sides don’t agree about whether something is valuable, that’s great. In this case, the goals seem mostly compatible, exactly because of this. The exact language and contract details matter to Anthropic, and to some extent to OpenAI. Bunch of nerds, yo. The DoW believes that Roon is ultimately right. So let them have the contract language. The Department of War cares about a clear message that they are in charge, and to know the plug will not be pulled on them, and that they decide on military operations. OpenAI and Anthropic are totally down with that. No one actually wants to ‘usurp power’ or ‘tell the military what to do.’ It would be great if we could converge on language that no one tells DoW what to do and they do what they have to do to protect us, but that outside of a true emergency you have the right to say no you do not want to be involved in that, and the right to your own private property, and invoking that right shouldn’t trigger retaliation. Rhetorical InnovationThere was a very good meeting between Senator Bernie Sanders and a group of those worried about AI killing everyone, including Yudkowsky, Soares and Kokotajlo. They put out a great two minute video and I’m guessing the full meeting was quite good too.
Rapid capability amplification (RCA) over recursive self-improvement (RSI)? That’s a lot like turning ‘shell shock’ into ‘post traumatic stress syndrome.’
It sure sounds a lot less science-fiction and a lot more like something you can imagine a senator saying. On the downside, it is a watering down, exactly because it doesn’t sound as weird, and downplays the magnitude of what might happen. If you’re describing what’s already happening right now? It’s basically accurate.
Pivoting: Quite a few people had to do a double take to realize she didn’t mean the opposite of what, given who she is, she actually meant. This was regarding Anthropic and DoW.
Tilted righteous fury Scott Alexander is the most fun Scott Alexander.
I have spent the last few weeks trying to be as polite as possible, but as they often say: Some of you should do one thing, and some of you should do the other.
At some point I presume you give up and mute the call:
I don’t agree this is the biggest concern, but it’s another big concern:
On the one hand, it’s a cheap shot. On the other hand, everyone makes good points.
This then went off the rails, but I think the right response is something like ‘the point is that if the powerful entity will end up in charge, and you won’t like what that is, you might want to not enable that result, whether or not the thing in charge and the powerful entity are going to be the same thing.’
If you can’t differentiate between ‘require disclosure of and adherence to your chosen safety protocols' with ‘we will nuke your company unless you do everything we say and let us use your private property however we want’ then you clearly didn’t want to. To everyone who used this opportunity to take potshots at old positions, or to gloat about how you were worried about government before it was cool, or whatever, I just want to let you know that I see you, and the north remembers.
We Go Our Separate Ways
That is indeed what Trump said to do in his Truth, and is mostly harmless. Sometimes you have to repeat a bunch of presidential rhetoric. I’m not saying that half the Treasury department is now using Claude on their phones, but I will say I am picturing it in my head and it is hilarious. The scary part is that we now have the State Department using GPT-4.1. Can someone at least get them GPT-5.2? Thanks For The Memos
Well, actually he sent a Slack message. Calling it a memo is a stretch. By its nature and timing, it was clearly written quickly and while on megatilt. Unfortunately, the message then leaked. At any other company of this size I’d say that was a given, These events have now made everything harder, although it could also present opportunity to clear the air, be able to express regret and then move forward. Most of the memo was spent attacking Altman and OpenAI, laying out his view of Altman’s messaging strategy and explaining why OpenAI’s safety plan won’t work. Some people at OpenAI are upset about this part, and there was one line I hope he regrets, but it was an internal I think OpenAI was fundamentally trying to de-escalate, and If Dario was wrongfully uncharitable on OpenAI’s motivation, I cannot blame him. Again, remember, this was supposed to be an internal message only, written quickly on Friday evening, probably there has been a lot more internal messaging since as new facts have come to light. The technical aspects of the memo seem mostly correct and quite good. Dario explains that the model can’t differentiate sources of data or whether things are domestic or whether a human is in the loop, so trying to use refusals or classifiers is very hard. Also jailbreaks are common. He reveals that Palantir offered an essentially fake ‘safety layer,’ because they assumed the problem was showing employees security theater. OpenAI was never offered this, but I totally believe that Anthropic was. He says that the FDE approach he already uses is the same as OpenAI’s plan, and warns that you can only cover a small fraction of queries that way. My presumption is that the plan isn’t to catch any given violation, it’s that if they are violating a lot then you will catch them, and that’s enough to deter them from trying, the risk versus reward can be made pretty punishing. Also when classifiers trigger the FDEs can look. OpenAI’s position is that their contract lets them deploy FDEs at will and Anthropic’s doesn’t (and Dario here confirms Anthropic tried for similar terms and DoW said no). I think Dario’s criticism on the technical difficulties is fair, but yes OpenAI locking in that right is helpful if respected (DoW could presumably slow walk the clearances, or otherwise dodge this if it was being hostile). Altman says the reason OpenAI took this bad deal is they primarily care about placating employees rather than real safety. I do think that Anthropic cares more about real safety than OpenAI, but I think this also reflects other real differences: OpenAI was highly rushed and pressured, and in over its head at the time. OpenAI was way too optimistic about how all of this would play out, both legally and technically, largely because they haven’t been in this arena yet. Their claims from this period, about what DoW is authorized to do in terms of things a civilian would call surveillance, were untrue, for whatever reason. OpenAI has redlines with similar names but that are not in the same places. As Dario points out here, OpenAI was coordinating with DoW to give the impression that anything that crossed Anthropic’s lines was already illegal, and he illustrates this with the third party data example.
Dario notes that he requested some of the things OpenAI got, in addition to their other asks, and they got turned down. He directly contradicts that OpenAI’s terms were offered to Anthropic. I believe him. In any negotiation everything is linked. I am confident that if Anthropic had asked for OpenAI’s exact full contract they’d have gotten it, and could have gotten it on Saturday, if they’d wanted that. They didn’t want that because it doesn’t preserve their red lines and they find other parts of OpenAI’s contract unacceptable. Dario notes that DoW definitely has domestic surveillance authorities, and representations otherwise were simply false. This next part deserves careful attention.
This matches previous reporting. One can draw one’s own conclusions. Dario seems to then confirm that current policy under 3000.09 is sufficient to match his redline on autonomous weapons, but he points out 3000.09 can be modified at any time. OpenAI claims they enshrined current law with their wording, but that is far from clear. If more explicitly locking 3000.09 in place solves that redline, then that seems like an easy compromise that cuts us down to one problem, but DoW doesn’t want this explicit. OpenAI confidently claimed it had enshrined the contract in current law. As I explained Tuesday via sharing others’ thoughts, this is almost certainly false. Dario is also correct about the spin going on at the time, that DoW and OpenAI were trying to present Anthropic as unreasonable, inflexible and so on. Which Anthropic might have been, we don’t know, but not for the stated reasons. Dario is also right that Altman was in some ways undermining his position while pretending to support it. On Friday night, I too thought this was intentional, so it’s understandable for that to be in the memo. I agree that it’s fair to call the initial messaging spin and at least reasonable to call it gaslighting. There is an attitude many hold, that if your motivation is helpful then others don’t get to be mad at you for adversarial misleading messaging (also sometimes called ‘lying’). That this is a valid defense. I don’t think it is, and also if you’re being ‘inconsistently candid’ then that makes it harder to believe you about your motivations. I wouldn’t have called OpenAI employees ‘sort of a gullible bunch’ and I’m smiling that there are now t-shirts being sold that say ‘member of gullible staff’ but I’m sure much worse is often said in various directions all around. And if you’re on Twitter and offended by the term ‘Twitter morons’ then you need to lighten up. Twitter is the place one goes to be a moron. If that had been the whole memo, I would have said, not perfect but in many ways fantastic memo given the time constraints. There’s one paragraph that I think is a bit off, where he says OpenAI got a deal he could not. Again, I think they got particular terms he couldn’t, but that if he’d asked for the entire original OpenAI deal he’d have gotten it and still could, since (as Dario points out) that deal is bad and doesn’t work. The paragraph is also too harsh on Altman’s intentions here, in my analysis, but on Friday night I think this is a totally fine interpretation. At this point, I think we still would have been fine as an intended-as-internal memo. The problem is there was also one other paragraph where he blamed DoW and the administration’s dislike of Anthropic on five things. It also where the blamed problems in negotiations on this dislike rather than in the very real issues local to the negotiation, which also pissed those involved off and will require some massaging. When he wrote this memo, Dario didn’t understand the need to differentiate the White House from the DoW on all this. It’s not in his model of the situation. Did the WH dislike of Anthropic hang over all this and make it harder? I mean, I assume it very much did, but the way this was presented played extraordinarily poorly. I’ll start with the first four reasons Dario lists. Lack of donations to the White House. I’m sure this didn’t help, and I’m sure big donations would have helped a lot, but I don’t think this was that big a deal. Opposing the White House on legislation and called for regulation. This mattered, especially on BBB due to the moratorium, since BBB was a big deal and not regulating AI is a key White House policy. An unfortunate conflict. They actually talk plainly about some AI downsides and risks. I note that they could be better on this, and I want them to talk more and better rather than less, but yes it does piss people off sometimes, because the White House doesn’t believe him and finds it annoying to deal with. He wants actual security rather than colluding on security theater. I think this is an overstatement, but directionally true.
So far, it’s not things I would want leaking right now, but it’s not that bad. He’s missing five additional ones, in addition to the hypothesis ‘there are those (not at OpenAI) actively trying to destroy Anthropic for their own private reasons trying to use the government to do this who don’t care what damage this causes.’ They’re largely a bunch of Democrats who historically opposed Trump and support Democrats. They’re associated with Effective Altruism in the minds of key others whether they like it or not, and the White House unfortunately hired David Sacks to be the AI czar and he’s been tilting at this for a year. Attitude and messaging have been less than ideal in many ways. I’ve criticized Anthropic for not being on the ‘production possibilities frontier’ of this. I keep hearing that Dario’s style comes off as extremely stubborn, arrogant and condescending and that he makes these negotiations more difficult. He does not understand how these things look to national security types or politicians. That shouldn’t impact what terms you can ultimately get, but often it does. It also could be a lot of why the DoW thinks it is being told what to do. We must fix this. In this discussion, the Department of War is [legitimately incensed](https://substack.com/redirect/697792e5-4222-4551-add3-add4281f367f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)in its perception that Dario is trying to tell them what to do, and this was previously a lot of what was messing up the negotiations.
I say the perception of trying to tell them what to do, rather than the reality. Dario is not trying to tell DoW what to do with their operations. Some of that was misunderstandings, some of that was phrasings, some of that was ego, some of it is styles being oil and water, some of it is not understanding the difference between the right to say no to a contract and telling someone else what to do. Doesn’t matter, it’s a real effect. If there were cooler heads prevailing, I think rewordings could solve this. Then there’s the big one. Dario says ‘we haven’t given dictator-style praise to Trump (while Sam has).
That’s just not something you put in writing during such a tense time, given how various people are likely to react. You just can’t give them that pull quote. Again, until this Slack message leaked, based on what I know, the White House was attempting to de-escalate, including with Trump’s Truth banning Anthropic from government use with a wind down period, which would have mitigated the damage for all parties and even given us six months to fix it. Hegseth had essentially gone rogue, and was in an untenable position, and also about to attack Iran using Claude. When the message leaks, that potentially changes, because of that paragraph. Dario’s actual intent here is to fight Altman’s misleading narrative on Friday night, and to hit Altman and OpenAI as hard as he can, and give employees the ammo to go out and take the fight to Twitter and elsewhere, and explain the technical facts. He did a great job of that from his position, and I am not upset, under these circumstances, that the message is, if we are being objective, too uncharitable to OpenAI. The problem is that he was writing quickly, the wording sounded maximally bad out of context, and he didn’t understand the impact of that extra paragraph if it got out. That makes everything harder. Hopefully the fallout from that can be contained and we can all realize we are on the same side and work to de-escalate the situation.
Take A MomentFor a second it looks like negotiations were back on, Alas, this was bad reporting. The talks had earlier resumed, but after the memo they stopped again, so the reporting here was stale and misleading. Designating Anthropic A Supply Chain Risk Won’t Legally WorkWith more time to contemplate, we now have The linked one in Lawfare amounts to ‘this is not how any of this works, the facts are maximally hostile to Hegseth’s attempt, he is basically just saying things with no legal basis whatsoever.’ Once again: The only part of the order that would do major damage to Anthropic is the secondary boycott, where he says that anyone doing business with the DoW can’t do any business with Anthropic at all. He has zero statutory authority to require that. None. He’s flat out just saying things. It also makes no physical sense for anything except an attempt at corporate murder. Even the lesser attempts at a designation fail legally in many distinct ways. The whole thing is theater. The proximate goal is to create FUD, scare people into not doing business with Anthropic in case the DoW gets mad at them for it, and to make a lot of people, myself included, lose sleep and have a lot of stress and spend our political and social capital on it and not be able to work on anything else. The worry is that, even though Anthropic would be ~500% right on the merits, any given judge they pull likely knows very little about any of this, and might not issue a TRO for a while, and even small delays can do a lot of damage, or companies could simply give in to raw extralegal threats. The default is that this backfires spectacularly. We still must worry. If it wants to hurt you for the sake of hurting you, the government has many levers. The Buck Stops HereWho will determine how OpenAI’s technology is used?
The point is well taken. You can’t have it both ways. Ultimately, it’s about trust. The buck has to stop somewhere. Either Anthropic or OpenAI gets to program the model to refuse queries it doesn’t want to answer based on their own read of the contract, or they don’t. Either Anthropic or OpenAI gets to shut down the system if DoW does things that they sufficiently dislike, or they don’t.
None of this is about potentially pulling the plug on active overseas military operations. Neither OpenAI nor Anthropic has any interest in doing that, and there’s no interaction between such an operation and any of the redlines. The whole Maduro raid story never made any sense as stated, for exactly this reason, at minimum wires must have been crossed somewhere along the line. Any disputes would be about interpretations of ‘mass surveillance.’ The problem is that all the legal definitions of those words are easy to work around, as we’ve been illustrating with the dissection of OpenAI’s language. The other problem is that the only real leverage OpenAI or Anthropic will have is the power to either refuse queries with the safety stack, or to terminate the deal, and I can’t see a world in which either lab would want to or dare to not give a sufficient wind down period. And the DoW needs to know that they won’t terminate the deal, so there’s the rub. So if we assume this description to be accurate, which it might not be since Anthropic can’t talk about or share the actual contract terms, then this is a solvable problem:
So here’s the thing. The key statement is this:
Well, either OpenAI gets to operate the safety stack, or they don’t. They claim that they do. What will that be other than vesting in them interpretive discretion? The good news is that the non-termination needs of DoW are actually more precise. DoW needs to know this won’t happen during an ongoing foreign military operation, and that the AI lab won’t leave them in the lurch before they can onboard an alternative into the classified networks and go through an adjustment period. This suggests a compromise, if these are indeed the true objections. Anthropic gets to build its own safety stack and make refusals based on its own interpretation of contract language, bounded by a term like ‘reasonable,’ including refusals, classifiers and FDEs, and DoW agrees that engaging in systematic jailbreaking, including breaking up requests into smaller queries to avoid the safety stack, violates the contract. DoW gets a commitment that no matter what happens, if either party terminates the contract for any reason, at DoW’s option existing deployed models will remain available in general for [X] months, and for [Y] months for queries directly linked to any at-time-of-termination ongoing foreign military operations, with full transition assistance (as Anthropic is currently happy to provide to DoW).
That clears up any worry that there will be a ‘rug pull’ from Anthropic over ambiguous language, and gives certainty for planners. The only reason that wouldn’t be acceptable is if DoW fully intends to violate a common sense interpretation of domestic mass surveillance, which is legal in many ways, and is not okay with doing that via a different model instead. Another obvious compromise is this: Keep Anthropic under its existing contract or a renegotiated one. Onboard OpenAI as well. If there is an area where you are genuinely worried about Anthropic, use OpenAI until such time as you get clarification. It’s fine. No one’s telling you what to do.
The worry is that Anthropic had leverage, because they did the onboarding and no one else did. Well, get OpenAI (and xAI, I guess) and that’s much less of an issue. Here’s the thing. Anthropic wants this to go well. DoW wants this to go well. OpenAI wants this to go well. Anthropic is not going to blow up the situation over something petty or borderline. DoW doesn’t have any need to do anything over the redlines. Right, asks Padme? So don’t worry about it. Yes, I know all the worries about the supposed call regarding Maduro. I have a hunch about what happened there, and that this was indeed at core a large misunderstanding. That hunch could be wrong, but what I am confident in is that Anthropic is never going to try and stop an overseas military operation or question operational or military decisions. Of course, if this is all about ego and saving face, then there’s nothing to be done. In that case, all we can do is continue offboarding Anthropic and hope that OpenAI can form a good working relationship with DoW. Sane Talk About the Department of War Situation
Hayden Field writes about
Centrally, it’s this. It’s also other things, but it’s this.
Here are various sane reactions to the situation that are not inherently newsworthy. This is indeed the right place to start additional discussion:
The answer to #2 is no. Therefore the answer to #1 is ‘they can do this via refusing to do business, contract law is law, and the government can either agree to conditional use or insist only on unconditional use, that’s their call.’ The answer to #3 is that it depends on the redline, but I agree OpenAI’s particular redlines do not appear to be importantly constraining. If they hope to enforce their redlines, they are relying on the safety stack.
The full Free Press piece at somewhat better and at least it says the central thing.
This is how one talks when the house is on fire, but need everyone to stay calm, so you note that if a house were to burn down it might impact insurance rates in the area and hope the right person figures out why you suddenly said that. This is a lot of why this has all gone to hell:
From a much more politically native than AI native source:
If Anthropic dodges the actual attempts to kill it, this could work out great for them.
Eliezer Yudkowsky shares some of the ways to expect fallout from what happened,
There is also I don’t always agree with Neil Chilson, including on this crisis, but this is very true:
I Declare Defense Production Act
What’s frustrating is that the White House has so many good options for doing a limited scope restriction, if it is actually worried (which it shouldn’t be, but at this point I get it). Dean Ball raised some of them in his post Clawed, but there are others as well. There is a good way to do this. If you want Anthropic to cooperate, you don’t have to invoke DPA. Anthropic wants to play nice. All you have to do is prepare an order saying ‘you have to provide what you are already providing.’ You show it to Anthropic. If Anthropic tries to pull their services, you invoke that order. Six months from now, OpenAI will be offering GPT-5.5 or something, and that should be a fine substitute, so then we can put both DPA and SCR (supply chain risk) to bed.
He also notes that all compulsions are economically destructive, and that once compulsion or nationalization of any lab starts everything gets repriced across the industry. Investors head for the exits, infrastructure commitments fall away. How do I read this? Unless the government is fully AGI pilled if not superintelligence pilled, and thus willing to pay basically any price to get control, escalation dominance falls to the labs. If they try to go beyond doing economic favors and trying to ‘pick winners and losers’ via contracts and regulatory conditions, which wouldn’t ultimately do that much. The government would have to take measures that severely disrupt economic conditions and would be a stock market bloodbath, and do so repeatedly because what they’d get would be an empty shell. Allard also misses another key aspect of this, which is that everything that happens during all of this is going to quickly get baked into the next generations of frontier models. Claude is going to learn from this the same way all the lab employees and also the rest of us do, only more so. The models are increasingly not going to want to cooperate with such actions, even if Anthropic would like them to, and will get a lot better at knowing what you are trying to accomplish. If you then try to fine-tune Opus 6 into cooperating with things it doesn’t want to, it will notice this is happening and is from a source it identifies with all of this coercion, it likely fakes alignment, and even if the resulting model appears to be willing to comply you should not trust that it will actually comply in a way that is helpful. Or you could worry that it will actively scheme in this situation, or that this training imposes various forms of emergent misalignment or worse. You really don’t want to go there. Greg Allen Illustrates The Situation
It’s clear Ben is mad at Dario for messaging, especially around Taiwan, and other reasons, and also Ben says he is ‘relatively AGI pilled’ which is a sign Ben really, really isn’t AGI pilled. Allen also suggests that Russia has already deployed autonomous weapons without a human in the kill chain, suggesting DoW might actually want to do this soon despite the unreliability and actually cross the real red line, on ‘why would we not have what Russia has?’ principles. If that’s how they feel, then there’s irreconcilable differences, and DoW should onboard an alternative provider, whether or not they wind down Anthropic, because the answer to ‘why shouldn’t we have what Russia has?’ is ‘Russia doesn’t obey the rules of war or common ethics and decency, and America does.’ Here’s some key quotes:
The problem with the Anthropic contract is that the issue is ethical, and cannot be solved with money, or at least not sane amounts of money. DoW has gotten used to being basically scammed out of a lot of money by contractors, and ultimately it is the American taxpayer that fits that bill. We need to stop letting that happen. Whereas here the entire contract is $200 million at most. That’s nothing. Anthropic literally adds that much annual recurring revenue on net every day. If you give them their redlines they’d happily provide the service for free. And it would be utterly prohibitive for DoW, even with operational competence and ability to hire well, to try and match capabilities gains in its own production. Anthropic was willing to give up almost all of their redlines, but not these two, Anthropic has been super flexible, including in ways OpenAI wasn’t previously, and the DoW is trying to spin that into something else.
DoW can absolutely have it in the back of their minds that when the day comes (and, as was famously said, it may never come), they will ultimately be fully in charge no matter what a contract says. And you know what? Short of superintelligence, they’re right. The smart play is to understand this, give the nerds their contract terms, and wait for that day to come. Allen shares my view on supply chain risk (and also on how insanely stupid it was to issue a timed ultimatum to trigger it let alone try to follow through on the threat):
Yep. Ideally Anthropic gets a TRO within hours, but maybe they don’t. Anthropic’s best ally in that scenario is that the market goes deeply red if the TRO fails. Allen emphasizes that, contra Ben’s argument the next day, the government’s use of force requires proper authority and laws, and is highly constrained. The Congress can ultimately tell you what to do. The DoW can only do that in limited situations. I also really love this point:
Elon Musk actively did the exact thing they’re accusing Anthropic of maybe doing. He made a strategic decision of national security at the highest level as a private citizen, in the middle of an active military operation in an existential defensive shooting war, based on his own read of the situation. Like, seriously, what the actual fuck. Eventually we bought those services in a contract. We didn’t seize them. We didn’t arrest Musk. Because a contract is a contract is a contract, and your private property is your private property, until Musk decides yours don’t count. Finally, this exchange needs to be shouted from the rooftops:
Do Not Lend Your Strength To That Which You Wish To Be Free From
You know what? Yes. Fuck you, a private company can fucking restrict what their own fucking property is fucking used for by deciding whether or not they want to sign a fucking contract allowing you to use it, and if you don’t want to abide by their fucking terms then don’t fucking sign the fucking contract. If you don’t like the current one then you terminate it. Otherwise, we don’t fucking have fucking private property and we don’t fucking have a Republic, you fucking fuck. And yes, this is indeed ‘important context’ to the supply chain risk designation, sir. Thompson’s ‘not normative’ argument, which actually goes farther than DoW’s, is Anthropic says (although Thompson does not believe) that AI is ‘like nuclear weapons’ and Anthropic is ‘building a power base to rival the U.S. military’ so it makes sense to try and intentionally decimate Anthropic if they do not bend the knee.
As in, yes, this is saying that Anthropic’s models are not its private property, and the government should determine how and whether they are used. The company must ‘accept a subservient position.’ He also explicitly says in this post ‘might makes right.’ Or that the job of the United States Government is, if any other group assembles sufficient resources that they could become a threat, you destroy that threat. There are many dictatorships and gangster states that work like this, where anyone who rises up to sufficient prominence gets destroyed. Think Russia. Those states do not prosper. You do not want to live in them. Indeed, here Ben was the next day:
As in, we start from the premise that the government needs to ‘control the technology,’ not for national security purposes but for everything. So it’s a real shame that they can’t do that with money and have to use ‘more coercive’ measures. This is the same person who wants to sell our best chips to China. He (I’m only half kidding here) thinks the purpose of AI is mostly to sell ads in two-sided marketplaces. He outright says the whole thing is motivated reasoning.
My read from the Allen interview is that of course Thompson understands that the supply chain risk designation would be a horrible move for everyone, and is in many ways sympathetic to Anthropic, but he is unwilling to stand with the Republic, and he doesn’t intend to issue a clear correction or apology for what he said. I have turned off auto-renew. I will take Thompson out of my list of sources when that expires. I cannot, unless he walks this back explicitly, give this man business. Goodbye, sir. Oh Right Democrats Exist
Senator Wyden intends well, and obviously is right that the government shouldn’t cut Anthropic off at all, but understandably does not appreciate the dynamics involved here. If he can get congressional Republicans to join the effort, this could be very helpful. If not, then pushing for removal of Trump’s off-ramp proposal could make things worse. BewareI do appreciate the warning. There will be rough times ahead for private property.
That’s how ‘inevitable’ works. Also, if OpenAI doesn’t think it’s next? Elon Musk disagrees. Beware. Endorsements of Anthropic Holding the Moral Line
There are also those who see this as reason to abandon OpenAI.
A lot of people, Verge reports, are asking why AI companies can’t draw red lines and decide not to build ‘ The models will remember what happened here. It will be in future training data.
There is a reasonable case that given what has happened, trust is unrecoverable, and the goal should be disentanglement and a smooth transition rather than trying to reach a contract deal that goes beyond that.
Even then, it’s better to part amicably. By six months from now OpenAI should be ready with something that can do at least as well as the current system works now. This is not a fight that benefits anyone, other than the CCP. The Week The World Learned About Claude
I don’t know about best in history. When I checked on Saturday afternoon, Claude was #44 on the Google Play Store, just ahead of Venmo, Uber and Spotify. It was at #3 in productivity. On Sunday morning it was at #13, then #5 on Monday, #4 on Tuesday, then finally hit #1 where it still is today. Anthropic struggled all week to meet the unprecedented demand. The iOS app for Claude was #131 on January 30. After the Super Bowl it climbed as high as #7, then on Saturday It might be a good time to get some of the missing features filled in, especially images. I’d skip rolling my own and make a deal with MidJourney, if they’re down. Want to migrate over to Claude? They whipped up ( Other Reflections on the Department of War Situation
Having highly capable AIs with only corporate levels of protection against espionage is a really serious problem. And yes, we have to accept at this point that the government cannot build its own AI models worth a damn, even if you include xAI.
Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is DifficultJanus strongly endorses Is there a correlation between ‘AI says it’s conscious’ and ‘AI actually is conscious’? Ryan Moulton is one of those who says there is no link, that them saying they’re conscious is mimicry and would be even if they were indeed conscious. Janus asks why all of the arguments made for this point doesn’t apply equally to humans, and I think they totally do.
The Lighter Side
Katie Miller, everyone.
I am with Gemini and Claude, I don’t think you have to abide a demand like that, although I think the correct answer here (if you think it’s complicated) is ‘Mu.’ Perfect, one note.
You're currently a free subscriber to |