---
subject: "The Monday Media Diet with George Akhalkatsi"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-06-03 10:22:08
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
I was introduced to George Akhalkatsi (GA) via friend of WITI Tell us about yourself. Hi, I am George Akhalkatsi. I was born and spent most of my life in Georgia, although I had a chance to spend a year in Oklahoma as a high school exchange student, and later spent some time studying in Czech Republic, France and Singapore. I have also spent a year working in London, UK. Despite of my international exposure if feel very Georgian at my core. I currently lead European Bank of Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) in Yerevan, Armenia. EBRD is a multilateral development bank that was originally set up after collapse of the Soviet Union to support ex-soviet countries transition to market economies. Similar to the World Bank and other development banks we do quite a lot of reform work both on macro and micro level. I also love entrepreneurship and have tried few things since I was 20, that’s already 20 years now 😊 I co-founded a) Dasta Records Management, the first private archive outsourcing and records management company in Georgia, b) Impact Hub Tbilisi – part of the global Impact Hub network, c) Log Out – a local commercial warehousing company. There were other projects, some successful, some good learning experiences. I have a wife (Sophie) and three kids (Anastasia, Otto, Archil) and we are all passionate about outdoors, skiing and number of other sports. Describe your media diet. My media diet is largely shaped by my work and the region I live / work in. I follow daily Armenian news at news.am, What’s the last great book you read? The one that immediately comes to mind is What are you reading now? I just finished What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication? It’s quite simple for me, I keep it next to my bed and mostly read it before going to sleep. I also spend most of my flights reading, unless there is a movie I really want to watch. Who should everyone be reading that they’re not? The Eighth Life by Nino Kharatishvili is similar to The Forty Days of Musa Dagh; it is a historical novel that helps a reader understand the past 125 years of the South Caucasus. It’s a story that a lot of people in Georgia resonate with. Again a very long read, but I could not put it down for a week. What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone? I am not a big app person, the one that I use a lot is Plane or train? Train. Especially when travelling in Europe. What is one place everyone should visit? Of course, Georgia. Or even better, combine Georgia with Armenia. Both countries are very safe and you will be surprised by so many things in each of this countries, especially if you are fond of nature, good food and wine. Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into. Exploring mycology became a significant focus during the Covid-19 period, when my family and I retreated to our summer house on the outskirts of Tbilisi National Park. Initially drawn to foraging and identifying edible mushrooms, my curiosity deepened over time, and I started reading about the subject. Eventually, I embarked on cultivating a variety of mushrooms, including Oyster, Shiitake, and Wine Cap. I am still fascinated by mushrooms. From the thrill of finding rare edible mushrooms in the wild to the patience and care required for cultivation, each step offered its own insights and joys. (GA) — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & George (GA) —
You're currently a free subscriber to |