---
subject: "Decision Selection Bias"
from: "Robin Hanson from Overcoming Bias <overcomingbias@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-12-28 21:46:40
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Overcoming Bias", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8616244883382228708", "UNREAD"]
---
As futarchy interest and activity are way To make a decision, one wants estimates of the outcome that would be caused by each possible decision. But decision markets instead give estimate of outcomes conditional on each possible decision. Selection biases can cause a difference between conditional and causal outcome estimates. This figure describes a concrete example: The two dimensions here are of the value of a company’s stock if the CEO is dumped, and if the CEO is kept. Assume that market speculators know only that the truth is uniformly distributed within the oval shown, but the actual decision to dump or keep will be made according to the actual point in this space. Risk-neutral speculators should then estimate the value the stock conditional on dumping by averaging the x-axis value over the yellow region, and also estimate the value of the stock conditional on keeping by averaging the y-axis value over the red region. Combining these (x,y) values gives an “apparent center” point, while the “true center” of the oval gives the speculators best info. According to the true center, the CEO should be dumped, but according to the apparent center, the CEO should be kept. Thus a decisions selection bias here distorts the market advice, making it seem like the CEO should be kept, when they should be dumped. Now this example has been designed to create a worst case, by basing the decision on the exact point and also by finding a worse-case (x,y) correlation. Here are many other correlations, showing that this problem is rare overall: I’ve discussed this issue many times in talks over the years (e.g.,
I blogged in There is only a difference between causal and conditional outcome estimates in decision markets when then the decision is made using different info that the market prices. So make sure the market directly decides, or that decision makers trade in the markets, to tell all they know. Also make sure that the decision moment is clear, by measuring prices over a short know time period, and paying Conditioning on random decisions should very effective, but seems expensive. However, it seems much less expensive to sometimes randomly not do a policy change that you were going to do, than to sometimes randomly do a policy change you were not going to do. So I suggest that a futarchy system for considering and adopting proposals randomly reject say 5% of the changes that it would otherwise have accepted. This should ensure good estimates conditional on not adopting proposals, leaving only the potential problem of a decision selection bias distorting estimate conditional on adopting some proposal. Given the complexity of human behavior, there’s only so far one can go with theory to address such problems. This is why I hope to run some lab experiments soon, so look for robust ways to pick decisions in the context of price conditional price histories. You're currently a free subscriber to |