---
subject: "Dating Roundup #10: Gendered Expectations"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-01-12 20:24:25
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
The game is asymmetrical. Life is not fair. Doesn’t matter. Play to win the game. You’re Single Because Your Emotions Gave Her The IckAh, the ultimate ick source. A man expressing their emotions is kind of the inverse of the speech in Barbie about how it’s impossible to be a woman. It’s easy. Express your emotions. No, not those, and definitely not like that. But do it. That’s the goal. If you say that’s not fair? Well, life it’s fair, I report the facts rather than make the rules, and the whole thing sounds like a you problem.
Robin’s imprecise here. It’s not that you can’t feel the emotions, it’s that you can’t talk about or too obviously reveal them, and especially can’t burden her with them. Unless, that is, you are sufficiently justified in not commanding them in a given situation, in which case you can do it. As with many other similar things this creates a skill issue. Yes, we’d all (regardless of gender) like to be fully in touch with and in command of our emotions and in a place where we can own and share all of it securely and all that, while also having a good sense of when it’s wise to not share. That’s asking a lot, so most people need practical advice on how to handle it all. When you sense potential trouble and the wrong move can cause permanent damage up to and including the ick, risk aversion and holding things back is the natural play. But if you always do that you definitely fail, and you also don’t fail fast. A lot of risk aversion is aversion to failing fast when you should welcome failing fast, which is the opposite of the correct strategy. So you’ll need to start getting command and ownership of at least some of those emotions, and you should err on the side of sharing more faster if you’re in position to handle it, but also it’s fine to hold other stuff back or be vague about it, especially negative stuff. You Are Still Single Because You Don’t Know When To Show EmotionsYou’ll be told that the above is overthinking things. It isn’t. It is extremely attractive to feel and openly show your emotions and get away with it, if you do it successfully, largely because it is so difficult to do it successfully.
On the evolutionary level, yes selection is rapid but even if the effect were extreme that’s over centuries and millennia, not decades. So the ‘if this was attractive evolution would have handled it’ argument only holds for traits that would have been attractive in older worlds very different from our own, in cultures radically different from our own, where selection operated very differently. Also, a lot of your reproductive success in those worlds (and ours) is about intersexual dynamics and resource acquisition, and several other factors, so a trait can be attractive but still get aggressively selected against. So while yes, obviously evolution can offer some very big hints and should be considered, you cannot assume that this is predictive of what works now. ‘Can feel and openly show emotions’ is not one thing. There are some ways that being able to feel and openly show emotions is attractive and winning. In other ways and situations it is very much not. Like when you train an LLM, there are a bunch of correlated things that will tend to move in correlated ways, and modifying one thing also modifies other things. So yes, when you see the player in the clip talk about missing his family, that is (mostly) a good use of feeling and showing emotions at this point (although it wouldn’t have gone as great in the same spot even a few decades ago, I am guessing). But that doesn’t mean that showing that level of emotion and crying on a regular basis will go that well. This is a skill issue. Being the brick wall is not a universally optimal play. But it is a safer play in any given situation. In many situations it is indeed correct, and at low levels of related skill it is better than the alternatives even more often. First best is to be in touch with your emotions but be high skilled in managing them and knowing when and how to communicate them to others, and so on. Second best is to be cautious. Long term, yes, you want to pick up this skill. You’re Single Because You Don’t Have Enough Gendered EnergyThis is speculative. The theory is, it is fine to mix and match and combine and defy stereotypes, but only via embodying more things rather than less things.
You’re Single And I Have To Praise You Like I Should
Beware Alberto’s warning too, of course, you need to not overdo it, and also beware. If you’re not sure what kind of compliment they prefer, you can run tests.
I think it’s entirely context dependent whether it’s centrally a neg. Your delivery of the line would matter a lot. You’re Single Because You Guessed Wrong On Paying For The Date
The transactionalism worry is real as a downside. Despite this, I believe men should very clearly pay on most first dates, for at least five good (related) reasons. The man is usually the one doing the asking. The man is usually the one doing the planning. The man does not want her to have the distraction or bad vibes of thinking about money or having not paid. This is a lot of vibe improvement at low cost. The man wants the woman to say yes more often both to the first and subsequent dates, and have positive memories and a positive experience. The man wants to send a costly signal of several things.
Thus, given other dynamics present, the man should usually pay for the first date. This is a relatively acceptable way to make the date market clear more often and improve outcomes. To the extent that the above justifications are broken, such as when the woman is initiating and suggesting the activity, that is an exception. Consider an obvious example where one party should pay: If you are invited over to someone’s house for dinner, very obviously they should usually not send you a bill, no matter what relationship you have with them or what else you might do or not do. Similarly, I am a big fan of the rule I have with some of my friends that whoever travels the farthest does not pay for dinner. Very obviously, if you have someone like Ruby or Aella where the vibes run the other way, and not paying hurts their experience? Then you should split or they should pay, It is on her to let him know this. He should reach for and request the check in a way that indicates intention to pay, but in a soft way that is interruptible. You’re Single But Not Because You Make Too Much Money
Not only did she get more matches presenting as a higher earner, the matches were on average higher earners themselves.
The ability to be ambitious is valued, she asserts, but actually still being ambitious isn’t. See Taylor Tomlinson’s bit about how she wants to marry a stay-at-home dad, but not a man who wants to be one, so she needs to find a successful man and destroy him, and she’s kind of into him resenting her for it. Which is all entirely compatible with CHH’s findings, but also means that you’re strictly better off making more money rather than less. You’re Single Because You Gave Someone A Ride
Being worried someone that is a little late is dead in a ditch? Also paranoia. I don’t think this is automatically one of those ‘that which can be destroyed by the truth should be’ or ‘if I can take your man he was never your man’ situations. Circumstances drive behavior, and yes it is entirely plausible that you could have a good thing worth preserving that would be put at risk if you put yourself in the wrong situation, even one that is in theory entirely innocent. Opportunity and temptation are not good things in these spots and a tiny chance of huge downside can be worth avoiding. Most couples most of the time do not need to worry on this level, and certainly having to worry that way is a bad sign, but play to win. Also from the same person recently:
And for fun:
She’s somehow cracked the Twitter code, she has 1584 followers and half her posts recently break a million views. It’s amazing. You’re Single Because You Left The Price Tag On But It’s For The Best
At least one bullet was dodged here. The question is which one, or was it both?
I’d say that if this is real both of them dodged a bullet. It’s a terrible match. She was willing to crush him in front of everyone over this and then doubled down, saying that she didn’t feel chosen even though he’s been planning this for a year. In particular, she also said ‘something from Walmart’ rather than saying it was the wrong type of diamond, which I’d respect a bunch more. But also, dude, look, this is your moment, you planned this for a year, you don’t leave the freaking price tag and Walmart label in the box, what the hell are you doing. And yeah, you can say that doesn’t matter, but that type of thing matters a lot to her. You’re Single So You At Least Get To Keep Your Upgrade
What you are going to do is realize that if she takes the upgrade, that information is far more valuable than the upgrade. Hence the now ex part of the girlfriend. There are situations in which sitting apart is not worth the upgrade, and a honeymoon plausibly counts as this, but they are rare. Mostly you want to offer her the upgrade, the value of doing that (and the value you lose by not doing that) greatly exceeds the actual experiential benefits even if she says yes, she often says no and you get valuable information. You’re Single Because You Tried To Problem SolveOne of the big classic <problem>s.
Most of you already know this, but perhaps a better framing is helpful here? So I would reply: Wife’s problem is not <problem> it is <emotional stress of problem>, and so You need to offer a <solution> to <emotional stress of problem> at which point the problem changes to <problem>, which may or may not then be <someone else’s problem>. As in, no problem. You’re Single Because You Were Actually A Crazy StalkerHello, human resources.
The original response thread I saw this from said The main problem with mostly harmless versions of such things is that they strongly correlate with and predict future very much not harmless versions of those and other things. Which is exactly what happened in this case. He got abusive and threatening and clearly was a physical danger to her, she had to flee her apartment. Fortunately it sounds like she’s okay. A potential rule to live by here would be to say, don’t do anything you wouldn’t think the other person would be fine with in a hypothetical. Another obvious one is, if you think this would make people think you were crazy stalker person if they found out, then don’t do it, even if you think it wouldn’t mean that. You don’t want the rule to be ‘would be fine with it if they knew everything,’ because knowing can ruin the effect. For example, one sometimes needs to Perform Vacation (or another occasion or action) and present as if one is happy in context, and they want you to do this if needed but it wouldn’t work if they outright knew you were faking it. There certainly is also a class of ‘do your research’ strategies where you would okay with someone doing this as long as they kept it to themselves how they found out. As many noted, the (often far more intensive) gender flipped version of this is common, and guys are remarkably often entirely fine with it (including many cases where it goes way too far and they shouldn’t be, but also many cases in which it is totally fine). This is not ‘fair’ but the logic follows. You're currently a free subscriber to |