---
subject: "The Case for Marking More to Market"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <the-diff@ghost.io>"
to: ""
date: 2024-03-18 14:29:25
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
In this issue: - The Case for Marking More to Market—Some political debates end up being absorbed in accounting questions rather than economic ones. There is a solution, at least some of the time: create markets in the aggregate quantity of taxes collected for certain programs, and use this to measure exactly how solvent they are.
- Petrodollar Recycling—Oil exporters always have to stash their profits somewhere, and one of the most strategic options is to spend money in ways that increase future demand for oil.
- Importing Talent—Japan tries to tempt angel investors.
- Self-Regulation—Even crypto free-for-alls have rules.
- Apple/Google—When and why to outsource critical services.
- Exits—Making a good investment is not the same thing as being able to keep the money.
The Case for Marking More to MarketSome political debates convert a lot of energy into waste by leading people to fixate on the framing rather than the economic reality. Take social security: in one sense, it's a classic pension; there's a But wait! That trust fund is an accounting fiction! Social Security is a promise from the government to pay a certain amount in the future, and it's backed by a trust fund that consists of—promises from the government! It's circular, like having your retirement savings exclusively take the form of IOUs from yourself back to yourself. But that, too, is off. The trust fund is indeed an accounting fiction, but it's not the only one. Really, it's equally fictional to say that a government-issued promise to pay $x on some date (i.e. a treasury bond) is in the same category as a promise from AT&T or Ford to pay a dollar amount on some date. Ford prints dollars by investing in capital equipment, buying materials, hiring workers, and mixing those together to create a car it can hopefully sell for a bit more. The US government manufactures dollars through the more straightforward process of taking a mix of linen and cotton, and stamping it with assorted decorations, one of which is a denomination that makes this scrap worth more than the ~6 cents it costs to manufacture. This tends to have a more predictable margin than the private sector approach. But that only describes one set of interactions in a system. The Federal government can merrily convert cheap materials into expensive dollar bills, but that only matters if the dollar bills are actually worth something. It's similar to the fact that companies can, If the trust fund is an accounting gimmick backed by a different accounting gimmick, is Social Security unbacked? No: it owns what amounts to preferred stock in every American worker: 12.4% of their income up to a cap of $168.6k. But that just raises another problem: we can debate exactly what a share of any given company ought to be worth—this is, in fact, a fun and absorbing hobby for many people! But that debate is implicitly settled in real time throughout the trading day, when buyers and sellers find a price they're both satisfied with. There is not a market price on the total size of payroll taxes in the year 2044. But maybe there should be: Social Security could auction off, say, 1% of each year's future payroll tax payments for every year in which currently-living taxpayers would be working, and then run a new auction each year. The point of this wouldn't be to raise funds, and in fact to keep this from being slightly deflationary we'd want to spend slightly more to compensate—instead, the goal would be to put a market value on what's a combination of an actuarial, macroeconomic, and political bet: how much will future workers be paying into social security, and what does that say about the sustainability of the current system? And, finally, we'd be able to mark Social Security's actual assets to market, and figure out how solvent we should expect it to be. Of course, another feature of the entire debate is that if Social Security were to become insolvent, such that checks were drawn on an account with insufficient funds, this particular fact would be unimportant. A world where that happens is a world with some serious problems, but the object-level issue of one government department being unable to make good on its promises really indicates two more fundamental issues: - Some kind of institutional dysfunction wherein the promised benefits can be economically paid to beneficiaries, or
- An inability to provide the promised benefits without raising either taxes or inflation to politically untenable levels.
In a sense, the US government can't default, but America can, by failing to produce enough taxable output to make good on the promises America has collectively made to itself and the rest of the world. Social Security could do this, but it instantly raises political questions. Does it invest solely in public equities? Which ones? Does that amount to a subsidy for big business, or at least for businesses that the market perceives as potentially bigger in the future? What about private companies? Does anyone want to defend a case where a PE fund delivers below-average returns, and half of its gross proceeds pay managers' fees rather than retirees' incomes? Also, how do you manage the timing: as George W. Bush discovered, [proposing that social security funds be invested in livelier asset classes](https://www.thediff.co/r/38802ac6?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)is politically feasible when the stock market has been doing well for a while, but having proposed this becomes a liability when the market drops.[↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/0ef36d2d?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)The cap creates odd discontinuities where a taxpayer's marginal tax rate can drop at higher income. From the perspective of income redistribution, having taxes phase out at higher incomes would be crazy; you'd want higher earners to pay more, not less. But from the perspective of social security as a minimalist pension, it makes sense to require it up to a certain point and to tell people that if they want a better retirement than what Social Security provides, they'd better have some savings of their own, too. It's a bit like hybrid healthcare systems where care at some baseline is either cheap or free at point of use, but fancier treatments are handled by the private sector. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/acfe6037?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)Among other things, you could trade income tax futures against payroll tax futures as a way to speculate on future income inequality. A world where a tiny minority of AI researchers and roboticists have automated most of the economy is a world where high earners do quite well, but where payroll taxes to fund Social Security are a minor contributor to the overall budget. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/f0928f8d?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)Owners of treasury bonds look like senior creditors, and in nominal terms they are. But in real terms, they're junior creditors: if the only way to keep the electorate happy happens to involve more spending, the goods-and-services-denominated obligation to voters supersedes the dollar-denominated obligation to lenders. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/b41a2d03?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
You're on the free list for The Diff. This week, paying subscribers read about Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. See a sampling of current open roles below: - A VC firm using data science and ML to source and evaluate opportunities is looking for a senior data engineer. (Menlo Park, CA or NYC)
- A systematic hedge fund is looking for portfolio managers who have experience using alternative data to develop systematic strategies (NYC).
- A company building the new pension of the 21st century and building universal basic capital is looking for a frontend engineer. (NYC)
- A diversified prop trading firm with a uniquely collaborative team structure is looking for experienced traders and PMs. (Singapore or Austin, TX preferred)
- A startup building a new financial market within a multi-trillion dollar asset class is looking for generalists with banking and legal experience. (US, Remote)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. ElsewherePetrodollar RecyclingSaturday's post included a Importing TalentJapan has a Self-RegulationBefore the SEC, finance was more of a free-for-all. It wasn't anarchy, though, or, if it was, it's the liveliest testament to the school of anarchism holding that people will come up with prosocial institutions and reasonable rules as a community in the absence of some all-powerful ruler. So market manipulation was legal, but egregious instances of it could lead to someone getting expelled from the New York Stock Exchange (one successful corner in 1920 Today, Apple/GoogleWhen Apple launched the iPhone, it didn't have a complete ecosystem of apps. Parts of that ecosystem did exist, but as default-desktop services provided by other companies. So they launched with a maps app powered by Google, One way to look at tech partnerships is that it's optimal for a market leader to bundle together a collection of market laggards to fill out its offering. If Bing were more competitive with Google, that's presumably what Apple would do in search. Their first priority is to make sure whatever product they're bundling is good enough, but once they've satisfied that criterion, the thing to maximize is their leverage to capture the upside. ExitsUS venture and PE firms are |
||||||||||
|
|
|
||||||||||
|