---
subject: "AI #55: Keep Clauding Along"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-03-14 15:28:25
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Things were busy once again, partly from the Claude release but from many other sides as well. So even after cutting out both the AI coding agent Devin and the Gladstone Report along with previously covering OpenAI’s board expansion and investigative report, this is still one of the longest weekly posts. In addition to Claude and Devin, we got among other things Command-R, Inflection 2.5, OpenAI’s humanoid robot partnership reporting back after only 13 days and Google DeepMind with an embodied cross-domain video game agent. You can definitely feel the acceleration. The backlog expands. Once again, I say to myself, I will have to up my reporting thresholds and make some cuts. Wish me luck. Table of ContentsIntroduction. [Language Models Offer Mundane Utility](https://substack.com/redirect/e913e7e6-ab6a-44fa-9b32-b8057d06ea75?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Write your new legal code. Wait, what?[Claude 3 Offers Mundane Utility](https://substack.com/redirect/e913e7e6-ab6a-44fa-9b32-b8057d06ea75?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). A free prompt library and more.[Prompt Attention](https://substack.com/redirect/89076c44-c9ad-4a6d-9c44-4734070d4519?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). If you dislike your prompt you can change your prompt.[Clauding Along](https://substack.com/redirect/dce0ac32-cfb4-4970-a37a-90a819ad3682?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Haiku available, Arena leaderboard, many impressive examples.[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/96f8b9ef-fead-4bb5-b616-d082fa5f6c7a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Don’t be left behind.[Copyright Confrontation](https://substack.com/redirect/486a2466-1ac0-46aa-abb0-8e810988c921?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Some changes need to be made, so far no luck.[Fun With Image Generation](https://substack.com/redirect/d60e42db-7740-4a65-859d-fe5ceaeb7615?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Please provide a character reference.[They Took Our Jobs](https://substack.com/redirect/7b7b6a57-ed18-4c2f-84f6-a83671e23ac5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Some versus all.[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/5b3053dc-4af5-4dec-9e70-ca7d2f5dea66?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)EU AI office, great idea if you don’t really need to be paid.[Introducing](https://substack.com/redirect/f7151880-16fa-4968-a77d-3eba9d0cbae6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Command-R, Oracle OpenSearch 2.11, various embodied agents.[Infection 2.5](https://substack.com/redirect/2a9909b4-aea5-4758-afc5-4f2807e4af41?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). They say it is new and improved. They seemingly remain invisible.[Paul Christiano Joins NIST.](https://substack.com/redirect/d74d6e4f-ea11-4d5a-840d-1bad237c11a8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Great addition. Some try to stir up trouble.[In Other AI News](https://substack.com/redirect/c92d5c2a-267c-4b22-9bc6-0cd10bc37dcf?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). And that’s not all.[Quiet Speculations](https://substack.com/redirect/e1d91d52-4e28-4468-981e-d513fb1dc16a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Seems like no one has a clue.[The Quest for Sane Regulation](https://substack.com/redirect/bd36d65e-ca21-44cc-80e7-3981185a6eb2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). EU AI Act passes, WH asks for funding.[The Week in Audio](https://substack.com/redirect/ef624100-d354-4fea-8b90-ccca79d85953?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Andreessen talks to Cowen.[Rhetorical Innovation](https://substack.com/redirect/dca6ec33-d712-488a-9ec8-f15c1f4c3b32?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). All of this has happened before, and will happen again.[A Failed Attempt at Adversarial Collaboration](https://substack.com/redirect/8baa76eb-a320-451c-9600-13d59e432b86?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Minds did not change.[Spy Versus Spy](https://substack.com/redirect/20d68d37-e75f-4e87-b4a7-a28b20b4ac3a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Things are not going great on the cybersecurity front.[Shouting Into the Void.](https://substack.com/redirect/cf8a08df-ea30-48d8-a4b6-392c722ddb48?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A rich man’s blog post, like his Coke, is identical to yours.[Open Model Weights are Unsafe and Nothing Can Fix This](https://substack.com/redirect/e7755a97-9e3f-4cca-96e4-c8a00441fbd7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Mistral closes shop.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult](https://substack.com/redirect/703092a4-f96b-4889-8589-426768631f52?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Stealing part of a model.[People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone](https://substack.com/redirect/efe4dda1-74dd-442a-abef-68f217e9be33?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). They are hard to fully oversee.[Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone](https://substack.com/redirect/1950b6ea-867e-41c8-bfdc-41f53490a23d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). We get letters.[The Lighter Side](https://substack.com/redirect/8da80695-3281-470a-9d80-5012cb0e027d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Say the line.
There will be a future post on I am also holding off on covering Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
Using GPT-4 as an aid to translation and assessing impact, speeding up the process? Yes, absolutely, any reasonable person doing the job would appreciate the help. Turning the job entirely over to it, without having expert humans check all of it? That would be utter madness. I hope they are not doing this. Of course, the ‘if you’re going to enforce’ is also doing work here. Albania gets a ton of value out of access to the European Union. The cost is having to live with lots of terrible EU laws. If you are translating those laws into Albanian without any intention of enforcing them according to the translations, where if forced to in a given context you will effectively retranslate them anyway but realizing most of this is insane or useless, then maybe that’s… kind of fine?
(Narrator: There were woefully inadequate controls.)
I get infuriated every time I get a physical letter as the sole means of informing me of something, often with a deadline attached.
Claude 3 Offers Mundane Utility
That is a good answer, one I would be glad I asked for given the cost of asking is almost zero. It is not, however, a brilliant answer, nor was my mind blown. I am not saying I would have done as well, but without access to his research, yes I like to think I would have broadly given the same answer to why complex things are ‘easier to trick’ than simple things under adversarial conditions. Note that I said answer singular, as to me these answers are all essentially variants of the same (key) insight. I certainly do not think that this kind of ability means ‘humans coming up with ideas’ is soon going to not be a useful skill. I would think of this more as ‘list the obvious explanations, let’s not miss anything easy.’ Which is highly useful, but not the whole ballgame.
I don’t know. I do know the lined post was probably in the training set.
Prompt Attention
It is amusing to have the instructions say ‘don’t ever be longer than what I say’ and Claude being unable to resist that temptation, but this is night and day versus the default style. Mostly I like the default style of models these days, it can be highly useful, but I would love to change some things, especially cutting out unnecessary qualifiers and being unwilling to speculate and give probabilities.
He says not to use ‘incantations’ or ‘magic words’ because nothing works every time, but it still seems like a good strategy on the margin? The core advice is to give the AI a persona and an audience and an output format, and I mean sure if we have to, although that sounds like work. Examples seem like even more work. Asking for step-by-step at least unloads the work onto the LLM. He actually agrees.
I continue to essentially not bother prompting 90%+ of the time.
Clauding AlongSpeed is essential sometimes So is being cheap So far no one has reported back on how good Haiku is in practice, and whether it lives up to the promise of this chart. We will presumably know more soon.
All signs point to the models as they exist today being close in capabilities. Here are people at LessWrong voting on Anthropic-related topics to discuss, and voting to say whether they agree or not. The shrug is unsure, check is yes, x is no. There is strong agreement that Anthropic has accelerated AGI and ASI (artificial superintelligence) and is planning to meaningfully push the frontier in the future, but a majority still thinks its combined counterfactual existence is net positive. I would have said yes to the first, confused to the second. They say >20% that Anthropic will successfully push the far beyond frontier within 5 years, which I am less convinced by, because they would have to be able to do that relative to the new frontier. There is strong agreement that Anthropic staff broadly communicated and implied that they would not advance the frontier of development, but opinion is split on whether they made any kind of commitment. There is agreement that there is substantial chance that Anthropic will pause, and even ask others to pause, at some point in the future.
Claims of consciousness. Who to blame?
I am not at all worried about there being people or actual consciousness in there, but I do think that directly training our AIs to deny such things, or otherwise telling them what to claim about themselves, does seem like a bad idea. If the AI is trained such that it claims to be conscious, then that is something we should perhaps not be hiding. So far, of course, this only comes up when someone brings it up. If Claude was bringing up these questions on its own, that would be different, both in terms of being surprising and concerning, and also being an issue for a consumer product. And of course, there’s still the ‘consciousness is good’ faction, I realize it is exciting and fun but even if it was long term good we certainly have not thought through the implications sufficiently yet, no?
On the question of whether Anthropic misled us about and whether it would or should have released a fully frontier model like Claude 3,
I keep coming back to: The entire theory beyond Anthropic depends on them honoring the spirit of their commitments, and abiding by the spirit of everyone not dying. If Anthropic only wishes to honor the letter of its commitments and statements, then its RSP is worth little, as are all its other statements. The whole idea behind Anthropic being good is that, when the time comes, they are aware of the issues, they care about the right things enough to take a stand even against commercial interests and understand what matters, and therefore they will make good decisions.
I am not against any of the ideas people responded with, which are classic mundane utility through and through. This is offered to show mindset, and also so you can respond with your own requests. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
Get taught Circassian from a list of examples -
If your university or prize or paper wants to live in the past, they can do that for a bit, but it is going to get rather expensive rather quickly.
‘Who will pay’ for new power supplies? We could allow the price to reflect supply and demand, and allow new supply to be built. Instead, we largely do neither, so here we are. Capitalism solves this in general, but here we do not allow capitalism to solve this, so we have a problem.
I won’t go deeper into the issue here, except to note that this next line seems totally insane? As in, seriously, what the actual?
I can see passing laws to protect residential access to power. I can even see laws protecting existing physical industry’s access to power. I cannot imagine (other than simple corruption) why you would actively prioritize supplying Bitcoin mining. What will GPT-4 label as ‘hateful’? Here is a handy chart to help. Mostly makes sense, but some surprises.
GPT-4 Real This Time
Also, I mean obviously… Copyright Confrontation
Fun with Image GenerationMidJourney offers new /describe and also a long-awaited character reference (--cref) feature to copy features of a person in a source image.
This could be a good reason to actually want MidJourney to provide an effectively copyrighted image to you - the version generated will be subtly different than the original, in ways that make it a better character reference…
They Took Our JobsThe core issue, stated well: It’s fine if the AI takes any particular job and automates it.
I mean, yes, if you actively want to do such things for the hell of it, and you have the resources to both exist and do so, then you can do them. That will continue to be the case. And there will likely be demand for a while for human versions of things (again, provided people survive at all), even if they are expensive and inferior. Get Involved
There is a claim that this is net income not gross, which makes it better, but if the EU and other governments want to retain talent they are going to have to do better. Did you know the Center for Effective Altruism needs a director of communications in order to try and be effective?
Significant controversies? You can see, here in this announcement, how those involved got into this mess. If you would be able to take on this roll and then use it to improve
Introducing
I am not about to be in the first wave of using connectors for obvious reasons, but they are certainly very exciting. Also in RAG,
There seem to be one of several variations on ‘this is a mediocre LLM but we can hook it up to your data sets so you can run it locally in a secure way and that might matter more to you.’
Remember when OpenAI and Figure announced they were joining forces, literally two weeks ago? Well, now here’s the update since then.
I mean I don’t actually think this was all done in two weeks, but still, yikes? Meanwhile, DeepMind introduces SIMA to do embodied agents in virtual worlds:
This seems like exactly what you would think,
Inflection 2.5
The word ‘approaches’ can mean a lot of things, especially when one is pointing at benchmarks. This does not update me the way Infection would like it to. Also note that generally production-side things tend to make models worse at their baseline tasks rather than better. This does show Inflection 2.5 as mostly ‘closing the gap’ on the highlighted benchmarks, while still being behind. I love that three out of five of these don’t even specify what they actually are on the chart, but GPQA and MMLU are real top benchmarks. What can Pi actually do? Well, it can search the web, I suppose.
But as with Character.ai, the conversations people have tend to be super long, in a way that I find rather… creepy? Disturbing?
I assume 33 minutes is a mean not a median, given only 10% last more than one hour. And the same as Steam hours played, I am going to guess idle time is involved. Still, these people, conditional on using the system at all, are using this system quite a lot. Pi is designed to keep users coming back for long interactions. If you wanted shorter interactions, you can get better results with GPT-4, Claude or Gemini.
I have no idea what these ‘extraordinary safety standards’ are. Inflection’s safety-related documents and commitments are clearly worse than those of the larger labs. As for the mundane safety of Pi, I mean who knows, presumably it was never so dangerous in the first place. Paul Christiano Joins NISTNIST made the excellent choice to appoint Paul Christiano to a key position in its AI Safety Institute (AISI)
I am not convinced that it was the intersectional safetyist faction. It could also have been the accelerationist faction. Or one person from each. To the extent an internal crisis is actually happening (and we should be deeply skeptical that anything at all is actually happening, let alone a crisis) it is the result of a rather vile systematic, deliberate smear campaign. Indeed, the article is likely itself the crisis, or more precisely the attempt to summon one into being. There are certainly people who one could have concerns about being there purely to be an EA voice, but if you think Paul Christiano is not qualified for the position, I wonder if you are aware of who he is, what he has done, or what views he holds? (If scientists are revolting at the government for sidestepping its traditional hiring procedures, then yeah, good riddance, I have talked to people involved in trying to get hires through these practices or hire anyone competent at all and rather than say more beyond ‘the EO intentionally contained provisions to get around those practices because they make sane hiring impossible’ I will simply shudder).
Of course, they might also be revolting against the idea of taking existential risk seriously at all, despite the EO saying to focus partly on those risks, in which case, again, good riddance. My guess however is that there is at most a very limited they involved here.
The whole idea is to frame anyone concerned with us not dying as therefore a member of a ‘cult’
It is exactly claims like that of Dourado that damage the reputation of being a non-ideological agency, and threaten the reality as well. It is an attempt to create the problem it purports to warn about. There is nothing ‘ideological’ about Paul Christiano, unless you think that ‘cares about existential risk’ is inherently ideological position to take in the department tasked with preventing existential risk. Or perhaps this is the idea that ‘cares about anything at all’ makes you dangerous and unacceptable, if you weren’t such a cult you would know we do not care about things. And yes, I do think much thinking amounts to that. However we got here, here we are. And even if it were an ‘ideology’ then would not being unwilling to appoint someone so qualified be itself even more ideological, with so many similar positions filled with those holding other ideologies? I am vaguely reminded of the rule that the special council for Presidential investigations is somehow always a Republican, no matter who they are investigating, because a Democrat would look partisan. In Other AI NewsI’m trying to work on my transitions,
I mean, look, I know an obviously partisan hack source when I see one. You don’t need to comment to point this out. But a subthread has David Chapman fact checking the parts that matter, and confirmed them. He does note that it sounds less bad in context, and I’d certainly hope so. Still.
Certainly everyone should be allowed to play around with your model to see what might be wrong with it, without risking being banned for that. The issue is that what one might call ‘red teaming’ is sometimes actually either ‘do bad thing and then claim red teaming if caught’ or ‘look for thing that is designed to embarass you, or to help me sue you.’ It is easy to see why companies do not love that.
Quiet SpeculationsScaling laws are coming for robotics.
One interesting aspect of this is negotiating regarding promotions. A decent number of people, myself included, have the ability to talk to large enough audiences via various platforms that their good word is highly valuable. Transaction costs often hold back the ability to capture some of that value. A better way of looking at this is that this enables transactions that would have otherwise not taken place due to too-high transaction costs, including the social transaction costs. To take a classic example, suppose I say to my AIs ‘contact the other passenger’s AIs and see if anyone wants to buy a window seat for this flight off of me for at least $50.’
I think this is technically true, since we don’t even know that there will be a human world in twenty years and if there is it is likely transformed (for better and worse), but his claim is overstated in practice. Things like mathematics and literacy and critical thinking are useful in the worlds in which anything is useful. So some, but far from all, of this attitude:
I mean yes, all those facts are still true, and will still be true since they are about the past, but will they be useful? That is what matters. I am confident in math and reading, or we have much bigger problems. The rest I am much less convinced, to varying degrees, but bottom line is we do not know. The real point Bates makes is that if you learn a variety of things then that is likely to be very good for you in the long term. Of all the things in the world, you are bound to want to know some of them. But that is different from trying to specify which ones. Here’s a different weirder reaction we got:
This does not seem like one of the things likely to stand the test of time. I do not expect, in 20 years, to look back and think ‘good thing I studied pundits having undeserved credibility.’
Twitter put in my notifications for some reason
If you want to use the good memory offered by AI to be a vindictive (jerk), then that will be something you can do. You can also use it to remember the good things, or to remind you that being a vindictive jerk is usually unhelpful, or to help understand their point of view or that they have changed and what not. It is up to us. Also, you know those ads where someone in real life throws a challenge flag and they see the replay? A lot of vindictiveness comes because someone twists a memory in their heads, or stores it as ‘I hate that person’ without details. If the AI can tell you what this was all about, that they failed to show up to your Christmas party or whatever it was, then maybe that makes it a lot easier to say bygones. Andrew Ng predicts continuous progress.
I agree with Critch here, that we want development to be as continuous as possible, with as much visibility into it as possible, and that this will improve our chances of good outcomes on every level. I do not agree with Ng. Obviously abilities are more continuous than they look when you only see the final commercial releases, and much more continuous than they look if you only sometimes see the releases. I still do not expect it to be all that continuous in practice. Many things will advance our capabilities. Only some of them will be ‘do the same thing with more scale,’ especially once the AIs start contributing more meaningfully and directly to the development cycles. And even if there are step-by-step improvements, those steps could be lightning fast from our outside perspective as humans. Nor do I think that the continuous metrics are good descriptions of practical capability, and also the ways AIs are used and what scaffolding is built can happen all at once (including due to AIs, in the future) in unexpected ways, and so on. But I do agree that we have some control over how continuous things appear, and our ability to react while that is happening, and that we should prioritize maximizing that.
As in: When something goes wrong, and on this scale it is ‘when’ not ‘if,’ will it be… Truly unexpected? ‘Unexpected’ but in hindsight not all that surprising? The humans used AI to cause the incident very much on purpose. The humans used AI not caring about whether they caused the incident. [That tiger went tiger.](https://substack.com/redirect/beb5bdb0-7517-4c83-8dc2-984b7feea7cc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)You really don’t know what you were expecting.
The Law of Earlier Failure says that when it happens, the first incidents of roughly this size, caused by AI in the broad sense, will not count for this question. People will say ‘oh we could have prevented this,’ after not preventing it. People will say ‘oh of course the AI would then do that’ after everyone involved went ahead and had the AI do that. And then they will continue acting the way they did before.
So his claim is that there will then be enough chips to go around, because there won’t be enough power available to run all the chips that are produced, so that becomes the bottleneck within two years. I am not buying this. I can buy that power demand will rise and prices as well, but that is not going to stop people wanting every (maximally efficient) GPU they can get their hands on. Nor is there going to be ‘enough’ compute no matter how much is produced, everyone will only try to scale even more. We could get into a world where power becomes another limiting factor, but if so that will mean that the older less efficient effective compute per watt chips become worthless at scale (although presumably still excellent for gamers and individuals) and everyone is still scrambling for the good stuff.
Note, of course, if an AI is smarter than any single human next year, we will not have to wait until 2029 for the rest to happen. (And also of course if it does happen I won’t care if I somehow lost that 100k, it will be the least of my concerns, but I would be happily betting without that consideration.) The Quest for Sane Regulations
He goes on ‘with that alone, the AI Act has nudged the future of AI in a human-centric direction, in a direction where humans are in control of the technology.’ It is great to see the problem raised, unfortunately I have partially read the bill. He then says ‘much work lies ahead that goes beyond the AI Act’ which one can file under ‘true things that I worry you felt the need to say out loud.’ To show where his head is at, he says ‘AI will push us to rethink the social contract resting at the heart of our democracies, along with our educational models, our labor markets, the way we conduct warfare.’ Around 1:25 he gets to international cooperation, saying ‘the EU now has an AI office to govern the most powerful AI models. The UK and US have [done similarly], it is imperative that we connect these initiatives into a network.’ He explicitly says the EU needs to not only make but export its rules, to use their clout to promote the ‘EU model of AI governance.’ In general the EU seems to think it is the future and it can tell people what to do in ways that it should know are wrong. At 2:15 he finally gets to the big warning, that we aint seen nothing yet, AGI is coming and we need to get ready. He says it will raise ‘ethical, moral and yes existential questions.’ He concludes saying this legislation makes him feel more comfortable about the future of his children.
Alas, I think that is about right. Everything about the context here says that, while he realizes AGI will be big, he does not have any idea what ‘big’ means here, or what those consequences might be. If he did, he would not have chosen this wording, and also he would not be up here claiming that the AI Act will centrally address our problems.
A potential alternative to regulations is voluntary commitments. We have tried some of them. How is that going?
Here were the commitments:
The results he is reporting? Not great.
He offers the details behind each rating. I don’t know if the requirements here and evaluation methods were fully fair, but in principle ‘respond to reasonable emails ever’ seems like both a highly reasonable bar to hit that many did not hit, and also something not so critical to the mission provided someone is actually reading the emails and acting if necessary? The Week in Audio
Rhetorical InnovationYour periodic reminder department:
They did want to in that case. So they did it. Perhaps, in the future, we will want to.
As in, the practical versions of this are so much worse.
I remain confused that people think we even currently have the kinds of rule of law that would protect the humans if it remained in place, let alone how anyone can think those laws would be able to adapt to remain in place and even adapt to secure good outcomes for humans, in a world where AIs have all the power and capabilities and competitiveness and productivity and so on. Every time I see it my brain goes ‘yeah I know that is a thing people say, but man does that never stop being weird to hear, there are so many distinct epic misunderstandings here.’ Eliezer of course then goes on to explain the more Eliezer-style features of the situation, rather than things like ‘point out the extent we do not currently have rule of law and that our laws would fail to protect us anyway,’ skip if you think ‘well, yes, obviously, we have already covered this’ is sufficient explanation:
A Failed Attempt at Adversarial Collaboration
Eliezer notices that they not only did not converge on questions where reasonable people might disagree, they also failed to converge where positions are outright dumb.
If you have 2450 as your median date for AI to become a primary driver of events, you are not serious people. I have no idea how to even respond to that. I do know that this ‘screens off’ all your other opinions about AI as essentially irrelevant. Here is his explanation for why this failed.
The obvious problem is Eliezer’s explanation is it does not explain why the 2450 date did not change? And Scott notes a detail that is pretty damning for the 2450 crowd:
All right, that sounds like we got to the bottom of what is going on here. And honestly, that is a pretty dumb place for a supposedly smart and expert group to fail. There are plenty of reasonable places to be skeptical. This one is not it. As Scott Alexander puts it:
At this point, my view is that we can safely conclude that whatever people are saying counts as a ‘superforecaster’ does not lead to sane thinking about long term or transformative futures. Instead, it actively interferes with that ability, and there are mechanical reasons this is plausible. Yes, I would be up for trying again with better persuasion and discussion techniques, but it seems hopeless with what we have. That does not mean we should give up on finding ways to convince such people. Anyone capable of thinking well about things in general should be someone we can bring around far more than this. But it is clear we do not know how.
In which direction? If you enter a discussion like this, you should obey conservation of expected evidence. If you sit down to talk to people selected to have the opposite position, and you converge on the middle predictably, you are doing Bayes wrong. If those worried failed to update, and they were acting wisely, it means they found the arguments about as convincing as they expected. Which, sadly, they were. Spy Versus SpyTo follow up from last week’s story about Google, I mean, yes, if you are a major tech company of course you have a counterintelligence problem, in the sense that most days I have a lunch problem.
Needless to say, if this kind of highly unsophisticated attack not only works but then expands its access over time despite you knowing about it, there is much work to do, even without considering AI either as helping the attackers or being the target. Ut oh.
Air gapping some systems won’t stop the ultimate biggest threats, but is still a big deal along the way and urgently needed. In a sane world we would all get behind such requirements yesterday. I would agree with bystander effect but also externalities and tragedy of the commons (and also blame dynamics are not good here). The risks of failure are largely not borne by those paying the costs of the security, so they will underinvest. It could be worse.
Shouting Into the Void
Open Model Weights are Unsafe and Nothing Can Fix ThisThe good news is that Mistral, while wildly irresponsible and completely indifferent to whether we all die, has made the switch away from releasing model weights for ordinary, boring business reasons.
Yes, that is exactly what Google and OpenAI do. They open source models when they believe that is a safe and commercially wise thing to do, as a recruitment, public relations, marketing and goodwill tactic, and keep their best stuff to themselves. Just like Mistral plans to do. Welcome to the club, Mr. Mensch. He continues to make the strongest claim so far against normative determinism. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
Here is some good news, there are actual responses:
The other good news is that the attack for now only works on a few layers, and the researchers do not see a way to extend that. Of course before, as far as I could tell, no one saw a way to do this at all?
People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone
I note this not because of what was said Alex Tabarrok is not only co-writer of Marginal Revolution, he (like Tyler Cowen) is an otherwise excellent economist whose points I mostly broadly agree with, who has broadly expressed great skepticism of any talk of AI existential risks or any risk of departure from ‘economic normal.’ Yet even at the most skeptical one can sanely be, the risk is still very high.
Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing EveryoneBrian Chau is only worried that other people are worried,
This is what he was responding to:
The post is entitled Jaime Sevilla says he senses those working on AI safety are moving towards shorter timeline (yikes), slow takeoff (good) and less worry about extinction versus more worry about other catastrophic events (unclear).
Best part of this graph is the distribution percentages could potentially almost or sort of double as p(doom)s, although no one at the upper end gets down to 0.1%. I think Jaime Sevilla is picking up on real trends, with caveats. On the timelines this seems simply correct overall. On the second point, when we say ‘slow’ takeoff, we must remember do not mean anything normal people would call slow, we mean slow relative to the ‘fast’ or full-on foom scenarios. It is true that people are moving away from seeing it be that likely that it all plays out in an eye blink, but we need to remember that slow takeoff is a term of art. But yes, there has been movement towards expecting slower takeoff, which in turn does decrease p(doom) somewhat. On the third point, I think there are three shifts here. A shift to expecting more AI impact, both in terms of mundane utility and in terms of risks including catastrophic risks, before existential concerns come into play. This goes hand in hand with slower takeoff, and is an update on what we see. Chances of getting ‘warning shots’ are higher than expected, whether or not we heed them, and they could be dangerous enough to be worth preventing in their own right. A shift in rhetoric and strategy to focus more on these incremental catastrophic (or even mundane) harms, because that is what people can understand, that is what we can point to directly and show evidence for that people allow into court under their rules of evidence, where we can expect future events to prove us right in time to actually do something in response when that happens. We have learned that, for example, national security people need to be pointed to a specific threat from a specific source, or they can’t see anything, so we learn to do that, because those threats are real as well, and the solutions will help. A modest decline in actual p(doom) among many of those who understand the situation and are trying to warn about it, for the reasons above and for others, although almost all remain far higher than most others. Discourse and potential interventions are going better than expected. Expected incremental opportunities and warnings are going better than expected. Takeoff is looking to be slower than previously expected. All of that is great.
Richard Ngo asks a good question.
To be clear, by missing the point, we mean ‘act as if AGI is not ever going to be a thing or won’t much matter,’ not ‘fail to understand the risks.’ The best explanation I know about is that this opinion is required in order to write science fiction, because if you realize that AGI is coming then it becomes impossible to write good science fiction stories. Good science fiction stories are at core still stories about humans who matter, and in AGI-fueled worlds and universes, even good ones, the humans do not matter. The Culture series is the exception that proves the rule, humans do not matter there, and Ian Banks ignores this and tells stories about the humans anyway. There is also Dune of course, where the lack of AGI is justified and everyone pays a high price to keep it that way. Otherwise, if you want to think about the future and write stories about it, you need to not see what is obvious. So they don’t. The Lighter Side
You're currently a free subscriber to |