---
subject: "DeepSeek v3.1 Is Not Having a Moment"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-08-22 15:45:11
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
What if Why We Haven’t Seen v4 or r2
The real world so often involves people acting so much stupider than you could write into fiction. America tried to sell China H20s and China decided they didn’t want them and now Nvidia is halting related orders with suppliers. DeepSeek says that the main restriction on their development is lack of compute, and the PRC responds not by helping them get better chips but by advising them to not use the chips that they have, greatly slowing things down at least for a while. Introducing DeepSeek v3.1In any case,
Signs of LifeThere are some impressive scores here. There’s also the weird result where it is
But these two data points don’t seem backed up by the other reactions, or especially the lack of other reactions, or some other test results. Artificial Analysis has it coming in at 60 versus r1’s 59, which would be only a small improvement.
I tried to conduct Twitter polls, but well over 90% of respondents had to click ‘see results’ which left me with only a handful of real responses and means Lizardman Constant problems and small sample size invalidate the results, beyond confirming no one is looking, and the different polls don’t entirely agree with each other as a result. If this were most open model companies, I would treat this lack of reaction as indicating there was nothing here, that they likely targeted SWE as a benchmark, and move on. Since it is DeepSeek, I give them more credit than that, but am still going to assume this is only a small incremental upgrade that does not change the overall picture. However, if 3.1 really was at 66-level for real in practice, it has been several days now, and people would likely be shouting it from the rooftops. They’re not. How Should We Update?Even if no one finds anything to do with it, I don’t downgrade DeepSeek much for 3.1 not impressing compared to if they hadn’t released anything. It’s fine to do incremental improvements. They should do a v3.1 here. The dumbest style of reaction is when a company offers an incremental improvement (see: GPT-5) and people think that means it’s all over for them, or for AI in general, because it didn’t sufficiently blow them away. Chill out. It’s also not fair to fully pin this on DeepSeek when they were forced to do a lot of their training this year on Huawei Ascend chips rather than Nvidia chips. Assuming, that is, they are going to be allowed to switch back. Either way, the clock is ticking on v4 and r2. You're currently a free subscriber to |