---
subject: "The Nutgraf: Youtube missed"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-15 04:39:01
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
The Nutgraf Podcast’s first mistake
So, it turns out I made a mistake in the debut episode of The Nutgraf podcast, which I launched with a lot of fanfare last week. As multiple subscribers wrote and pointed out to me (mostly nicely), I totally butchered the pronunciation of Shein, and kept calling it SHY-EN when it’s actually SHE-IN. It also didn’t help that the entire edition was about Shein.
Maybe this is a good thing. One mistake is an error that needs an apology. Forty mistakes can be explained as an artistic and cultural movement.
Anyway, if you want to listen to this week’s edition of The Nutgraf podcast, you can subscribe to it here. I’ve tried to be a bit more conversational and less wooden while reading out today’s edition. It’s hard. Discussion podcasts are much easier. My producer, Rajiv, is already horrified because I told him I’m thinking of doing weird voices next week and making it into a full-blown one-act audio play.
Tell me what you think.
As a 40-year-old who works in a media organisation, I’m constantly cautioned to keep an eye on the content that GenZ people are consuming these days. Luckily, most of my colleagues at The Ken are much younger than me and easily distracted. So, once in a while, I head over to their desks, point at the ceiling and shout, “Look!”, and steal their phones to check out their Youtube and Instagram watch history. I’m not proud of it, but as a millennial, we spend 70 hours a week at work and aren’t allowed to stare at our spouse’s faces, so we look at other people’s phones instead.
Anyway, that’s how I discovered India’s Got Latent, the Youtube show started by the comedian Samay Raina. I watched a few clips and got a little nostalgic because it reminded me of some mild, harmless ragging that most people who’ve been in engineering colleges in the 90s and 2000s likely remember. We didn’t have cameras or the internet back then, but fortunately, we have access to excellent mental-health therapists today.
Unfortunately, a lot of people my age (and older) also seem to have discovered India’s Got Latent last week. Some of those people happen to be important people like parliamentarians, Chief Ministers, angry TV anchors, or influencers. All of them got [very angry](https://indianexpress.com/article/entertainment/bollywood/samay-raina-deletes-all-videos-of-controversial-show-indias-got-latent-only-objective-make-people-laugh-9832770/) and upset about a show on Youtube, and decided that it needed to be stopped. So they all got together and decided to slap some FIRs, scream loudly on news channels, and issue grave statements about obscenity, vulgarity, and several other things.
Everyone missed one big announcement which dropped on Tuesday, coincidentally, on the same day that the India’s Got Latent controversy became national news in India.
And it came not from the creators of the show, but from Neal Mohan, CEO of Youtube.
If there was any doubt before, this seals it: YouTube is in the TV business.
According to Neal Mohan, YouTube’s CEO, TV screens have officially overtaken mobile as the “primary device for YouTube viewing in the U.S.” In other words, more people are watching YouTube on TV sets than any other device, at least here in the U.S.
It is, as Mohan writes in his annual letter from the CEO, an indication that “YouTube is the new television.”
“But the ‘new’ television doesn’t look like the ‘old’ television,” Mohan writes. “It’s interactive and includes things like Shorts (yes, people watch them on TVs), podcasts, and live streams, right alongside the sports, sitcoms and talk shows people already love.”
Youtube Surprise: CEO Says TV Overtakes Mobile as “Primary Device” for Viewing, [The Hollywood Reporter](https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/business/business-news/youtube-tv-viewing-overtakes-mobile-ceo-neal-mohan-1236132074/?eicker.news)
This was uncharacteristic. Youtube isn’t really known for making such bold statements, but this was the 20th anniversary of the company, and I imagine they decided to take this opportunity to make their ambitions clear—they were going to take on old media, i.e., television. In fact, in an [interview](https://www.fastcompany.com/91277047/youtube-ceo-neal-mohan-conquered-living-room-tv-creators-the-new-hollywood), Mohan called the creators on Youtube as “the new Hollywood.”
For me, the real story of India’s Got Latent isn’t about free speech, vulgarity, obscenity, or culture. It’s actually a story of what happens when “new” television (Mohan’s words, not mine) tries to take on “old” television. Youtube took a swipe at the old world. And the old world punched back and gave it a bloody nose.
I’m not suggesting a conspiracy theory here. For me, old television represents the overarching system that includes everything—the powerful companies who run it, the process and the people who create content on it, the mediums where it’s distributed, and the acceptance from the broader society that consumes it about what’s okay and what crosses the line. This is old television. The business. The content. The society. The sensibilities. All of it.
There are many striking aspects of how India’s Got Latent is the perfect representation of everything that “new television” is supposed to be. The show was creator-led and not studio-led. Raina created content that was, in his words, “unrestricted”. He even claimed to have turned down offers from OTT players because he wanted the freedom to do what he wanted, and stay “independent” without any interference from the platforms. The production values on the show are minimal. It’s created with a fraction of the cost. The show’s sponsors are also treated with the same irreverence as the content. Overall, the vibe is unsanitised, raw, crass, and authentic. This is not a bug of new television. It’s a feature.
And this gave the show all the success that new television promised. Every episode of India’s Got Latent on Youtube has at least 20 million views, more than most old television shows. Samay Raina probably made more in ad revenue in a couple of months than what most OTTs in India manage to pay their top talent. The show even decided to go direct with its users and started a popular membership program, which by some accounts was fairly successful. Raina took this one step forward and launched a dedicated app which topped the charts on both Google and Apple’s App Stores. As far as Youtube is concerned, nothing epitomises the success of their model than India’s Got Latent.
New television came for old television in India. And leading the way was India’s Got Latent. In fact, my colleague Nathan presciently [wrote](https://the-ken.com/story/tv-channels-beware-youtubers-samay-raina-and-tvf-are-taking-over-the-screen-and-the-couch/) about this back in October in a story he titled, “TV channels, beware! Youtubers Samay Raina and TVF are taking over the screen—and the couch”. I recommend reading it.
So what did everyone miss?
A lot has been written about how India’s consumer habits are changing thanks to digital products and how old players are being disrupted. However, a lot of people haven’t noticed that institutional power and influence have swung back in favour of the incumbents. Disruptors from the new world challenged the old world. But the old world in India has also shown that it’s much stronger and resilient than we expected. And this is true in sector after sector, in industry after industry. Fintechs arrived with a big splash to disrupt traditional banking, but today, the big banks are stronger than ever. Two-wheeler EV startups challenged automakers, but the automakers are the ones who are winning. D2C brands tried to take on big FMCG companies… and D2C brands are the ones who are losing.
And last week, we found out that this is also true about old media. The old world is particularly powerful, and deeply entrenched. And this is despite Youtube’s [dominance](https://www.business-standard.com/entertainment/youtube-remains-the-crown-jewel-of-india-s-video-streaming-market-125010701088_1.html) in the streaming business in India. This isn’t even the first time that old television has been challenged by forces that are much better capitalised than them. A few years ago, OTT platforms arrived with a lot of fanfare and threatened to disrupt old television by promising “edgy” content, a direct relationship with subscribers, no advertising, and showcasing newer, younger, bolder creators and storytellers. Sounds familiar? Well, in a few short years, old television beat OTTs—not by reinventing themselves but by transforming OTTs to resemble old television. If you’re still sceptical, ask yourself why most of the content across all OTT platforms look exactly the same, with subtitles carefully bleeped and sanitised to avoid any whiff of controversy. Ask yourself why that explicit scene in that HBO show is censored on streaming platforms. That’s old television. Netflix India’s biggest star is Kapil Sharma—an old television show. And if you subscribe to Amazon Prime Video in India and try to watch a movie, you’ll be interrupted by a non-skippable ad every 20 minutes. That’s old television.
There’s a famous line from The Wire which captures the power and influence of old television in India—if you come for the king, you better not miss.
Youtube missed.
It’s not the end, though. We’ve seen this story play out earlier. I’m sure Samay Raina, Ranveer Allahabadia, and India’s Got Latent will all be back in a few months, all in different avatars. I’m also sure that Youtube will find some new shows, and other creators who’ll also become successful and make lots of money for themselves and for Youtube. It’s hard to say what they’ll be, but if there’s one thing we know for sure—it’s that they’ll look more like old television.
New television will have to wait a bit longer.
Regards,
Praveen Gopal Krishnan