---
subject: "Monthly Roundup #33: August 2025"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-08-19 12:35:06
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
I got suckered into paying attention to multiple non-AI political stories this month: The shooting of the messenger, in violation of the most sacred principles, via firing the head of the USA’s Bureau of Labor Statistics, and the Online Safety Bill in the UK. As a reminder, feel no obligation whatsoever to engage with either of these. There are tons of other things worth paying attention to that are not that. Highly Effective AltruismI realize philanthropy has been handed quite a few sinking ships lately, but if you exclude AI there is one crisis I would prioritize above the rest, which is mRNA. Which is: As Rick Bright puts it in the New York Times,
A huge portion of optimism about new medical technology, and even about the future in general discounting AI, is mRNA vaccine development. They’re trying to kill it. Private investment can and must come in and over. The funding gap here is only $500 million. Certainly some combination of billionaires (and perhaps others) should step up and their make grants or invest as needed to fix it. The cost-benefit ratio here is absolutely absurd. When we think of the futures that aren’t transformed by AI, mRNA is one of the technologies giving us the most hope. If those who heave the means do not pick up the slack here, flat out. This comes on the heels of various forms of
The worries are politics and game theory. In terms of game theory, if we step in and save this situation, did we effectively let the government steal $500 million? Won’t they then have every reason to do it again and target the best programs? Won’t this willingness to fund (acasually) be the reason this got cut? My answer here is no, because this cut was intended not to steal the money but to stop the research. The people who are cheering this have bought into their own paranoia or perverse incentives so much that they actually want mRNA dead. In such cases, it is relatively safe to step up, although it does carry some risk of giving people ideas. In other situations, the dynamics are different. Either the motivation was indeed to save or steal money, getting others to pick up the slack. Or it was to use a wrecking ball to kill a wide variety of things, knowing the best ones would then gets saved. Then you have to look at these questions a lot more carefully. The politics means both that the administration might then use other means to stop mRNA or at least not be helpful, or that this might mark one as an opponent of the administration. I would not worry much about the administration not playing further ball. This is a long term fight, and also we have reports Trump himself is not thrilled about the cuts. It is also quite a lot harder to turn down the life-saving medicine when the time comes than it is to deny the initial funding. The pressure would be immense, and also there are places besides America to start deployment if you need to do that for a bit. I also don’t worry too much about this alienating the Trump administration. You’re investing in America, Trump was reportedly not thrilled about the cuts, and he definitely isn’t a true believer on this like he is on tariffs. He knows that being against mRNA is about placating crazy people, so if it happens without him, that is fine. That assumes, of course, that you are worried about this dynamic in the first place. Some people very much aren’t. Variously Effective Altruism
Although also, yes, at reasonable prices, and while factoring in other things we also care about, we should reduce suffering. Also, yes, This is also a central common pattern, and the difference that matters.
I would not go to either conference. But, if you did go to one such conference, you would want it to be that second one. I will note that there is already lots of talk about making the new in-ovo chicken sexing technology mandatory, starting in Europe. There will always, always be a push to make such things mandatory. Some more making fun of how awful Cate Metz is and how much he got everything wrong yet again:
This is also why I refer to the ‘chasm of personal utility.’ Once you hit f*** you money, there is remarkably little that additional money buys on a personal level. Marginal returns drop dramatically. It takes quite a lot of additional money to get remarkably little benefit. The things people buy for themselves that actually get expensive, like boats and lavish private parties, really aren’t that great. If you actually want your life to get better, the only way to do so becomes improving the world, since you and those you care about have to live in it. Hence, public goods. As a toy example, as a gamer, I could basically buy whatever I want and not bat an eye, unless I wanted things like Vintage Magic decks, and even that has an upper bound. So at that point, if I want better gaming, what do I have to do? Commission games. Bad News
Nefarious Jobs will, for a remarkably small fee that usually is only four figures,
The trucking industry reports it is experiencing the dreaded double whammy, RIP Hulk Hogan, Reminder, once again: When people tell you who they are, believe them.
She is of course directly incorrect, developing cures for the rich is how you develop the technology, after which it leads to cures for everyone else, but even if she were somehow correct, consider what don’t even count as the implications, just the outright telling people if they are rich then it is good they are disabled, my lord. Oh, and then the follow-up is, maybe curing your disability would be bad, yo, and if you disagree with this than you’re not really a disabled person so you have no right to talk, there are those who can make this up yet I remain not one of them.
Those corporate ‘icebreaker’ and ‘team building’ events?
This is effectively a large reason to seek out coworkers you like hanging out with, since you’re going to be forced to do that if you want to succeed. I never had a problem with such work exercises, because the offices I did join for any length of time - Jane Street and Wizards of the Coast - selected for people I would have been happy hanging out with anyway. I did however kind of get fired as a student at a Dojo for this. For a while I would go to class twice a week and had moved up one rank. I was informed by Sensei that as I kept going, they expected me to participate more in the community. I found the other students to be nice people, I didn’t at all mind training with them and making small talk, but burning evenings socializing? Oh, hell no. That was essentially that. The farther you go downthread the worse it gets.
Whisper Networks
Opportunity KnocksRecommended:
Recommended: (I do not currently have a plan to make an appearance myself, I only have so many trips in me per year, but certainly there is some chance I will choose to do so.)
Government WorkingI am doing my best to avoid commenting on politics. As usual my lack of comment on other fronts should not be taken to mean I lack strong opinions on them. Yet sometimes, things reach a point where I cannot fail to point them out. If you are looking to avoid such things, I have split out this section, so you can skip it. This month, that applies to the following two sections as well. Because this is the realm of things like this:
The pushback seemed to be they did not like that it applied to the President and Vice President. I can’t imagine why. I only report the news. Censorship In The UKThe good news first. The Then they went and did all the other stuff they did this month. Oh no.
The situation has reached the point where if I lived in the UK, I would feel it necessary to leave, because I would otherwise not feel safe doing my job.
Meanwhile Oh, and on the first day of the ‘Online Safety Act’ they were already on the verge of shutting down Wikipedia. Could there be any clearer sign things are extremely bad?
It is a great relief to confirm that Wikipedia is not going to give in here, especially on censorship of ‘harmful’ topics even for adult users.
What kind of things are being censored,
It was a bold move, Cotton, to go directly after Wikipedia and coverage of police and protests and testimony before Parliament on day one. They did not want there to be any illusions what their true target was.
Would I The community note is incorrect. This very obviously was exactly what the act was for. I’m not a pure ‘the purpose of a system is what it does’ person, but yes very obviously the purpose of this system is to censor speech authorities dislike.
Nigel Farage and the Reform Party would get rid of the Online Safety Act, Many such cases.
Here is that post:
It can always get worse.
Then again, what did we expect from
The direction of this move is ambiguous. If the previous regime was that everyone was treated as a minor until proven otherwise, and now you have a second way to get the regime to stop doing that, and how minors are treated does not change, then This Is Good, Actually. Alas, this likely goes hand in hand with worse treatment of minors. Also note that the actual changes listed are (they use the word ‘including’):
All of those seem like they could be straightforward upgrades? Can I choose to turn on those features? What they of course fail to mention is that the main change is age restricting videos. I do notice that I have an alt Google account, I definitely did not provide Google my ID there, and when I use YouTube on it I have yet to run into age restrictions on videos. A fun note is, if you were trying to ‘look like an adult,’ what would you do? You would among other things try to make your consumption as age inappropriate as possible?
Wikipedia has the right idea. By all means sue, but make it clear that if push comes to shove you will simply cut the country off. Even if the governments held firm, fine, so be it, let everyone use a VPN. The traditional way such stories end, when they don’t end in revolution, is this:
In particular I would not have simultaneously severely censored the internet for 16-and-17 year olds and also given them the vote. That’s just me.
To be fair, if you can’t get a VPN working then you shouldn’t be using Nvidia apps.
Guess who is also downloading those apps, also billing the public for them?
Well, actually the #2 choice is you have a federal ID system and the kids access the porn anyway, but it was never about the porn. The porn is an excuse.
If those implementing a law tell you ‘excessive implementation is never a problem with regulation’ and you let them continue implementing, you know what you will get. There was a period where we were constantly told that those concerned about AI killing everyone would impose dystopian authoritarian nightmare surveillance states because we wanted to impose some restrictions on who could train or distribute future frontier AI models potentially smarter than humans. Instead, things far worse for freedom than anyone was talking about are being imposed because otherwise ‘you are not serious about protecting children from predators’ or what not, and being used to suppress dissent and also settings on Nvidia cards on day one. Somehow most of the same voices are being a lot less loud about it.
Also, frankly, go ahead, go after 4Chan and see what happens. It’ll be fun. Then they went after Twitter for censoring in the UK too much, because it made the UK government look bad.
There was then an escalation.
Don’t Shoot the MessengerIf you have one rule, this is it. Also, if you must shoot the messenger, Alas, we have chosen to shoot the messenger along with a bold post that says ‘we are shooting the messenger,’ as in we got revisions to a jobs report that Trump didn’t like so he fired the Commissioner of Labor Statistics and accused her of ‘faked job numbers.’
Those trying to justify this keep getting details wrong and having others turn out rather inconveniently for them,
This of course compounds the undermining of confidence. It seems actively designed to undermine confidence in the numbers. Here is the director of the NEC outright saying that the data ‘has to be something you can trust’ and by ‘you can trust’ he means a high number that makes people do the things we want them to do. As in, the job of the numbers is to lie. I appreciate the candor about the intent, sir.
Then, as the replacement, Trump nominated E.J. Antoni, which seems like a caricature of the worst possible nominee.
His Twitter feed is, shall we say, sobering throughout. The National Review summary of the situation is ‘
This is all a whole different level of absurd and awful than usual. Technically it is illegal to suspend the report but do you expect that to stop them?
It’s a relatively minor point relative to not shooting the messenger, but the defenses claiming the messager was terrible have just been so absurdly bad.
What BLS does is they provide an early estimate, because that is valuable even when it is noisy, and then a later estimate. This Is Good, Actually. Tyler Cowen, who has had some very let’s say creative defenses of various administration decisions, flat out made it is very bad to behave this way, and On top of everything else, the whole thing happens to be backwards in two distinct ways. As in, the first way is that downward revisions mean the numbers were initially overstated, which makes you ‘look good,’ and no one involved is buying the galaxy brain (but kind of correct) take that you want to ‘look bad’ to get a fed rate cut.
The second way this is backwards is that low numbers mean you can get the Fed to lower interest rates, which is what Trump wants, so he should welcome that.
This is very much not an isolated incident. It is easy to say to all of this ‘oh this is at this point entirely unsurprising’ or dismiss it as unimportant. I believe that would be a mistake. This type of action is a big deal, and falls into the list of things you absolutely never do. Do not shoot the messenger, violate a flag of truce or break guest right. Ever. If you do, The North Remembers. As in, recently I finally got around to watching The Godfather, and then it was clear that everyone involved expected everyone in their culture to go around shooting messengers (and shooting people at peace talks) and that’s when I lost the ability to sympathize with the characters. Jones Act Watch
The Incorrect Contrarian ClusterThere exist true things that are forbidden to talk about. There also exist a lot of false things that are forbidden to talk about.
Talent SearchWhat’s the best model of being unable to ‘work your way up from the mailroom’? Here is one attempt.
I think this is mostly a case of romanticizing a path that was never great in the first place. It’s not that it is impossible to ‘work your way up’ in this fashion, if you actually are good enough that you would deserve it, it’s that if you could impress enough to actually pull it off working your way up then you have much better paths, with or without going through college. That’s also largely about the great news that we have much better skill and reputation transfer, so you’re not permanently at the mercy of the firm and your boss. I also very much don’t think it means your dreams die quickly if you are ‘only’ 99th percentile or 99.8th percentile talent. A hypothetically perfect sort where relative talent is static would do that, but neither half of that is true. Nor do you get locked out of most ‘dreams’ worth having if you get somewhat off track. There are certainly some that do have strict tracks, but they are that way because they are oversubscribed and mostly generic dreams and even then you mostly have redraws if you care enough. While I Cannot Condone ThisJohn Wentworth offers
I would generalize this even further than Ben Pace does here:
Emotions also have practical effects beyond their information content, so you want to watch out for and optimize those as well. One aspect John does not get into is that you need not take your emotional responses as givens.
I disagree that the finding doesn’t make sense. Like many things in social psych, you can tell a plausible story of effects in either direction, or of no effect.
A much better and simpler story is that the UK home islands simply didn’t have enough land and natural resources, which is why there was so much emigration in the first place? Europe was never going to be able to sustain its economic advantages indefinitely. And of course in recent times, the UK has been dying mostly of self-inflicted wounds, such as effectively banning the construction of housing, and now the saying of words. An excellent point:
Note that the jobs here could be described in three words just fine, all you have to do is lose a little detail, on the level that ‘I catch fish’ simplifies fisherman. He doesn’t catch all fish everywhere, after all. Software sales analyst. Improve automated capabilities. Create blockchain recorders.
Only three words is largely about negative space. Observe these job descriptions I brainstormed quickly: Sit at desk. Let boss yell. Fetch the coffee. Pitch investors. Diversity training monitor. Cash the check.
Also note that it’s ‘if you can’t do it, it’s bullshit’ not ‘if you can do it, it’s not bullshit.’ Why does the trick still mostly work? Because the fact that you have a bullshit job predicts not that you can’t describe it in three words, but that you will choose not to. Predictions Are Hard Especially About The FuturePolymarket is on its way back to (being fully legal in) America, baby!
The best part about this is that this comes on the heels of the BBB plausibly making professional sports betting essentially illegal in America, since you can only deduct 90% of losses while being taxed on 100% of gains. If that is applied to individual wagers, then no one has an edge big enough to overcome it, so gamblers would have to either give up the gambling or give up on paying their taxes. But if you buy a sports futures contract under CFTC rules, then you get normal tax treatment, and you’re back in business. This could all end up being a blessing in disguise. The current licenced sportsbooks in America offer highly non-competitive pricing, focus on pushing you towards predatory behaviors and products, and aggressively limit winners. Once Polymarket gets sufficient liquidity, trading there is remarkably cheap, and you are naturally pulled towards behaviors that have little cost even if you are betting at random. However bad you think companies like FanDuel are, they’re worse.
There is no way to make 16.3% profit on wagers in general without being deeply, deeply predatory, even if all of your customers are suckers. Someone betting a normal NFL line fully at random only loses 5%. Good News, Everyone
Whenever there is
If a statistic or claim sounds absurd and wrong,
Remember those claims that gas stoves caused large increases in asthma cases? You can identify outlier people by For Your Entertainment
Whereas yes, a large portion of children’s media has been for decades or more straight up eco propaganda and says the ultimate evil is humans wanting to build and do things, or even wanting to exist.
It is getting a lot easier to avoid. There is so much to choose from, so you don’t get whatever is on broadcast TV forced upon you, and similarly you can filter the books, and also the broader marketplace seems to be pulling things back. It’s still rough out there. I love that yes,
I do think there have been some fantastic late shows that I was happy to watch, in particular Taylor Tomlinson’s After Midnight and previously Craig Ferguson’s Late Late Show, or early Daily Show and Colbert Report, but I found most late shows bad and essentially unwatchable. That includes Colbert’s Late Show run, and I’m actually really happy for him to get a new show or podcast instead where he can do more interesting things. Free Colbert, as it were.
A discount does not mean a ‘good deal.’ Vacation markets are super duper inefficient. But also these are going to mostly be forced sellers, without natural buyers, and buyers might have gotten discounts to begin with by booking in advance, so if you can figure out what is a good deal (use AI for this?) you can probably find pretty good bargains. The best part is that you have to buy one of a small number of particular packages. You avoid choices, and as we all know Choices Are Bad. Instead of comparing this vacation to all possible choices, and sweating planning and decisions, you take what is available and you show up and that is it. If something isn’t a great fit for your preferences, you have an excuse to go outside your comfort zone and you don’t feel like you punted. It actually sounds nice. Game Theory
Assuming I cannot hedge the flip and no tax implications? I do notice I am past the point where I would flip, the marginal value of money is declining too rapidly. Gamers Gonna Game Game Game Game Game
There is a long history in Magic of players discussing the need for emergency bans, and then mostly not getting such bans, as Wizards has placed very high value in sticking to its announcement windows outside of true emergencies. They’ve shown time and again they’d rather let Standard wither and be terrible for months on end. Usually there is a lot of talk about letting the players find a solution, long after it is clear that there exists no solution. I have long disagreed with this policy. I disagree with it even more today, as information is found and spreads faster and there is tons of statistical data. Drop the ban hammer. Do it now. Chess.com has a team of 30 people that Optimization for thee but not for me, I insist:
Clair Obscura Expedition 33 continues to go well as I move into Act 3, despite some frustrating design mistakes. One that I’m rather annoyed by is that at some point (not a meaningful spoiler) there is a character you pick that the game is telling you that you need to have in your party or they won’t learn their skills, similar to for example a Blue Mage in Final Fantasy V. I find this really annoying because that’s not who I enjoy having in the party on an aesthetic level, but it feels bad missing out, and even worse not knowing if any given battle is a place you would miss out. Grr. I’ve mostly decided I don’t care. Even if you ignore that issue, the way upgrades work, both with Color of Lumina and weapon upgrades, effectively locks you into a party. I chose Luna and Maelle because I find that fun and more central to the plot. I’m happy with my choices but sad that the game punishes experiment like this. Another main complaint is that balance is often lacking. Decisions that should be interesting instead feel forced. There’s also a big ‘too awesome to use’ problem with certain resources, especially Color of Lumina. My biggest complaint is that it is very easy to get turned around, or for it to be otherwise unclear how to move on to the next area. Several times I have been extremely frustrated and effectively stuck, including right now as I type this inside the monolith. I am fine with navigation as an interesting puzzle or decision, but this does not feel like that. There are a bunch of things in Act 3 that are deeply confusing or rediculous, but all of them seem highly optional. If you want to go completionist that’s your call.
To be fair to itch.io, they are over a barrel and do intend to bring the banned games back.
Even Lord of the Rings took six months to get to that point, and that set is still selling several years later. Spiderman is up next. They see Japan as a ‘potential gold mine’ for more material. Perhaps this was always the endgame for Magic. We had decades of our own storylines and worlds, but once Magic went sufficiently big and mainstream and moved away from competition and two-player games towards Commander, being the meta-IP for all of fantasy (and perhaps beyond it) makes too much sense, and it will only feed on itself until and unless it wears the product out. This also seems like a solution for running out of design space. There’s no shame in it after three decades. Magic has mostly fully mined the simple stuff that works, forcing complexity to drift higher and the mechanics that work are getting continuously recycled, even if they get new names. If you want to have higher complexity and repeat mechanics forever, top down is where it is at. Boen seems largely correct here:
Roguelite metagame progression can be very good. I especially like it when you are unlocking additional abilities over time while you are not close to winning the run, and when the amount of progression you make determines what you unlock and is part of strategic decision making. What annoys me quite a bit are situations in which you are reliably winning runs, there are higher difficulties that would be interesting, and the game wastes a bunch of your time getting to them. The worst version of this is when you are winning your runs but also unlocking capabilities faster or almost as fast as the extra difficulty kicks in, so the game doesn’t get harder for a long time and you’re skilling up on top of that. The central example of this I remember is Roguebook. The other stuff is really terrible. The thing is, you could simply not do these things? Unless you are getting them on microtransactions there is no real advantage to keeping a player playing Call of Duty for 100 hours instead of 50 hours, not having any fun. Many games are using these techniques without the microtransactions. Stop it. I Was Promised |