---
subject: "Manufacturing Went South"
from: "Marginal REVOLUTION <donotreply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-05-15 11:22:31
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tyler Cowen", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2466199532210586699", "UNREAD"]
---
[Excellent piece](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=d32be88745883708c223e2ff012a6e5ed8d2989e3f4d17cedab7cd826bfaa974&blog_id=42693868&post_id=90667&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=8d04f3da35594c6bc80efe6d84ba66fc&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cud2FzaGluZ3RvbnBvc3QuY29tL29waW5pb25zLzIwMjUvMDUvMTQvc3VuLWJlbHQtcnVzdC1iZWx0LW1hbnVmYWN0dXJpbmctam9icy1teXRoLw=&email_id=f7ea9ac3284458e34f95221a1b5b17f8) by Gary Winslett in the Washington Post. As I pointed out in my piece on [Manufacturing and Trade](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=b6f8906b3946dbc1a14716339c6420e39680419442d683dd17810b59c48b13e1&blog_id=42693868&post_id=90667&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=fac8ca67fcf458b80a4b0f6ef757062f&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly9tYXJnaW5hbHJldm9sdXRpb24uY29tL21hcmdpbmFscmV2b2x1dGlvbi8yMDI1LzA0L21hbnVmYWN0dXJpbmctYW5kLXRyYWRlLmh0bWw&email_id=f7ea9ac3284458e34f95221a1b5b17f8), the US is a manufacturing powerhouse. So why did the rust belt rust? Because manufacturing went South.
The Rust Belt’s manufacturing decline isn’t primarily about jobs going to Mexico. It’s about jobs going to Alabama, South Carolina, Georgia and Tennessee...In 1970, the Rust Belt was responsible for
[nearly half of all manufacturing exports]while the South produced less than a quarter. Today, the roles are reversed, it is the Rust Belt that hosts less than one-fourth of all manufactured exports and the South that exports twice what the Rust Belt does.
Why the move? Better policies:
Economic research suggests that
[labor conflict drove much of the decline of the Rust Belt]. Right-to-work laws in the South, by contrast, created more operational flexibility and attracted capital. The average unionization rate in the Rust Belt is[13.3 percent; in the South, it’s 4.3 percent]. Southern states’ political leaders are[quite open]about how they see right-to-work as foundational to their competitiveness.
But that's far from the only factor. The South offers cheaper electricity, a critical input for energy-intensive manufacturing. Ten states in the South have
[industrial electricity rates]under 8 cents per kilowatt-hour; zero states in the Rust Belt do. Ohio has[some of the country’s most restrictive wind-energy setback regulations]. You know who doesn’t? Texas.
Despite the economic growth, Southern states have built so much housing that they kept costs from becoming unaffordable. Last year, both North Carolina and South Carolina each built more than four times as much new housing per capita as Massachusetts, according to U.S. census data. Florida, Georgia, Texas, Tennessee, South Carolina and North Carolina, all built more housing per capita than all of Illinois, Ohio, Michigan, Pennsylvania, California, New York and Massachusetts. That is not just a 2024 dynamic. That is true for every single year going all the way back to 1993. Comparatively low-cost housing makes it easier to attract and retain workers, which further attracts capital, which adds yet more investment and jobs, and the virtuous cycle spins upward.
...Immigration helps a lot, as well. More immigrants live in the South than
[any other region]of the country. The region with the fewest immigrants? The Midwest. Immigrants promote growth, makes the workforce more robust, and create the goods and services that support manufacturing.Right-to-work laws, cheap energy, affordable housing, low-cost land, fast permitting, low taxes, immigration. That’s a powerful combination...
Neither party wants to face these realities. The Republicans are mired in victimology and don't see that the South's success is built on exporting and immigration, both of which they are cutting. The Democrats don't want to acknowledge right to work laws, cheap energy and low taxes.
Both parties prefer simple villains, whether it’s China or greedy corporations. But what’s needed isn’t more warm fuzzies about the way things used to be or globalization scapegoating. It is a clear-eyed approach that understands why companies choose Alabama over Ohio and that embraces the choices made by Southern states. That means leaning into globalization, right-to-work, all-of-the-above energy policy, permitting reform, immigration and low taxes. America’s economic future depends on embracing this reality rather than in indulging in turn-back-the-clock fictions.