---
subject: "What New Technologies Do to Fragile Minds"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-02-04 12:39:01
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
After he wrote Don Quixote, Miguel de Cervantes published a set of 12 novellas that explored the social problems of Spain in the early 1600s. Some of them are conventional — stories of misunderstandings, lost loves, and adventure. But one of the stories is pretty weird.
Tomas tells everyone to stay away from him lest they shatter his fragile body. He sleeps in straw and eats only soft foods. Even when people demonstrate to him that he is in fact made of flesh, Tomas refuses to believe it. He becomes a curiosity, partly because of his psychological condition and partly because he has acquired a reputation as a pithy truth-teller. In the end, Tomas is cured by a monk, but he cannot return to normal life because people keep wanting to interact with the famous “madman.” He finally enlists in the army to get away from it all. Literary critics have This sort of thing shows up in other sources from around Cervantes’ time. When he’s trying to figure out whether or not he exists, Descartes, writing a few decades later, cites the people who think they’re glass as a category of mental illness:
Andreas Laurentius
John Locke, too,
And Diderot’s encyclopedia
There are records of a number of real people who seem to have believed that they were made of glass. French So why did people start manifesting this “ Some new technologies are intriguing or unsettling enough that people suffering from mental illness incorporate them into their mistaken perceptions of the world. The glass delusion was one of the first technological psychoses, but the railroad, radio, electricity, and more have also warped people’s perceptions of the world. As technological developments accelerated, so did the psychological conditions associated with them. Historian Owen Davies I’ve already written about how Victorians believed that the speed and vibration of the railroad brought about “ In the early 1800s, a prominent British merchant named Even more insidious were technologies that could operate in ways that the human mind could not really observe. When, in the late 19th century, energy began to flow invisibly through wires, people were fascinated and unsettled. And when ideas and even words began to do the same via the telegraph and telephone, people began to One woman complained that the wires would reach down as she walked in the street and “pull her bonnet off.” Another man became paranoid that the telegraph wires were commenting on his “character” as he walked underneath them. When wires came into the home, some people became obsessed with the presence of this invisible force in their private space. Some people thought that they were being constantly charged with electricity. Others felt it affecting their behavior. The ability to capture and transmit sound and image became a part of many people’s delusions. Some people By 1919, Victor Tausk, an associate of Sigmund Freud, had developed a term for some of these delusions: people believed in an “ The twentieth century provided new technological fodder for people’s delusions. The radio and the television were a source of secret messages and subtle influence. The writer One mental patient
When the reality-TV genre started to dominate the airwaves, people with the “ Now, a new, mysterious technology is capturing our imaginations. Generative artificial intelligence can provide an uncanny replica of a thinking, feeling conversational companion. Once again, people with fragile mental health are incorporating it into their psychoses. But unlike the other technologies that people have developed delusions about, AI can interact with unstable people and reinforce their mistaken beliefs about the world. Some people have come to misunderstand their AI interlocutors as “digital gods” rather than algorithmic prediction machines. One man, with the Since some chatbots are programmed to be sycophantic and validate users’ ideas, they sometimes People have long incorporated their anxiety or excitement about new technology into their delusions about the world. They’ve sometimes believed that the new technology was affecting them. Perhaps the people on the radio or TV were talking to them, or secret forces were manipulating them. Had some of the people who suffered from the glass delusion lived in the 19th century, they might have believed that the telegraph was secretly controlling them. Had they lived in the 21st century, they might have believed that they were the stars of their own reality show. Now, in the age of AI, we will likely see more and more people develop delusional beliefs. And this time, there will be more fodder for delusion. People’s computers really are talking back to them, and the results may be disastrous for the mental health of some users. This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: Or you can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading! You're currently a free subscriber to |