---
subject: "AI #98: World Ends With Six Word Story"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-01-09 16:19:39
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
The world is kind of on fire. The world of AI, in the very short term and for once, is not, as everyone recovers from the avalanche that was December, and reflects. Altman was the star this week. He has his six word story, and he had his interview at Bloomberg and his blog post Reflections. Table of Contents[Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/7ce22bfe-e7a4-467b-b1c1-6a31d600704d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)It knows where you live.[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/18fd257d-85be-479d-8b5e-75be849f20b8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)I see why you’re not interested.[Power User.](https://substack.com/redirect/f9ffa82a-3c43-4435-9a39-9e257f7c917f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A flat subscription fee for a high marginal cost service. Oh no.[Locked In User.](https://substack.com/redirect/8fc81bc3-2351-4993-810b-755755d7904d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)No one else can ever know.[Read the Classics](https://substack.com/redirect/1e702c2b-22d7-46e0-b284-5799ad783f02?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/1e702c2b-22d7-46e0-b284-5799ad783f02?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Why do we even read Aristotle, anyway?[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon.](https://substack.com/redirect/8f979009-5f3e-43c4-8e7c-50486be52013?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Glad it’s not happening to me, yet.[Fun With Image Generation.](https://substack.com/redirect/76fbd281-5d6a-416f-9ef0-6035816b9ca4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Congratulations, we solved the trolly problem.[They Took Our Jobs.](https://substack.com/redirect/0c885c9c-e203-45e9-98ec-a827e483431a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Personalized spearfishing works, so why so little of it?[Question Time.](https://substack.com/redirect/dbdb9da1-df62-40be-941e-6a6b8129948e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)What is causing Claude to ask the user questions all the time?[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/61907cc6-a7d3-42c4-bda1-df5b5b19474a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)EU AI Office is still trying to hire people. It’s rough out there.[Introducing.](https://substack.com/redirect/434d1fae-ed51-44f9-90cf-053d43d2c5a1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)AIFilter, a Chrome Extension to filter Tweets. Do it for science.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/f84513d1-79d1-4b88-b1e4-28416fb40e94?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The investments in data centers, they are going large.[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/098498bd-1ad5-48fa-8187-aa5a7462c7de?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)We are not ready. We do not understand.[The Quest for Sane Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/b90b4102-f835-4842-9d75-b637c00c19ab?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)If we can’t target training compute, what then?[The Least You Could Do.](https://substack.com/redirect/b5adb45a-fecd-4dca-954d-bd639410eac0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A proposed bare minimum plan for short timelines.[Six Word Story.](https://substack.com/redirect/4fe40bc1-14c4-4245-bbaf-4e85337fbcb6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Man responsible for singularity f***s around.[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/94c28aaf-c3ec-4adb-a9bf-46dfb784a8fa?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Anthropic discussion about alignment.[And I Feel Fine.](https://substack.com/redirect/f400ddd2-af28-4476-a9ff-067831c9ac6e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The end of the world, potentially coming soon, you say.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/acf94965-a80e-481d-87d5-84556d7863b3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Chernobyl as the safety standard you are not living up to.[Liar Liar.](https://substack.com/redirect/8e110383-7907-4f5c-9a77-be754e038d7b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Stop lying to your LLMs, please?[Feel the AGI](https://substack.com/redirect/ed36fcbe-c4b8-4a8d-90ec-d9b8c98bca0c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/ed36fcbe-c4b8-4a8d-90ec-d9b8c98bca0c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)People are not feeling it.[Regular Americans Hate AI.](https://substack.com/redirect/08c88a18-6d36-4fec-b764-09500b1deb01?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)This, they feel quite a bit.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/4990c8be-6516-4a81-9847-b412ca4f1fb1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)What is your p(scheme)?[The Lighter Side.](https://substack.com/redirect/fbdb2530-79f5-487b-9de6-4f48be535942?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Einstein said knock you out.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
Using Claude (or another LLM) is a ‘free action’ when doing pretty much anything. Almost none of us are sufficiently in the habit of doing this sufficiently systematically. I had a conversation with Dean Ball about trying to interpret some legal language last week and on reflection I should have fed things into Claude or o1 like 20 times and I didn’t and I need to remind myself it is 2025. Sully reports being impressed with Gemini Search Grounding,
Reminder (from Amanda Askell of Anthropic) that if you run out of Claude prompts as a personal user, you can get more queries at
A reminder of how far we’ve come.
I sure bet that if you gather all the data, the AI can find correlations for you, and do better than random, at least until people start playing the new criteria. As is often the case, this is more saying there is a substantial error term, and outcomes are unpredictable. Sure, that’s true, but that doesn’t mean you can’t beat random. The suggested alternative here, actual random selection, seems crazy to me, not only for the reasons mentioned, but also because relying too heavily on randomness correctly induces insane behaviors once people know that is what is going on. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane UtilityAs always, the best and most popular way to not get utility from LLMs is to not realize they exist and can provide value to you.
It is crazy how many people latch onto the hallucinations of GPT-3.5 as a reason LLM outputs are so untrustworthy as to be useless. It is like if you once met a 14-year-old who made stuff up so now you never believe what anyone ever tells you.
It began November 12. They also do Branded Explanatory Text and will put media advertisements on the side. We all knew it was coming. I’m not mad, I’m just disappointed. Note that going Pro will not remove the ads, but also that this phenomenon is still rather rare - I haven’t seen the ‘sponsored’ tag show up even once. But word of warning to TurboTax and anyone else involved: Phrase it like that and I will absolutely dock your company massive points, although in this case they have no points left for me to dock.
You know exactly what you want, so you can just type it in and get it. You don’t know exactly what you want, but you have parameters (e.g. ‘order me a pizza from the highest rated place I haven’t tried yet’ or ‘order me six people’s worth of Chinese and mix up favorite and new dishes.’) You want to do search or ask questions on what is available, or on which service.
Then longer term, the use of memory and dynamic recommendations get involved. You’d want to incorporate this into something like Beli (invites available if you ask in the comments, most provide your email).
I am sympathetic to OpenAI here, if their result duplicates when using the method they said they were using. That method exists, and you could indeed use it. It should count. It certainly counts in terms of evaluating dangerous capabilities. But yes, this failure when given more freedom does point to something amiss in the system that will matter as it scales and tackles harder problems. The obvious guess is that this is related to what METR found, and it related to o1 lacking sufficient scaffolding support. That’s something you can fix.
Power User
I agree that a fixed price subscription service for o1-pro does not make sense. A fixed subscription price makes sense when marginal costs are low. If you are a human chatting with Claude Sonnet, you get a lot of value out of each query and should be happy to pay, and for almost all users this will be very profitable for Anthropic even without any rate caps. The same goes for GPT-4o. With o1 pro, things are different. Marginal costs are high. By pricing at $200, you risk generating a worst case scenario: Those who want to do an occasional query won’t subscribe, or will quickly cancel. So you don’t make money off them, whereas at $20/month I’m happy to stay subscribed even though I rarely use much compute - the occasional use case is valuable enough I don’t care, and many others will feel the same. Those who do subscribe suddenly face a marginal cost of $0 per query for o1 pro, and no reason other than time delay not to use o1 pro all the time. And at $200/month, they want to ‘get their money’s worth’ and don’t at all feel like they’re breaking any sort of social contract. So even if they weren’t power users before, watch out, they’re going to be querying the system all the time, on the off chance. Then there are the actual power users, who were already going to hurt you.
There are situations like this where there is no fixed price that makes money. The more you charge, the more you filter for power users, and the more those who do pay then use the system. One can also look at this as a temporary problem. The price for OpenAI to serve o1 pro will decline rapidly over time. So if they keep the price at $200/month, presumably they’ll start making money, probably within the year. What do you do with o3? Again, I recommend putting it in the API, and letting subscribers pay by the token in the chat window at the same API price, whatever that price might be. Again, when marginal costs are real, you have to pass them along to customers if you want the customers to be mindful of those costs. You have to. There’s already an API, so there’s already usage-based payments. Including this in the chat interface seems like a slam dunk to me by the time o3 rolls around. Locked In UserA common speculation recently is the degree to which memory or other customizations on AI will result in customer lock-in, this echoes previous discussions:
Humans enjoy similar lock-in advantages, and yes they can be extremely large. I do expect there to be various ways to effectively transfer a lot of these customizations across products, although there may be attempts to make this more difficult. Read the Classics
The question is why you are reading any particular book. Where are you getting value out of it? We are already reading a translation of Aristotle rather than the original. The point of reading Aristotle is to understand the meaning. So why shouldn’t you learn the meaning in a modern way? Why are we still learning everything not only pre-AI but pre-Guttenberg? Looking at the ChatGPT answers, they are very good, very clean explanation of key points that line up with my understanding of Aristotle. Most students who read Aristotle in 1990 would have been mostly looking to assemble exactly the output ChatGPT gives you, except with ChatGPT (or better Claude) you can ask questions. The problem is this is not really the point of Aristotle. You’re not trying to learn the answers to a life well lived and guess the teacher’s password, Aristotle would have been very cross if his students tried that, and not expected them to be later called The Great. Well, you probably are doing it anyway, but that wasn’t the goal. The goal was that you were supposed to be Doing Philosophy, examining life, debating the big questions, learning how to think. So, are you? If this was merely translation there wouldn’t be an issue. If it’s all Greek to you, there’s an app for that. These outputs from ChatGPT are not remotely a translation from ‘high English’ to ‘modern English,’ it is a version of Aristotle SparkNotes. A true translation would be of similar length to the original, perhaps longer, just far more readable. That’s what you want ChatGPT to be outputting here. Maybe you only 2x instead of 5x, and in exchange you actually Do the Thing. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse SoonRob Wiblin, who runs the 80,000 hours podcast, Fun With Image Generation
Well, sure. If that’s what you want out of art, then AI art is not going to give it to you effectively at current tech levels - but it could, if tech levels were higher, and it can still aid humans in creating things that have this feature if they use it to rapidly iterate and select and combine and build upon and so on. Or, essentially, (a real) skill issue. And the AI, and users of AI, are skilling up fast. They Took Our Jobs
Question TimeI had of course noticed Claude Sonnet’s always asking question thing as well, to the point where it’s gotten pretty annoying and I’m trying to fix it with my custom prompt. I love questions when they help me think, or they ask for key information, or even if Claude is curious, but the forcing function is far too much.
Get Involved
Introducing
In Other AI News
Ordinary people and the social consensus are getting increasingly disconnected with the situation in AI, and are in for rude awakenings. I don’t know the extent to which policymakers are confused about this. Quiet Speculations
I would like Chollet’s statement here to be true, but I don’t see why it would be:
The existence of humans seems like a definitive counterexample? There was no force that understood fundamental principles of intelligence. Earth was simply a ‘big enough datacenter’ of a different type. And here we are. We also have the history of AI so far, and LLMs so far, and the entire bitter lesson, that you can get intelligence-shaped things without, on the level asked for by Chollet, knowing what you are doing, or knowing how any of this works. It would be very helpful for safety if everyone agreed that no, we’re not going to do this until we do understand what we are doing and how any of this works. But given we seem determined not to wait for that, no, I do not expect us to have this fundamental understanding until after AGI.
Not so fast! Most people don’t care because most people haven’t noticed. So we haven’t run the experiment yet. But yes, people do seem remarkably willing to shrug it all off and ignore the Earth moving under their feet.
The Quest for Sane Regulations
It can help to think about this in reverse. Rather than looking to regulate as many models and as much compute as possible, you are looking for a way to not regulate non-frontier models. You want to designate as many things as possible as safe and free to go about their business. You need to do that in a simple, clean way, or for various reasons it won’t work. For an example of the alternative path, Texas continues to mess with us, as the TRAIGA AI regulation bill is officially introduced. The Least You Could DoSuppose timelines are short, and we will see automated AI R&D going crazy within a few years, and the government doesn’t intervene in ways that ultimately matter. Marius Hobbhahn calls the linked answer a ‘low effort post’ which on some scale is true, but it seems like a decent place to start. He suggests, at a bare minimum, that it is necessary (but not sufficient!) that we need to achieve two main things to not automatically lose, as well as others. Model weights (and IP) are secure. The first AI that significantly speeds up alignment research isn’t successfully scheming.
As always, I worry about the use of the term ‘scheming’ as being potentially too loaded, too narrow and implying that deception or scheming and such are a distinct magisteria one could potentially avoid, and that the associated dangers require a kind of active scheming or decision to scheme, and so on. I won’t rehash beyond that. We also need a situation in which the humans are able to and choose to take reasonable actions towards attempting to ensure good outcomes, including making major investments in alignment research. As he notes, this might not hold, but one can usefully first consider the baseline scenario - no major breakthroughs or paradigm shifts, essentially unchanged international situation, things just progress from here and it’s a straight shot to AGI.
In his view, we have two potential paths. Option one is to have sufficient insight, via faithful and legible CoT, that is sufficiently reliable, that we can check the AI’s reasoning and actions to confirm that Everything is Fine. I notice I am rather skeptical here. AIs will start being more capable than we are, and as we will start using the monitoring of their chain of thought (CoT) in various ways and necessarily doing so mostly with AIs to boot. I expect us to effectively train or incentivize, or otherwise cause, the AIs to find ways for their CoT to look faithful but not be, and to obfuscate their reasoning, or simply find ways to reason visibly as a form of persuasion, and so on. Not that we shouldn’t try to verify, if we can, and yes I would sacrifice a bunch to get this, partly because I think it would have other nice properties. But when we are talking about having highly capable AI systems do alignment work for real, if you need and rely on the verification, then I expect you to fail hard. I do agree with Marius that no one has tried hard yet. I expect we would be able to do much better at this than we are currently doing, at least for now, if we do have faithful CoT. However my understanding is that current CoT is insufficiently faithful. Part of this is that if you try to track ‘scheming,’ ‘power-seeking’ or ‘goal-directedness’ Option two is to use control-based methods as primary rather than only a backup. Here I once again notice myself despairing at the idea that you can have AI models that you expect to be, when they think it would help them to do so, engaging in shenanigans (‘scheming’ here) and then design systems to detect and stop this, which ideally in turn mean that the AIs never try it in the first place. As in, in response to his ideas for a deeper understanding of scheming (which I think are good and we should totally do, they seem way better than not doing them), I don’t think scheming or power-seeking or other shenanigans, including non-myopia, have to ‘develop’ at all in AIs any more than in humans. I think they are the default, and are ever-present along a continuum. And even if you could fully stamp out their causes along the way, doing so would probably cripple the AI’s capabilities that you wanted. I would instead describe the question not as how it develops ( He then follows up with Layer 2, which are important but lower priority items. This includes things like a safety first corporate culture, without which I am very skeptical any of the rest of this happens for real, and which I fear is now clearly missing everywhere expect perhaps Anthropic, and especially missing at OpenAI. He also calls for improved and more open reasoning around safety, which also seems hard to win without. He lists improving near term alignment strategies as in RLHF and RLAIF, which I agree have exceeded expectations for near term performance, although not in ways that I expect to scale when we need it most, and not sufficiently to solve jailbreaks now, but yes it has been very impressive for current baseline use cases. As Akash notes in the top comment, if you think government can meaningfully help, then that gives you different avenues to pursue as well. Six Word StoryPerhaps world ending? Tweet through it.
Yes. It works in a lot of ways. It is clever. Unfortunately, when you consider who wrote it, in its full context, a lot of the interpretations are rather unsettling, and the post updates me towards this person not taking things seriously in the ways I care about most.
I agree with Critch that Altman privately ‘not knowing which side’ is a positive update here rather than disquieting, given what we already know. I’m also fine with joking about our situation. I even encourage it. In a different context This Is Fine. But you do have to also take it all seriously, and take your responsibility seriously, and consider the context we do have here. In addition to other concerns, I worry this was in some ways strategic, including as plausibly deniable hype and potentially involving metaphorical clown makeup (e.g. ‘it is too late to turn back now’). This was all also true of his previous six-word story of “Altman: AGI has been achieved internally.”
The Week in Audio
And I Feel Fine
At this point, I consider claims of the form ‘everyone always thinks every new technology will be the end of the world’ as essentially misinformation and debunked, on the level of what Paul Krugman calls ‘zombie ideas’ that keep coming back no matter how many times you shoot them in the face with a shotgun. Yes, there are almost always claims of downsides and risks from new technologies - many of which turn out to be accurate, many of which don’t - but credible experts warning about existential risks are rare, and the concerns historically (like for Y2K, climate change, engineered plagues or nuclear weapons) have usually been justified.
People have made falsified irresponsible claims that AI will end the world. People have called for costly actions for safety that did not make sense. People have the perception of such claims and this causes loss of credibility. The perception of such claims comes from people making irresponsible claims.
Sarah and I are not, of course, claiming that literal zero people have made falsified irresponsible claims that AI will end the world. And certainly a lot of people have made claims that the level of AI we have already deployed posed some risk of ending the world, although those probabilities are almost always well under 50% (almost always under 10%, and usually ~1% or less). Mostly what is happening is that opponents of regulatory action or taking existential risk are mixing up the first and second claims, and seriously conflating: An (unwise) call for costly action in order to mitigate existential risk. A (false) prediction of the imminent end of the world absent such action.
These two things are very different. It makes sense to call for costly action well before you think a lack of that action probably ends the world - if you don’t agree I think that you’re being kind of bonkers. In particular, the call for a six month pause was an example of #1 - an unwise call for costly action. It was thrice unwise, as I thought it was at the time: It would have had negative effects if implemented at that time. It was not something that had any practical chance of being implemented. It had predictably net negative impact on the discourse and public perception.
It was certainly not the only similarly thrice unwise proposal. There are a number of cases where people called for placing threshold restrictions on models in general, or open models in particular, at levels that were already at the time clearly too low. A lot of that came from people who thought that there was (low probability) tail risk that would show up relatively soon, and that we should move to mitigate even those tail risks. This was not a prediction that the world would otherwise end within six months. Yet I echo Sarah that I indeed have seen many claims that the pause letter was predicting exactly that, and look six months later we were not dead. Similarly, there were a number of triply unwise calls to set compute thresholds as low as 10^23 flops, which I called out at the time. This was never realistic on any level. I do think that the pause, and the proposals for thresholds as low as 10^23 flops, were serious mistakes on multiple levels, and did real damage, and for those who did make such proposals - while not predicting that the world would end soon without action or anything like that - constituted a different form of ‘crying wolf.’ Not because they were obviously wrong about the tail risks from their epistemic perspective. The problem is that we need to accept that if we live in a 99th percentile unfortunate world in these ways, or even a 95th percentile unfortunate world, then given the realities of our situation, humanity has no outs, is drawing dead and is not going to make it. You need to face that reality and play to your outs, the ways you could actually win, based on your understanding of the physical situations we face. Eliezer Yudkowsky’s claims are a special case. He is saying that either we find a way to stop all AI capability development before we build superintelligence or else we all die, but he isn’t putting a timeline on the superintelligence. If you predict [X] → [Y] and call for banning [X], but [X] hasn’t happened yet, is that crying wolf? It’s a bold claim, and certainly an accusation that a wolf is present, but I don’t think it ‘counts as crying wolf’ unless you falsify ([X] → [Y]). Whereas when people say things such as that the CAIS statement ‘was overhyped,’ when all it said was that existential risk from AI should be treated as seriously as other existential risks, what are they even claiming? Those other risks haven’t yet ended the world either. Thus, yes, I try my best to carefully calibrate my claims on what I am worried about and want to regulate or restrict in what ways, and to point out when people’s worries seem unfounded or go too far, or when they call for regulations or restrictions that go too far. Perhaps one way of looking at this: I don’t see any wolves. So why are you proposing to have a boy watch the sheep and yell ‘wolf’ if a wolf shows up? Stop crying wolf. Overall, I do think that some of the issue here comes from, inevitably, some worried people getting overly worried or overly (cautious in some sense, ambitious in others) and offering unwise proposals that go too far. Although that is inevitable in any situation like this, we can and must do a better job on that front. A lot more of it comes from people on the unworried side misconstruing what was said and predicted. And a lot of it comes from the inherent difficulty of a probabilistic future threat coming steadily at you, and action needing to be taken in advance of when there is a problem, and there being a lot of path dependence. This is tough. Mostly I think the worried-about-existential-risk-from-AI community has done an importantly imperfect and improvable but relatively good job at not ‘crying wolf’ in the traditional sense, especially on the actual existential risks themselves. Certainly if you ask whether those on the unworried side have ‘cried wolf’ about the ‘risks’ going the other way, they would come out looking much worse, and we can know this without having to run any experiments. Alas, reality does not grade on a curve. Rhetorical Innovation
Janus highlights a particular section of it, I’ll share that part and a little bit after it.
Liar Liar
If we are going to expect people not to lie to LLMs, then we need there not to be large rewards to lying to LLMs. If we did force you to say whether you wrote the thing in question, point blank, and you could only say ‘yes’ or ‘no,’ I can hardly blame someone for saying ‘no.’ The good news is you (at least mostly) don’t have to do that. Feel the AGISo many smart people simply do not Feel the AGI. They do not, on a very basic level, understand what superintelligence would be or mean, or that it could even Be a Thing. Thus, I periodically see things like this:
People often really do think this, or other highly mundane things that humans can already do, are all you could do with superintelligence. This group seems to include ‘most economists.’ I’m at a loss how to productively respond, because my brain simply cannot figure out how people actually think this in a way
The second part of that is plausibly true of AI as it exists today, if you need the AI to then pick out which songs are the Bob Dylan songs. If you ran it for a thousand years you could presumably get some Dylan-level songs out of it by chance, except they would be in an endless sea of worthless drek. The problem is the first part. AI won’t stay where it is today. Another way to not Feel the AGI is to think that
There’s no reason to assume it would only be 6-12 months. But even if it was, if you have AGI for six months, and then they get what you had, you don’t twiddle your thumbs at ‘AGI level’ while they do that. You use the AGI to build ASI. Regular Americans Hate AI
It is remarkable how many replies were ‘of course we want ASI.’ Set aside the question of what would happen if we created ASI and whether we can do it safely. Who is we? Americans hate current AI and they hate the idea of more future capable smarter AI. Hashtag #NotAllAmericans and all that, but AI is deeply underwater in every poll, and do not take kindly to those who attempt to deploy it to provide mundane utility.
They mostly hate AI, especially current AI, for bad reasons. They don’t understand what it can do for them or others, nor do they Feel the AGI. There is a lot of unjustified They Took Our Jobs. There are misplaced concerns about energy usage. Perception of ‘hallucinations’ is that they are ubiquitous, which is no longer the case for most purposes when compared to getting information from humans. They think it means you’re not thinking, instead of giving you the opportunity to think better.
It’s not about what you ‘can’ do. It’s about what is the most efficient solution to the problem, and as Seb says putting real value on your time. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
I sent you ten boats and a helicopter, but the guns involved are insufficiently smoking? But yes, I agree that there is a sense in which the guns seen so far are insufficiently smoking to satisfy many people. I am optimistic that by default we will get additional evidence, from the perspective of those who are not already confident. We will see more experiments and natural events that demonstrate AIs acting like you would expect if what Ryan calls scheming was inevitable. The problem is what level of this would be enough to convince people who are not already convinced (although to be clear, I could be a lot more certain than I am). I also worry about various responses of the form ‘well we tuned it to get it to not currently, while scheming obviously wouldn’t work, show scheming we can easily detect, so future models won’t scheme’ as the default action and counterargument. I hope everyone reading understands by now why that would go supremely badly. I also would note this section:
I find this hopelessly optimistic about alignment of preferences, largely for classic Yudkowsky-style reasons, but if it only discounts the downside risk by ~33%, then it doesn’t actually much matter in terms of what we should actually do. Ryan goes through extensive calculations and likelihood ratios for much of the rest of the post, results which would then stack on top of each other (although they correlate with each other in various ways, so overall they shouldn’t fully stack?). Model architecture and capability levels are big factors for him here. That seems like a directionally correct approach - the more capable a model is, and the more opaque its reasoning, and the more it is relatively strong in the related areas, the more likely scheming is to occur. I was more skeptical in his likelihood ratios for various training approaches and targets. Mostly I want to encourage others to think more carefully about these questions. What would change your probability by roughly how much? Dominik Peters notes that when o1 does math, I do think, assuming the pattern is real, this is evidence of a substantial alignment failure by OpenAI. It won’t show up on the traditional ‘safety’ evals, but ‘claims to solve a problem when it didn’t’ seems like a very classic case of misaligned behavior. It means your model is willing to lie to the user. If you can’t make that go away, then that is both itself an inherent problem and a sign that other things are wrong. Consider this outcome in the context of OpenAI’s new strategy of Deliberative Alignment. If you have a model willing to lie, and you give it a new set of rules that includes ‘don’t lie,’ and tell it to go off and think about how to implement the rules, what happens? I realize this is (probably?) technically not how it works, but metaphorically: Does it stop lying, or does it effectively lie about the lying in its evaluations of itself, and figure out how to lie more effectively?
The Lighter Side
You're currently a free subscriber to |