---
subject: "A $100k Prize for a Decentralized Inflation Dashboard"
from: "1729 <support@1729.com>"
to: ""
date: 2021-08-05 16:57:47
labels: ["1729", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_1655087446004800712", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX"]
---
|
|
|
Inflation is a And that is why the world needs a global, decentralized, censorship-resistant inflation dashboard. For the next 90 days, we're accepting submissions for this project. We'll invest $100k in the best entrant if you end up starting a company, with possible follow-on investment from In this post, we discuss why such a dashboard should exist, how one might go about building it, and how we might fund it should you come up with a good effort. Why an Inflation Dashboard Should ExistWhy do we need an inflation dashboard? Because trillions of dollars have been If inflation is a government-caused problem, we can't necessarily rely on government statistics like the As such, the short version of what we want to build is a maximally government-independent, on-chain, open-source, crypto oracle version of Think of it as coinmarketcap.com, but for inflation: the next dashboard that crypto people around the world will How You Might Build An Inflation Dashboard, in BriefHere's the high-level version of what we want to see in an inflation dashboard. - Obtain price data. This is actually one of the hard parts! See
[below](#prices)for more detail, but in short it's not that easy to get good data. As such, your data acquisition and verification pipeline will be an important part of your[submission](#task), should you choose to enter the competition. - Identify a large basket of goods. Let's assume for the sake of argument that you can get verified price data. A good data source should allow you to isolate a large (but finite)
[basket of goods](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/b/basket_of_goods.asp)with reliable data from different sources. Just like[Coinmarketcap.com](https://coinmarketcap.com/)tracks the prices of 10000+ digital assets over time across many exchanges in different countries, you want to track the prices of N basket items over time across many merchants in different countries. For comparison, here are[some](https://download.bls.gov/pub/time.series/ap/ap.item)of the goods that the US Consumer Price Index (CPI)[tracks](https://data.bls.gov/cgi-bin/surveymost?ap). - Put price data on-chain. Once you have good price data, you want multiple censorship-resistant, decentralized, moderately-available data stores to store various versions of that data for auditing purposes. The refined data could be on-chain, the raw price data could be on IPFS or equivalent, and any original URLs with prices of goods could potentially also be redundantly backed up using services like
[archive.is](https://archive.is)or[web.archive.org](https://web.archive.org). Data can be made available for periodic download (like[MIT BPP](http://www.thebillionpricesproject.com/datasets/)) and hashed onto other chains (eg via[Merkle trees](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Merkle_tree)), such that there are many different cryptographic integrity checks someone could run should they doubt any entry. Existing technologies like BitTorrent could be relied upon for dataset distribution and, as noted[below](#publishing-on-chain),[Chainlink](https://docs.chain.link/)'s decentralized oracle networks could be used to cryptographically sign and deliver data on chain. - A multivariate time series of raw prices. If the data is parsed into relational format, a
[UPC](https://www.shopify.com.sg/encyclopedia/universal-product-code-upc)(or more likely an internal version thereof) could be used to join price data across different sources. This would give a global dashboard for the price of everything; you could compare[the price of a tea in a store in China](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/What%27s_that_got_to_do_with_the...%3F)to the price of the exact same tea in a different locale, or at a different time, to start visualizing the trajectory of prices over time. And you'd ideally have clickable attribution to the original archived data source for every price data point, retail and wholesale alike. - A smart contract to calculate inflation. We also want transparent logic, open source and ideally on-chain in a smart contract, to turn the price data from the decentralized datastore into various kinds of inflation estimates.
- A way to do personalized inflation calculations. The ultimate version of the smart contract would allow you to pick some weighted basket of goods to get a personal inflation calculator. Is it your imagination, or have your personal costs for gas, food, rent, education, and healthcare been rising?
- A calculation that doesn't rely on government statistics. This might go without saying, but all of this should be a bottom-up inflation calculation, using only the raw prices that people are paying on the web and in mobile apps as input. Government Consumer Price Index (CPI)
[data](https://www.bls.gov/cpi/)is useful only as a comparison, and shouldn't be an input to any calculation. - A security-conscious development process. There is good reason to do the project under a pseudonym, as it may help should the dashboard eventually be targeted for censorship. However, in order to award the prize and do the investment, we may need to know your identity for KYC purposes. We recognize this is a contradiction but will do our best to work with the winners to maintain their privacy while complying with all applicable laws. Note that you may also choose to use your real name, but simply decentralize the dashboard enough that it's out of your control.
How You Might Build An Inflation Dashboard, in DetailThe above was a quick summary of what we'd like to see. But there are several hard parts of building an open-source, censorship-resistant, on-chain inflation dashboard. Perhaps the toughest part involves actually acquiring the price data in the first place. With new tools, publishing it on-chain and calculating personalized, verifiable inflation estimates isn't that hard. So let's go through the price part in some detail. Acquiring Price DataIn order to calculate anything related to inflation, you need to collect data on prices for many goods over time. There are at least two ways to do this: - Option A: Scraping websites
- Option B: Partnering with retailers (like Amazon and Alibaba) or with crypto merchant service providers (like BitPay and Coinbase Commerce)
Of these, the second may turn out to be the most feasible. To understand this, let's discuss why scraping isn't as easy as it may seem. Option A: Acquiring Price Data by ScrapingThe obvious way to build an inflation dashboard is to write code that collects prices over time for many different goods from many different websites and mobile apps. The naive approach would rely on the concept of a Why The Scraping Approach Has Issues The core dynamic that drives the entire scrapers vs. retailers arms race is this: retailers want to get users on-site by any means necessary, whereas scrapers are often building search engines. While search engines want to only send a user to the “best” retailer for a particular query, retailers are strongly incentivized to stand out from the pack and get people onto their site at any cost. Once you’re on-site, even if what you came for is out of stock, they can try to sell you an upgrade, an accessory, or an alternative to the thing you were looking for. This has many implications that will apply even to an inflation feed scraper that is using price data for a different purpose. Issue: extracting data from a page This can mean maintaining many site-specific scrapers using XPATH selectors and Regex. Retailers will change their markup a lot to tweak these pages so that all your XPATH queries break, and they do this just to frustrate scrapers. There are technologies that can work around this, like Issue: dealing with automated countermeasures Issue: maintaining the web crawler Issue: detecting fake in-stock status They claim the axe above is in-stock, but when you click through to the site you see this: As you can see, you can’t select a variant to add to cart, which means it’s not actually available. This is just one random retailer, but tricks like this abound online. What this stock status manipulation means for an inflation price scraper is that even an item that is not widely available may show as in-stock at a certain (bogus) price, where the apparent stock status and price are manipulated for the sole purpose of sucking in users from search and comparison shopping engines. If you’re trying to be accurate by only scraping real-world, market prices from in-stock listings, this presents an issue. Issue: parsing hard-to-determine units There’s a useful Issue: catching hidden shipping prices You can see that the first site is playing around with delivery to get its listing to the top when sorted by price. Clicking through furthermore shows that shipping actually varies, and they’ve listed the low end of $15.99 for Google: Again, this is all gamesmanship done in order to appear attractive to Google and to get the user on-site. Issue: disambiguating UPCs and SKUs Additionally, different variants on a product will have different UPCs and SKUs and other numbers. For example, an office chair available in multiple colors will have a suite of different codes for each color. It’s hard for a scraper to figure out that these products are merely color or size variants on the same product. You might still decide to write a scraper. But you should be aware of these issues before beginning. Option B: Acquiring Price Data by PartneringThe alternative to scraping is partnering. As noted above, there are at least two ways to do this: - Partnering with large retailers like Amazon/Alibaba, or smaller online merchants.
- Partnering with crypto merchant service providers, like Bitpay and Coinbase Commerce.
The first of these approaches is tough. Larger merchants generally have no incentive to work with you, and smaller merchants may not have the breadth of selection required to calculate a proper inflation feed. The second approach is more interesting, and it's a novel application of crypto commerce. Over the last several years, the business of accepting cryptocurrencies for online payments has grown quietly but substantially. Between A related set of companies are those which allow the use of cryptocurrency to back The advantage of partnering with one of these companies to obtain a database of prices quoted in crypto terms is that (a) they are more likely to understand the problem Bitcoin solves, and (b) each has a single consistent historical database of prices across a wide variety of merchants that can be used (with some effort) to build up a historical inflation feed. The disadvantage is that the With that said, it may be worth combining the two approaches: some price data from scraping, and some from partnering. You might even be able to create some kind of crypto mechanism for a retailer to voluntarily (and perhaps pseudonymously) submit legitimate, representative price data without risking a loss of competitive advantage. Publishing price data on-chain and calculating aggregatesOnce you've got the price data, you want to get it on-chain to make it censorship-resistant. Perhaps not all of it goes on-chain – that can be expensive – but enough of it should be on-chain for skeptical users to verify as much as possible.
[launching Chainlink nodes](https://docs.chain.link/docs/running-a-chainlink-node/)to write data on-chain, including price data- calculating aggregates from
[on-chain](https://docs.chain.link/docs/architecture-decentralized-model/)and[off-chain](https://docs.chain.link/docs/off-chain-reporting/)data (such as inflation estimates) - creating
[external adapters](https://blog.chain.link/build-and-use-external-adapters/)to make[API](https://blog.chain.link/apis-smart-contracts-and-how-to-connect-them/)[calls](https://docs.chain.link/docs/advanced-tutorial/) [fetching commodity prices](https://blog.chain.link/fetch-commodity-prices-in-solidity-smart-contracts/)from smart contracts
Chainlink's 📋 Task: Earn a $100k investment and a $100K grant in LINKSubmit your censorship-resistant inflation dashboard. A successful inflation dashboard could become the next We've outlined much of what we want to see above. We'll make a seed investment of $100k in the best entrant if you end up starting a company, with possible follow-on investment from We're accepting submissions for the next 90 days. Once you're ready, just submit your project below for evaluation. |
|||||
|