---
subject: "The Israel–Hamas Ceasefire Won’t Last"
from: "Tomas Pueyo from Uncharted Territories <unchartedterritories@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-01-27 16:01:56
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tomas Pueyo", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_28238133486362596", "UNREAD"]
---
I’m pulling articles from future weeks into this week because the news are hot on several important topics. I might or might not publish additional articles in the coming week(s). The next batch is on AI and Tesla. Also, before we start, a poll for you to guide future articles:
Israel and Hamas have signed a ceasefire agreement. It’s supposed to have three phases that bleed into the reconstruction of Gaza over the next few years. It won’t last that long. I don’t think it will make it to the end of the year. Here’s what the agreement says and why the current geopolitics stamp an expiration date on it. The AgreementIt has three phases:¹ In the first 42 days, 33 Israeli hostages will be released (women, children, and older people)². Israel will release hundreds of Palestinian prisoners—many of whom have life sentences for crimes against Israel. Israel will also start withdrawing from some parts of Gaza. In the following 42 days, Hamas releases all the remaining hostages who are still alive. Israel releases more Palestinian prisoners. Israel should be withdrawing from all of Gaza. After that, Hamas releases the remains of the deceased Israelis it holds, while Israel releases still more Palestinian prisoners. Israel and Hamas negotiate the future of Gaza. Hamas agrees not to rebuild its arsenal, and Gaza is rebuilt.
So why won’t this last? Israel’s Existential ThreatFor Israel, Hamas’ attack of October 7th 2023 was a holocaust. The Israel from before is dead: Israelis no longer believe that peaceful cohabitation with Hamas is possible. Now, the only thing Israelis think is how can we ensure that this doesn’t happen again? This is why Israel’s Prime Minister Netanyahu has consistently said that Israel has three war objectives: To return all hostages To eliminate Hamas’s governing capabilities To ensure that Gaza will no longer pose a threat to Israel
He So why is Israel signing the ceasefire? I don’t think broad international pressure mattered much: If anything, it has shrunk over time, as people have gotten used to the violence. It’s also not money: For all the war effort in 2024, Israel’s debt to GDP ratio has grown There are two reasons why Israel signed the ceasefire. The most important is because the first war objective is to get the hostages, of course. They are the symbol of October 7th. If it can get them back, it can close that painful chapter. But that is going to happen in the coming 84 days. It will be done by the end of April. After that, of course Israel will want the remains of the deceased, but that might drag out over time and is not as important as getting the live hostages.⁴ And with every new remains brought home, Israel will have less motivation to keep the ceasefire intact. By April, Israel’s first war objective will have been achieved. It will then focus on the other two: the end of Hamas and the neutralization of Gaza as a threat. Do you really think Israel will let Hamas take over again? Israel benefits from the ceasefire for a second reason: Trump. As Israel’s Prime Minister Netanyahu told Trump for his inauguration: Trump wants to look like he can bring peace to the Middle East easily, so he pressured Israel. Israel knows that, when things fall apart, Trump will blame Hamas and have Israel’s back. And right now Netanyahu’s government is a bit more stable than it used to be. So he probably thought: OK let’s sign this deal, this will get us our first war goal and give us some points with Trump. Then, once we get the hostages, we can make the ceasefire fail, blame Hamas, and go for the other two war goals: Eliminate Hamas and make sure Gaza is never a threat again. Why is the elimination of Hamas so important? Because Israel now realizes the group will never stop until Israel is eliminated. Why? [The updated Hamas charter](https://substack.com/redirect/534ef2ff-c29c-4c93-8544-f8078ef30c1b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)sees peace with Israel as impossible, doesn’t give up the right to fight, doesn’t recognize Israel, and advocates for the liberation of all of Palestine—that is, Israel, Gaza, and the West Bank. Jerusalem must be the capital of Palestine. All Palestinian refugees would be entitled to both the right to return and reparations for the time they lost their homes.Hamas claims it doesn’t have problems with Jews, but it can’t stand Zionism—the construction of a state for Jews in Palestine. [The popular opinion in Gaza](https://substack.com/redirect/2901a62d-40c5-4ed0-90f1-0a00ae5b3bfe?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)still heavily supports Hamas: As of September 2024, 89% of Gazans thought Hamas didn’t commit the atrocities it committed against civilians, 40% thought Hamas was correct in attacking Israel, 39% thought Hamas was managing Gaza well, 36% wanted Hamas to stay in control of Gaza, 48% of voters would have voted for Hamas if there were elections, 36% still thought armed resistance against Israel was the way to get an independent state.Hamas has built its entire identity around the conflict with Israel. That’s why it has diverted immense sums of money from the economy into building its weapons and tunnels. Have you heard any reference to a change of heart? Palestinian authorities don’t recognize Israel’s existence,⁵ [consistently portray](https://substack.com/redirect/65ed9892-bfe8-4859-b591-13a9eca17ce5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Palestine as including Israel, raise children to believe all of Palestine should be free[from the river to the sea](https://substack.com/redirect/4dda53ca-7cf4-4a3c-ac01-cc453ac9a7e6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o),⁶[educate them](https://substack.com/redirect/0e1c5b11-29d3-4298-a56d-4ed860e9d20f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[to kill Jews](https://substack.com/redirect/4af3232d-23eb-4c74-86c5-c897c99cf7ad?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o),[convert](https://substack.com/redirect/2fc45824-9311-40aa-b894-a57c7df8cbaa?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[them](https://substack.com/redirect/4b0c1d25-bbdd-49d6-8ec1-319348a0b57f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)into[terrorists](https://substack.com/redirect/82ac58e8-a808-4b59-925b-37394f4d2c09?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), funds the families of martyrs, and often quote any concession from Israel as a[stepping stone](https://substack.com/redirect/a0b8e325-179c-4543-b0ec-5a0205e20560?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)to liberating all of Israel and Palestine.
Before, Israel could bury its head in the sand and avoid this reality, but then Hamas yanked it out and raped it. And nothing Israelis see make them think Hamas or Palestinians have had a complete change of heart. This is the new head of Hamas: This is Hamas with Gazans: This is what Israel sees, so it concludes that the only solution to Hamas is its total destruction. And Israel also believes that now is the perfect time to eliminate Hamas, because it is at its weakest. Hamas’ MiscalculationI don’t think Hamas realizes how clueless its miscalculation was. Hamas thought: They were in the right to kill, torture, rape, and kidnap thousands of Israelis The Israeli retaliation would unify Palestinians and rally them to the cause It would fire up its Muslim brethren, who would support Palestinians In particular, Iran’s proxies, Hezbollah, Syria, and maybe even the Houthis, would come to their rescue Israel would become an international pariah The US would intervene to stop Israel’s attacks Allah would support them in their Jihad Eventually, all this friendship for Hamas and hatred towards Israel would result in a huge victory for Hamas and the recognition of the State of Palestine Something something Hamas conquers back Israel, from the river (Jordan) to the sea (Mediterranean)
What happened instead? Hamas is alone. Internal SupportThe worst for Hamas is what happened at home. Although a sizable share of the population still supports them, that number dropped precipitously in the last few months: As the war raged on, support for Hamas waned. Gazans think Hamas did a poor job. We can get a visceral sense of that—While Hamas tried to convey a sense of power during the first hostage release: This was the reality: So the internal support has fallen, but the external support has plummeted even faster! Iran & FriendsThey’re off the gameboard.
In The Houthis are in Yemen, too far away. They played at antagonizing Israel by launching missiles, but Israel Iran has lost its proxies everywhere, has economic problems, its attack and defense systems have been exposed to Israel’s, it will be crushed economically by Trump, and it has rampant internal dissent. It will be hard for it to have much impact in Palestine in the coming years. Other Muslim BrethrenArab states Obviously, that’s not what they say. They all show solidarity with Palestinians and their cause, blame Israel, and demand de-escalation. But the reality is different. When Iran sent missiles to Israel, Egypt and Jordan have been at peace with Israel for decades. Egypt has had its border with Gaza closed for ages, and forced all its border population to move away from the border to create a buffer zone that tunnels couldn’t bridge. Jordan expelled the Palestinian leadership, went to war with it, and has serious concerns about the Palestinians living in Jordan. The government there collaborates heavily with Israel, including The United Arab Emirates, Bahrain, Morocco, and Sudan signed the Abraham Accords with Israel—peace treaties—and didn’t back out of them. The USWhereas Biden’s administration was sympathetic to Palestinians, Trump’s administration is radically more pro-Israel. Trump has described himself as the "most pro-Israel President", has said
Also: Why the ceasefire then? Israel has three war goals: Get the hostages back, eliminate Hamas, and make sure Gaza is not a threat ever again. The ceasefire allows Israel to achieve Goal 1. It also wins points with Trump, hence the timing of the agreement (and not when Biden proposed it eight months ago). Trump’s strong support of Israel allows Israel to break the ceasefire without repercussions from the US. The moment Israel gets the hostages, it will focus on Goal 2: Eliminate Hamas, because Hamas still fundamentally wants the destruction of Israel. Hamas is at its weakest, both internally and externally. It has never been easier to eradicate it. Meanwhile, Israel is extremely strong, on the back of successes against Hamas, Hezbollah, Assad, and Iran. So Israel won’t let the chance pass. It has an incentive to attack Hamas as soon as possible, to avoid its reinforcement.
All this tells us that Israel will break the ceasefire at some point after the end of Phase 2, when all the live hostages are in its hands.⁷ The end of Phase 2 is April 13th. Meanwhile, it’s very unlikely that Hamas will break the ceasefire: It’s super weak It knows it will never get a better deal than what it got under President Biden
From all this, we can conclude that the ceasefire is most likely to be broken soon after April 13th. Do you agree? You can make your predictions But wait, we’ve only discussed Israel’s war Goals 1 and 2. What about Goal 3, ensuring that Gaza is never again a threat? How Can Israel Achieve Peace with Gaza?We saw how much Gazans support Hamas and its armed struggle. But this support comes from something deep. It’s not superficial. It’s the result of deeply-held beliefs by Palestinians. Here are
These beliefs are so entrenched that I’ve always thought peace in the Middle East requires a rewiring of Palestinian brains. Last year, when Since intervening in Palestinian media and education seemed impossible without the Israelis proposing to also make theirs neutral, I proposed that a neutral commission intervene the education and media of both countries. I still believe this is the best long-term solution to the violence in the region, because if you don’t win the hearts and minds of Palestinians towards a peaceful cause, how can you expect them to be peaceful? But everything that has happened over the last year has made me change my mind slightly: I think Israel has proven that this is not the only solution. Just project Gazan support for Hamas if the war continues: The ceasefire will see an increase in Hamas support, but when the ceasefire ends, another year of war would see support for Hamas plummet again, along with Hamas’s force. That will be a good moment for an alternative to emerge; Palestinians will be ready. But what alternative? There’s no alternative today in Gaza, and the Palestinian Authority in the West Bank won’t be welcome in Gaza, either by Palestinians or Israelis. The next most popular Palestinian candidate, Since at that point Israel will likely control Gaza militarily, if I were Israel, I would do the same as Americans did with Germany: Install a puppet government, re-educate the population, heavily intervene in the media and the economy, and rebuild Gaza into a law-abiding, educated, pro-Israel, rich city. This is serious stuff. What kind of pressure will Israel get if it tries to intervene so heavily into Palestinian affairs? There’s probably going to be massive pushback. The reason why the Americans vs Germans didn’t is because Germany was thoroughly defeated, and because it quickly got another enemy to focus on: Communism. Israel won’t get the benefit of another enemy for Palestine, so it needs a thorough Palestinian defeat, prior to a complete intervention of the country. If it doesn’t do it alone, it would need partners to make it happen, but Europe is not pro-Israeli enough to make that happen, and I’m not sure the US has the appetite to get into this cluster F. The UN has proven it can’t, as its UNWRA was heavily aligned with Hamas. And how much can Israel trust other partners like Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, or China? So this is unlikely. In other words, here are Israel’s options: Intervene the Palestinian education and media through a neutral party, which might require Israel to do the same. Thoroughly prevail militarily and impose media and education intervention, among other interventions of daily life and the economy. Get a trustworthy third party to execute that. Deal with a neighbor who wants Israel’s death for decades more.
If you think of another way that Palestinians can accept Israel’s existence peacefully, I’m all ears. Note here I don’t discuss the Palestinian perspective much. That’s because they put themselves into an uncomfortable corner. They can either change their approach completely (won’t happen), follow new and conciliatory leadership (unlikely, none of the conciliatory leaders appear to be preferred by the population), get a Hail Mary from an external player (very difficult as partners are moving away from Palestinians, not towards it), or continue the cycle of violence that will lead nowhere. 1 Here’s the 2 Priority will come to live hostages. If there are not enough hostages alive who meet these criteria, the remains of dead ones will be delivered. 3 For context, the US’s debt to GDP ratio is about twice that, and it grew by 20 percentage points during COVID. 4 Israel recently announced the return of the remains of soldiers that fought in the Golan Heights 10 years ago. Which shows that, yes, they’re important, but nowhere near as important as live hostages. 5 Palestine did in the past, during the Oslo Accords, but has withdrawn its recognition since. I can’t find an official Fatah (or Palestinian Authority) paper recognizing it. I’ve searched hard, and others have, too. 6 There’s a lot of debate about this sentence. I’ve seen people (usually Westerners) defend that it really refers to liberating Palestinians from the river to the sea, not conquering Palestine from the river to the sea. Maybe in some cases that’s true. But after listening to dozens of interviews and seeing extracts of Palestinian education, I believe the more common meaning of the sentence is the aim to erase the existence of Israel. 7 Or earlier, if Hamas fails to provide them, and that will be a good reason to break it. You're currently a free subscriber to |