---
subject: "Weekly Dose of Optimism #95"
from: "Not Boring <notboring@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-05-24 12:41:13
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Not Boring", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2982495070691762429", "UNREAD"]
---
Hi friends 👋, Happy Friday and welcome back to our 95th Weekly Dose of Optimism. It was another busy week in our corner of the internet, and we’re going to try to cover it all for you before you head out for the long Memorial Day Weekend. ‘Merica. Let’s get to it. From the Financial Services Committee
Packy here. It’s been a big week for crypto in the nation’s capitol, the result of the hard and patient work of a lot of people in educating policymakers on the industry. On Wednesday, the House of Representatives passed the Financial Innovation for the 21st Century Act (FIT21). The bill provides much-needed regulatory clarity for the crypto industry, and pushes crypto out of the weird gray area it’s been forced to operate in. Entrepreneurs trying to build new things should understand the rules of the road going in, and FIT21 is a step in that direction. There’s still a long way to go — it will face headwinds in the Senate — but it’s the second time in two weeks where crypto received bipartisan support from the House. 71 Democrats, including financial whiz kid Nancy Pelosi, voted for the bill. Crypto is becoming bipartisan. Then yesterday, a double whammy! First, the SEC approved an Ethereum ETF. More than a financial win, as a16z crypto General Counsel and all around good guy Miles Jennings Then, the House came back for more, passing Tom Emmer’s CBDC Anti-Surveillance State Act, banning the Fed from issuing a Central Bank Digital Currency. This is great, because as As I We love to see a little pro-innovation lawmaking heading into Memorial Day Weekend. What a country. (2) From Anthropic
Researchers at Anthropic made an interpretability breakthrough, giving us an inside look at how these large language models really work. LLMs work by representing concepts through patterns of neuron activations, where each concept is spread across many neurons, and each neuron contributes to multiple concepts. This allows the model to understand and generate responses based on these internal representations. Anthropic’s work, for the first time, gives us a better mapping of these internal concept representations. As an example, Anthropic's research showed that amplifying the "Golden Gate Bridge" feature in the model made it obsessively mention the bridge, even in unrelated contexts. This demonstrated that specific features control behavior. Importantly, identifying the controllable features of a model will mean that LLM builders will be able to influence the model’s behavior. Knowing how the model works means the models can be better monitored, steered, and put to good use doing things for us humans. Want to see what it means for yourself? The Anthropic team pushed a Golden Gate Bridge Mode. “We found a feature that, when amplified, can make Claude focus intensely on the Golden Gate Bridge. For a limited time, you can talk with this version of the model.” It’s fun. Go play with it — No need to Pause, just to understand. Who woulda thunk it? (3) Carly Cassella for Science Alert
Packy again, back with maybe my favorite theme: people keep saying we’re running out of a particular resource, or that we can’t mine them profitably or cleanly, and then we just go ahead and discover boatloads of that resource right in our backyard! God bless America 🇺🇸 This time, it’s lithium, the element we need to make all of the batteries we’re going to need to make to electrify our vehicles and Then last year, as we covered in Weekly Dose #60, researchers discovered what may be the world’s largest lithium deposit in an ancient supervolcano at McDermitt caldera. Now, we’ve struck Lithium again, in my home state of Pennsylvania, in the most beautiful way possible. Pennsylvania is home to the Marcellus Shale, a massive source of natural gas from fracking. Injecting high-pressure fluid into shale formations creates fractures — hence fracking — which frees up oil and gas. Just when we thought we were reaching peak oil, humans figured out fracking, and unlocked a huge source of hydrocarbons on our home turf. Fracking is controversial, but it’s awesome. And now it’s even more awesome. Turns out, deep groundwater has dissolved lithium in the rocks over millennia, and when we dredge up the wastewater from fracking, it contains massive amounts of lithium! The study, published in Extracting even a conservative amount of lithium from the Marcellus wastewater could meet 30% of current US lithium demand. That’s fracking poetic. (4) Mark Peplow for Nature
A team at Oak Ridge National Laboratory synthesized the first chemical complex with radioactive promethium, an elusive element in the periodic table. The work exposes promethium's bonding behavior with other atoms in water, bridging what has long been a crucial gap in chemistry knowledge. So what’s promethium and why do we care? Promethium is a rare radioactive element from the lanthanide series, found in nuclear waste. It’s currently used in products like pacemakers and spacecraft power sources. The new research gives us a better understanding of how promethium bonds to other elements, and thus, gives us a better understanding of how we can extract promethium from those other elements — for example, separating promethium from similar elements in nuclear waste. Beyond better nuclear waste management, the promethium learnings could lead to more efficient methods for separating and purifying other rare-earth elements, enhancing the production of high-tech products like lasers, magnets, and batteries. (5) Vera Bergengruen for Time We don’t really have a perro in this fight, but thought it was worth sharing this new Time profile of Argentinian President Javier Milei. Milei certainly has his critics and it's frankly is too early to tell if his economic plans will pan out for Argentina in the long run, but the guy is doing what he promised to do and the early results speak for themself. Inflation is down. The currency is devalued by 50%. Spending is down. Argentina ran a surplus in Q1 ‘24, the country's first quarterly surplus since 2008. Milei is delivering on his plan, whether you or the Argentinian people want him to. Milei promised change, and change is what he is delivering. Whether you agree with or like Milei is besides the point. The point is that real change is possible within democratic governments, and that change can (and in many cases should!) happen quickly. On this Memorial Day Weekend, the story of Argentina serves as a good reminder. In the early 20th century, it was one of the top 10 wealthiest countries in the world and experienced long periods of political stability. Today it’s the ~75th richest country in the world. What happened? To overgeneralize: socialism and mismanagement. Capitalism and democracy are worth fighting for. We’re thankful that generations of American men and women, much braver than me, agree with that statement and have paid the highest price protecting those ideals. Enjoy the long weekend, support the troops, and God Bless America. If you miss us too much this weekend and you haven’t read it yet, go read We’ll be back in your inbox on Tuesday. Thanks for reading, Packy + Dan |