---
subject: "The Wagner Group in Africa Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-08-24 10:00:30
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Colin here. The Wagner Group, the Russian state-funded private military company, casts a substantial, albeit murky, shadow across Africa. Whether it is cozying up to nations with valuable mining stakes or dictators needing hired muscle to maintain power, Wagner’s presence is palpable. From the Central African Republic to Mali and Mozambique, Yevgeny Prigozhin’s gang have demonstrated their economic and military prowess, often coupled with the same subterfuge, disinformation, and electoral interventions that they’ve deployed in the US and elsewhere. As noted
WITI Classifieds: We are experimenting with running some weekly classifieds in WITI. If you’re interested in running an ad, Interpreting the internet for the tasteful reader. Join 23,000+ subscribers who rely on Dirt for their cultural alpha. Why is this interesting? At press time for WITI, the world has But what’s the future for Wagner’s African campaigns? Its decentralized nature suggests the operations could persist without their brutish architect. The Economist
Kimberly Marten from Columbia University’s Barnard College Wagner Group’s intricate web in Africa still highlights the extent of high-stakes geopolitical maneuvering at play: Africa is strategically important to China, the US, and Russia on multiple fronts. And given these high stakes—both in terms of power and resources—it’s likely that the group’s influence in the region will remain sans its figurehead. But to what level of potency remains to be seen. (CJN) Quick Links: If you didn’t [read the New Yorker profile of Prigozhin/Wagner](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/c6fad4c2-ce70-4900-9e30-d814ef024130?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), it’s worth the time. (NRB)I finally got around to posting some of the videos from my marketing X AI conference in the spring. The first one, along with a write-up, went up yesterday: [my talk on building intuition for a fundamentally counterintuitive technology](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/b146f383-f158-4469-8cf3-2524daf2f128?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). (NRB)Guessing this one is close to many WITI-ers hearts: [Charlie Warzel explores what happened to Wirecutter](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/a8e5512b-9b33-4510-a062-ace9be8542a7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). (NRB)
— Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) — Why is this interesting? is a daily email from Noah Brier & Colin Nagy (and friends!) about interesting things. If you’ve enjoyed this edition, please consider forwarding it to a friend. If you’re reading it for the first time, consider subscribing. You're currently a free subscriber to |