---
subject: "The Swiss Army Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-06-27 12:30:47
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
A WITI classic today. Back tomorrow. Jann Schwarz (JS) is a WITI contributor and bon vivant from the Engadin valley. He wrote Jann here. The Swiss Army is world-famous. Not so much for its fighting skill, but for the very high-quality standards of its procurement officers. Not unlike the Japanese, well-made things are an obsession for the Swiss. The legendary Maybe it was the dysfunction of power grids and the hidden fragility of busted water heaters laid bare by the recent polar vortex calamity in the US that made me think of this. Or maybe, stuck inside my Brooklyn apartment on snowy days, I just long for the virgin powder and majestic vistas of the Swiss Alps, where I grew up. Browsing through a nicely illustrated book on I have been daydreaming about sunny winter afternoons under cloudless skies spent on the terraces of ski hut-type restaurants in the Engadin Valley: enjoying the view and indulging in the hearty cuisine of I miss favorite haunts like Why is this interesting? And what does it have to do with Swiss Army gear? Well, I remembered that growing up, one of the quirks of these Alpine outdoor dining experiences was that they would provide you with sheepskin rugs to sit on, and old surplus Swiss Army blankets to fend off the cold (see image below). Unable to get to the mountains, I figured the mountains could move to me if I tracked down a Swiss Army blanket. With it, I could sit on the patio furniture of my rooftop in the snow, heated by fragrant pinon wood burning in my Solo stove. Sipping gluhwein I would pretend that the Williamsburg waterfront condo buildings were Alpine peaks. Call it pandemic LARPing. It is the unique texture and smell of these blankets that has stuck in my mind. They are brown with a red stripe and a Swiss white cross and are made of thick felted wool. And they always seem to have the slightly musty but not unpleasant odor of something that has been stored in a basement or a horse stable for a long time. As it turns out, that smell is a tell-tale sign of their collective origin story. These blankets are a relic from a time when the army played an outsized role in the Swiss collective imagination. Unlike all of its neighbors, Switzerland survived World War II fairly unscathed. Local public opinion at the time attributed this to the Swiss Army’s immediate mobilization against possible invasion by Nazi Germany based on a strategy called
Such collective martial mentality required large supplies of everything, including hundreds of thousands of blankets stored in hundreds of army depots and bunkers. At the turn of the Millennium, over 300,000 blankets were still in use, and with the downsizing of the army, many ended up being sold as surplus, which is when the ski restaurants must have picked them up. They are remarkable examples of craftsmanship because they are designed for decades of continuous use and made in Switzerland, woven of ultra-rugged pure wool. Until the 1970s they were hand-finished, with the year of production painstakingly felted into the wool, along with the obligatory Swiss white cross. Their ultra-utilitarian, modernist design and the fact that they are extremely warm and indestructible make them perfectly suited for hipster survivalists and Park Slope glampers, a suddenly underserved market following There is a PS: To complete the full look, there is also an PPS: For a deep dive into this quietly fascinating topic, read |