---
subject: "The Meme Economy"
from: "1729 <support@1729.com>"
to: ""
date: 2021-08-23 17:53:41
labels: ["1729", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_1655087446004800712", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX"]
---
|
|
|
Harry Jones is Meme Tsar at If you spend enough time on the internet, you’ve probably heard the term ‘meme stock’. You may have also heard of In the meme economy, the market performance of a stock or cryptocurrency is less about forecasting business revenue than it is about gauging a traded asset’s “memeability.” This user-generated, virality-based investment strategy can best be explained by René Girard’s Mimetic desire causes people to invest en masse into things that they have little knowledge of beyond who else is a part of the movement. The social proof provided by friends and influencers creates a network effect that, especially when combined with a genuine value proposition, is powerful enough to commandeer entire financial markets. “While traditional investing moves along the lines of traditional media (be it TV, Radio, or also online publications with a top-down approach), meme investing instead has developed as a result of “user-generated” investment strategies. The platforms to communicate have been Reddit and Twitter.” — Gennaro, For a real-world example of this in action, look no further than the The /r/wallstreetbets crowd views the meme investing crusade as an opportunity to take back power. Many of the “Memes are fun and memes are also something to come together around. Speculating on the popularity of memes and their staying power is no different than any other form of speculation… I’ve decided that I am going to stop ignoring and dismissing meme investing and start trying to understand it better. I think it is not something that is going away anytime soon and may turn into something even more interesting.” — Fred Wilson, While the Gamestop and Dogecoin phenomena are powerful signals, the endgame Fred Wilson alludes to, perhaps unknowingly, is the ability to invest in memes themselves. A Brief History of the Meme MarketThe idea of a meme economy long predates /r/wallstreetbets and GameStop. Before Redditors hit on the idea of meme-driven investing in real stocks, there was a thriving but fake marketplace for actual memes online — a kind of “fantasy baseball” version of a meme market, but without real money changing hands. The The subreddit These meme “investors” are competitive, with Forbes having “Keep a sharp eye out, and don’t rely too heavily on the community to cherry pick all the profitable memes for you. Do your own research and hunt them yourself every once in a while. Doing this will grow your aptitude for picking out the freshest and dankest memes. Not only will you be one of the first to stumble upon the next possible meme trend, but there is also a sense of satisfaction knowing that you were there in the beginning.” Meme markets like NASDANQ and MemeTrades even offered the first online stock brokerage platforms for internet memes and were “equipped with basic functionality, such as buying and selling memes and setting firms” (
But without real money involved, these platforms were unable to offer much more than a gimmick (despite their popularity). Memes had no real monetary value, until… NFTsNFTs have opened the door to digital collectibles in a way that was never before possible. I won’t spend time extolling the virtues of NFTs themselves here, but “ Some of the most successful NFT projects like What has begun more recently, though, is the NFT-ization of digitally native content — the things which have never had a physical counterpart, like memes and viral videos. The meme economy has quickly become a reality, with the creators of the internet’s most iconic memes auctioning NFTs for hundreds of thousands, if not millions of dollars: Doge — $4 million, Disaster Girl — $570,000, Nyan Cat — $515,000. The list goes on (check out The most valuable collectibles will always be the most culturally significant ones, and there is nothing more culturally significant on the internet than memes. And love it or hate it, NFT memes have the media’s undivided attention. Here’s just a tiny sampling: - Wired:
[They were ancient internet memes. Now NFTs are making them rich](https://www.wired.co.uk/article/nft-memes-2010s) - The Guardian:
[NFTs and me: meet the people trying to sell their memes for millions](https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2021/jun/23/nfts-and-me-meet-the-people-trying-to-sell-their-memes-for-millions) - Decrypt:
[Here Are the Classic Internet Memes Finding New Life as NFTs](https://decrypt.co/66937/classic-memes-nfts) - BBC:
[Harambe: Gorilla photo to be sold as an NFT five years after he was shot dead](https://www.bbc.com/news/newsbeat-57279486) - NY Times:
[‘Disaster Girl’ Meme NFT Sells for $500,000](https://www.nytimes.com/2021/04/29/arts/disaster-girl-meme-nft.html) - Mashable:
[Classic memes that have sold as NFTs](https://mashable.com/article/classic-memes-sold-nft-prices)
Each massive auction reflects the fact that there has never been a medium that embodies and influences the public consciousness quite like memes. Memes are art and have revolutionized the way we communicate. Rosanna Guadagno, researcher at the Pace Innovation Lab at Stanford University, argues that memes are a “ Meme creators who sell NFTs are not greedy hyper-capitalists looking to scam unwitting buyers. They are regular people who, often without their permission, became universally recognized cultural symbols (and sometimes laughingstocks) without any monetary reward… and now they’re finally getting the payout they deserve. Unlike sports cards and NBA Top Shot, where players are rewarded with little to none of the proceeds from the sales of their valuable collectibles (which are only valuable because of their talent), meme creators are the direct beneficiaries of sales. Zoë Roth, the subject of “Disaster Girl”, In the same article, Kyle Craven (Bad Luck Brian) described NFTs as “the only thing that memes can do to take control.” The Future of the Meme EconomyIn the not-too-distant future, every meme will begin as an NFT, and it will be possible to invest in memes before they go viral. The more legendary memes will sell for the kinds of large sums we’re seeing right now in NFTs, but investing in nascent memes will be accessible to investors without deep pockets. The free and open meme economy will enable savvy memesters to use existing memes as on-chain templates, rewarding the original creator with ownership in the new meme. We’ll even be able to trace a meme’s distribution/’spread’ in real-time as it’s engaged with, invested in, and templated. Memers are already becoming millionaires (deservedly so), and it’s only a matter of time before it will be possible to make a lucrative career for oneself out of meme creation and curation. Eventually, all intellectual property rights will take the form of NFTs, a development that Jake Brukhman Believe me when I say that we’re well on our way. 📋 Task: Earn $10 in ETH for Meme Economy Startup LinksCrowd-source a list of startups We're building a list of Meme Economy startups, and we need your help. Submit a link to a startup launch blog post, news article, or other coverage of a new Meme Economy startup, and we'll pay you $10 in ETH for each link we accept. |
|||||
|