---
subject: "Arguments About AI Consciousness Seem Highly Motivated And At Best Overconfident"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-08-25 13:15:18
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
I happily admit I am deeply confused about consciousness. I don’t feel confident I understand what it is, what causes it, which entities have it, what future entities might have it, to what extent it matters and why, or what we should do about these questions. This applies both in terms of finding the answers and what to do once we find them, including the implications for how worried we should be about building minds smarter and more capable than human minds. Some people respond to this uncertainty by trying to investigate these questions further. Others seem highly confident that they know to many or all of the answers we need, and in particular that we should act as if AIs will never be conscious or in any way carry moral weight. Claims about all aspects of the future of AI are often highly motivated. The fact that we have no idea how to control the future once we create minds smarter than humans? Highly inconvenient. Ignore it, dismiss it without reasons, move on. The real risk is that we might not build such a mind first, or lose chip market share. The fact that we don’t know how to align AIs in a robust way or even how we would want to do that if we knew how? Also highly inconvenient. Ignore, dismiss, move on. Same deal. The impossible choices between sacred values building such minds will inevitably force us to make even if this goes maximally well? Ignore those too. AI consciousness or moral weight would also be highly inconvenient. It could get in the way of what most of all of us would otherwise want to do. Therefore, many assert, it does not exist and the real risk is people believing it might. Sometimes this reasoning is even explicit. Diving into how this works matters.
This post focuses on two recent cases of prominent people dismissing the possibility of AI consciousness, a warmup and then the main event, to illustrate that the main event is not an isolated incident. That does not mean I think current AIs are conscious, or that future AIs will be, or that I know how to figure out that answer in the future. As I said, I remain confused. Asking The Wrong QuestionsOne incident played off a comment from William MacAskill. Which then leads to a great example of some important mistakes.
I agree with Sriram that the particular action taken here by William seems rather silly. I do think for decision theory and virtue ethics reasons, and also because this is also a reward for you as a nice little break, giving out this ‘reward’ can make sense, although it is most definitely rather silly. Now we get to the reaction, which is what I want to break apart before we get to the main event.
I get Sriram’s frustrations. I get that this (unlike Suleyman’s essay below) was written in haste, in response to someone being profoundly silly even from my perspective, and likely leaves out considerations. My intent is not to pick on Sriram here. He’s often great. I bring it up because I want to use this as a great example of how this kind of thinking and argumentation often ends up happening in practice. Look at the justification here. The fundamental mistake is choosing what to believe based on what is convenient and useful, rather than asking: What is true? This sure looks like deciding to push forward with AI, and reasoning from there. Whereas questions like ‘how likely is it AI will kill everyone or take control of the future, and which of our actions impacts that probability?’ or ‘what concepts are useful when trying to model and work with LLMs?’ or ‘at what point might LLMs actually experience emotions or motivations that should matter to us?’ seem kind of important to ask. As in, you cannot say this (where [X] in this case is that LLMs can be attributed human emotions or motivations): Some people believe fact [X] is true. Believing [X] would ‘lead us down the path to’ also believe [Y]. (implicit) Belief in [Y] has unfortunate implications. Therefore [~Y] and therefore also [~X].
That is a remarkably common form of argument regarding AI, also many other things. Yet it is obviously invalid. It is not a good reason to believe [~Y] and especially not [~X]. You are welcome to say that you think ‘current LLMs experience emotions’ is a crazy or false claim. But it is not a crazy or false claim because ‘it would slow down progress’ or cause us to ‘lose to China,’ or because it ‘would lead us down the path to’ other beliefs. Logic does not work that way. Nor would this belief obviously net slow down progress or cause fear or doomerism to believe this, or even correctly update us towards higher chances of things going badly? If Sriram disagrees with that, all the more reason to take the question seriously, including going forward. I would especially highlight the question of ‘motivation.’ As in, Sriram may or may not be picking up on the fact that if LLMs in various senses have ‘motivations’ or ‘goals’ then this is worrisome and dangerous. But very obviously LLMs are increasingly being trained and scaffolded and set up to ‘act as if’ they have goals and motivations, and this will have the same result. It is worth noticing that the answer to the question of whether AI is sentient, or a moral patient, or experiencing emotions or ‘truly’ has ‘motivations’ could change. Indeed, people find it likely to change. Perhaps it would be useful to think concretely about Data. Is Data sentient? What determines your answer? How would that apply to future real world LLMs or robots? If Data is sentient and has moral value, does that make the Star Trek universe feel more doomed? Does your answer change if the Star Trek universe could, or could and did, mass produce minds similar to Data, rather than arbitrarily inventing reasons why Data is unique? Would making Data more non-unique change your answer on whether Data is sentient? Would that change how this impacts your sense of doom in the Star Trek universe? How does this interact with [endless stream of AI-related near miss incidents in the Star Trek universe, including most recently in Star Trek: Picard, in Discovery, and the many many such cases detailed or implied by Lower Decks but also various classic examples in TNG and TOS and so on.] How To Usefully Predict And Interact With an AIThe relatively small mistakes are about how to usefully conceptualize current LLMs and misunderstanding MacAskill’s position. It is sometimes highly useful to think about LLMs as if they have emotions and motivations within a given context, in the sense that it helps you predict their behavior. This is what I believe MacAskill is doing. Employing this strategy can be good decision theory. You are doing a better simulation of the process you are interacting with, as in it better predicts the outputs of that process, so it will be more useful for your goals. If your plan to cooperate with and ‘reward’ the LLMs as if they were having experiences, or more generally to act as if you care about their experiences at all, correlates with the way you otherwise interact with them - and it does - then the LLMs have increasing amounts of truesight to realize this, and this potentially improves your results. As a clean example, consider AI Parfit’s Hitchhiker. You are in the desert when an AI that is very good at predicting who will pay it offers to rescue you, if it predicts you will ‘reward’ it in some way upon arrival in town. You say yes, it rescues you. Do you reward it? Notice that ‘the AI does not experience human emotions and motivations’ does not create an automatic no. (Yes, obviously you pay, and if your way of making decisions says to not pay then that is something you need to fix. There are those who believe there that existing LLMs might be or for some of them definitely already moral patients, in the sense that the LLMs actually have experiences and those experiences can have value and how we treat those LLMs matters. Some care deeply about this. Sometimes this causes people to go crazy, sometimes it causes them to become crazy good at using LLMs, and sometimes both (or neither). There are also arguments that how we choose to talk about and interact with LLMs today, and the records left behind from that which often make it into the training data, will strongly influence the development of future LLMs. Indeed, the argument is made that this has already happened. I would not entirely dismiss such warnings. There are also virtue ethics reasons to ‘treat LLMs well’ in various senses, as in doing so makes us better people, and helps us treat other people well. Form good habits. The Only Thing We Have |