---
subject: "The DIY Guitar Pedal Culture Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-01-25 00:33:14
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Chris Moon (CM) is a serial hobbyist living in San Francisco. When he’s not soldering on the kitchen table, he is sharpening antique Disston saws, pickling umeboshi, rebuilding a clutch-pack, or solving for zero-days. Chris here. Amongst electric guitarists, effects pedals can be an obsession. These small, sound-distorting aluminum enclosures offer a wide range of effects across curious categories, from optical phasers and rotary flangers to auto-wahs, bitcrushers and fuzz sustainers. And all of them typically contain a printed circuit board (PCB), requisite components, power, and a few audio jacks. For decades, effects pedals have helped define and inspire musical genres. From Pink Floyd using a Colorsound Power Boost and Binson Echorec to sculpt Guitarists spend years questing to find their own amalgamation of grail worthy tones: trying to identify the precise effects used on their favorite track; snapping photographs of pedalboards at live gigs; endlessly listening to reviews on a myriad of YouTube channels; or lusting after legendary (and expensive) pedals made by long defunct manufacturers. And while certain brands like Electro-Harmonix, Boss, and Dunlop have always lined music store shelves, the last decade has seen a frenzy of boutique guitar pedal manufacturers offering a dizzying array of effects, with elaborate graphics and names like Astral Destiny, Rabid Mammal, Lizard Queen, and Tonal Recall, all serving up a true smorgasbord of tonal-manipulation. Why is this interesting? Photo: Because as people have become ever more passionate about their pedals, DIY pedal builders—a seasoned community of guitarists, electronics enthusiasts, makers, collectors, and at times entrepreneurs—are making their own. While many guitar effects pedals can cost hundreds of dollars retail, they can be made at home for as little as $10 in Practically there can be very little, if anything, distinguishing a homemade pedal from a factory or boutique maker. Indeed the allure of cheap replicas is strong, and the DIY community has gone from Photo: While wildly tedious, it is possible to remove this layer in a process known as “de-gooping.” Many in the DIY community see gooping as an affront to consumer transparency. The practice obscures not only the components, but the possibility of a pedal itself being a clone, not to mention the general quality of the workmanship. With the abundance of clones, some makers have taken to peddling their wares online, offering custom Perhaps the most notable example of a DIY guitar pedal being cloned by a big name manufacturer is the For many guitarists caught in an industry saturated by boutique gear, hype, and pseudoscientific tone-sniffing, the opportunity to have a hand in building your own equipment is empowering. Not only does it offer a frugal alternative, it also allows one to cut through flowery marketing and reveal the immutable truths found in simple circuits and schematics. On every one of Bill Finnegan’s Klon KTRs it states, “Kindly remember: The ridiculous hype that offends so many is not of my making.” (CM) — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Chris (CM) —
Invite your friends and earn rewardsIf you enjoy Why is this interesting?, share it with your friends and earn rewards when they subscribe. |