---
subject: "Anduril Takes Over $22 Billion Contract to Build Technomancers for U.S. Army"
from: "Ashlee Vance from Core Memory  <ashleevance@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-12 05:26:17
labels: ["Ashlee Vance", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_4216359091400734623", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX"]
---
|
The headline on Tuesday’s [press release](https://substack.com/redirect/d3a153fa-63ed-4b00-8000-d9745165e89a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) from Anduril and Microsoft went like this: “Anduril and Microsoft partner to advance Integrated Visual Augmentation System (IVAS) program for the U.S. Army.”
This is a work of true art.
Because what actually happened here is that Anduril took a $22 billion U.S. Army contract over from Microsoft to help Microsoft save face. It will now be on Anduril to rescue the beleaguered IVAS effort and build a new line of augmented reality headsets – aka futuristic helmets - for the military. (The deal still hinges on approval from the Defense Department, but you can be sure that Microsoft and Anduril would not announce this thing without approval secured.)
The Army officially began testing out potential partners for the IVAS program around 2018. For a while, it seemed like Magic Leap would earn the Army’s business, and then Microsoft swooped in with its HoloLens technology and won an initial $480 million contract to make 100,000 custom HoloLens units for soldiers. The technology was meant to provide more information and communication functions to the soldiers via a face computer just like you see in the movies but do not actually see in real life.
In 2021, the contract got swole and hit $22 billion with Microsoft making much fancier headsets that looked [like this](https://substack.com/redirect/749f4966-5ea6-4565-abc2-3ab72df0b16c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).
Things, however, did not go great. Microsoft’s technology initially struggled in inclement weather. Later, soldiers were plagued by [headaches and nausea](https://substack.com/redirect/4fb913c7-968e-4b55-9cc3-7770790020c9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). There were resolution and field of view problems and on and on. In 2023, reports emerged that it would take Microsoft until mid-2025 to have field-ready versions of improved headsets that addressed the issues.
As the years ticked by, Microsoft received regular public floggings from military and government officials for spending upwards of $1.5 billion to make a few thousand HoloLens-based headsets that did not work right.
At the end of last year, the situation became more, er, complicated when Microsoft discontinued its HoloLens production. (Although you could argue that HoloLens really died in 2022 when Alex Kipman, the product’s biggest champion, left Microsoft.)
You don’t have to be part of Team Doge to do the math here. The U.S. Army had put in all the hard work to have a $22 billion program approved. Microsoft no longer had the will or the means to live up to the contract. Nor did it want to look bad in the press for letting the Army down . . . more. So, in order for the Army to keep the contract alive and to grant Microsoft a graceful exit, both parties needed a deus ex machina, and that deus ex machina looked like this.
In Palmer Luckey, the U.S. finds itself in that ultrarare position of having an all-time VR/AR headset guru-cum-weapons dealer at the ready. You can make a strong case that no one on this planet knows more about the particular set of skills required to make a helmet of the future, and Luckey seems enthused by the challenge.
He [writes](https://substack.com/redirect/e88d7156-5777-4829-9c7f-ca2a2caf7a46?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o),
Tactical heads-up-displays that turn warfighters into technomancers and pair us with weaponized robotics were one of the products in the original Anduril pitch deck for a reason. The past eight years we have spent building Lattice have put Anduril in a position to make this type of thing actually useful in the way military strategists and technologists have long dreamed of, ever since Robert Heinlein’s 1959 novel Starship Troopers. Not just day and night and thermal and ultraviolet, but peering into an idealized interactive real-time composite of past, present, and future that will quickly surpass traditional senses like vision and touch. Put another way, Superman doesn’t use menus – he just sees and does. If Anduril had been more than a dozen people when IVAS was first getting spun up all those years ago (at least the Tragic Heap guys didn’t win, our country really dodged a bullet there), I do believe our crazy pitch could have won this from the start – as things stand, though, there is no time like the present.
(I mean, China seems prepared for a lot of what the U.S. can dish out, but I’ve yet to read about its anti-technomancer program.)
For Anduril, this deal goes beyond any other contract it has secured to date. (There are [rumors](https://substack.com/redirect/22ed6ce1-57de-4fb4-9bd8-81155db341bc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) that the Army will bring in more competition for future IVAS designs.) The mega win comes on the heels of the company opening a massive new factory in Ohio and raising as much as [$2.5 billion](https://substack.com/redirect/84af4466-bf9a-42e9-87da-0bdc6a96db98?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) more in funding. And all of these things were already in the works before Trump won the election and planted a bunch of Anduril allies in Washington. Life is good.
Microsoft got to exit the IVAS debacle with some dignity intact by announcing that its Azure cloud computing system will be used by Anduril for IVAS work and for Anduril’s AI work.
Luckey, meanwhile, found a return to the technology that he holds most dear. IVAS has emerged as his personal top project. And, by personal, I mean, really fucking personal.
Again, he writes,
Everything I’ve done in my career — building Oculus out of a camper trailer, shipping VR to millions of consumers, getting run out of Silicon Valley by backstabbing snakes, betting that Anduril could tear people out of the bigtech megacorp matrix and put them to work on our nation’s most important problems — has led to this moment. IVAS isn’t just another product, it is a once-in-a-generation opportunity to redefine how technology supports those who serve. We have a shot to prove that this long-standing dream is no windmill, that this can expand far beyond one company or one headset and act as a a nexus for the best of the best to set a new standard for how a large collection of companies can work together to solve our nation’s most important problems.
Whatever you are imagining, however crazy you imagine I am, multiply it by ten and then do it again. I am back, and I am only getting started.
I’ll go ahead and set the bar here.
Hopefully, you enjoyed this story. If so, please share it and subscribe to Core Memory. We want to do more of this for you and need your help. Thanks!