---
subject: "All products must evolve. BFO and The Nutgraf are evolving too"
from: "Rohin from The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2020-06-15 07:02:17
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031"]
---
Starting 1 July, we’re taking our free newsletters, [The Nutgraf](https://link.the-ken.com/ss/c/aX9wIf2EaINWwJhuQmbIavVb26VfZZzHZ63evDdWNM8bnqlBqESqtPM7ATCdsLWr/32n/Fq6NnfjoT1mRkkXWygp_wg/h0/yxjIAgucIsISr263rhadtMo8qpD3MlOvttfv3BcuOU8) and [Beyond The First Order (BFO)](https://link.the-ken.com/ss/c/aX9wIf2EaINWwJhuQmbIasmp81WDP17KjjqmkXt6UvA/32n/Fq6NnfjoT1mRkkXWygp_wg/h1/EVE4tA8xB0NLl9iFdhGYmzYSR869ONZLGrN1wCQKtr0) behind our paywall. After this date, each newsletter will cost Rs 99/month in India and US$2/month in other regions.
Since launch, both BFO and The Nutgraf have driven thousands and thousands of new readers to The Ken - all entirely through word of mouth from existing subscribers like you. Hundreds of you have written in to us every week with feedback, which has helped us sharpen these products. This has been invaluable, and I’d like to thank you for doing this. Thank you for making our newsletters better, and for giving us the confidence to take this step.
While we are making our newsletters paid, we aren’t bundling them, because we want to give you the choice to decide which one you want to subscribe to (though we hope your answer is, “both!”). Both The Nutgraf and BFO will continue to be free for all our premium subscribers at no additional cost, so if at any point you decide to purchase an annual or a quarterly subscription to The Ken or The Ken Southeast Asia, our flagship products, you’ll receive newsletters for each edition free of cost for the duration of your subscription.
However, if you have a few minutes though, I’d love to tell you why and how we got here. The decision to paywall our newsletters took much deliberation internally. But once we arrived at it using the same first principles we used to make The Ken a subscription-only product back in 2016, it felt obvious.
The Nutgraf is our weekly newsletter that goes out Saturday mornings and uses a very high level of synthesis, interpretive narrative and humour to string together the most significant business events from India. BFO, in contrast, is our daily newsletter that analyses the complex second and third order effects thrown into motion because of Covid-19 across India and Southeast Asia. One’s an interpretive (occasionally performative) weekly newsletter from India while the other’s a diverse and analytical daily newsletter from India and Southeast Asia underpinned by Systems Thinking.
Why are we making them subscription products? Because we believe that valuable products always have a price associated with them. If they don’t, you should wonder what’s in it for the creators. Few creators can afford to make high quality products each day over a long term and give them away free of cost.
Media products are no different.
The Nutgraf and BFO are a labour of love for us. Producing them is a complex, newsroom-wide process within The Ken that is both exhilarating and exhausting. We love them, of course. To continue giving them away for free over the long run would mean either we consider indirect sources of revenue (like sponsorships and advertising) or try to control the significant time and effort that goes into them.
Making them subscription products sets off another set of virtuous cycles for us, where subscribers directly support our newsletters with both their money and feedback, which, in turn, enables us to devote additional resources and efforts to them. That is the only model we’ve known since starting The Ken.
Instead, we’re doubling down and hiring for a [full-time newsletter writer](https://link.the-ken.com/ss/c/aX9wIf2EaINWwJhuQmbIauVO8qkuIoM6LeIERjafX4HKtB2mBlqlKsjlJ9OUvww5p-_6TvA0dptGRr5mgG4waQ/32n/Fq6NnfjoT1mRkkXWygp_wg/h2/7-Aj5RP_4Po0yYEoxtcSlUKhvOUoZ3DmcL1c5Ji98cY) position. (If you know someone great, please refer them!) The Nutgraf will continue to be helmed by Praveen Gopal Krishnan, while Arundhati Ramanathan will lead the team running BFO.
Please do write to me if you’ve any suggestions on how we could improve our newsletters even further. Or if you aren’t receiving them in your inbox everyday. Or even if you think there’s an alternative business model that we’ve overlooked.