---
subject: "How Common Is Accidental Invention?"
from: "Construction Physics <constructionphysics@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-09-25 12:01:14
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Construction Physics", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8588207018748827248", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
One of the most important inventions of the 19th century was Beyond the industry that it spawned, mauve is notable for having been invented accidentally. Perkin stumbled upon mauve when trying to synthesize quinine, a treatment for malaria that was only obtainable from the bark of the cinchona tree. In one of his attempts, Perkin found that instead of the colorless quinine, he had created a reddish powder: further investigations of this unexpected creation resulted in a black residue that, when dissolved in alcohol, created a bright purple solution. There are numerous other examples of accidental inventions. Famously, the process for vulcanizing rubber was discovered in 1839 by Because I’m interested in the nature of technological progress, I wanted to get a sense of how common accidental invention is. So I turned once again to Wikipedia’s By “accidental,” I mean roughly, “the primary or major mechanism by which an invention works is created or discovered unintentionally.” The invention does not need to emerge fully formed, only the basic thing that makes it work. So Alexander Fleming’s chance discovery of penicillin would count as an accidental invention, even though turning Fleming’s observations into a working drug would take years of deliberate effort. A deliberate search for something to solve a specific problem would not count as accidental, even if there was an element of chance in its ultimate discovery. So Edison testing hundreds of different filament materials for his incandescent light bulb until a suitable one was found would not count as accidental. By contrast, a deliberate search that resulted in something other than what was being searched for would count as accidental. For instance, I count Harry Brearley’s I also didn’t count someone accidentally or serendipitously getting the idea for an invention (the concept of “accidental” breaks down a bit when you’re talking about the origins of ideas, since we often don’t know why a particular idea pops into our heads). So Robert Gair seeing an A challenge with determining whether an invention is accidental is that it requires having some idea of the inventor’s mental state, which may not have been recorded, or which may have been exaggerated by historical retellings. For instance, the invention of the Accidental inventionsAltogether, of the 190 “major” inventions Wikipedia lists between 1800 and 1970, I counted 15 (just under 8%) that could be described as accidental. This is a short enough list that we can enumerate each one. In addition to the four we’ve already mentioned (vulcanized rubber, mauve, stainless steel, and penicillin), the inventions are listed below: The stethoscope was invented in 1816 when French physician Hot blast iron smelting was invented in 1828 by Scottish inventor Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) was first The critical breakthrough for Alexander Graham Bell’s telephone came accidentally in 1875 when Bell was working on the
X-rays were famously discovered accidentally by German physicist William Roentgen in 1895 when he was experimenting with
Polyethylene was first created in 1898 by German chemist Hans von Pechmann, when he Safety glass was Czochralski crystal pulling, which creates large single crystals of material by slowly pulling them out of a molten pool, was The mechanism behind the microwave oven was famously stumbled upon accidentally in 1945 by Perry Spencer at Raytheon when he noticed a candy bar in his pocket was melted by a microwave radar he was working on. The mechanism behind the silicon solar PV cell, light striking a p-n junction in a piece of silicon and creating an electrical current, was first
Kevlar was invented in 1965 at Du Pont when Stephanie Kwolek, tasked with synthesizing new types of
Patterns of accidental inventionThe most notable pattern at work here is that the majority of these inventions — 9 out of 15 — are chemical inventions. Accidental inventions make up almost 20% of the 47 inventions between 1800 and 1970 I previously classified as chemical.² This isn’t that surprising to me. Chemical phenomena are both highly opaque (meaning we’ll often be surprised by them), and require comparatively little deliberate effort to create. You might create a new, valuable chemical or chemical process just by mixing other chemicals together, or by exposing the right set of chemicals to the right set of conditions. Rubber vulcanization was invented when a mixture of chemicals spilled onto a hot stove, and Duco paint was invented when a batch of nitrocellulose and sodium acetate was left idle for a few days following a power failure. By contrast, it seems much harder to create a new, valuable machine by accident, in part because we can predict the behavior of physical objects much more readily than we can predict the behavior of chemicals: you can’t have an accident if you already know what’s going to happen. And while electrical phenomena are also opaque to human senses and not naturally intuitively predictable, it’s my sense that creating interesting combinations of them tends to require a lot of deliberate effort to create and shape moving electrical charges. But chemical reactions often happen on their own, without much in the way of human intervention. The other notable pattern is that most accidental inventions (12 of the 15) were the product of deliberate research, or of attempts to invent something else. Mauve was invented when Perkin tried to synthesize quinine, the telephone breakthrough came when Bell and Watson were trying to build a harmonic telegraph, and X-rays were discovered when Roentgen was doing experiments with cathode ray tubes. Only three inventions — the stethoscope, safety glass, and the microwave — were the product of accidents outside the context of deliberate science or technology research and development. This probably also shouldn’t be surprising: it suggests the conditions for creating an accidental invention aren’t likely to be created in everyday life, but instead when trying to create or discover something new. If we look at the frequency of accidental invention, it doesn’t seem to have changed much over time. On average a new one comes along every decade or so: ConclusionAccidental invention is in some ways the opposite of The major exception to this is with chemical inventions, where the rate of accidental invention ( around 19%) is much closer to the rate of multiple invention (33% for successes or near-successes). Evidently the nature of chemical phenomena — which are comparatively difficult to predict, but comparatively easy to create and manipulate — both makes accidental invention more likely, and multiple invention somewhat less likely. 1 I think it’s debatable whether it makes sense to classify X-rays as an “invention” or not, but it’s on the Wikipedia list so I’ve included it here. 2 Originally this was 46 chemical inventions, as safety glass was categorized as a mechanical one. But the nature of the discovery led me to re-categorize it as chemical. 3 Though accidental and multiple invention are not mutually exclusive. The telephone, for instance, is on both lists: Bell’s breakthrough was accidental, but both he and Elisha Gray had the idea for the telephone. Construction Physics articles will always remain free, but if you find this work valuable, I encourage you to Construction Physics is produced in partnership with the Institute for Progress, a Washington, DC-based think tank. You can learn more about their work by visiting their You can also contact me on |