---
subject: "AI-Based Disinformation Will Not Be An Especially Big Deal in the 2024 Election"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <the-diff@ghost.io>"
to: ""
date: 2024-02-12 15:06:40
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
|
In this issue: - AI-Based Disinformation Will Not Be An Especially Big Deal in the 2024 Election—It's possible to make fake videos of politicians that will fool some people, at least some of the time. But a disproportionate share of this content will be consumed by people who have already made up their minds. Platforms are dialing back political content generally, which will affect the fakes as well as the real ones. And the most effective deepfakes will be the ones that are close to plausible, making them a modern version of the age-old practice of trial balloons.
- Discount Pods—A new hedge fund startup keeps the analysts but automates the portfolio managers.
- China and Real Estate—One important thing to understand about China's economic policies is that 80% of household wealth is real estate.
- Microcaps—Markets get into the gambling boom.
- Unraveling—On a growth model that works until it doesn't.
- Market Structure—Italy's economy as a bad factor bet.
AI-Based Disinformation Will Not Be An Especially Big Deal in the 2024 ElectionA persistent concern about AI is that it enables the creation of hyper-realistic fake audio and video, which will usher in a dark age in which no one can trust anything they see online, and that elections will ultimately be determined by whether Russia or China get the most GPUs—or something like that. It's unclear, because the implication of most disinformation-discourse is that it's a warning that other people will fall for it, in harmful ways. Nobody says "My biggest fear is that I, personally, will switch the candidate I support on the basis of a fake thirty-second clip posted on Twitter by Belorussian intelligence." It's always a vague model of somebody else's bad decisions. The main protection most people have against falling for AI-generated propaganda is choosing to tap the NYT app icon instead of the X one. The Times is not perfect, but they presumably have rules against writing stories about random social media rumors without at least going through the motions of vetting these for truth. Meanwhile, apps themselves are reducing the salience of political content generally, which would cover the fake kind as well as the new kind; In fact, one of the ways that you can't readily trust mainstream media: there's bias in which stories count as news, and that bias exists both in the heads of people who write the news and in the social networks through which stories propagate. In that last category, there's no doubt that some stories happen entirely because a journalist gets an idea, digs into it, and produces a coherent narrative. Either there isn't a catalyst, or there's a subtle one that's easy to miss: a classic instance of this would be noticing that someone has been quietly dropped from a scheduled presentation, or noticing an explanatory footnote in some document that leaves more questions than it answers. The real genesis for those stories is less seemly: when two people really love what they can do for each other, and one has an audience and another has information, they can be combined to gestate into an exclusive story. This is the usual genesis for articles about pending legislation or executive orders, about mergers, and product launches. Which raises the question: what is each side doing for the other? When someone tells a financial journalist that company XYZ is probably bidding for company ABC, why do they do it? It's a trial balloon ( But disclosure has degrees of freedom. Suppose you're involved in the legislative process, and you hear about a bill to which you're opposed. This bill has pluses and minuses, but you know, realistically, that it can probably get passed. What can you do? You can make a list of those minuses, and share them with someone who will highlight them. For example, if for obscure DC politics-related reasons, you are opposed to a proposal for incentivizing people to precisely quantify the risk of terrorist attacks, you could probably emphasize that In fact, we can even see this in AI-disinformation discourse! So, in this case a deepfake arguably had an effect: people who thought the video was real responded in a way that made it more likely to happen. So AI is influencing politics, but the specific way it is is that it democratizes the trial balloon. If there's an idea that's in the range of things that could be proposed, but also in the range of proposals that would be opposed, a trial balloon actually creates information by determining where those distributions overlap and where they don't. This "what if" game used to be restricted to the well-connected among either leakers or writers, but now anyone who can make a video plausible enough to be taken seriously but interesting enough to go viral can have the same sort of influence. So if there is a deepfake effect, it's one that makes the market more efficient. It's easier than ever to get a large group of people to temporarily believe a politician said something they didn't, and for a politician to see whether they'd like it or not. And since a politician is someone who has opted into a job that's pure popularity contest, or at least one where the more serious judgment doesn't happen until after they're dead, it will be pretty easy for such people to end up endorsing the surprisingly popular views that are ascribed to them, and rejecting the unpopular ones. The audience that's swayed by deepfakes is some combination of low-information voters and the hyper-partisan (often both!); they're more likely to reinforce existing beliefs than to change them. Even though the deepfakes in question are fake, they're actually contributing to a more efficient process of converting vague notions into concrete policy proposals. And even though increased market efficiency is uncomfortable to the people who prosper from the inefficiencies, in the long run it's a good thing to have and impossible to stop. Disclosure: Long META. To be clear, I'm using "bias" in the morally-neutral sense that people all have different priorities and interests, and that institutions naturally select for some personalities over others. Media is an industry where the pay is low compared to the credentials required, so it's going to select more for people who care about status over money. And caring about status means being sensitive to the opinions of status-conscious people. All of us have this kind of bias; I'm much less likely to know about or write about sports than the average person, so one of The Diff's biases is that it underrates both the importance of sports and sports as an intuition pump for understanding other parts of human behavior. Acknowledging biases doesn't mean reversing them; the time investment to get something of value out of football is more than I'm willing to make, so this bias will be with us for a while yet. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/b818eafa?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)The usual way to engineer this is to [do the reading](https://www.thediff.co/r/8732d467?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99). This is easier in business/finance reporting than anywhere else, because so much of the material you'd use to tell the story already comes in the form of either publicly-available legal filings or fairly widely-available transcripts. Don't want to be stuck continuously rewriting Apple press releases until you get replaced by an AI? Start reading earnings transcripts from Apple's suppliers, and their suppliers' suppliers, until you start to find the stories that Apple doesn't want to put in a press release.[↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/737ee5d0?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)It's worth meditating, however briefly, on how much better your life is because there are people who profitably bet on horrible outcomes. When civilization fails to collapse after a natural disaster, it's because someone prepared for it and then put their plan into action when it happened. That person had a motivation; perhaps they're at a nonprofit and want to feel good about their contributions to the world, or perhaps they're a supply chain manager who knows that they'll still get fired if their company isn't back in operation by the time their competitors are. Financial markets are a less direct way that people who get paid to bet on disaster make your life better, but this still holds in an indirect way: when someone responds to geopolitical risk by buying futures in some at-risk commodity, they're signaling to the consumers of that commodity that it's a good idea to look for substitutes, build up a stockpile, or both. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/d6fdcf7c?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)I don't think anyone who has enough information to know this for sure can be trusted, but: this does present a fun Leaks Hypothesis of Polarization. Every bill is a negotiation, and the more complicated ones will involve more give-and-take from both sides. But that increases leak risk on two dimensions: first, a longer negotiation means there's more time for someone to backchannel parts of it to the media. And second, a more complex set of tradeoffs gives a leaker more negatives to highlight. So the temptation to leak gets stronger, and when it happens, both sides trust each other less. To really test this, though, you'd need some way to track how official and systematized leaks are, and that's hard to do. A hundred years ago, an off-the-record comment from an official familiar with the President's thinking [could have come directly from the President himself, at a secret but regularly-scheduled press conference](https://www.thediff.co/r/12fa7252?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99).[↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/bd5a622f?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
You're on The Diff's free list. This week, paying subscribers read about Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. See a sampling of current open roles below: - A CRM-ingesting startup is on-boarding customers to its LLM-powered sales software, and is in need of a product engineer with a track record of building on their own. (NYC)
- A systematic hedge fund is looking for portfolio managers who have experience using alternative data to develop systematic strategies (NYC).
- An alt data provider is using LLMs to scrape and is in need of a backend engineer—experience building with LLMs required, web scraping experience preferred. (Remote)
- A concentrated crossover fund is looking for an experienced full stack software engineer to help develop and maintain internal applications to improve investment decision-making and external applications to enable portfolio companies. (SF)
- A private credit fund denominated in Bitcoin needs a credit analyst that can negotiate derivatives pricing. Experience with low-risk crypto lending preferred (i.e. to large miners, prop-trading firms in safe jurisdictions). (Remote)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. ElsewhereDiscount PodsPod shops have been a frequent topic of discussion in The Diff (you can start with Getting rid of the best-paid employees means a cheaper cost structure, but also raises the obvious question of why other firms haven't thought of this. It's easier to add analyst headcount than portfolio manager headcount, so if analysts were higher ROI you'd expect the big funds to have fewer teams with more headcount over time, instead of adding new teams. But it's also possible that some of that portfolio manager compensation is a premium for depending on a skillset that's more automatable. Converting a set of fundamental theses into a portfolio is partly a problem of math and partly a problem of taste, but the usual bet to make is that when mass production gets cheap enough and good enough, there's little room for craft. China and Real EstateOne way financial bubbles can come about happens when politically-favored groups get better treatment: savings and loans were a sympathetic category in the early 80s, when MicrocapsThe penny stock boom, UnravelingThe WSJ (The Diff Market StructureItaly's economy is |
||
|
|
|
|||
|