---
subject: "Weekly Dose of Optimism"
from: "Not Boring <notboring@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-11-03 12:52:29
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Not Boring", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2982495070691762429", "UNREAD"]
---
Hi friends 👋, Happy Friday and welcome back to our 67th Weekly Dose of Optimism. It’s a big weekend here in NYC — Marathon weekend. I like to think of marathons as optimistic endeavors — displaying human potential, our ability to overcome obstacles, and to delay instant gratification in favor of longer-term personal growth. You don’t meet too many pessimistic marathon runners. Good luck to all runners this weekend, with a special s/o to my girlfriend Sienna ❤️. Let’s get to it. Today’s Not Boring is brought to you by… Packy here. Instead of a sponsor, I’m going to pump our new podcast: Age of Miracles. Our first season is on nuclear energy, and the combination of innovation and nitty gritty it’s going to take to build an energy abundant future. We just released Episode 3 minutes ago. You can listen to it on Thanks to all of you who listened, commented, liked, subscribed, reviewed, shared, and gave us feedback on our first two episodes! We climbed as high as #12 on the top tech podcast charts, which beat my expectations for Week 1. Let’s keep it going and break the top 10. Episode three is all about what it’s going to take to build more large reactors more affordably and predictably. We cover how nuclear plants work, their economics, why their Idiot Index is so high, and the steps we might take to improve their economics. We cover everything from cost overrun insurance to psyops, debate whether government or the free market has a bigger role to play, and try to answer the question of what it would take to bring large nuclear plants down the experience curve. For those who want to go deeper, we put together a I want to give a big shoutout and congrats to my co-host, Harry Baker for Space.com
OK, you probably didn’t expect Mini-Me humping a laser to start off the newsletter, but let me explain…Scientists have activated the world's smallest particle accelerator, a nanophotonic electron accelerator (NEA), which is the size of a coin and accelerates electrons using mini laser beams aimed at "pillars" within a microchip. Anytime I hear mini and lasers in the same sentence, my mind goes to the image above…sue me. The NEA is 54 million time smaller than the 16.8-mile-long Large Hadron Collider at CERN. It fits within a microchip and boasts a main acceleration tube only 0.02 inches long. The NEA has wide range of potential applications, including putting particle accelerators inside human patients. For example, a tiny NEA could be placed on an endoscope to better administer precise radiotherapy for cancer patients. That’s the main goal of the research, but who knows what else those crazy scientists will dream up once we have the ability to put particle accelerators inside of humans. Accelerate, indeed. (2) Prachi Patel for IEEE Spectrum
Speaking of tiny machines inside of our body… an international team of researchers have developed a DNA nanoengine that can perform pulsing movements, driving nanomaters with chemical energy instead of random Brownian motion. It’s an example of DNA origami, which “involves carefully designing DNA sequences that can fold, twist, and staple together at the right places to assemble into preconceived structures.” On Tuesday, DNA nanomachines are another avenue for making changes inside our body, and in the physical world. The researchers think that their pulsing nanometer should be easy to connect to other tiny molecular machines, driving them as they DNA origami nanoengines that can make things … what a world. (3) Dennis Normile for Science
Big things are happening at much larger scales, too. We’re one small step closer to commercial fusion. Japan's JT-60SA, the world's largest fusion reactor, turned on last week. This machine can sustain a plasma heated to 200 million degrees Celsius for about 100 seconds, surpassing prior large tokamaks. The activation demonstrates the reactor's foundational functionality, though it will take another couple of years before the JT-60SA can sustain plasmas long enough for use in meaningful physics experiments. That said, the success of and learnings from JT-60SA will bolster the progress of ITER, the world's largest and most advanced experimental tokamak reactor. The main goal of ITER is to demonstrate the feasibility of large scale fusion. While ITER is based in France, it’s one of the largest international scientific collaborations in history, with over 35 countries involved, including the US, China, and Russia. Both ITER and JT-60SA have been slow — with such advanced, complex, and enormous machines, there are bound to be issues and delays — and we’re excited by the startups entering the The more that reactors like JT-60SA push progress and knowledge forward, the faster others in the space can move, and the closer we get to generating power the same way the sun does. (4) Steven Sinofsky for Hardcore Engineering
On Monday, The White House issued an That’s the argument Ben Thompson makes in the most fiery Stratechery piece we’ve read in a long time:
Optimism (and pessimism) shape reality. This is a prime example of that. Once a regulation is in place, it’s incredibly hard to roll it back. Thankfully, this is just an Executive Order, but it should be a warning shot that we’re going to put rules in place now that could impact humanity for decades to come. It’s worth reading both Sinofsky and Thompson’s pieces to get up to speed and fight on the side of the optimists. (5)
Packy here. If there’s anybody who has hands-on experience actually putting AI in weapons systems, it’s
That’s just one of the many gems in Palmer’s conversation with In recent years, he’s used the podcast circuit to go scorched-earth on the investors, partners, and journalists that he believes mistreated him earlier in his career. You should go find those podcasts, like In this one, Palmer describes his motivations for doing what we he does: to make the world a different place. He wants to make it better, certainly, but above all else, he wants to make a big impact. And to do that, he builds big companies. Palmer Luckey is a singular character. Chances are, you won’t be able to listen to this podcast, download his wisdom, and go out and do what he does. But it’s one of the best podcast conversations I’ve heard in a long time because it highlights the balance of ambition, innovation, and practicality that’s necessary to make big things happen. I’m not going to start the next Anduril, but listening to the conversation certainly made me think about what I am trying to accomplish with what I have. I’m happy we have people like Palmer Luckey working on the side of the good guys. That’s all for this week. We’ll be back in your inbox on Tuesday. Thanks for reading, Dan + Packy |