---
subject: "The Seedless Fruit Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-06-23 13:37:34
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Mark Slavonia (MJS) is an investor, a pilot, and an Mark here. It’s stone fruit season, my favorite time of year for fresh, seasonal fruit. There’s a row of trees behind my house that drop small, delicious plums more quickly than we can harvest them. Although I might prefer to eat these tiny treats unimpeded by their pits, the big, hard seeds of plums, apricots, and peaches have not yet yielded to efforts to cultivate seedless varieties.
Why is this interesting? There are several ways to develop and produce seedless fruit, but luck has yielded some of the best results. A chance mutation can create a variety that delays its seed production, one that produces tiny seeds, or one that has no seeds at all. For example, the navel orange—seedless and awesome—resulted from a The navel orange, a happy and seedless accident But observant growers can rescue these mutants and reproduce them through
Stone fruit are especially intractable. Botanists haven’t yet developed or discovered a peach, cherry, or apricot that will develop a useful fruit without a big seed and its husk.
Seedless varieties that are raised through grafting or cutting are genetic clones of each other, leaving them especially susceptible to blight or disease due to their limited genetic diversity. Such a fate ruined the commercial cultivation of the (seedless)
None of the seedless fruit commonly on the market today is a genetically modified organism (“GMO”) in the modern sense. Seedless varieties are the result of old-fashioned botany, patience, and luck. While some fruits have been successfully bred to cultivate useful seedless varieties, the perfect seedless apple or pitless cherry is still elusive. Finding or cultivating one would be a botanical breakthrough. (MJS) Atlas Obscura goes searching for a [Gros Michel](https://email.mg-d1.substack.com/c/eJwlUcGOhCAM_ZrhNgZEcThw2Mv-hinQVbIIBuoa_35xJiW0gbav79UB4ZLLZfZcid3XTNeOJuFZIxJhYUfFMgdvxDAqKYVm3kht-cspFur8UxA3CNFQOZDth43BAYWc7pKJc85WA256Ca6U0lbJqfeDkwq4HSXonvdCfnDh8AGTQ4N_WK6ckLm8bZjo7sSiWYn2-pBfj_67nfM8O6AINdvqjgJdS27PUCi4iLWFS8n1uQW3YnxaSM0qC6YB9lz1Ukg5yaGT3ehQDErgq1djr71_DHxbnl509bCVwP3enVkxoa6Quptqy1hu__5ojOd7ziMFumZMYCP6jxj0EfUtz7xgwtLE9jOQEWoctRbDJMTAP-wbR8Un3kbQrCH73KqSOdcrVFpDDamtAiuFtPwDlPiT8g)bananaThe ancient Romans had seedless grapes, probably, but the evidence is a [single mention by Pliny the Elder](https://email.mg-d1.substack.com/c/eJwlUctuhSAQ_RrZ1fBQlAWLpk1X7TcQhLlKimhgrPXvi70JYRLmDHMeziLMW770vhUk92Xw2kEnOEsERMjkKJBN8Jp1vRSCKeK1UBMdnSShmEcGWG2IGvMBZD-mGJzFsKV7ZKCUkkWPXik-gJfUTQ9rx0k9evnwTMnOAe275157-ADJgYYfyNeWgLhtXSHh_ROJekHcSyNeG_5Rz3mebdxgctGWElxpK7g-_wQ4a9ljSJeB6CG_JItHttEsoWBVWrtMifEGTebz7VMMtOWsb3_X2IiPDNZ_bR4a8Z7B4UaC5pRzKrlgQgyia0XbO2CdZDBy2XPlfdPRdX7xrC3HVNC675sLyTqUxab2Nqci5rv-N6pH5lZ2pICVY7JTBP-0D58x_BtqZkiQazzeWNRM9r1SrBsY6-jTr-qKpAOtFBSpm_1Wp5I-l6vqrFpDquFBwZDmP_5ZpM4)Grafting can produce fantastical fruit trees that produce several different types of fruit. If you don’t have the patience to do the grafting yourself, you can purchase a [fruit cocktail tree](https://email.mg-d1.substack.com/c/eJwlUcGuhCAM_JrltgYEUQ4c3uX9hkGoSlbBQHnGv3-4JqQ0aaedmVqDsMR06SNmJHcY8TpABzjzBoiQSMmQRu80E53knCniNFcTHawkPo9zAtiN3zSmAuQo0-atQR_DDekppWTVXMyWKcY7NgjRz8JNPRfW9UqB5IMxz15TnIdgQcMfpCsGIDbuOwS8J5FNr4hHfvGfV_tb33mezWwyvpcUTx-WN1YiuamQWjxSdMVirumcise3jfaDleW3i3jd0ralsuWM80ql4U1ngQnJYGhl1yrnXoLuy9uxJpcpo7GfezJJ2ufVhOYWXDuW-_8Wqu7xZluCx2uEYKYN3GMJPtZ-TRoXCJCq5W40qJnsOqWY6BkT9PGgKpW0p5WCInWzixUV9LlePuPqsw_1IJCx6v0H-IaW0w).
— WITI x McKinsey: An ongoing partnership where we highlight interesting McKinsey research, writing, and data. Resilience for sustainable, inclusive growth. Resilience is the ability to deal with adversity, withstand shocks, and continuously adapt and accelerate as disruptions and crises arise over time. A can’t-miss — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Mark (MS) —
You’re a free subscriber to |