---
subject: "The Monday Media Diet with Derrick Gee"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-05-22 10:26:49
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
I found Derrick Gee (DG) through some of his Tell us about yourself. I’m a painfully private person who tripped over and fell into a content creation ball pit, where I now talk to hundreds of thousands of people about music and culture on I’m an Australian based in Sydney, who has worked in London and New York and am of Chinese descent - which actually gives me an interesting footing as a person from many places all at once. I describe myself as a DJ/radio host (with former residencies on London’s Describe your media diet. I have a CMD+T habit of opening the Verge whenever I’m procrastinating, which also extends to Nilay Patel’s Decoder podcast. I am endlessly fascinated in how technology influences our lives, and how decisions made regarding user interface and design impact our consumption, entertainment and addictions. Similarly I keep an eye on Outside of that, I keep up to date with music via internet radio, Soundcloud and suggestions in my discord. I have to admit, a lot of my media consumption is my TikTok For You Page. It may not be the intellectual answer, but it really is Twitter in vertical video scrolling form. If there’s a drama happening at your local music festival, you’ll see it all, in video, almost in real time, and is really the evolution that was missing from the Twitter interface long ago. What’s the last great book you read? I’m not much of a reader! (I understand if you now close this newsletter and deem me an uncultured TikTokker!). I’m not sure if it’s my attention span, but I’m much more of a listener - whether it’s albums or podcasts. Ironically I enjoy writing a lot via my So to that end - here are some great texts (albums) to check out: Alt-brit-pop (from an American): [Yves Tumor - Praise A Lord Who Chews But Which Does Not Consume; (Or Simply, Hot Between Worlds)](https://substack.com/redirect/1d954005-b2e6-466f-871e-f813df655d08?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)(2023)Spiritual Jazz: [The Awakening - Hear, Sense and Feel](https://substack.com/redirect/8a183567-11e2-4dab-b31d-89ad782b41d9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)(1972)Post rock: [caroline - caroline](https://substack.com/redirect/b1e682a5-042f-4f76-9e62-f471ab876550?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)(2022)
What are you reading now? I’ve had a GQ tab open for forever titled “ What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication? Finish it. Sometimes I enjoy the New Yorker, because it’s in-depth enough but fits my attention span. But what ends up happening is I have a copy in my beach bag and I stare at the horizon for an hour. If I’m to flip this to be more about music - it’s much the same. I try my best to finish an album and give it repeat listens before fully passing judgement, because sometimes it can take years for a record to truly sink in. The accompaniment of a horizon also helps me to digest this audio diet. Who should everyone be reading that they’re not? The Wikipedia article on the What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone? Apple Music Classical is the most important app launch of the last year. It organises and recontextualises classical music in a standalone app - much needed when the composer and composition is as important as the conductor and the orchestra. As a classical music newb, this has been a great way to learn about and dip my toe in and I hope this concept can extend to more genres (jazz and hip hop for starters). Plane or train? Train all day. Planes are overrated meat tubes that smell like highly processed oil and hand sanitiser. Trains go choo choo. What is one place everyone should visit? Your nearest beach with a New Yorker in your bag. Also bring with you a determined gaze. Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into. Edits of K-Pop group TWICE by — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Derrick (DG) —
|