---
subject: "Elon's AI startup 🤖, iOS 17 beta 📱, Bill Gates on AI risks 📝"
from: "TLDR <dan@tldrnewsletter.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-07-13 10:17:58
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "TLDR", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_795315172960844453", "UNREAD"]
---
[Musk announces new AI company that seeks to “understand the universe” (2 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Farstechnica.com%2Finformation-technology%2F2023%2F07%2Fmusk-announces-new-ai-company-that-seeks-to-understand-the-universe%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001894ec1e9f0-81762f83-bf9b-4f78-a3a9-3f6e517f05a2-000000/_-sAshlzWbtOOISRQWoMeNAMREbMrCAmljicArixD8A=309)
Elon Musk has announced the formation of xAI, a company aimed at understanding the true nature of the universe. Musk and the operator of his family office incorporated X.AI in March and there were reports that Musk was in talks for potential funding of a new AI startup in April. xAI’s core team will be led by Musk himself. The team will have an array of talent from across the AI industry. xAI will maintain close ties with Twitter and Tesla to achieve its mission. The company plans to host a Twitter Spaces chat on Friday to give the public a chance to ask questions. |
[Apple releases first public betas of iOS 17, macOS 14 Sonoma, and other new OSes (3 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Farstechnica.com%2Fgadgets%2F2023%2F07%2Fapple-releases-first-public-betas-of-ios-17-macos-14-sonoma-and-other-new-oses%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001894ec1e9f0-81762f83-bf9b-4f78-a3a9-3f6e517f05a2-000000/Mzxbw-mJEuTji9GJwjyBqwAKwm1FxV7Q09Db0Odq-Gk=309)
The first public betas of iOS 17, iPadOS 17, watchOS, and macOS 14 Sonoma are now available. These builds are essentially identical to the third developer betas released last week. Public betas are usually signals that OSes are approaching the level of stability and polish required for a public release. Updates to all OSes include improved autocorrect, new iMessage and AirDrop features, separate profiles for Safari, an Enhanced Private Browsing feature, and the removal of 'Hey' from the 'Hey Siri' activation phrase. |
Science & Futuristic Technology
|
[Chinese company wins race for first methane-fueled rocket to orbit (9 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Farstechnica.com%2Fspace%2F2023%2F07%2Fchinese-company-wins-race-for-first-methane-fueled-rocket-to-orbit%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001894ec1e9f0-81762f83-bf9b-4f78-a3a9-3f6e517f05a2-000000/sRBgwyxk8tdCr54McKMK009DEKlCvQ16XwzW9BjRat8=309)
Chinese firm LandSpace is the first company ever to send a methane-fueled launcher into orbit. LaunchSpace's Zhuque-2 rocket was launched at 9 pm ET on Tuesday from the Jiuquan spaceport in the Gobi Desert. The launch mission was a complete success. Methane is the preferred fuel for rockets due to its high density and warmer boiling point. It also deposits less soot inside engines, making the engines easier to clean and reuse. Future explorers on Mars may be able to tap into natural resources to produce their own methane rocket fuel. |
[The deep-sea gold rush is beginning (2 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.semafor.com%2Farticle%2F07%2F12%2F2023%2Fdeep-sea-mining-gold-rush%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001894ec1e9f0-81762f83-bf9b-4f78-a3a9-3f6e517f05a2-000000/bWwOZBrn5V6NUwaNdDSiHR12-q78P9wepZOS1NCtJdA=309)
Deep-sea mining could begin within the next two years. A handful of companies backed by countries hungry for nickel, manganese, and other minerals needed for clean energy are ready to forge ahead with deep-mining projects. An obscure UN agency called the International Seabed Authority is finalizing regulations for the emergent industry. Around a dozen countries currently support a temporary or permanent halt to deep-sea mining, but a majority vote by the ISA's 167 member states is required to stop the practice. Approval of the practice will almost certainly set off an undersea gold rush. |
Programming, Design & Data Science
|
[pg_embedding (GitHub Repo)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fneondatabase%2Fpg_embedding%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001894ec1e9f0-81762f83-bf9b-4f78-a3a9-3f6e517f05a2-000000/IUX2i7pWtp22X_SrkSnxg_d1JepMkDz5vIbolZmROlY=309)
pg_embedding enables the use of the Hierarchical Navigable Small World (HNSW) algorithm for vector similarity search in PostgreSQL. It is based on the implementation of the current state-of-the-art billion-scale nearest neighbor search system. HNSW is a graph-based approach to indexing multi-dimensional data known for its superior performance in terms of speed and accuracy. |
[Google’s new “NotebookLM” app builds a custom AI based on a source document (3 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Farstechnica.com%2Fgadgets%2F2023%2F07%2Fgoogles-new-notebooklm-app-builds-a-custom-ai-based-on-a-source-document%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001894ec1e9f0-81762f83-bf9b-4f78-a3a9-3f6e517f05a2-000000/2cVyie-tLBGEnlbw3TR6pDX78fv2sAc4a0VED5HPd_c=309)
Google NotebookLM is a notebook app designed to use the power of language models paired with existing content to gain critical insights faster. Google describes it as like a virtual research assistant that can summarize facts, explain complex ideas, and brainstorm new connections. NotebookLM's source-grounding reduces model hallucinations. The app is now in limited public testing. A link to a waitlist for the app is available in the article. |
[Bill Gates: The risks of AI are real but manageable (14 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.gatesnotes.com%2FThe-risks-of-AI-are-real-but-manageable%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001894ec1e9f0-81762f83-bf9b-4f78-a3a9-3f6e517f05a2-000000/xMifqXCE0_6g4n3bt96VlNBiLyxbwvHiPp6HGHhUK4o=309)
AI could affect employment rates, the results of an election, and even the future of humanity. While these threats need to be taken seriously, this is not the first time a major innovation has introduced new threats that need to be controlled. People have always managed to adapt through other transformative moments and come out better off in the end. It is natural to feel unsettled, but history shows that it's possible to solve the challenges created by new technologies. |
[Data and Compute Are the Ultimate Flywheel (15 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fevery.to%2Fp%2Fdata-in-the-age-of-ai%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001894ec1e9f0-81762f83-bf9b-4f78-a3a9-3f6e517f05a2-000000/NWKpTAWq_SVLQdLkkXv0Zl_L-ySvjV4rQKkiYrJChOg=309)
Data and compute have created a flywheel that generates more digital information than ever before. This will shift where value sits in software ecosystems and presents key opportunities for companies. This article explores the implications of generative AI for the future. It reviews past advances in technology, the compute revolution with the introduction of GPT, the data business, how information is changing, and more. |
[TLDR Talent](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fdanni763618.typeform.com%2Fto%2FrSL4lOH3/1/010001894ec1e9f0-81762f83-bf9b-4f78-a3a9-3f6e517f05a2-000000/Q6Ski-LoydqcuGvAOGqZzZfhusm1kAIZgbiuhfVCbd8=309) is our exclusive community where we help world-class tech talent and get intros to companies of their choice, along with a number of exciting startups and tech companies curated by TLDR.
We give you full control of the process, you can specify if you’re actively searching or passively interested only if something amazing comes along. Set your preferred compensation, seniority/title/role, specific companies (or types of companies) you’d like to work for and more. [Click here to apply](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fdanni763618.typeform.com%2Fto%2FrSL4lOH3/2/010001894ec1e9f0-81762f83-bf9b-4f78-a3a9-3f6e517f05a2-000000/pvAFiK_kpRXGoZS3M-37Qbuo9kq4WMra4gSu4RRoEmQ=309).
|
If your company is interested in reaching an audience of tech executives, decision-makers and engineers, you may want to [advertise with us](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fshare.hsforms.com%2F1OxvmrkcFS4qsxKpNXCi76wee466%3Futm_source=tldr%26utm_medium=newsletter/2/010001894ec1e9f0-81762f83-bf9b-4f78-a3a9-3f6e517f05a2-000000/rF9MnHL2WqUjo1YbLJ76Rf8hHTOnVRLlfEzgn8vvIpQ=309).
If you have any comments or feedback, just respond to this email!
Thanks for reading,
[Dan Ni](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2Ftldrdan/1/010001894ec1e9f0-81762f83-bf9b-4f78-a3a9-3f6e517f05a2-000000/BgKZL9O7Ez7YN0g8cRA04tXF7ulHtQcZTvz-LJ2Azps=309) and [Stephen Flanders](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2FSteveFlanders22/1/010001894ec1e9f0-81762f83-bf9b-4f78-a3a9-3f6e517f05a2-000000/eLXmsI0w2CTHgxhrh0uW-LgdSloNBMWoiGJ3Ms_kIpA=309)
|
|
|
|