---
subject: "In Investing, and in Life, The More Timeless the Discovery the More It's a One-Off Gain"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <byrne@thediff.co>"
to: ""
date: 2023-12-04 15:08:49
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
|
In this issue: - In Investing, and in Life, The More Timeless the Discovery the More It's a One-Off—You can boil many successful investors' results down to a set of strategies that, at least today, are trivial to implement. Part of their returns come from human pattern-matching at a time when the automated kind wasn't feasible, and part of their returns come from other investors catching up to their insights. This happens at all levels of finance; the biggest hedge fund fortunes right now come, not from picking stocks, but from picking stock pickers. And the alpha from that, too, will dissipate in time.
- Airlines—Alaska Airlines has acquired the parent company of Hawaiian Airlines for $1.9bn, with the intention of consolidating their businesses and reducing costs.
- Deflation—Prices for durable goods are now declining year-over-year, but services inflation is more persistent.
- VC—Venture funds are utilizing a private equity tool to extend the life of their fund, taking advantage of a limited pool of high-quality companies and the ability to charge fees on more assets for a longer period of time.
- Automation—A Brazilian city passed an ordinance written by an LLM. This demonstrates the utility of LLMs as an interface.
- Vertical Integration—Apple's chip business is part of their general efforts to control the entire stack, and it creates a chip business with more predictable demand and thus better economics.
In Investing, and in Life, The More Timeless the Discovery the More It's a One-Off GainA fun hobby among systematic investors is taking the historical track record of a famous discretionary investor, running some regressions, and discovering that they were actually just quants-without-calculators—Bill Gross's returns can be partly attributed to It's worth thinking about why that happened the way it did. Quality is more persistent than other factors like value, momentum, and growth. Status as a value stock is transient, because some companies snap back to being fairly valued and others remain cheap-for-a-reason (Jim Chanos noted that "Kodak was cheap all the way down too, trading at five times cash flow, from 70 to 24"). Momentum doesn't last forever, because if it did every stock would go straight to either zero or infinity. That is, in effect, what happens over sufficiently long time periods, but it's not a straight line. And growth also tends to fizzle out: buy a portfolio of companies that grew 30% last year, and you'll find that some are cyclicals that will have seen revenue shrink 25% the next year, some are flukes that mean-revert for other reasons, and even the quality growth companies are growing a bit more slowly than before. Meanwhile, - Investors buying these stocks will systematically outperform.
- That outperformance will be more extreme in cases where the companies mostly reinvest in their own business, or, if their stock is cheap enough, in buybacks.
That described the status quo when Buffett made the shift towards quality investing, a process that started in the 60s and was mostly complete by the 80s. But today, that's not true. Investors understand quality; as the WSJ article on Munger notes, high-quality stocks outperformed low-quality ones by 5.2% annualized over a 34-year period, in part because those companies started getting recognized by investors, and partly because their managers learned how to manage them. If a company's an unsteady grower with poor returns on capital, a buyback will be heavily countercyclical; they'll only have the money to do it when they're over-earning, and both cash flows and valuation will mean-revert. Meanwhile, a dividend is The net result of all of this is that quality stocks are priced as if they're high-quality, and can, in part with generous equity compensation, recruit better managers than other industries can. The signal is still there, but much of the edge has been priced out. It's good to find a signal that works, and it's It is, of course, unfair to say that great investors didn't add value during their careers, just because we can reverse-engineer their process today. Sure, you could imagine buying a license for Capital IQ—Time Travelers Edition In short: the bargains were there because it was a colossal pain to identify and exploit them. This kind of transition has happened in the faster-moving parts of markets, too: before Black-Scholes, options were fantastically illiquid and mispriced. One of the big latency decreases in the 1960s was This framework even applies to meta discoveries. There was a time when the big money in investing was made in a literal way, by systematically identifying undervalued companies. But if you look at the categories that are currently minting the biggest fortunes (private equity and multi-manager hedge funds), they've actually moved out one level of abstraction. They're both good layers for connecting returns-seeking capital to investment talent, with a disproportionate share of the excess returns accruing to that intermediary party. They've gone from stockpickers to stockpicker-pickers, trying to snap up an undervalued index arb or load up on cheap vol traders while also hoping to flip their TMT team before it mean-reverts (again). The more important the discovery is, the more likely it is that the news gets out and the knowledge gets priced in. Anyone can go back and reverse-engineer the classic quality trades; soon they’ll be asking why it was possible to buy a growing network effect beneficiary like American Express at 18x earnings in the early 60s, or to invest in a globally-recognized brand with high and high-margin international growth like Coca-Cola at a similar valuation. Now, it's easy to list quality companies, but within that list you have two choices: either pick a company trading at roughly the market multiple because that quality is offset by some existential risk, or get ready to pay a gigantic premium and pray that the growth model stays intact forever. Genies are sadly reluctant to reenter their bottles, and the big ideas work once before they become part of everyone's vocabulary, and are just one more generic risk premium that produces small excess returns but periodically blows up. That is, of course, the fun of the whole business; the money is made by using mental models to identify mispriced assets, but with mental models that have a hard to estimate half-life that's usually far shorter than a career. So there's a metagame of getting good at revisiting and revising models, and inventing new ones. The cycle is probably speeding up, too; whoever the best investor of the 2020s is, by the 2030s there will be an ETF replicating whatever they're doing right now. Which means that, if they're a truly generational talent, by then they'll be doing something else. One reason big tech companies have done so well is that while their growth rates weren't absurdly high for most of their time as public companies; [those growth rates have been surprisingly durable](https://www.thediff.co/r/a2102f80?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)($, Diff). Usually, investors model a deceleration in growth, but sometimes a company's economies of scale and continued efficiency improvements are enough to almost fully offset the difficulty of achieving the same percentage growth rate on an ever-higher base. Over very long periods, cumulative returns approach cumulative growth in revenue per share, so a slower-than-expected deceleration has an outsized impact.[↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/b76c6e0f?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)"Mostly," but not entirely: one reason to do quality over value is that it's really hard for a big company to be statistically cheap unless there's something seriously wrong with it. But at smaller scales, Buffett was involved in companies that were nothing special but were especially cheap; even when he was one of the world's richest people, some of his personal money was in [small REITs](https://www.thediff.co/r/33d09681?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)and[a small-cap electronics company that was slowly liquidating](https://www.thediff.co/r/80037dea?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99).[↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/5e7dc4f4?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)Comprehensive data, but only up through the date you're visiting, lest you a) create a paradox by reacting to history you already know, and b) even worse, fall prey to look-ahead bias. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/b2ffd96d?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)The first hand-held calculators started appearing in the early 1970s, and the CBOE launched in 1973. This is not a coincidence. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/34559dc7?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
You're on the free list for The Diff. This week, paying subscribers learned about Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. A sampling of current open roles: - A well-funded startup is building a platform to identify compliance risks associated with both human- and AI-generated outputs. They are looking for a frontend engineer with React/Typescript experience to join their team of world-class researchers. (NYC)
- A company building the new pension of the 21st century and building universal basic capital is looking for a GTM / growth lead. (NYC)
- A crypto proprietary trading firm is actively seeking systematic-oriented traders with crypto experience—ideally someone with experience across a variety of exchanges and tokens. (Remote)
- A concentrated crossover fund is looking for an intellectually curious data scientist with demonstrated mastery in analytics. Experience with alt data, web scraping, and financial modeling preferred. (SF)
- An early-stage startup aiming to reduce labor costs by over 80% in a $100bn+ industry is looking for a part-time technical advisor with robotics experience; this has the potential to evolve into a full-time role. (NYC)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. ElsewhereAirlinesAlaska Airlines has - There are some fairly-fixed airport-level costs that are cheaper with more planes. The number of spare parts and maintenance workers needed on hand for surprises is a sublinear function of the number of planes in a given location.
- All airlines have idiosyncratic demand drivers. In the long run, these don't matter much, as long as demand keeps growing. But in the short term, they can give a specific company a bumpy ride; Hawaiian's shares are down 87% over the last five years for some destination- and fleet-specific reasons. A hedge makes an airline less likely to go under, and that makes it cheaper to borrow.
The deal may not go through; Spirit and JetBlue have been trying to merge since July of last year, and are just now getting to the point where a deal might be approved. So this announcement is closer to the start of something than the end. DeflationInflation is always and everywhere a multi-causal phenomenon. Sometimes it really is about the quantity of money flying off the printing press, and sometimes it's something as prosaic as traffic jams at major ports. Right now VCVenture funds are AutomationPorto Alegre, a city in Brazil with a population of 1.3m, Vertical IntegrationCNBC has |
||
|
|
|
|||
|