---
subject: "Who Invented Photography?"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-03-04 13:42:04
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
For pretty much all of human history, if you wanted a picture of yourself or someone else, you would need to have artistic talent or the resources to hire somebody who could draw, paint, or sculpt. And even then you’d only have one copy of the image. But during the Industrial Revolution, a Frenchman invented a remarkable device that could help people to make inexpensive automated portraits of their loved ones. I’m referring, of course, to the physiognotrace, a gizmo that allowed someone to quickly trace the silhouette of their subject, transferring that silhouette to a copper plate, which would then be reproduced so that the customer could have up to a Sometimes, the physiognotrace’s initial product would be filled in by an artist, as in this portrait of the diplomat Albert Gallatin: The machine was unwieldy, but getting a physiognotrace made was much quicker and cheaper than sitting for a painted portrait. You can see one in action in this video: The invention of the physiognotrace helped to kick off the golden age of the silhouette. The black-on-white images started appearing everywhere, from tableware to lockets. In an age when many Luckily for all of us, this was just one of the technologies invented in the 19th century to create images, and some of the other innovations were more promising than the clunky old physiognotrace. By the late 1700s, scientists had realized that some chemical solutions darkened surfaces that were exposed to light, but this was considered an academic curiosity for decades, until somebody realized that they could use this process to create permanent images. That somebody was Thomas Wedgwood, the son of pottery manufacturer, For the next few decades, other scientists played with photograms, but the first to find a way to fix images permanently was Joseph Nicéphore Niépce, an inventor who also invented one of the first internal combustion engines. He used a different chemical solution — There was only one problem: Niépce’s method required an exposure time of more than eight hours, and, as you can see, its clarity left something to be desired. So Niépce often used his heliographs as a basis for more elaborate engravings like this: Niépce thought he had found something important. He took his discovery to the Royal Society, but the gatekeepers there were uninterested. Frustrated, he looked for a partner who could help him make the heliograph a success. He found that man in Louis Daguerre, a theatrical painter and Daguerre was both a methodical artist and a skilled self-promoter. He worked with Niépce to develop new techniques involving lavender oil and silver plates. When Niépce died of a sudden stroke in 1833, Daguerre continued working on the problem on his own. He eventually found a process involving silver iodide and mercury fumes that required much shorter exposure times. Never afraid of a little self-promotion, he called these images daguerreotypes. By 1838, Daguerre was creating images like this, the first photograph to contain a human being (the guy getting his shoes shined in the lower right, who achieved this distinction by staying still enough during the five-minute exposure to be picked up by the camera): The showman went on to present his findings to the French Academy of Sciences, and his presentation caused a sensation. He became world-famous. The discovery was revealed to an overflow crowd on August 19, which was later enshrined as World Photography Day. Daguerre is now known as the father of photography. But not everyone agreed that Daguerre should get all the credit. First, Niépce’s son, even though he received some of the royalties from the sale of the technology to the government, felt like his father had been denied credit. He would Moreover, at the very same time that Daguerre was working up to his big moment, other inventors were making very similar discoveries. An Englishman named William Henry Fox Talbot had become frustrated while on vacation at Lake Como; he had So Talbot, a gentleman-scholar and member of Parliament, set himself to the task of figuring out how to capture images on paper. He used salt, silver nitrate, and potassium iodide to capture this image of one of the windows in his estate in 1835: And combined his love of botany with his photographic experiments by capturing silhouettes of plant specimens: Talbot’s early images were rather crude, and he didn’t do much to innovate on them — until he heard that Daguerre was presenting his findings in France. Talbot took his methods to the Royal Society in January of 1839 and began working to improve them. Within a year, he had developed a new process — which he called the The calotype, which Talbot discovered about a month after Daguerre’s big unveiling, needed only a few seconds of exposure thanks to the use of gallic acid and allowed the creation of unlimited copies from a single negative. Because the calotype required people to stay still for seconds, not minutes, it made photography of people practical, as you can see in this early example of Talbot’s work: But wait, there’s more — one other person deserves consideration. Hippolyte Bayard wasn’t a nobleman or a showman. He was a simple civil servant who used silver chloride and potassium iodide to capture positive images like this one by 1839. But Bayard needed money to keep his work going and found a sponsor in François Bayard was devastated. He responded as only a photographer could, creating a self-portrait of himself as a drowned man (his closed eyes may be part of the pose or simply because it was hard to keep from blinking for the long exposure times). On the back, he
Though Bayard was beaten by Daguerre to the announcement of a photographic technique, if not the discovery of that technique, he went on to work as a relatively successful photographer into the 1880s. So — who are you going with? Niépce, who created the first permanent photograph, even though his process was impractical? Daguerre, who combined technical achievement with a canny ability to make sure he got the credit? Talbot, the guy whose process most influenced modern photography? Or Bayard, the poor sap who got tricked out of his chance at glory? There are no wrong answers here, but your choice probably says something about how you think about innovation and who should. Like This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: Or you can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading! You're currently a free subscriber to |