---
subject: "Seeing Through the Spartan Mirage"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-19 13:28:45
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX"]
---
Thanks for reading! To support my work, please click the button below: If you want to help keep this project going, please consider purchasing a paid subscription. Paid subscribers — it’s only about 75 cents a week! — get access to the archives, the satisfaction of supporting work they enjoy, and my undying gratitude. If you’re American, you’ve probably seen it on the rear window of a car or perhaps on a too-tight T-shirt on a muscly guy: two Greek words, “ΜΟΛΩΝ ΛΑΒΕ.” There seems to be a Molon labe means “come and take them.” It’s used by American gun enthusiasts and Second Amendment fundamentalists as a message: you can take my military-style assault rifles over my dead body. The phrase comes from Plutarch’s
Very cinematic! The modern popularity of the phrase almost certainly originates from the 2006 movie 300, a cartoonish adaptation of a comic book based on the events of the Persian Wars (the general approach of the film is to take the spiciest scenes from the ancient sources and turn them up to 11 with a bunch of naked ladies and monsters): Did it happen like this?
This is not to say that Diodorus Siculus recorded a more accurate depiction of these events, but his phrasing does more closely mirror the flowery language with which ancient leaders probably addressed each other. But I guess if I were a second-amendment-sticker-on-my-pickup-truck guy, I wouldn’t want a T-shirt that said “If we should be allies of the king we should be more useful if we kept our arms….” either. The enthusiasm for Sparta on the American right is just the latest example of a modern movement seeing something to emulate in ancient Sparta. The people who admire Sparta generally fixate on a few ideas about the ancient society: The prowess of the Spartan military, which was a product of strict discipline and tough training; A code of honor and bravery, exemplified by the supposed [instruction](https://substack.com/redirect/3b95a21d-6434-400d-a4ac-4ade9536c1d1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)of Spartan mothers to their sons: “Come back with your shield, or on it” (another Plutarch gem);An austere culture that was uncorrupted by extreme wealth or material greed; A strict social order designed to produce ruthlessly excellent warriors; And an ethos of military brotherhood and belonging.
It’s not hard to see how such a warrior-culture ideal might appeal to a certain Type of Guy. The problem is that it might not be very historically accurate. The Spartans certainly had a very effective military and were a major power in the 400s BCE — they defeated the much larger city of Athens in the Peloponnesian Wars and seem to have been widely feared. But we don’t have any historical sources about Spartan society from the Spartans themselves. Heck, there’s not even much left of the city-state itself. Everything we know about ancient Sparta was written by outsiders, most of whom were either the contemporary enemies of Sparta or later writers looking back on Sparta and using it as a mirror for their own values, fears, or agendas. The French scholar Francois Ollier wrote a famous book in the 1930s called The Spartan Mirage, which argued that the Romans idealized Sparta during their own period of expansion. The Athenians and other Greeks wrote a lot about the Spartans, too, but they used them mostly as an object of fascination and a foil for the vision of Greek culture that they wanted to promote. The Athenians’ depictions of the Spartans were probably akin to Americans’ portrayals of the Soviets during the Cold War — based on reality, but skewed by the rivalry between the two societies. Yes, the Spartans had an intimidating military and a strong warrior culture, but it seems that we can’t trust many of the details of these ancient sources. For every truism about Sparta in the ancient sources — they never surrendered! — there are exceptions that make Sparta seem less unique — over 120 of Sparta’s best men surrendered at Over the centuries, philosophers took these imperfect and incomplete accounts and used them to illustrate ideas that were important to them. Medieval writers looked to Sparta as a model for their monarchs. Philosophers like Enlightenment thinkers also twisted the history of Sparta, using it to support their arguments.
Voltaire, on the other hand, saw Sparta as a powerful but deeply flawed city-state. He
The Sparta of these philosophical debates was an exaggeration — an impossibly austere and militaristic counterpoint to cultured, democratic Athens. Thinkers used it as an object for self-reflection rather than trying to understand it as a real historical society. Sparta hasn’t just been an inspiration for philosophers; some of the most extreme modern political movements have found inspiration there as well. During the French Revolution, Rousseau’s idea of an austere, disciplined Sparta appealed to rebels who were fed up with the extravagance and inequality of the ancien regime. Even though the real Sparta had been a deeply unequal society whose success relied on the fact that the A bust of the Spartan lawgiver Lycurgus looked out on the legislators in the French National Convention alongside more straightforwardly republican figures like Demosthenes, Brutus, and Cincinnatus. Under Lycurgus’ gaze, revolutionaries dreamed of establishing an educational system based on Sparta’s that would create a republic of virtue. When the Terror came, radicals like Robespierre looked to Sparta as an example of a society where individuals had to sacrifice their freedom and even their lives for the good of the collective. The Nazis admired the Spartans for different reasons. They saw the city-state as an example of successful eugenics, as Spartans had supposedly killed sickly and disabled children to ensure that their armies were strong. Hitler, when arguing that the government should “limit the number who are allowed to live,” The Nazis The Nazis were especially
Here’s the thing about Thermopylae: the Spartans lost. Leonidas’ 300 men made a brave stand in the mountains, and a superior Persian force wiped them out. You can see it like the Nazis did and the guys in the ΜΟΛΩΝ ΛΑΒΕ T-shirts do, as a glorious battle in which an honorable band of brothers sacrificed their lives for their principles. Or you can see it as a tragedy in which the leaders of an oligarchical, slave-dependent society threw away their finest soldiers’ lives, and for what? To briefly delay the Persian Army while failing to achieve their goal of protecting Athens and the rest of northern Greece from the Persian attack? Sure, the popular perception of the Spartans as a uniquely austere, disciplined, value-driven society is attractive in some ways. I’d love to have abs like those guys in the movie version of 300. But we should remember that, in actual history, Sparta was an oppressive society that established itself as the enemy of the Greek city-states that valued democracy and the arts. We should also remember that many of the modern people who have been most enthusiastic about the Spartans as historical role models have also been really enthusiastic about oppressing and killing their fellow human beings. As a new generation of people adopts the Spartans as historical role models, we should understand that they’re probably telling us more about themselves than the actual people who lived in Sparta more than two millennia ago. This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: Or you can share the newsletter with others: Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week! A version of this essay was also published You're currently a free subscriber to |