---
subject: "John von Neumann Shot Lightning From His Arse"
from: "Erik Hoel <erikhoel@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-11-12 17:05:04
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Erik Hoel", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_2504961760700514996", "INBOX"]
---
The movie Braveheart has a great scene where, by whispers and tales, the legend grows of the Scottish rebellion leader William Wallace (played by Mel Gibson in one of his best roles). First that he killed “50 men,” and then no, “100 men!” and was “seven feet tall;” he even, as Gibson jokes, shoots “fireballs from his eyes” and “bolts of lightning from his arse.” And that’s what I think of when I hear the legends of John von Neumann. “He could remember every book he’d ever read verbatim!” No, of course he couldn’t. Indeed, as we will see, John von Neumann, despite being (inarguably) a genius, didn’t even invent the “von Neumann architecture” for computers. He’s just credited with it, as he is with so much else. Why Does This Matter?A decade ago, in the grand Nature vs. Nurture debates, proponents on the Nature side regularly said this about the “ “Hey! Those blank slatists over there, those biased journalists and gatekeeping editors of scientific journals, they’re the unreasonable ones! We’re just arguing that Nature is non-zero!” And that’s sympathetic, for who can argue with “non-zero?” But with the rise of a new pop-hereditarianism, which has undergone virulent growth on social media websites like the former Twitter, the reverse is now just as true: Pop-hereditarians scoff at the very idea that Nurture’s contribution might be non-zero, fanatically dismissing that even the best education—gasp—could have an effect. Given an inch, they’ve taken a mile, and become annoyingly identical to the blank slatists they once criticized. Much like blank slatism, pop-hereditarianism is built on selective credulity: holding things like meta-analyses of the positive effect of education on IQ to the highest possible standards, while meanwhile, happily accepting the results of poorly-recorded half-century-old twin studies (where the “separated” twins already knew one another and self-selected into the research). When it comes to the Nature vs. Nurture debate, the truth is in the middle. It will always be in the middle. Yet middles are unsatisfying. Like most arguments online, facts matter less than symbology. And John von Neumann has become a symbol of pop-hereditarianism. The funny thing is that, as one of the best educated people of all time, Johnny (as he preferred) is a poor choice as a symbol for pop-hereditarianism. He certainly wasn’t genetically perfect (as we will see), and he wouldn’t have agreed with them anyway, as he also thought education and parenting and cultural milieu matter.¹ Last week, when I pointed out that “von” was a marker of nobility Here are a few gems I heard from the brain trust on social media: He could do 8 digit calculations in his head as a 6-year-old (false) He was fluent in 8 languages as a child (false) He could recite any book he’d ever read, including telephone books (false) His first math teacher wept when he met Johnny (false) The von Neumanns were humble upper-middle-class who purchased a noble title (false)
I’m going to give a history of Johnny that debunks all these. I’ll also correct a great deal of bad scholarship along the way, and show you don’t need to invoke spooky rare variants or genetic dark matter to explain John von Neumann. You just need to do a little research yourself, and accept that places and eras can be just as exceptional as brains. The Best Education of All TimeThe most definitive biography we have is John von Neumann, by economist Norman Macrae. It was supposedly approved of by Johnny’s family, and it’s well-researched and lengthy (unless otherwise specified, quotes come from there). Macrae opens his thesis agreeing with me:
So Johnny had innate talent, gobs of it, but he was also a product of a society and an education system that doesn’t exist anymore. Hungarian society produced geniuses at an astonishing rate.
What made Hungary so special? It was not a democracy, but an aristocracy transitioning to a plutocracy. Its inequality meant it could establish an extremely favorable-to-the-elite education system, and it did. However, it was also welcoming to new immigrants and new ideas and new money.
In this milieu of turn-of-the-century Budapest Johnny was Macrae says it was the “Hungarian tradition with infant prodigies” to find them one-on-one tutoring from university professors. Rátz recognized the boy’s talents shortly after Johnny began formal schooling, and began tutoring him personally. He also arranged for a progression of ever-more impressive math tutors over the next eight years (keep in mind, Johnny had been tutored at home in mathematics previous to meeting Rátz, meaning that he was tutored his entire young life). He and his tutors would, it seems, meet multiple times a week, and later on the revolving door of them contained august mathematicians famous in their own right, like Johnny’s father Max was an intellectual who had an instinct for education and ran mealtimes like seminars. Regular dinner guests “glittered with especial brilliance,” and included Leopold Fejér, who would become Johnny’s PhD supervisor.
Max also hired well. German governesses and French governesses (apparently they hated one another), as well as an Italian governess; then, two homeschooling teachers just for English, a Mr. Thompson and a Mr. Blythe (but this started in 1914, so it seems Johnny only began English at the later age of 11). Max sat in on the lessons with Johnny. Little Johnny had a Fencing Master who came to his home (there was enough room), and a music teacher too, but she apparently did not impart much to Johnny. He had teachers come to his home as well, about whom we know nothing—their contributions have been lost to history. In their enormous building, their cousins lived on the floor below. Max (the father) bought a summer home that was so nice it is now historically preserved as a place for the local children to play. The entire family was wealthy and well-connected (his mother’s lineage has its own Even if Johnny only became an aristocrat on paper at 10, looking at his young life, any modern person would instantly recognize it as fundamentally aristocratic and elite and his education as, basically, perfect. How “The Martians” Explained ThemselvesThe incredible socio-educational environment of Budapest had effects on the entire world and the shape, and ending, of World War II. Classically, Johnny is grouped with a Jewish-Hungarian group of similar ages called “ However, this clustering of genius probably isn’t as historically mysterious as it’s been made out to be. Nor was it solely a Jewish phenomenon, e.g., there were plenty of non-Jewish Hungarian geniuses produced by that period, like Albert Szent-Györgyi or György Békésy (both won Nobel Prizes). Macrae cites that Johnny’s Lutheran school self-identified as 52% Jewish, and speculates that over 70% of Johnny’s school may have been ethnically Jewish, with many having converted. Other elite high schools were probably somewhat similar. Additionally, many of those kids were second-generation immigrants (including Wigner and Johnny), which we know can be a huge boon to academic success. Indeed, we see the exact same effects here in America today, coupled with the advantages of cultures that
According to Macrae, Jewish immigrants chose to go to Budapest, rather than New York, because of its culture and sophistication, its (somewhat) meritocratic aspects, its quality of life, such as its extremely plentiful domestic servants, its education system, and there was no long and dangerous sea voyage—all this In fact, Budapest of that era may have been one of the few places and times in all of history where you could hire a bevy of top-notch professional private tutors and governesses without being obscenely wealthy (just well-off), and also where it was standard to do so (which is why formal school started so late).² What did they themselves think? Eugene Wigner wrote
Instead, he suggests that credit is due to “the superb high schools in Budapest, which gave us a wonderful start,” but that most impactful was “our forced emigration." And indeed, Johnny agreed that it was the situations into which they were thrown, historically, and had to succeed in to survive. Therefore, we see that Budapest operated like a reservoir-release model, drawing in via immigration a bunch of talent, educating it incredibly well due to rare historic and economic circumstances, and then exploding in a forced diaspora via antisemitic persecution and world war. John von Neumann Didn’t Invent the “von Neumann” ArchitectureHe was afraid on his deathbed that history would forget his name. That now seems unlikely. No one can argue that John von Neumann wasn’t one of the greatest contributors to human understanding in the 20th century. His relevancy only continues to grow into the 21st century, as the topics he touched on (like computers) have become more central (see, e.g., As an adult, probably owing at least partly to his lengthy aristocratic tutoring, Johnny was incredible at formal frameworks, calculations, and taking an idea to its conclusion before anybody else. He simply knew, crystallized, so much more than others. However, there’s an uncomfortable corollary:
Let us consider a perfect example of this, which is always high on the list of Johnny’s contributions: the “von Neumann architecture” of modern computers. ENIAC was one of the earliest uses of vacuum tubes as a general-purpose computer. It was developed at the Moore School of Electrical Engineering of the University of Pennsylvania. A fellow early computer scientist who was also in the military, Herman Goldstine, secured von Neumann a tour of it (and involved him with the funders). Johnny, as usual, instantly understand what was central and important about the numerous planned potential improvements to ENIAC, which John Mauchly and J. Presper Eckert had been working out. The two men had built ENIAC and had been off-and-on designing a follow-up for a while, and all this they openly shared with Johnny. Not long after Johnny’s visit, inspired by McCulloch and Pitts’ infamous But then Herman Goldstine sent out the report with only Johnny’s name on it, and voilà! The “von Neumann architecture.” Here is an excerpt from “
Don’t misread this as my saying that Johnny was a plagiarist or unoriginal. Johnny contributed to the computer revolution in later ways as well, and that specific incident is almost certainly just Herman Goldstine’s fault, although Johnny did silently benefit. Johnny was fond of saying some version of “It takes a Hungarian to walk into a revolving door behind you and come out ahead” and that’s precisely what happened. My point is merely that, while Johnny was absolutely one of the greats in the pantheon of science and math, one of is how we should see John von Neumann. His first major work on axioms had “run aground” on Gödel. His second major work on formalizing quantum theory had been upstaged by Dirac’s notation, which became the standard, and his major proof that hidden variable interpretations of quantum mechanics were supposedly impossible turned out to be flawed, due to what John Stewart Bell called a “silly” error. Johnny’s long-time assistant and fellow great Hungarian mathematician,
Johnny even suspected that Norbert Wiener had a mind “intrinsically better than his own.” Who was Norbert Wiener? Another famous early computer scientist and cyberneticist that people like to tell stories about.³ He was also another child prodigy shaped by his father, but much more intently and viciously than Max; e.g., when Norbert was born, his father held a press conference saying he would raise a genius—and, well, he did. Johnny Nobel Prize winner Eugene Wigner, Johnny’s best and longest friend, firmly and clearly gives his opinion on whether John von Neumann was the Smartest Man of All Time. The answer was no.
Johnny’s friend, Stanisław Ulam, who suggested the idea of automata growing on cells that Johnny then formalized into cellular automata (note again the pattern),
Absolutely none of this means that John von Neumann wasn’t a genius, nor contributed far more than all but a few others. Certainly, plenty of other geniuses thought he was smarter than them (just as he suspected Einstein and Wiener might have something he didn’t). His output attests to it. As Halmos, his assistant,
But even in his incredible output and the legends around him, Johnny’s overall academic oeuvre seems closer to what one would expect from someone whose talents were due to his perfect education vs. his supposedly-superhuman brain itself. His work is a triumph of formalizing things beautifully and quickly, being in the right rooms, flat-out knowing more than other people, and competitively beating them to the punch (he described himself in a letter to his daughter as “an ambitious bastard”). I personally can’t help but feel that Johnny’s most original work was his development of game theory. Games have existed for a pretty long time, but here’s Johnny in 1928 with “Theory of Parlor Games” which grows into his famous 1944 book Theory of Games and Economic Behavior. It’s also the most him. As a child, Johnny would dress up and have his brothers move sheets of paper around, enacting battles. Probably it was Just Because It’s on Wikipedia Doesn’t Make It RealNow that we have sketched the man, and his many, many impressive contributions (but also noted their occasional overhyped nature), we have the capacity to look honestly at the legends and myths around Johnny’s raw mental abilities. Unfortunately, these myths have propagated to the point where even Wikipedia is wrong. E.g., on Wikipedia it’s stated that Johnny could divide 8-digit numbers in his head at the age of 6. The actual link takes you to a 2007 pop-sci book titled Mathematics: Powerful Patterns In Nature and Society by one Harry Henderson. Here’s what Henderson’s, and thus Wikipedia’s, child prodigy feat is based on: an incredibly brief section about Johnny’s childhood (because this book is not a biography). No specific source, unfortunately! Yet Henderson, via Wikipedia, is cited by so many others for the same claim. Indeed, we can debunk this entirely. For I tracked down another “eight-digit” number story about Johnny that the author Harry Henderson (who had no connection to Johnny) almost certainly misremembered. His Further Reading section contains Macrae’s biography, and, yup, there it is written by way of introduction that:
Henderson almost certainly just misremembered that part of Macrae’s biography. And so not only is Wikipedia, by way of Henderson’s mistake, reporting an ability that’s “half wrong,” the situation is even worse, because from the surrounding context Macrae is clearly talking about the adult Johnny, not Johnny as a 6-year-old! And Macrae’s quote is about multiplication. So it is thrice wrong. Other rumors have similar origins. Enter, once again, Herman Goldstine. That’s right, the same guy who gave Johnny all the credit for the von Neumann architecture. In 1972, Herman Goldstine published Second, Goldstine gives us what seems to be the original “perfect recall” story:
Macrae also mentions this story, but gives some pretty critical context that deflates the whole thing from superhuman to merely incredibly impressive: Johnny had specifically memorized the beginning of Dickens’ A Tale of Two Cities prior to coming to America to improve his English.
Macrae also mentions that:
That’s obviously impressive, to remember a long passage so many years later. But Goldstine makes it sound like he “tested” Johnny on the opening of a random book—except it couldn’t have been a random book, as it was the exact same passage Macrae reports Johnny purposefully memorized years before to practice his English. Likely, either that book came up in conversation naturally and the demonstration actually occurred, but then Goldstine misunderstood or misremembered (or worse) and portrays his effort as “testing” him (and perhaps exaggerated the length of the passage too). Consciously choosing passages to learn by heart to improve one’s feel for a language is incredibly astute, but also wildly different from being able to remember every book you’ve ever read. Indeed, the same titles (the history he read when he was young, the Dickens, and entries in an encyclopedia) crop up again and again in the stories of recitations. If it wasn’t purposeful memorization, it wouldn’t be listable like that. It would really be just any random book. Like a telephone book! Incredibly, that’s also another (false) claim. This claim is from Prisoner’s Dilemma: John von Neumann, Game Theory, and the Puzzle of the Bomb, yet another pop-sci semi-biography more focused on the science than Johnny himself, published in 1993 by William Poundstone. And surely we can trust the esteemed author of other books like How Do You Fight a Horse-Sized Duck? Nope, it’s almost certainly another misremembering of a different source. Specifically, this time from a 1973 source: “
So that joke (he knows the numbers, get it?) may have started the rumor about Johnny memorizing phone books as an adult (or they originated elsewhere, but certainly Halmos himself never witnessed anything like that in his many years of working closely with Johnny or he’d say so). However, somehow Halmos’ wry recounting of tall tales makes it into Prisoner’s Dilemma, and there it is mistaken to be (a) about Johnny as a child, and (b) true. What’s interesting is that Halmos, who would be in one of the best positions to judge the adult Johnny as his assistant, does give actual examples of Johnny’s calculating brilliance. Some are as impressive as the legend suggests—e.g., Johnny solving difficult math puzzles, or once beating a computer at a calculation. But others are, frankly, not so impressive. Kind of disappointing, really. Johnny arrived at a solution in two seconds while his students took 10 seconds? Okay. He once gave a presentation on his area of expertise without any notes? Okay, now we’re just reaching for stuff. Halmos even makes us question how many languages Johnny knew. Apparently:
So that’s “only” four fluent languages as an adult, and his biographer Macrae implies that Johnny’s English spelling was bad. Stanisław Ulam does say an adult Johnny remembered his Latin and Greek from school (implying he learned it in the formal system) and could kind of speak Spanish by adding “el” to things (again, this seems like clear reaching?). So we have four fluent languages, his ability to add “el” to words, and at least some unclear amount of Latin and Greek from school as an adult—deeply impressive, except for the Spanish! But that impressiveness was, yet again, transformed via the rumor mill into him knowing all those (and more) languages fluently as a young child, while it’s quite clear that he started learning English only at 10 or 11. The Italian governess apparently never had much of an impact on Johnny—odd for someone who could learn everything effortlessly! The “Nothing Ever Happens” ExplanationWhile hopefully giving Johnny his incredible due, we have so far debunked that child Johnny had the preposterous powers assigned to him, and we’ve also shown how even his adult legend has been exaggerated. There’s so little original scholarship too that pretty much everything links back to the same few mistakes I’ve identified. Johnny died before writing his autobiography, a huge blow to history. To make matters worse, most Johnny biographies are pop-sci slop and contain numerous errors. Even Macrae’s biography isn’t perfect (see this footnote⁵ for a historical error I identified, and other minor criticisms). However, my long-standing policy is not to destroy careers via gotcha mistakes, and I believe that most people are doing their best, and so I’ve tried to not single out any individual author too much (other than the long-dead Goldstine, but perhaps it was a series of errors on his part too).⁶ Johnny undeniably was a child prodigy. Wigner’s memoirs attest to that.⁷ But Wigner only met Johnny when Johnny was 12, already having been tutored by Rátz privately for two years, and simultaneously likely Fekete as well. A preteen can indeed be incredibly mathematically impressive, especially when they are being tutored by those two! Personally, after all my reading, I do believe Johnny had a mind like a steel trap. I just also believe he was mortal. And the boring explanation is that he simply had a habit of memorizing certain passages and pulling them out to show off. There is suggestive evidence of this. One of the best first-hand accounts of Johnny’s mental powers comes from Given his family’s practice of memorizing, Johnny likely had both an innately good memory for the things he read but also studied and practiced them. And most families also don’t expect recitations at the dinner table to begin with. Even his grandfather used to come over and perform arithmetic tricks, abilities that Johnny had a jolly time exaggerating later in life. We don’t hear any specific anecdotes about Johnny’s supposed ability to remember literally anything he wants in his daughter’s memoir, However, Johnny’s daughter does offer the observation that Johnny’s first wife (her mother) complained he was always taking an encyclopedia to the bathroom.
So maybe he just read and re-read books on the toilet? There’s an answer as mundane as possible! Of course, the further part of the “nothing ever happens” explanation is that people tell stories about other geniuses too. E.g., Norbert Wiener had an “encyclopedic memory” according to What we do know for sure is that Johnny’s huge amount of crystallized knowledge was:
The Something Happened Explanation: Johnny Had OCDI couldn’t help being struck, in my reading, by how Johnny’s second wife’s personal account strongly suggests he had OCD:
This conflicts with another legend, that Johnny was 100% normal, despite his intelligence. He liked parties, yes, but he wasn’t normal—just normal compared to people like Dirac, who crept along next to walls. The details of Johnny’s wife’s account have only And, interestingly enough, there’s a phenomenon where OCD sometimes manifests as “memory hoarding.” It’s not well-studied, but it’s common enough for the term to be used. Here’s from the
Maybe Johnny’s version of OCD manifested within his studying habits and he became a “mental hoarder.” Johnny certainly could have disguised this, just as he pragmatically accepted his daughter hiding her Jewish ethnicity later in life to keep appearances copacetic. Maybe he kept his own mental issues as private as possible too.⁸ Like, say, in the bathroom? Perhaps he sat on the toilet for hours and hours going over encyclopedias, not in raw intellectual pleasure, but in tormented neurosis. There are stories of him abruptly leaving parties to go do something mysterious, only to return as if everything was fine hours later. Everyone’s always assumed he was jotting down brilliant notes for new mathematics. Maybe he was just living out his OCD in the bathroom again. Again, there’s no strong need for the OCD hypothesis. But if you are going to give full credit to the remaining anecdotes (which are less preposterous than the ones I’ve debunked), the OCD hypothesis is more likely than that he genetically had a memory so beyond even his genius peers. And there’s a funny corollary. It might mean that out of a million embryos, maybe Johnny’s brain specifically wouldn’t be the one picked by genetic scoring! If you cloned Johnny today into a different family environment, you might not get a genius, but merely a smart person with OCD focused on stuff that’s not memorizing equations and hobby history. My overall thoughts on pop-hereditarianismI actually hate writing about hereditarianism, even obliquely. All the pivots are predictable and exhausting: “What about Study A, or Person B, or example C, or observation D!” Or “What about some other dug-up 80-year-old claim about Johnny—you can’t disprove them all!” It’s also a fraught subject, and I don’t like confrontation. I’m much like Johnny that way—always smoothing things over (our similarities, unfortunately for me, end there). There are just far more interesting things to do, and I want to get along with most individuals. The problem is, despite not actually being a blank slatist, I’m interested in what makes for a great education and this stuff pops up in my way when I want to talk about it. The philosophy also attracts immoral and dangerous political ideologues who use it as a way to accumulate power. That’s not to say everyone who disagrees with me is evil or bad! Plenty of others do honestly approach the question of Nature vs. Nurture and come down more on the hereditarian side than I. That’s perfectly fine and reasonable, of course. But when it comes to the pop-hereditarian movement as a whole, the loudest voices on social media will take over, if they haven’t already, as the project of pop-hereditarianism has obviously become a political one. Since this small but symbolically-important slice of the pop-hereditarian movement—all their legends about an individual with a genetically-perfect brain called John von Neumann—has turned out to be built on absurdly selective credulity, and on shallow intellectualism in general, I hope readers can reach their own conclusions about how much of the rest is not lightning coming out of arses, but something else. 1 Johnny was unlikely to be a strong hereditarian. First, there was his hatred of Hitler, and he would have likely drawn the analogy just as Wigner did. But more relevantly, it is evidenced in his own explanation of why he and his peers from Budapest were so brilliant (all we know is that he gave cultural reasons), as well as practically in his life, like his unusual arrangement (after the divorce) for how his daughter was to switch to living with him during her most intellectually formative years (she became Vice President of General Motors). Also, his own ethnicity did not appear particularly important to him. As Macrae writes:
2 To render “The Martians” even less mysterious, there were likely significant peer effects. In
3 People love to tell obviously exaggerated stories about famous mathematicians. A story about Norbert Wiener goes like this: His family moves to a new address, and his wife, knowing he would forget the new address, writes it down on a sheet of paper. Wiener uses the paper for notes that day, then throws it away. He goes back to the old address and realizes he’s lost. So he asks a little girl nearby “I’m the famous Norbert Wiener, and I’m lost. Do you know where I live?” And the little girl replies: “Yes, father.” 4 In the same “Legends of John von Neumann,” while talking about the telephone-memorizing being a rumor Halmos cracks a joke that, unfortunately, was probably misread by many. He says that “some of the von Neumann stories in circulation” are that:
Halmos is using these as specific examples of rumors that are “undocumented” and “unverifiable,” but the progression is so punchy he could just as well been wryly making them up himself, i.e., mastering calculus at age 8 and understanding Borel’s Théorie des Fonctions by 12 is the mathematician’s way of saying “fireballs from his eyes” and “lightning from his arse.” But since mastering calculus at 8 does seem kind of like a possibility for Johnny (understandably) at least a few authors thought “Wow, lightning!” even though Halmos had just said that these were stories. 5 Here’s one error I identified in the Macrae biography: Macrae implies that the very first tutor Rátz arranges was Szegő (this is where the story of Szegő having “tears in his eyes” from meeting young Johnny comes from—the tears were reported by Szegő’s wife). However, this is provably false. Macrae writes that Szegő had “done the initial coaching in 1915-16” of Johnny, and that Johnny’s tutoring was then taken over by others. But I discovered that Szegő was not even in Budapest in 1915-1916; he’d
Johnny’s tutoring progression now makes more sense, and speaks, yet again, against Johnny being a superhuman child prodigy (just, you know, one of those “normal” child prodigies). Johnny wasn’t taken immediately to the most famous mathematicians around and given their time, he had to work his way up, and he’s provoking tears when he’s 15-16 years old, not 11-12. So too when it comes to talking about Johnny’s mental abilities, I found Macrae frustrating. His carefully-chosen language occasionally plays up Johnny’s memory, but his fanciful descriptions could equally apply to Johnny just studying things, simply faster and better than most other people. If I were a biographer, and there was a rumor my subject could memorize any book he wanted to instantly, I wouldn’t lean into the legend by writing vaguely that he learned something by “reading very quickly but with enormous concentration” without mentioning the pretty critical information about whether he read it exactly once and whether the resultant knowledge was truly verbatim. Same with describing a study session as “one concentrated gulp.” What is “one gulp,” exactly? One read? One hour? A whole day? I’ll tell you what it is: it’s poetic license for “He memorized it fast but I don’t know the details.” 6 Speaking of mistakes, I wrote all this, my own mini-biography of Johnny, over just a few days. I’m sure there’s a mistake or two of my own hiding somewhere, given the huge number of sources and names and dates! I’ll try to correct anything major I missed. 7 Obviously, something about Johnny originally attracted the attention of Rátz. Wigner does hype up Johnny as a 10-year-old as knowing a bunch of mathematics, but he makes this comment while clearly speculating about Rátz’s motivations, which he didn’t know (and of course, Wigner only meets Johnny himself at 12, so he’s basically just trying to explain why Rátz did what he did and doesn’t himself know). 8 Incidentally, the OCD hypothesis might also explain why Johnny’s first wife left him (which is somewhat mysterious, given how well-matched they were and their good relationship afterward). Perhaps her many complaints about him being more attentive to his “work” than her were actually just as much about his OCD behaviors. You're currently a free subscriber to |