---
subject: "Repeal the Jones Act of 1920"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-11-27 14:59:24
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Balsa Policy Institute chose as its first mission to lay groundwork for the potential repeal, or partial repeal, of section 27 of the Jones Act of 1920. I believe that this is an important cause both for its practical and symbolic impacts. The Jones Act is the ultimate embodiment of our failures as a nation. After 100 years, we do almost no trade between our ports via the oceans, and we build almost no oceangoing ships. Everything the Jones Act supposedly set out to protect, it has destroyed. Table of Contents[Emergency Case Study: Salt Shipment to NJ in the Winter of 2013-2014.](https://substack.com/redirect/7e02f04e-b3d4-461e-9525-5d214502eb4b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[What About Potential Marine Highways, or Short Sea Shipping?](https://substack.com/redirect/4ba9b7c5-97c0-4751-833e-c40e7b8e1e96?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[What About John Arnold’s Case That the Jones Act Can’t Be Killed?](https://substack.com/redirect/720e0ba1-67c3-4f1a-8100-08848e53d3b5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)
What is the Jones Act?For a hundred years, we have required ships carrying cargo between two American ports to be American built, American owned (75% of stock owned by Americans), American manned and American flagged. The Jones Act has since been While protectionist laws around shipping are common, the severity of the Jones Act is unique. It is absolute. If we repealed the Jones Act, we could again take spices in one port, and ship them to another port. Generalized, this is a big deal. Why Work to Repeal the Jones Act?There is a unique opportunity here. Repeal would restore America’s oceangoing trade between its ports and rebuild its merchant marine, noticeably impacting the price level and GDP growth. This would be offset by only small losses to a small number of private interests. If necessary, it would cost only a small fraction of the benefits to strike a deal that fully compensates the losers. The new Secretary of Transportation nominee, Sean Duffy, has Yet I see no attempt to create credible studies of all of the benefits and costs involved, that would serve as the foundation of such a deal, or any attempt to explore what a deal would look like. Nor do I see the groundwork being laid to justify pushing through those private interests. While there are those who robustly and repeatedly point out the madness of the Jones Act and related laws, and Thus, a small effort can greatly increase the chances of a Jones Act repeal, potentially unlocking huge benefits. We need to try. Why Was the Jones Act Introduced?The proximate motivation for the law’s introduction was that Senator Wesley Jones of Washington wanted to Another motivation was ‘protecting the investment’ that was made in building the ships necessary for trade during the First World War. The law was sold as a way to ensure the health of the What is the Effect of the Jones Act?One hundred years of the Jones Act destroyed our merchant marine and our shipyards. We have no merchant marine. We have (almost) no oceangoing ships.
Over a century of the Jones Act, our shipyards and our merchant marine have been devastated. By 2000, only America’s four remaining shipyards are profoundly uncompetitive, charging America’s few remaining oceangoing vessels are now mostly The problem is ubiquitous. As in, from The Wall Street Journal: As our economy and population expanded, and volume carried by other methods including river barges continues to increase, What little is left of our shipping concentrates on the captive markets where there is no good alternative. 35% of domestic ocean-shipping tonnage involves Hawaii, Puerto Rico and Alaska. 25% is short range fuel transfers where the pipeline alternatives are running at capacity 10% are west coast shipments to coastal cities lacking an alternative connection. 25% is ore shipped from the Mesabi iron mines in northeast Minnesota to steel mills near Chicago, Detroit and Cleveland.
That adds up to 95%. A handful of shipping categories have survived for lack of an alternative. The rest, not so much, for example: We no longer ship almost anything between American ports other than a modest amount via riverboats, almost at all. One example of many: Rather than ship liquified natural gas (LNG) from Houston to Boston, a feat The Jones Act has failed to protect America’s shipbuilding and merchant marine.
What Else Happens When We Ship More Goods Between Ports?Shipping domestically via water is the most environmentally friendly option available. Not doing so diverts transport to trucks, or creates otherwise inefficiently long trade routes. Better internal shipping is necessary in many cases for reshoring of other production. Emergency Case Study: Salt Shipment to NJ in the Winter of 2013-2014
The defense says, look at all the salt, almost all of it, that was indeed delivered as ordered and on time. What happened was that New Jersey was going to run out of salt, so they had to order more, and ‘for the same reason I have a tough time finding a cab in New York on a Friday evening in the pouring rain’ no Jones Act ship was available that had the necessary equipment to help. Interesting example. I find it very easy, today, to find a cab in New York in the pouring rain on a Friday evening. I open the Lyft (or Uber, or Juno) app on my phone. I ask for one. A few minutes later, it arrives. The reason you used to have trouble in that situation was that the government only issued so many taxi medallions, putting a cap on supply, and combined this with a price that could not adjust. Now those issues are gone, and the closest I have come to failing on a cab was on January 1 at about 2am, when I was informed it was going to cost about $150 and we took the subway. Why was there no ship able and willing to carry New Jersey’s salt? Because the system has less than 10% of the domestic capacity it is supposed to have, and is unable to use additional supply in an emergency. In a slow-moving situation where we can make plans, yes, we get to move all our salt, prices do their thing even if they are several times too high. In an emergency, like this or a hurricane? That means there is no available supply. So, yes, the failure of New Jersey to get its extra salt that winter was due to the Jones Act. As a result, everyone has to always order extra salt, to head off such a situation. When there is predictable and inelastic demand, it is a question of price. The price adjusted until the Jones Act-only market for salt transport clears in the normal case. There would, however, be a serious problem if even one of the salt transport ships were to be put out of commission, or there was a larger future emergency surge in salt demand. The larger salt issue they point out is that American salt sold at the time for $49.15 a ton excluding shipping costs, whereas Chilean salt sold for $23 a ton excluding shipping costs. I would be inclined to agree that with that high a disparity, cutting American shipping costs will be insufficient to make us competitive, but it still requires investigation. The post pleads that Chile’s salt starts out cheaper than America’s salt, so America’s higher shipping costs are not the issue. America’s shipping costs, however, should be actively lower. We should have a big edge not having to haul tons of salt across continents. Which is supposed to help compensate for American labor and other higher costs. Instead, Chile’s shipping is cheaper. Why ever could that be? The other case the same paper cites is the Gulf Oil spill of 2010.
In this case, we were fortunate that the Jones Act did not apply to such vessels. We agree that foreign vessels should be allowed to help with this particular emergency. But that only raises the question: What makes these two cases different? Why would failure to allow help on an oil spill in domestic waters be an outrage, but failure to It also raises the question: If the Jones Act advocates are correct in their logic in general, why do we allow the skimming of oil by foreign vessels? Are we not worried this will outcompete Americans, and prevent us from having a strong domestic fleet or supply of mariners? Could not an enemy intentionally cause an oil spill in time of war, for which we might be unprepared without foreign help? Or is all of that quite obviously rather crazy? Why no Emergency Exceptions?New Jersey being short on salt could be a serious problem. Roads could be shut down. But if the situation was sufficiently dire, the salt could be brought in on trucks. Hurricanes in Hawaii and Puerto Rico are far more serious emergencies that have occurred several times per decade with increasing severity. Supplies have often been urgently needed. With so few Jones Act oceangoing ships, none were available to deliver the supplies in the time frame they were needed. There happened, by nature of their ordinary business, to be foreign ships that could deliver the supplies. The obvious thing to do, the only reasonable or merciful thing to do, is to grant an exception and deliver the supplies. Jones Act supporters instead loudly protested the granting of any exceptions, saying it would In response to granted waivers, they Now, no waiver can be issued unless the U.S. Maritime Administration first canvasses the market for available U.S.-flag vessels, undertakes steps to engage U.S. carriers, and determines that qualified U.S.-flag vessels cannot meet the need (which it must publish) – while the victims of natural disasters languish awaiting emergency supplies. Prior to this, it was possible for a waiver to be issued by the Secretary of Defense without these conditions, which was what was used to provide This is crazy. Emergency help does not hurt American shipyards or American shipping companies. It does not hurt anyone. Nor does it strengthen the Jones Act to not grant obviously necessary exemptions. Instead, it highlights the insanity of the Jones Act and how it weakens us as a nation. It also highlights that the defenders of the Jones Act care more about protecting the sanctity of their protections than they do about hurricane victims, and have no interest in cooperating for the greater good. To tell ships they cannot unload their cargo of emergency supplies is the act of a mustache-twirling villain. Even if you believed that the Jones Act was somehow a good idea in the general case, proponents show zero willingness to compromise or provide exceptions in the cases where we face catastrophic failure. Our existing Jones Act fleet simply cannot, for example, transport liquified natural gas or install offshore wind platforms, for any quantity at any price, because those ship types are entirely absent from the fleet. In the wake of hurricanes, they vehemently oppose any temporary waivers for the delivery of emergency supplies. These are not good faith actors who want what is best for America. What Are Some Specific Non-Emergency Impacts?The cost for shipping crude oil from the Gulf Coast to the northeastern USA is The liquified natural gas (LNG) situation is worse. We are the world’s
How do Jones Act supporters respond to that? Here we have an Never mind ‘asking for it,’ this is flat out ‘you knew I was going to shoot you so it’s your fault for not wearing a bulletproof vest.’ Also, there are other factors also increasing prices, which means the Jones Act could not possibly also be increasing prices, you would have to ‘match the price in Europe.’
That sounds like a lot, but this makes it sound like a lot more:
As in, the price of gasoline on the east coast would be $0.63 lower without the Jones Act. That’s insane. Can you imagine what voters would do if they realized they were paying that much extra for gas? If it were not for the Jones Act,
What Are Some Specific Impacts on Regions?In 2020, the Jones Act directly cost the average family in Hawaii about Shipping from Hawaii to the West Coast is also a problem. A particular issue is that there are no Jones Act-compatible livestock vessels. Hawaiian ranchers are left with two options: cram their cattle into modified 40-foot containers known as “ By contrast,
In 2018, a twenty-foot container shipped from Jacksonville to San Juan on a U.S. flagged ship cost about $2937 at the same time that shipping that same container to the Dominican Republic cost For any purpose requiring shipping to or from America, Puerto Rico is non-competitive. It takes a lot to be part of the United States, where citizens don’t pay Federal income tax, and have the economy struggle. There is, somehow, dispute that the cost of shipping goods to Puerto Rico is more expensive simply because it requires the use of more expensive ships paying more expensive maintenance and for more expensive crews. And while I have not researched this in detail, it defies all economic logic that making something cost more to provide and subjecting it to a duopoly does not render its market price more expensive. If foreign ships were permitted, they too could take advantage of the larger container sizes, and we should expect comparable relative savings to that we see with the smaller containers. There has been much controversy about various waivers, and the failure to offer other waivers, of the Jones Act during natural disasters. From these incidents we learn that proponents of the Jones Act value their ability to extract private rents above the timely delivery of goods in the wake of natural disasters. We routinely reject such price gouging when it enables the delivery of goods to those in need, so why are we tolerating it when it instead prevents the delivery of those goods? Alaska’s supply chains hang by a thread. What About |