---
subject: "River the Gerbil"
from: "\"River Kenna from In•Star\" <riverkenna@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-09 08:02:43
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "River Kenna", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3010718370428876194", "UNREAD"]
---
My ex used to run around the apartment playing with the cats and yelling “enrichment! enrichment!” It amused me. Our cats were her first pets. I think she read up a lot on caring for animals, steeping herself in the vocabulary of “enriching environments” and “enrichment activities” that animals require to stay happy and healthy. I ain’t all that different from a cat or dog or parrot or gerbil. I also require enrichment activities to keep me happy and healthy — and it’s been clicking lately that I’m missing entire classes of enrichment activities. The big one that thunked into place awhile back was about the more intellectual side of myself. When I was growing up, I read constantly, I wrote constantly, I desperately sought out friends who were interested in art and literature and philosophy and history and comparative religion. Mostly I failed to find any, except for the books that were my primary circle of friends and influences in those areas. For most of my early life, my mind went a mile a minute. I connected dots mid-conversation between ideas that were very present to me but jarringly out-of-left-field for those around me. I had an idiosyncratic way of speaking — I read Infinite Jest in high school because a friend had picked it up, read a few clips, and told me “hey, this book kinda talks like you.” This part of me was dominant for a lot of my life — my biggest ambition was to be a scholar and writer: to know everything and to write about it in ways that reshaped readers’ view of what kind of thing the world is. I wanted to chisel crystalline edifices from the hidden materials of the psychosphere. This part of me stopped working at a certain point, and mostly started trying to kill me. That’s a longer story I’ve told elsewhere, and the relevant bit is that I spent a couple few years staying away from books; instead I spent my time meditating, deepening into the body, slowing down, draining the part of myself that identified entirely as a racing mind. And it worked! I entered the happiest and most fruitful era of my life, felt more grounded and self-assured than ever before, I made new friends and did work I’m proud of… all in all it’s been great. But as I’ve I used to spend entire weekends in the library stacks, starting in the morning, moving floor to floor, finding areas of inquiry I’d never seen before and spending an hour or two immersing myself in them before moving to a new corner of the world’s knowledge. I’d keep this up until I realized it was getting dark and all I’d eaten was coffee and a protein bar. I don’t exactly want to get back to that type of behavior — it was often driven by compulsive magpie-ism, lack of self-trust, and dissociation. But the playful and joyful impulses it brought up, those I would like to get back. I’d like to find a couple books on, I don’t know, the art of Nestorian Christianity, and devour them out of pure joyful interest for a few days. All of which is to come around to the point: I haven’t been cultivating any kind of enriching environment for the part of myself that wants to reconnect healthily with intellect, with learning, with quickness. And that’s feeling like one obvious obstacle to its return. As within, so without: what you feed is what grows. If I’m not feeding an aspect of myself, it’s not going to be nourished, obviously. If I’m not providing an enriching environment, it doesn’t develop into a rich part of me. This should be obvious, but it’s so so easy to forget. I don’t think this exact moment is the time when I dive headfirst into building an enriching environment for my more intellectual and scholarly aspects. For starters, I’m on the road for the foreseeable future, living in hotels and ashrams and guesthouses and on friends’ floors — it doesn’t lend itself to the life of the mind all that much. For another thing, it feels like there’s still a lot of emotional and energetic stuff that needs to move before something around intellect unlocks, some attitude or approach that I can’t quite embody right now. It feels like something else needs to happen where I’m at. But the insight still stands for other aspects of myself as well. If I’m looking to nourish and develop an aspect of myself, I have to give it an enriching environment. I am basically a gerbil with more complex inner environments. I gotta give my emotional system a jungle gym and some cardboard rolls to chew on, if I want it to be happy and healthy. Infra is free and will stay free, but if you get something out of my work, consider giving something back. Share my writing with friends & followers, pick up my |