---
subject: "[New post] Neural Networks – Part 3"
from: "Seeking Wisdom <comment-reply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-11-12 21:28:46
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Jana V"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8135152689830330561"]
---
This is the seventh post in my series on making a toy GPT. For better understanding, I recommend reading my [earlier posts](https://janav.wordpress.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=d01ca45241ed0c2dda59ffcca4dddbe24e755d8d574bddf4eba40591824b75bf&blog_id=8483731&post_id=8123&user_id=0&subs_id=225460721&signature=ed94499e22a3789404747cea9dc033e5&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&url=https://janav.wordpress.com/) first.
The [MNIST dataset](https://janav.wordpress.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=11d69376293d4c3fe3b16436980af3880d4112f493d154db02d60b94bfb355c4&blog_id=8483731&post_id=8123&user_id=0&subs_id=225460721&signature=4c480f1befbd99667aa27e571b93aba8&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&url=https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/hojjatk/mnist-dataset) is the “hello world” of machine learning, containing images of handwritten digits that are used to train machine learning models. It includes 60,000 training images and 10,000 test images of handwritten digits for the numbers 0 through 9. Its practical use includes helping post offices automatically recognize handwritten zip codes.
Machines don't perceive images the way you and I do. Instead, they interpret and perform computations on numerical data. Take the MNIST digits, for instance. Each digit consists of a 28x28 grid of grayscale pixels, totaling 784 grayscale pixels. Each pixel is encoded in a single byte.
In many image processing contexts, pixel values range from 0 to 255, where 0 usually represents black and 255 represents white. However, in the MNIST dataset, this convention is reversed: 0 indicates “perfect background white,” and 255 indicates “perfect foreground black.” In the illustration below, I've mapped out the pixel values alongside their corresponding grayscale shades on the same grid.
We have already learned from my [earlier post](https://janav.wordpress.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=87b273828796f7444bb449695cd735f339e3c791d234fd3eb5dfba6f9e0d7aaf&blog_id=8483731&post_id=8123&user_id=0&subs_id=225460721&signature=6ad44f0c72899bbf80130e124160b187&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&url=https://janav.wordpress.com/2023/11/04/neural-networks-part-1/) that a neural network is a model for how the human brain works. Depending on the nature of the problem, we're free to choose the configuration of a neural network. This includes the number of hidden layers and the number of neurons in each hidden layer.
Our neural network has a fully connected architecture with two hidden layers. The first hidden layer contains 128 neurons, while the second hidden layer contains 64 neurons. The input layer receives 784 pixel values for each digit image.
These pixel values are fed as inputs to every neuron in the first hidden layer. Output from the neurons in the hidden layers passes through the ReLU activation function to introduce non-linearity. The output layer consists of 10 neurons, each predicting one of the 10 digit classes (0 to 9). The predicted digit class therefore corresponds to the neuron with the highest output value.
Can you guess how many parameters (weights and biases) this neural network has? This simple network has 109,386 parameters. Consider how complex the network must be for large language models (LLMs), which have parameters in the billions and some approaching one trillion.
The [PyTorch framework](https://janav.wordpress.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=a4262011caee3186aaacaf0c37e0d056b5c7bb22fed6477880a0c223431879d2&blog_id=8483731&post_id=8123&user_id=0&subs_id=225460721&signature=db2466a12624bc01c8b6e5aed4371ea4&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&url=https://pytorch.org/) enables creating this neural network with 15 lines of code, showing how easy PyTorch makes building neural networks.
The output layer has 10 neurons. But how does the network determine which particular neuron to select? Additionally, we need to understand how the network's loss is calculated. Each neuron produces a value ranging from negative to positive. We need to transform these values into probabilities. The Softmax function is useful for this. It converts the values into probabilities.
The first digit in the test set is 7. The table below shows how the raw output from the network is converted into probabilities using softmax for this single example. It also demonstrates how the cross-entropy loss is computed. If you understand how this works for one example, you know how it generalizes to calculating the loss over multiple examples.
The neuron responsible for identifying digit 7 produced a high probability of 1, while the other neurons produced probabilities of 0. Since the actual value (7) matches the predicted value (the neuron with high probability of 1), the loss of the network for this simple example is almost zero. We went through this concept in my [logistic regression](https://janav.wordpress.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=7866481315a1126e7f22b0a1c6f14b567d81494f28d57d07ca36adec8706fc1e&blog_id=8483731&post_id=8123&user_id=0&subs_id=225460721&signature=2cd50fe6bfe5244805da9f01f541a332&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&url=https://janav.wordpress.com/2023/10/22/from-linear-to-logistic-sigmoid-curve-and-log-loss/) post.
Jeremy Howard does an excellent job of explaining how softmax and cross-entropy loss work. I highly recommend [watching his explanation](https://janav.wordpress.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=bfd8dae69dd5b30a093c34eb189872224de31d5625ef6bab4a635b7cfc82bd78&blog_id=8483731&post_id=8123&user_id=0&subs_id=225460721&signature=365c472246106ecadaa08c113c087942&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&url=https://youtu.be/p4ZZq0736Po?t=2484), as these concepts will come up repeatedly when training neural networks.
We can train this neural network in less than 30 lines of PyTorch code. All neural network training involves the same four steps:
- Forward Pass runs computations from left to right to process the input, perform the computations, and produce the output.
- Backward Pass starts from the network loss and computes gradients as it traverses backwards through the network until gradients have been calculated for all neurons.
- Update each neuron's weights and biases by adding the result of: -1 * gradient * learning_rate. The key idea is to update the coefficients so that the loss function decreases.
- Resets all node gradients to zero before the next loop. This clears them to be recalculated for the next iteration.
Dividing image pixel values by 255.0 is a common normalization technique used in image processing, especially when training neural networks. This scaling of the pixel values to be between 0 and 1 is beneficial because neural networks tend to perform better when the input data is normalized to a smaller range.
It's magical to witness 109,386 coefficients dancing to the tunes of backpropagation, guided by the loss function, adjusting themselves to minimize the overall loss from the network. The thought of this marvel gives me goosebumps. I've created a small animation that illustrates how the 640 weights in the output layer change over 10 epochs. Isn't it magical?
When I made the network predict 10,000 test images, it achieved an accuracy of 97.51%. This is pretty good for less than 50 lines of code. The hard work was done by those who patiently wrote and labeled the handwritten digits. In just 3 lines of code, you can ask the network to make predictions for new inputs.
We have come a long way in 7 posts. We started by building a DNA generator using frequency counting of A, T, C, and G letters. Then we looked at the basics of derivatives and used that to predict weight given height. After that, we expanded our knowledge to predict weight using multiple input variables.
We moved from regression to classification and saw how the sigmoid function and log loss help classify heart disease. We then saw the limitation of a single linear classifier for solving the XOR problem, and how to combine multiple linear classifiers with the ReLU function to fit nonlinear outputs.
Just as Gutenberg's printing press revolutionized the spread of knowledge, the ingenious backpropagation algorithm sparked an AI boom, enabling machines to generate images, drive cars, and much more. We learned how the backpropagation algorithm works under the hood.
In this post, we created a neural network with 109,386 coefficients to predict handwritten digits. At this point, we have learned the ABCs of how machines learn, from simple linear classifiers all the way to complex neural networks and everything that goes on under the hood.
With this strong foundation, we can now look at another key pillar called Embeddings that enable large language models to perform their magic. Embeddings are a way of representing words and sentences as mathematical vectors or arrays of numbers. This allows computers to understand and process natural language more easily. It will be the topic of my next post.