---
subject: "The Economics of Logos"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <the-diff@ghost.io>"
to: ""
date: 2025-01-13 15:50:52
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX"]
---
|
|
In this issue: - The Economics of Logos—When you visit the homepage of a SaaS company or the portfolio page of a VC's website, you're looking at a reputational credit market complete with booms, busts, and sharp operators.
- Elsewhere in Reputation Markets—Referral bonuses make little sense when a company is small and everyone has material equity, a lot of sense as it grows, and then stop working once referrals get easier to exploit.
- Knocking Down Data Walls—The growth of AI raises the value of unfinished drafts.
- Closing the Arbitrage—Putting some of a public company's treasury into crypto tends to help their stock price. But anyone can do it.
- Cost Avoidance—AI hasn't directly induced many layoffs, but it has eliminated countless counterfactual jobs.
- State AI Investment—The comparatively low cost of being the best place to do AI research that doesn't directly lead to a profitable business.
This issue of The Diff is brought to you by our sponsor, The Economics of LogosOne of the recurring questions in The Diff is: what is money? We talked last week about What you're seeing is the surface of a unique form of intracorporate lending, where companies let other companies borrow a bit of their brand in exchange for some exposure (or, in some cases, in exchange for knocking down the price of a product a bit) Valuable logos have extreme returns to scale because they have overlapping feedback loops: - Sales pages are written on the assumption that the reader has a short attention span and the most valuable information needs to be upfront. If a company has two case studies, one of which involves doing something really amazing for an unknown company or a stodgy Fortune 500, and the other involves something trivial that they did for Databricks or Anduril or Stripe, the higher-profile logo wins over the better story. (They can always tell that story in the first Zoom meeting with a prospect.)
[[3]](https://www.thediff.co/r/9e7d967d?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99) - A company's brand gets more recognizable if it shows up in more places, so the more times a given company's logo is out there on suppliers' sites, the more name recognition and thus value that logo has.
- And, of course, this social proof helps companies win more details, expanding the scope of products they need and growing the set of suppliers whose homepage could host a logo.
Meanwhile, it wouldn't be a quasi-financial system without more purely-financial intermediaries. One of the rituals around fundraising is that when a company raises money from a fund, each one has a chance to put the other's logo on their site. This, too, has the usual returns to scale: Sequoia, Founders Fund, and a16z are very likely to get mentioned—if there's a next-generation fund in the round, even if the cognoscenti would rather have an LP stake in that fund than in Sequoia's vehicle, it doesn't have the cachet to make it onto a short list. So the system of logos tends to reinforce whoever's most powerful, in much the same way that bilateral trade between two countries tends to be denominated in the currency of whichever one has a more widely-accepted currency, or in the dollar. The profusion of logos is a form of reputational credit expansion, with all the usual upsides and downsides thereof. If tiny company X does a deal with established company Y, X bragging about it is actually a way to make the market more efficient—it's a valuable signal if they've convinced a reputable company that their product is a) a better deal than established providers, and b) better to buy than to build. So a section of the economy that doesn't have some way to make this kind of reputation-enhancing win visible is one that doesn't have enough circulation of reputational credit. But it's possible to get Minsky Moments here, too, where a company's ubiquity becomes a bigger part of its growth. Any time there's a way to create credit, there will be people who engineer ways to create too much of it. Something similar happened in a more legible way with the link graph: when Google launched, they could use hyperlinks as an incredibly convenient tool for measuring reputation—if lots of people link to irs.gov, and those links tend to use words like "Tax," you know that irs.gov is a great place for information about taxes. But that created an ecosystem where other companies were also incentivized to earn those links, or even to buy them. In that case, Google had more or less privatized the link graph, and could set up policies that mitigated some of the most annoying abuses while still leaving room for some hustle. But nobody really owns the concept of startup reputation (Y Combinator might come the closest, and they certainly have some visibility into how logos end up in the places they do). In the meantime, we're in an era of reputational free banking: anyone who can spend a few minutes in Photoshop, a few dollars on Upwork, or a few seconds with DALL-E can enter the reputational banking business and bootstrap from there. But as with other financial systems, this is great when it accelerates productive investment but vulnerable to overshooting. The use of logos (or even anonymized references i.e. “a Fortune 500 retailer”) are an explicit negotiating point in many B2B software MSAs, particularly if the vendor is an early-stage company. These clauses can get quite detailed, outlining explicitly when use of logos is permitted—for example, you may be able to negotiate use of the logo for an investor deck, but not on your website, etc. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/4afbe49a?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)This makes logos an especially strong signal in any business that sells to hedge funds and prop traders. If they can get their customers to leak incremental bits in exchange for something, they must have a lot to offer! [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/3a5b3838?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)Good salespeople are always practicing a sort of informal operations research when they decide the optimal sequence for different points they could make. This has been informal because there just isn't enough time in the middle of a meeting to jot down some formulas and decide whether the optimal next move is to tell a semi-relevant anecdote that contains some social proof or to mention the next feature. But as more of these interactions happen in text form, or in easily-recorded audio and video, and as that information gets more amenable to analysis, you'll eventually have a Sales Copilot telling you things like "this prospect is worried about pricing" or "this one would find it relatable if you mentioned that you own a dog." [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/20aa1b99?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
You're on the free list for The Diff! Last week, paying subscribers read about A Word From Our SponsorsIn 2025, every company is going to recognize the need for a customer service AI agent. Why? Because AI agents provide customers with better answers and faster resolutions, all at a lower cost to you. Fin by Intercom is the world’s leading AI agent for customer service. Fin can resolve up to 80% of questions in an instant—which customers love. And you can lower your cost to serve by 96% and finally get off the service rep hiring treadmill. The best part is that Fin is now available on every customer service helpdesk. That means you get all of Fin’s benefits without having to change platforms. See why more than 3,700 businesses have hired Fin for AI-first customer service. ElsewhereElsewhere in Reputation MarketsA decent model of a growth company is that everything it does matters only insofar as it lets the company get the right talent. Most of the value created in percentage terms happens early on, but in cumulative dollar terms it's mostly the result of the effort and judgment of people who were hired at some point after launch. (Some early career paths don't seem to make much economic sense for the company unless you see them as a way to identify and retain a small cohort of top talents.) So companies naturally care a great deal about hiring, and try to use various hacks to get it right, one of which is that they value referrals more highly than cold inbounds. Referrals combine some broadly useful correlations, like people meeting and hanging out with peers who share similar interests, and referrals also involve existing employees betting a bit of their reputation on new hires. For people who don't value that reputation especially highly, Knocking Down Data WallsText and code are great media for training AI models because they're both ways to think out loud. It's hard to be sure you understand a topic well until you can write someone an email explaining some aspect of it, and codifying a process in terms a computer can understand is also a great way to ensure that you yourself understand it. In other media, there's a sharper distinction between process and output—which means that more of the data AIs train on shows the end result disconnected from how it happened. Which is one reason If you're worried about AI taking your job, one way to reframe that is that the output of your work contains training data, and 1) being able to produce unique training data is a good idea, and 2) that specific job is going to go away eventually. Getting paid a bit more to make it happen a little faster is a bargain that someone will probably take, and at least in this case the streamers seem willing to take it. Closing the ArbitrageThe NYT has a good piece about Cost AvoidanceLayoffs are a surprisingly expensive choice, and one reason they're so severe and so clustered is that companies have incentives to delay them. The net effect of a round of layoffs is 1) of course, the direct effect of getting rid of some headcount and associated costs, 2) the loss of other people who quit because they want more job security, think the firm laid off the wrong people, etc., and 3) the ongoing productivity hit from reorganizing processes around the remaining employees and the inevitable morale hit. So one effect of labor-saving technologies like AI is State AI InvestmentThe UK Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. See a sampling of current open roles below: - A premier proprietary trading firm is looking for smart generalists to join their investor relations team, working with external investors, rating agencies, and the internal finance team. Investment banking and/or investor relations experience preferred. Quantitative background and technical aptitude a plus. (NYC)
- A growing pod at a multi-manager platform is looking for new quantitative researchers, no prior finance experience necessary, 250k+ (NYC)
- A well-funded startup that’s building the universal electronic cash system by taking stablecoin adoption from edge cases to the mainstream is looking for a senior full-stack engineer. Experience with information dense front-ends is a strong plus. (Singapore)
- A Google Ventures backed startup founded by SpaceX engineers that’s building data infrastructure and tooling for hardware companies is looking for a staff product manager with 5+ years experience, ideally with AI and data intensive products. (LA, Hybrid)
- YC-backed AI company that’s turning body cam footage into complete police reports is looking for a tech lead/CTO who can build scalable backend systems and maintain best practices for the engineering org. (SF)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. |
|||
|
|
|
|||
|