---
subject: "Taylor Sheridan's $1B Deal, Explained"
from: "Trung Phan <trungphan@workweek.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-11-01 06:01:19
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Trung Phan", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_7971156048460647958", "UNREAD"]
---
Paramount fumbling Sheridan is particularly surprising because the company recently merged with Skydance in an $8B deal and its owner David Ellison (aka son of Larry Ellison) has been on a spending spree comparable to me at the H-Mart food court after breaking a 36-hour fast:
-
The South Park guys agreed to ~$3B in deals to exclusively stream their 27-year catalog on Paramount+ (as well as create new content) over the next 5 years (P.S. I wrote
[more on how Trey Parker and Matt Stone became billionaires on these deals](https://link.workweek.com/click/42289639.62167/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cucmVhZHRydW5nLmNvbS9wL3NvdXRoLXBhcmstYW5kLXRoZS1ncmVhdGVzdC10di1jb250cmFjdD9oYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B006deefb)).
- UFC signed a 7-year $7.7B deal with Paramount for exclusive US rights.
- The Free Press newsletter with 1.5m subs was acquired for $150m and its founder Bari Weiss was made Editor-In-Chief of CBS News.
-
The Duffer Brothers jumped from Netflix (where they created Stranger Things) to Paramount on a 4-year deal starting in 2026. They were paid an “undisclosed sum”, which is code for “a massive massive bag” (Paramount has also signed deals with other top talent including Will Smith, James Mangold, Timothée Chalamet).
- Warner Bros. Discovery has received three unsolicited takeover bids from Paramount and rejected all the offers, which are in the $60B-$70B range.
While there was some tension on the South Park negotiations, Ellison is clearly willing to pay for top talent and had nothing [but praise for Sheridan when he acquired Paramount](https://link.workweek.com/click/42289639.62167/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuY25iYy5jb20vMjAyNS8wOC8wOC9jbmJjLWV4Y2x1c2l2ZS10cmFuc2NyaXB0LXBhcmFtb3VudC1za3lkYW5jZS1jaGFpcm1hbi1jZW8tZGF2aWQtZWxsaXNvbi1zcGVha3Mtd2l0aC1jbmJjcy1kYXZpZC1mYWJlci1vbi1zcXVhd2stb24tdGhlLXN0cmVldC10b2RheS5odG1sP2hhc2hlZF91c2VyPTBlYmVmMTJjNDI5MTE4NDU2MmRhYzA5OTY1YmNlODA4/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Bed553775):
So, I have a really good relationship with Taylor and I think he is literally a singular genius and content creator. I mean, when you look at him, he literally has a perfect track record. And so, from that standpoint, I’m thrilled that, you know, we have an exclusive deal with him through 2028. And my goal is to have Taylor call Paramount his home for as long as he wants to be telling stories.
So, what happened?
The Wall Street Journal has a [solid blow-by-blow](https://link.workweek.com/click/42289639.62167/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cud3NqLmNvbS9idXNpbmVzcy9tZWRpYS93aHkteWVsbG93c3RvbmUtbWFzdGVybWluZC10YXlsb3Itc2hlcmlkYW4tZGVjaWRlZC10by1kaXRjaC1wYXJhbW91bnQtMjE5MmQ0MDE_aGFzaGVkX3VzZXI9MGViZWYxMmM0MjkxMTg0NTYyZGFjMDk5NjViY2U4MDg/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B29803345) and it sounds like the new Paramount team took their eyes off the ball and forgot who buttered their toast:
-
They rejected one of Sheridan’s film scripts and he felt “disrespected” considering the fact that his Big Screen track record is absolute fuego including Sicario, Hell or High Water and Wind River. The disrespect peaked with a bunch of studio notes on his film idea — which is no bueno in Sheridan land. This man is NOT taking notes.
- The Paramount exec most responsible for Yellowstone (Chris McCarthy) left the company and Sheridan “wasn’t pleased with the departure”.
- Ellison pitched a TV idea to Sheridan about America’s 250th anniversary and while Sheridan makes “shows about tough men contending with a changing world appeal to red-state audiences, he did not want to get overtly political.”
-
Paramount cast Nicole Kidman in a new legal drama (Discretion) without telling Sheridan, who was working with the actress on Lioness and is likely to have to re-jigger the shooting schedule.
-
The good ‘ol finance department started “challenging” the budget on the show Lioness, which really “aggrieved” Sheridan (mind you, Paramount’s previous management let Sheridan go HAM and spent $1B on all of his shows, with some hitting Game of Thrones level of spend AKA $20m+ per episode for 1923 or about $500k a minute).
Cutting costs at the operational level certainly seems a priority. In fact, Paramount recently announced 2,000 layoffs as it restructures the company post-merger.
As for Sheridan, the tighter budgets combined with all those sleights led him (along with his longtime producing partners at 101 Studios) to seek greener pastures and the other studios sniffed out an opportunity.
It’s the classic truism in Corporate America: if you want to set the terms and score a fatter bag than you currently have, you need to solicit some offers.
NBCUniversal was the most aggressive courter. This is on-brand considering the media firm’s recent track record of poaching talent. They famously brought Christopher Nolan over after Warner Bros. wrecked the relationship by putting a slate of films straight to streaming during COVID. Nolan is all about the theatre experience and — even though it didn’t affect any of his films — he was very annoyed by the move. So, he took his talents Universal Pictures and made a small film about a guy in a hat called Oppenheimer (which went on to gross ~$1B and sweep the Oscars).
Universal also has great relationships with some real auteur’s auteur (Jordan Peele, Steven Spielberg).
On the TV side, NBCUniversal has two of the most prolific TV creators in history under its umbrella: Dick Wolf (Law & Order legend) and Lorne Michaels (SNL OG), two guys that Sheridan really admires.
Sheridan will presumably have a lot of leeway with his new deal that will hit $1B if he knocks off key milestones. An 8-year film deal starts in 2026 and a 5-year TV deal kicks off in 2029.
He does still have to finish a bunch of Yellowstone spin-offs that Paramount will own the IP on (Dutton Ranch, Y: Marshals, The Madison and 1944). In fact, Paramount owns all of Sheridan’s TV IP and can keep cranking out content.
Future show won’t slap as hard without Sheridan at the helm but — if we learned anything from the Star Wars and Marvel age — it’s possible to milk a franchise for billions before viewers realize the product has turned to doo doo.
Sheridan is also making Paramount Pictures a live-action version of “Call of Duty” on the way out (he will co-write it with Pete Berg, who will direct). I know Sheridan isn’t looking for casting advice (or any advice, really) but we need to get [Steve “Glasses Accountant-Looking Guy From Sicario” Forsing](https://link.workweek.com/click/42289639.62167/aHR0cHM6Ly94LmNvbS9UcnVuZ1RQaGFuL3N0YXR1cy8xOTgzOTU1MzU0ODQ2MzYzNzkzP2hhc2hlZF91c2VyPTBlYmVmMTJjNDI5MTE4NDU2MmRhYzA5OTY1YmNlODA4/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B098a8de4) in a lead role.
Anyway, the time period between 2029-2035 will be one to watch as Sheridan IP is likely to be floating two streaming apps. In reality, these sub-scale platforms really should just merge. A combination of Peacock (40m subs), Paramount+ (75m subs) and HBO Max (107m subs) would be larger than Disney+ (130m subs) and have the juice to dance with Amazon Prime (200m subs) and Netflix (300m subs).
Hollywood trade publication [Deadline has more details on how NBCUniversal won over Sheridan](https://link.workweek.com/click/42289639.62167/aHR0cHM6Ly9kZWFkbGluZS5jb20vMjAyNS8xMC90YXlsb3Itc2hlcmlkYW4tbmJjdW5pdmVyc2FsLWRlYWwtZXhwbGFpbmVkLTEyMzY1OTkzNDAvP2hhc2hlZF91c2VyPTBlYmVmMTJjNDI5MTE4NDU2MmRhYzA5OTY1YmNlODA4Izp-OnRleHQ9U291cmNlcyUyMHNhaWQlMjB0aGF0JTIwdGhlJTIwZml2ZSxhbmQlMjB0aGUlMjBOQkNVbml2ZXJzYWwlMjBzdHJlYW1lciUyMFBlYWNvY2su/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B5340986a):
Sources said that the five-year deal that begins in 2029 (earlier for movies) is at the unprecedented $1 billion territory. That is how it will work out in creator/EP and writer fees and backend, if the prolific Sheridan follows through on his plans to create 20 shows for NBC and the NBCUniversal streamer Peacock. There are slot guarantees, the equivalent of put pictures all over the place.
His attitude is, he is 12 for 12 in terms of creating shows that have become hits and established the Paramount Network and Paramount+ streamer as hitmaking enterprises. That includes Yellowstone, the prequel series and sequel series, Landman, Lioness and the rest.
Then it became a question of where Sheridan would land, and the easy answer became NBCUniversal. [Donna] Langley, the chair of NBCUniversal Entertainment, made it her mission to find commonality with Sheridan. She visited him numerous times at his ranches for long talks about what a future with her would look like. And so, 10 days ago, after Paramount sent a dozen people to a final meeting with Sheridan, Langley had already made her impression. Sheridan told Ellison he would finish out his Paramount series commitments, and then hang his cowboy hat elsewhere.
Also moving with him is the David Glasser-run 101 Studios, which gets a first-look deal and an early start on Sheridan’s feature work for NBCUniversal, along with producing a slew of shows that should eventually transform Peacock into much more than a repository for Saturday Night Live reruns and other NBCUniversal films and series. And the reruns of Yellowstone that Paramount sold for a song [to Peacock] back in the day, before the series became the biggest thing on basic cable.
Last year, I wrote a [deep dive I did on Sheridan’s creative process](https://link.workweek.com/click/42289639.62167/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cucmVhZHRydW5nLmNvbS9wL3RheWxvci1zaGVyaWRhbnMtZXh0cmVtZS1wcm9kdWN0aXZpdHk_aGFzaGVkX3VzZXI9MGViZWYxMmM0MjkxMTg0NTYyZGFjMDk5NjViY2U4MDg/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B18c31d70) and came to the conclusion that this dude loves working under pressure.
He didn’t even start writing until he was 40. He quit acting after the Sons of Anarchy producers low-balled him. After 15 years in Hollywood, he realized he’d never be more than a B actor. Writing seemed like the best option because he needed money and his wife had a kid on the way. Sheridan maxed out his wife’s credit card to buy the Final Draft screenwriting software and the first script was…Sicario.
He says he had “absolutely no idea” how to write but “knew exactly what not to do” because he had worked with “so many bad scripts” as an actor.
Sicario became a hit, which gave him runway to make Hell or High Water (2016) and Wind River (2017). After those three films — which Sheridan dubs the Modern American Frontier trilogy — Paramount tapped him for Yellowstone and kicked off his massively successful TV run.
A few seasons into Yellowstone, Sheridan bought the famed 6666 Ranch in Texas for $350m and needed a way to pay for it. He signed a new $200m deal with Paramount (which ballooned to ~$500m) and beasted out all those new shows in his Wyoming cabin.
All along, Sheridan wanted that maximum maximum maximum creative control.
It’s control he craved after a precarious acting career, which is also why his first films were all Indie projects far away from Big Studio notes. Once Yellowstone hit, Paramount+ was desperate for Sheridan’s content and basically gave him a blank check.
The control came with pressure, though. But Sheridan has performed on a Jordan-esque or Woods-esque or Brady-esque level.
What’s the pressure with this new $1 Billy NBCUniversal deal? I’m guessing that Sheridan wants a legacy similar to Dick Wolf and Lorne Michaels. He wants to prove that he can throw heaters and make it rain for decades.