---
subject: "Monthly Roundup #39: February 2026"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-02-18 20:26:01
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
There really is a lot going on these days. I held off posting this because I was trying to see if I could write a net helpful post about the current situation involving Anthropic and the Pentagon. Anthropic very much wants to help DoW defend our country and make us strong. It is clear there have been some large misunderstandings here about how LLMs work. They are not ordinary tools like spreadsheets that automatically do whatever the user asks, nor would it be safe to make them so, nor do they predictably adhere to written rule sets or take instructions from their CEO in a crisis. And they are probabilistic. You do not and cannot get absolute guarantees. The only way to know if an AI model will do what you need in a crisis is something you needed to be do regardless of potential refusals, and which is also what you must do with human soldiers, which is to run the simulations and mock battles and drills and tests that tell you if the model can do and is willing to do the job. If there are irreconcilable differences and the military contract needs to end, that would be a shame and a lost opportunity, and hopefully both sides could help ensure a smooth transition, but that would ultimately be fine. OpenAI and Google are waiting as qualified alternative suppliers. The far bigger issue is that we are now at risk of having the Pentagon designate Anthropic as a ‘supply chain risk,’ the primary effect of which would be to cause expensive and severe disruptions across the defense industry and at many large companies and impose nightmaring compliance requirements indefinitely. It would make us far less safe, would be a major norm violation, and would not address any actual supply chain risks. Everyone I have seen who has encountered this proposal and knew what it meant knew it would backfire on America horribly if implemented. No one wants that other than our enemies. Alas, I am the wrong person to deliver a detailed message on this, for many reasons, so I will simply say the above for now, and then proceed to the monthly roundup. Table of ContentsBad News
Not only should we not pass laws against ‘price gouging,’ And yes, when there’s a two day storm the grocery stores will look like this:
Government WorkingSomehow I need to put this here, despite my extreme aversion to doing so: I affirm my opposition to the American government straight up murdering people, and my call that people who commit straight up murders be convicted of murder, especially if there is video of them committing what is clearly a straight up murder, and I add a call that the government not actively seek to destroy evidence relevant to potential murder investigations. This applies on the high seas. It also applies in American cities. I also affirm my commitment to a whole slew of basic civil rights, the right to a lawyer and due process of law, the right to not be indefinitely detained for no reason, the right to walk around without ‘your papers,’ your right to not get physically attacked or tortured including while in official custody, your right to freedom of speech and to film what is happening to you, the right to bear arms, and my opposition to those who violate them, and to those who knowingly fund and enable such violations. I also oppose the government lying to the people, or attempting to smear murder victims, or engaging in witness intimidation, or forcibly cutting off access to such crime scenes, or trying to use such actions as a form of extortion or punishment of a particular area or its government. It also extends to creating conditions likely to lead to bad shootings that kill people even if they aren’t straight up murders, or attempts to lie about what happened and the nature of the victims, and to cover it all up. I believe that government public communications lying to the public should (with notably rare and specified exceptions) be criminally illegal, and that our laws on this are inadequate and must be updated. I leave the fact question of ‘how much of this happened or is happening’ to others.
Often my view is that ‘don’t resign but do the right thing and take bold risks with zero regard to whether you are fired, since you almost quit on the margin anyway, and you make them either change or eventually fire you’ is usually superior to resigning if you can do it, the exception being if your resignation would send a super strong signal. It’s even reasonable to actively take a job with that intention. But there are few who can do it, staying does tend to enable the harm that is happening, and resignation beats complicity. One instinct is that if resignations would not be a way of exercising voice, as things are so far gone that no one would notice, then staying won’t give you voice either. I also believe that Saying you are going to cap credit card interest rates is popular. California remains in crisis over the proposed wealth tax. Mike Solana can be many things but also he talked to 21 billionaires, The scariest part of this is that
As in, ‘if I lived in such places I would perhaps feel I had to flee’ levels of bad. Definitely ‘I could not do my job as a writer’ levels of bad. I agree that the dynamic involves ‘group [X] is now in our circle of concern so we will censor statements that offend, belittle or endanger members of [X],’ but this seems like it obviously is not about that, because we didn’t used to do this for old groups [Y] that were already within our circle. Why is causing anxiety in someone else your legal problem? What’s going on is something distinct from ‘[X]s are people’ or ‘[X]s matter.’ There seem to be a lot of cases where [X]s can call for the death of all [Y]s and mean it and that’s legal, but a [Y] can’t make an [X] anxious without being arrested and get bigger penalties than for many serious violent offenders even when they’re caught. It also makes it very difficult to catch even widespread actual criminal activities if you cannot discuss them and the police won’t pursue them.
The ‘President goes around threatening tariffs any time anyone is insufficiently accommodating’ problem continues. We do at least have
I would say the ecologist is, in a narrow way, entirely correct. Given the existence of the law and the inability to alter that law, spending the hundred million is not a waste of money, if it is the only way to get the associated project built and the project is worth spending that extra money. Thus, I’ll allow it, so long as you acknowledge that this is about the fact that we have an insane law, and has nothing to do with protecting the bats, since the value of protecting the bats is closer to a hundred pounds, and that the law should change. In this case, given the bill is a full hundred million pounds, I would argue that is high enough that ‘change the law’ is indeed a valid and right action.
There is a risk that this is radicalizing, and also that it opens the door for a, shall we say, ‘renegotiation.’ If the Boomer politicians and retirees think they can use the law to take our private property, what is their moral account for why they keep their own, especially when it takes the form of government benefits or tax exemptions? There is also a partisan aspect of this move, but I find that far less interesting.
The Epstein FilesMostly I am not the right person to talk about this. I am going to leave all the details about who did what to whom, or who covered what up, to others. There is one thing I think hasn’t been said prominently that is worth saying, which is that I think this from Nikhil Pal Singh is on the right track but importantly wrong.
The less important reason this is wrong is that he was very much also selling the actual experience along with the feeling of impunity. The more important reason this is wrong is that, as I understand these dynamics, he was often selling something more important than impunity. He sold kompromat. That sounds backwards. Why would someone want Epstein to have the ability blackmail them? That’s the trap, that’s bad, right? You lure these rich and powerful people to the island, get them to do horrible things, and then you have power. Because if you are now part of this conspiracy doing horrible things, and others that know about it have this leverage over you, then (as perverse and crazy as this is) that means, to types like this, that you can be trusted. You’ve proven you won’t care when others do maximally horrible things, and if you step out of line then they can ruin you, so obviously you won’t cause any trouble. You’re part of the team. That also explains a bunch of other vile behaviors that seem to be emergently misaligned, designed to be maximally evil and vile rather than because anyone actually wants to do, see or experience a given thing. This is not an accident. Everyone involved needs to be unmasked, investigated and prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law. If that would truly be so disruptive that our civilization would collapse, then there is a term for what must then be done instead: Truth and reconciliation. RIP Scott AdamsScott Alexander offers reflections and then his I will add that: I too greatly enjoyed the old Dilbert cartoons and his early books. I was reading Adams’s analysis of the Trump campaign in real time in 2016 and he absolutely figured out a bunch of central stuff everyone else missed. It’s not clear the extent to which Adams’s overconfident and increasingly crazy predictions were ‘real’ versus he was being strategic or doing his supposed ‘hypnosis’ thing. It became increasingly painful to read those predictions and his associated claims, and it was clear Adams was trying to copy various Trump persuasion tactics that he could spot from the outside but didn’t instinctively grok well enough or have the required secondary powers to make them consistently work. After that things went increasingly off the rails and I agree with Scott Alexander that this was centrally genuine. There’s quite a lot of evidence for that along the way. I do think he was also engaging in various ‘persuasion’ and ‘hypnosis’ tactics, as he understood them, so he would also Say That Which He Believed Was Not. He really did write or say a lot of things in what, to everyone but especially to someone In My Culture, is the most annoying way possible. What Adams called ‘hypnosis’ is centrally more like NLP and sloganeering, and is only ‘hypnosis’ in the sense that everything is hypnosis. It’s mostly not full or ‘real’ hypnosis. The thing he was doing is real and can be powerful but it’s not the same, and he often botched the execution. The full thing is real.
News You Can’t Use But Click On AnywayAre media organizations falling prey to the myopic revealed preferences of their core audiences at the expense of the long term? Yes, you can notice that users click on negative stories more, or those that confirm their biases and the rightness of the ingroup, or provide juicy sounding gossip, and so on.
But most people are running some sort of tracker in their in their heads about your reputation, whether your product provides value, and how they feel after using it. Long term damage accumulates. We’re Putting Together A Team
Not unless you absolutely have to. Even then, try really hard not to hire any particular person, or more than the bare minimum number of people, and only do it when they’re a great fit and you have a clear vision and a plan to integrate and teach everyone. You Can’t Retire, I QuitOr: It was that or dip into capital.
I understand the drive to become financially able to retire, to take all the pressure off, but yeah you can’t permanently check out of doing useful or interesting things at 41 and expect anyone to stick around, or for that to turn out well for you even in terms of hedonic enjoyment. Loser is exactly correct here. A well deserved break is one thing. Arguing ‘there is nothing to do it is too cold’ is not going to work when the internet exists, you have a computer (and can even install Claude Code)? That’s another thing entirely, even if she wasn’t going out every day to teach. Also, yeah, if you’re on drugs five days a week then you have a problem, period. If she’s still working full time then no, this is not going to work. I do think you can absolutely say ‘I’ve worked hard for 15 years to get to this point and I need a few months fully off’ but it can’t be indefinite. Jones Act Watch
Sharing the disingenuous claim that the maritime industry ‘provides 650,000 jobs nationwide’ that comes from counting everything that touches maritime anything in any way and attributing all of it to our banning further maritime activity. Indeed, they then expand that to the outright false claim of ‘650,000 Americans working in the maritime industry.’ Similar logic is behind their ‘economic impact of over $150 billion.’
And they say you pound these lies over and over again. Essentially, they see you with $100, they take $99 of them, and say ‘look I am responsible for you having a dollar.’
The fact that they are bragging about the unusual act of building a third-class ship three years late at twice the planned already outrageous budget is all the evidence you need that the Jones Act and Dredge Act have utterly failed in their stated objectives.
Protectionism almost never works, but most of the time there is at least We are not a ‘serious nation that handles energy’ on the high seas. Quite the opposite, we are a nation that has banned the handling of energy on the high seas, on the level of ‘we ship our LNG to Europe and then import LNG back because we don’t have ships that can legally take that LNG from Houston to Boston.’
Even in those areas where the fleet of the United States ‘includes ships’ that can haul cargo, which really does not seem like something that we should be at risk of not having (yet here we are), it is vastly more expensive, and available in vastly smaller quantities, than it would be otherwise, or than in any comparable place anywhere in the world. It is madness. It really is this simple:
Sal attempts to explain this away, and this explanation has to be seen:
So to summarize: We didn’t hold other countries for economic ransom in 1946. How dare we. Liberia has a ship registry. We helped other countries have their own shipyards. How dare we. The military sealift command uses its own ships. Cargo handling techniques were introduced that were not commercially viable, so key shipping companies died. The Interstate Highway System reduced shipping demand. Airplanes reduced shipping demand and opened up rail capacity. The Colonial Pipeline reduced demand in 1962. The US government did not pay for the development of container ships in time. The US Navy stopped subsidizing the commercial shipyards.
A lot of this is trying to say, oh, we have roads and trains and pipelines and airplanes, so who even needs ships? The rest (aside from #2 which is deeply silly, given the vast number of similar alternatives and that it’s irrelevant anyway) is ‘you didn’t give us enough money and subsidies, and didn’t extort or exploit our allies enough.’ And that all explains why we have approximately zero shipbuilding and zero ships, and we should keep having approximately zero ships to protect that approximately zero shipbuilding. It keeps us strong, you see. Variously Effective Altruism
I also think the large reference class of what Scott does here where he suggests labeling a box on your tax return ‘I request to cancel my participation in foreign aid this year and receive an $X tax refund. I understand this will result in Y amount of preventable death and suffering’ is rather obnoxious and toxic and if everyone in EA-related spaces stopped doing it that would help. Facts are very much not in evidence and oh boy do you piss people off when you talk like that. They Took Our Jobs And Now I Can RelaxNote that this graph is only from 7.0 to 8.0, the moves are not that big.
It’s not as simple as not having responsibilities, but yes there is a substantial jump upon retirement, followed by declines as aging makes your body stop working, but the declines then are remarkably small. I have a hard time believing people at 90 years old are actually happier than they were at 50. Mostly it says happiness changes little. While I Cannot Condone This
Good News, Everyone
If I had to point to one key insight, it is that our lives are largely made up of repeating particular patterns, and what is around drives you towards particular action choices, so instead of thinking generically you should engineer spaces around making the patterns you want to happen happen more often, in the most positive ways. Despite the associated tax incentives, Use Your One Time
Hands Off My PhoneRemember that So as a good principle, if it is plausible the US Government would try to get into your phone, and you wouldn’t want them to do that, don’t enable fingerprint unlock.
Fun TheoryLet’s face it. Church and synagogue and other religious services are usually boring. Doing the same exact thing week after week (modulo the sermon) is a tough ask, and it’s a much tougher ask now that we all have options.
A bunch of people point out that services are not supposed to be fun. I agree, but fun is not the opposite of boredom. If the service was actually moving you, if you cared about what you were saying, it wouldn’t be boring. Then you miss out on all the other benefits of having a shared community and ethical system, regardless of what you think of the religious beliefs themselves. I also saw people complaining about how church used to last an hour and now it is often ninety minutes. Can’t have that. Gotta keep it short and make it count. Good AdviceRemember to
What doesn’t kill you makes you stronger. When you know, you know. If it were a good idea, someone would be doing it already. If it’s worth doing, it’s worth doing well. If you like your job, you’re doing something wrong. “All people are insane. They will do anything at any time, and God help anybody who looks for reasons.” Money can’t buy happiness. Intuition is fake and rationality solves everything.
There’s some truth in all of them, and there’s a time and a place where each will be the right thing to say in the particular moment, but all eight are also importantly false. The full negation of all eight would each also be false.
For Your EntertainmentAs others have proposed before,
As I’ve seen a lot more movies both at home and in the theater, I grow increasingly confident people underestimate theaters. Use the big screen, Luke.
Film students have such terrible attention spans, and so little interest in actual films, Professors are split as to whether to accept this, or try to help students fix it. I strongly endorse the later strategy.
Plur1busTo not be left behind, I watched the first season of Plur1bus. It is intentionally extremely slow, including an entire first half hour or so that I would have cut outright. If this wasn’t by Vince Gilligan and something people talk about, I don’t think I make it out of episode one. I’m mildly glad I stuck it out. As others have noted, it cares more about particular characters than its overarching plot. I was disappointed that they did what media often does now, which is take a potentially interesting philosophical or moral question, and then give one side an increasing set of reasons why ‘oh obviously they’re wrong.’ A recent example that isn’t much of a spoiler would be in the new Superman movie. Indeed, not only have I ‘seen this movie before’ several times, as Carol puts it (upcoming link url itself is a potential spoiler in both directions so if you don’t want to know don’t look), Gamers Gonna Game Game Game Game Game
They’re also
I’ve been playing through the Dragon Quest 2D-HD remakes. First up was Dragon Quest 3, now I’m on Dragon Quest 1, as this is the explicitly intended order. My feeling on Dragon Quest 3 was that it was a fun game as a remake, but it had a few key flaws. As with many old games, when you fix Quality of Life issues like how you save the game or what happens if you die, or you give too clear indicators of where to go, you disrupt key balancing mechanisms. The barriers, and having to figure things out, are inherent to a lot of the fun, including needing to fight your way to a boss. The new Monster Wrangler class is basically a ‘you have to look up the info’ class, since it scales with how many monsters you catch, and it is clearly the way you are ‘supposed to’ beat the game given Wild Side. Way too many of the monsters and bosses in the late game will shut you out of casting spells, which forces you to switch over to Monster Wrangler. It’s way too easy to randomly die in the later dungeons if you’re at levels that keep the bosses interesting, in ways that don’t feel fair.
For Dragon Quest 1, I’m not done yet, but I think it extends those mistakes and is largely a failure, because it loses the elegance of the original and tries to shoehorn in a lot of extra spells and extra story that I feel don’t add anything. I get that the original was basically one long grind, but that’s kind of the point. Also, you spend a lot of time during which healing during battles de facto doesn’t work, which means you just have to unleash and hope you don’t die. But mostly the game destroys the key tensions in the original Dragon Quest 1, which is that if you push harder you might die and have to go back to the castle and lose half your gold, and also you need to map and figure things out. I’m still going to finish, but it’s kind of out of a sense of honor or obligation than that I’m having that much fun.
Sports Go Sports
Then there’s tanking, where we all are talking price. Everyone agrees that NBA teams that can no longer compete are under no obligation to maximize their chances of winning more games. But how far should we let them go to lose as many as possible? What is ethical versus unethical tanking?
One thing he points out is the dumb fact that you then have to lie to everyone and say you’re not tanking.
I see six schools of thought about ethical tanking. Tanking is ethical, full stop, it is the league’s job to set the rules. Tanking by the front office is ethical, tanking by the coach or players is not. Tanking by nonplayers is acceptable, but not by the players. Tanking by nonplayers is acceptable, but only to the point of indifference to winning or putting a competitive product on the field this year. Tanking by nonplayers is acceptable, but only to the point of plausible deniability. Tanking is fine if and only if your fans approve of it. Tanking is never acceptable, how dare you, sir.
We can all agree that a player actively trying to lose the game is not acceptable, although if they decide to try a new play or be selfish with their stats, well, okay then. I can see an argument for all six positions. I think for now the answer should basically be #6, if the fans cheer when you tank then the NBA is the one with the problem. Ultimately the current lottery is half measure. I see a few different ways out of this, shortening the season would help a lot, but fundamentally you need to make it so that teams want to win the game. I see basically two ways to do that. Method one is financial incentives. Put a financial value on each game. You can buy those top picks if you want, but they will not come cheap. Claude estimates that $3 million per game would mostly do the trick, and you’d have to adjust the luxury tax rate for obvious reasons. But, man, that’s good TV. The other solution is to take away the incentive to tank entirely. Bite the bullet. All non-playoff teams pick in a fully random order, or something else drastic. You could get creative, and have a loser’s playoff or late season reversed incentive for the top pick in some fashion. Have fun with it. You could also simply accept that tanking is fine, actually, and let it be in the open. The Revolution of Retroactive Rising Expectations
There’s plenty of answers on why the financial side of things did get harder, I discuss this in The
I Was Promised Spying CarsIf [X] inevitably leads to [Y] in practice, then you can either choose [~X] or [Y].
Yeah, you can’t do that. You can’t have cars that are fine in Quebec and then not legal to drive into Ottawa. You have to pick a side. That’s the same as you can’t say ‘oh we will build AI that can do [bad thing] we just won’t use it for [bad thing]’ whether that’s autonomous killer robots or deepfakes or whatever else you happen not to like. Doesn’t work that way, especially given open models. You mostly either build it or you don’t. Prediction Market Madness
But yes, it will happen eventually. It is cheap to try this, and the gains can be very large, either in the form of ‘I trick people into following and then trade against them’ or ‘I trick people into trading on that basis elsewhere for orders of magnitude more money and I trade against them there’ or even ‘I convince people that [X] is going to happen, and this changes events.’ It will be very funny. The way there wouldn’t be spoofing is if there is already enough ‘natural spoofing,’ as in people who look like insiders but do stupid things for dumb reasons, to make insider bets not trustworthy. But so far we’ve seen that insider bet signals are, while not reliable, actually pretty good.
He points out you need someone to lose money, which means one of three ultimate sources:
I would add: Manipulators: People who lose money in order to try to change the market price. Motivators: People who bet in order to change their incentives.
These are extreme descriptions: You merely have to be bad enough that you lose money, not ‘totally wrong.’ You can subsidize in a wide variety of ways, AMMs are only the crypto default. And there are reasons other than info to want to subsidize a market. Hedging includes arbitrage, including statistical arbitrage.
Nut basically yes. Either you have traders who get beat, who are hedging, or who are subsidizing the market, or who are manipulating prices or themselves. I think it is inevitable that the bulk of the volume will be where there is the best product-market fit, and it will be on places where the information is not so socially valuable, like sports and crypto, over short time horizons. I also think this is fine, as it serves several purposes. It draws in liquidity and eyes, which can then be directed elsewhere. It creates an incentive to draw in eyes or improve reputation, by providing socially valuable markets.
As in, at equilibrium, Polymarket and others should be creating some markets that are money-losing but that function as brand building and advertising. Polymarket should want to be the front page of the information system, where you get the ‘real news.’ On method of subsidy, the advantage of AMMs is that they are predictable, easy to implement and come with various nice assurances. The problem with AMMs is that most of the subsidy often ends up wasted, because you get run over, and make dumb trades, and don’t get the capture much of the benefits of two-way volume. The AMM is a deeply dumb trader. You can and should do better by doing something smart, that can fall back in a pinch on something dumb. The Lighter Side
She’s real, and
This is a case of the ‘no wife, no horse, no mustache’ principle where you actively don’t want to know what the original tweet was, the mystery will always be better.
Yes, that picture is AI. No, I don’t care. I don’t think my wife would fall into this one, but there’s one way to find out.
Times when the apology only makes it better:
You're currently a free subscriber to |