---
subject: "I Was Here"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-01-26 14:01:49
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Thanks for reading! To support my work, please click the button below: If you want to help keep this project going, please consider purchasing a paid subscription. Paid subscribers — it’s only about 75 cents a week! — get access to the archives, the satisfaction of supporting work they enjoy, and my undying gratitude. Amidst all of the news stories about terrible travelers that have hit my feed in this age of overtourism, one stuck in my craw more than others. A year or so ago, there was an Because this happened in the modern age of tourism, and the Colosseum was overcrowded with tourists wielding phone cameras, somebody took a video of him (titled, appropriately, “Asshole tourist carves name in Colosseum in Rome”). Ivan was later sentenced to pay a Whether you saw this item when it first came out or are just hearing about it now, I’ll bet you’re horrified by the actions of Ivan the Asshole Tourist. How dare he deface such an august building by scratching his name out with his keys? How selfish, how egocentric! Or, in the So how come I’m so charmed by this? This is some graffiti, written on the walls of the Tomb of Ramses V, by tourists who were viewing the then-centuries-old site (Ramses died in the 1100s BCE). The example on the left above, in Greek, is just somebody’s name (Pamonthes, son of Pamonthes). The inscription below it, in Latin, says: “Ianuarius, a Primus Pilus (a military rank), saw this place and was amazed.” Ianuarius’ name shows up in a number of Egyptian tombs and temples — he apparently took the deluxe tour of ancient Egyptian sites. Some of the graffiti is more complex, And there’s a lot of it in this particular tomb: People didn’t leave graffiti only in Egyptian tombs. Here’s some from the cathedral in Strasbourg: This cathedral, like Ramses’ tomb, has centuries’ worth of graffiti from tourists: Some of the vandals spent serious time on their inscriptions: Many inscriptions look like they were done by real artists (check out those Ws!): Most of them are just slightly more aesthetically pleasing IVAN + HAYLEYs, to be honest. But I find this graffiti to be far more charming than Ivan the Asshole Tourist’s. Maybe Ivan’s big problem is that he’s our contemporary. Perhaps, in 500 years, future tourists will delight at his graffiti the way I delight at this stuff. North of Khartoum, there’s a place called Musawwarat es-Sufra. Though most settlements in this part of the world hug the life-giving Nile, it’s oddly Though they’re not quite sure, historians think that the site was a magnet for religious pilgrimages. Many pilgrims left graffiti to mark their travels. Some of them drew patterns: Later Christian travelers left symbols of their religion: Not too far away, at El Kurru, there’s another temple, built around the same time. There, too, pilgrims etched graffiti into the walls. They depicted animals, like these chickens and horses: Or these bulls: Some of the art shows the boats that pilgrims must have used to travel to the site: In some ancient sites, the graffiti left by later travelers is a little more controversial. At Persepolis, the capital of the ancient Persian Empire, ruins of the gates and palaces erected by leaders like Darius and Xerxes two and a half millennia ago are scarred with the names of European travelers who felt the need to memorialize their trips. Even in the nineteenth century, many European visitors condemned this vandalism. Arch-imperialist George Curzon, later the Viceroy of India,
Some of the Persepolis graffiti is quite verbose: Other inscriptions stick to a nineteenth-century version of “I was here:” There are a few famous names in Persepolis, as well — this inscription was made by Henry Morton Stanley the year before he traveled to Africa to find David Livingstone: The graffiti continued to be left well into the twentieth century: Persepolis isn’t the only site covered in Victorian-era graffiti. The temple of Bacchus at Baalbek in Lebanon has its fair share: Felix Bonfils, a photographer, even used the ancient site as a billboard, How should we think about all this graffiti? I’m pretty sure I know how I feel about Asshole Tourist Ivan carving his name into the Colosseum. So I suppose I should feel the same way about Pamonthes and Ianuarius. But I don’t, not really. The more ancient graffiti feels like a priceless record of a fleeting human life, an “I was here” echoing across the centuries. But a modern tourist or a nineteenth-century imperialist doing such a thing? It feels like self-aggrandizing vandalism. Comedians will tell you that This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: Or you can share the newsletter with others: Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week! You're currently a free subscriber to |