---
subject: "Links For October 2025"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-10-30 10:56:55
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
[I haven’t independently verified each link. On average, commenters will end up spotting evidence that around two or three of the links in each links post are wrong or misleading. I correct these as I see them, and will highlight important corrections later, but I can’t guarantee I will have caught them all by the time you read this.] 1: In 1876, a woman named 2: 3: 4: 5: Related: 6: 7: Everyone who studied biochem has asked themselves at some point “Why do cells need so many second messengers?” - proteins whose only point is to activate other proteins, and so on in a chain, until the last protein in the chain makes something happen. If I understand 8: 9: 10: Sol Hando 11: Pharmacy-blogger Benjamin Jolley
Inspiring words - but my personal strongest reaction was relief at learning that I wasn’t the only supposedly-competent health professional to bungle the urine jug. 12: 13: According to And 14: 15: 16: The oldest surviving joke book is the An Abderite hears that beans cause wind, so he hangs a sackful on his sailing ship. In Kyme, an official of some sort is having a funeral. A stranger approaches those conducting the obsequies and asks, “Who’s the dead guy?” One of the Kymaeans turns and points: “The one lying over there in the coffin.” A student dunce begets a child by a slave girl. His father advises him to kill the child. The dunce retorts, “First kill your own children, and then tell me to do the same with mine!”
More at the link. 17: One the one hand, the predictions are remarkably close to reality, and everyone who denounced them at the time comes out with egg on their face. On the other, they don’t seem to beat a baseline of linear extrapolation from past data. When I try to recall the 90s and early 00s, when these debates were at their most vitriolic, they always involved the ability of complex atmospheric models to track the chaotic nature of the world. I don’t remember hearing “it’s just linear extrapolation”, and I feel like this would have been much more convincing. 18: 19: 20: 21: 22: Earlier this year, I 23: I’ve enjoyed following 24: Chinese author and “Shakespeare superfan” Zhang Yiyi …and ended up looking more like Michael Jackson, or maybe a better way to think about it is that anyone who gets too much plastic surgery looks like everyone else who gets too much plastic surgery. Possibly related: 25: IVG advance: for the first time, 26: 27: Also Fatima-related: in the comments highlights post, I linked FWLAB’s 28: Arguably related: 29: More 30: Although research continues to challenge the measurable positive effects of cash transfers (eg basic income) in First World countries, even more studies are coming out showing positive effects in developing ones, including 31: Is China no longer on track to outpace US GDP? Noahpinion looks into this 32: 33: For the past several years, the Slime Mold Time Mold blog has been arguing that rising obesity rates cannot be a simple matter of changing diets, 34: How does ChatGPT score on a Big 5 personality test? 35: 36: 37: 38: Eliezer and Nate’s book 39: Sam Rosen (coi notice: personal friend) 40: 41: Related: NVIDIA is emerging as a new villain in US tech policy; they really want to be allowed to sell advanced technology to China, and are swinging their weight as World’s Largest Company to undermine anyone who who raises national security objections. David Cowan makes the case here: 42: 43: Related: most people have the varicella zoster herpesvirus (aka chickenpox virus) latent in their bodies. Occasionally it reactivates in old people with bad immune systems and causes a rash called shingles, so old people are recommended to get the shingles vaccine. 44: OpenAI’s statistics on what people use ChatGPT for ( 45: 46: Anthropic has put out 47 Last links post, I linked a claim that the “child penalty” to mothers’ earnings was primarily a “daughter penalty”, since mothers spent more time with daughters (and fathers with sons). @Scientific_Bird on Twitter investigates and 48: In the ongoing survey of AI progress I wrote about 49: 50: Tomas Pueyo with a new theory for why cold/temperate countries are rich and warm countries are poor - 51: Silicon Valley sperm donor search startup called - of course - You're currently a free subscriber to |