---
subject: "AI #85: AI Wins the Nobel Prize"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-10-10 13:38:53
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Both Geoffrey Hinton and Demis Hassabis were given the Nobel Prize this week, in Physics and Chemistry respectively. Congratulations to both of them along with all the other winners. AI will be central to more and more of scientific progress over time. This felt early, but not as early as you would think. The two big capability announcements this week were OpenAI’s canvas, their answer to Anthropic’s artifacts to allow you to work on documents or code outside of the chat window in a way that seems very useful, and Meta announcing a new video generation model with various cool features, that they’re wisely not releasing just yet. I also have two related corrections from last week, and an apology: Table of ContentsIntroduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. Proofs of higher productivity. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. Why the same lame lists? Blank Canvas. A place to edit your writing, and also your code. Meta Video. The ten second clips are getting more features. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. Assume a data breach. They Took Our Jobs. Stores without checkouts, or products. Online total victory. Get Involved. Princeton, IAPS, xAI, Google DeepMind. Introducing. Anthropic gets its version of 50% off message batching. AI Wins the Nobel Prize. Congratulations, everyone. In Other AI News. Ben Horowitz hedges his (political) bets. Quiet Speculations. I continue to believe tradeoffs are a (important) thing. The Mask Comes Off. What the heck is going on at OpenAI? Good question. The Quest for Sane Regulations. The coming age of the AI agent. The Week in Audio. Elon Musk is (going on) All-In until he wins, or loses. Rhetorical Innovation. Things happen about 35% of the time. The Carbon Question. Calibrate counting cars of carbon compute costs? Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. Some paths. People Are Trying Not to Die. Timing is everything.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
How much mundane utility are public employees getting from Generative AI?
This is in contrast to 2 in 3 private sector employees reporting use at all. Education staff are out in front, I suppose they have little choice given what students are doing. The legal system is the most resistant. Lots more good graphs A majority using AI say it enhances work quality (70%), almost none (4%) say it makes it worse. About half of those using it claim to be more productive. Only 6.9% felt it was all that nice and saved them 2+ hours a day. But stop and do the math on that for a second, assuming 8 hours a day, that’s 7% of the workforce claiming at least 25% savings. So assuming those employees were already of at least average productivity, that’s a floor of 1.75% overall productivity growth already before adjusting for quality, likely much higher. Meanwhile, the public sector lags behind the private sector in adaptation of AI and in ability to adjust workflow to benefit from it. So this seems like very strong evidence for 2%+ productivity growth already from AI, which should similarly raise GDP. If you actually take all the reports here seriously and extrapolate average gains, you get a lot more than 2%.
I don’t use AI editors yet, as I don’t think it’s a worthwhile use of time, but that could be a skill issue. I don’t use an article summarizer, because I would want to check out the original anyway almost all the time so I don’t see the point, perhaps that’s a skill issue in finding prompts I trust sufficiently? I definitely keep telling myself to start building tools and I have a desktop with ‘download Cursor’ open that I plan to use real soon now, any day now.
A month is about 160 hours of work. So this AI upgrade on its own is improving Patrick McKenzie’s available hours by 0.2%, which should raise his TFP by more than that, and his ‘accounting productivity’ by 200% (!). Not everyone will get those returns, I spend much less time on accounting, but wow. A consistent finding is that AI improves performance more for those with lower baseline ability. One thing I notice about such studies is that they confine performance to that within an assigned fixed task. Within such a setting, it makes sense that low ability people see the largest AI gains when everyone is given the same AI tools. But if you expand the picture, people with high ability seem likely to be able to figure out what to do in a world with these new innovations, I would guess that higher ability people have many ways in which they now have the edge.
Poe’s email has informed me they consider Flux 1.1 [pro] the most advanced image generator. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
Convergent evolution and similar incentives are the obvious responses here. Everyone is mostly using similar performance metrics. Those metrics favor these types of responses. I presume it would be rather easy to get an LLM to do something different via fine-tuning, if you wanted it to do something else, if only to give people another mode or option. No one seems to want to do that. But I assume you could do that to Llama-3.2 in a day if you cared. For generic code AI is great but it seems
This type of issue is a huge effective blocker for people with my level of skills. I find myself excited to write actual code that does the things, but the thought of having to set everything up to get to that point fills with dread - I just know that the AI is going to get something stupid wrong, and everything’s going to be screwed up, and it’s going to be hours trying to figure it out and so on, and maybe I’ll just work on something else. Sigh. At some point I need to power through.
Blank Canvas
This is the kind of thing you need to actually use to properly evaluate. Having a good change log and version comparison method seems important here. What initial feedback I saw was If you’re curious, Meta Video
The promise of precise editing excites me more in the short term than full generation. I can totally see that being highly useful soon because you are looking for a specific thing and you find it, whereas generation seems like more of finding some of the things in the world, but not the one you wanted, which seems less useful.
This time, however, they say something more interesting:
I am happy to hear that they are at least noticing that they might not want to release this in its current form. The first step is admitting you have a problem. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
As will always be the case when people think they can do it,
We are very much going to keep seeing stories like this one. People will keep being exactly this horny and stupid, and some of the horny and stupid people will be into all the things of all the types, and websites will keep getting hacked, and this will grow larger as the technology improves. From a user perspective, the question is how much one should care about such privacy issues. If one is enjoying adult scenarios and your information leaks, no doubt the resulting porn-related spam would get annoying, but otherwise should you care? That presumably depends on who you are, what your situation is and exactly what you are into. Also one must ask, has anyone created one of these that is any good? I don’t know of one, but I also don’t know that I would know about it if one did exist. They Took Our Jobs
So the store looks like this: And the warehouse, formerly known as the store, still looks like this: I bet that second one changes rapidly, as they realize it’s not actually efficient this way. On the question of job applications,
My prediction is that this would not go the way Anton expects. If everyone can train on all the data on what gets accepted and rejected, the problem rapidly becomes anti-inductive. You go through rapid cycles of evaluation AIs finding good heuristics, then the application AIs figuring out what changed and adjusting. It would be crazy out there. Once everyone is using AI on all fronts, knowing what sells, the question becomes what is the actual application. What differentiates the good applicant from the bad applicant? How does the entire apparatus filter well as opposed to collapse? What keeps people honest? Here’s another prediction that seems likely in those worlds: Application Honeypots. As in, Acme Corporation puts out applications for several fake jobs, where they sometimes express modestly non-standard preferences, with various subtle queues or tactics designed to minimize the chance a non-AI would actually send in an application. And then you keep a record of who applies. When they apply for a different job that’s real? Well, now you know. At minimum, you can compare notes. Of course, once the AIs get actively better than the humans at detecting the clues, even when you are trying to make the opposite the case, that gets a lot harder. But if that’s true, one must ask: Why are you even hiring?
If there is no future in work, how is there a future you can survive? Asking for everyone. Get Involved
(The top comment is ‘ Introducing
AI Wins the Nobel Prize
He says he is ‘flabbergasted’
Everyone agrees this is was a great achievement, but many raised the point that
Roon in particular is down for both awards.
I think I mostly agree. They’re a little faster than Nobel Prizes are typically awarded, but timelines are short, sometimes you have to move fast. I also think it’s fair to say that since there is no Nobel Prize in Computer Science, you have to put the achievement somewhere. Claude confirmed that Chemistry was indeed the right place for AlphaFold, not physiology. In Other AI NewsIn other news, my NYC mind cannot comprehend that most of SF lacks AC:
Quiet Speculations
The key problem with the trillions in profits from those ASIs is not getting the trillions into the ASIs. It’s getting the trillions out. It is a superintelligence. You’re not. It will be doing these things on its own if you want it to work. And if such ASIs are being taken off their leashes to build trillion dollar companies and maximize their profits, the profits are probably not the part you should be focusing on.
I totally buy that complicated interpersonal dynamics and various ordinary boring issues could be causing a large portion of issues. I could totally buy that a bunch of things we think are about prioritization of safety or research versus product are actually 95%+ ordinary personal or political conflicts, indeed this is my central explanation of the Battle of the Board at OpenAI from November 2023. And of course I buy that being better at safety helps the product for at least some types of safety work, and research helps the product over time, and so on. What I don’t understand is how these trade-offs could fail to be real. The claim literally does not make sense to me. You only have so much compute, so much budget, so much manpower, so much attention, and a choice of corporate culture. One can point to many specific decisions (e.g. ‘how long do you hold the product for safety testing before release?’) that are quite explicit trade-offs, even outside of the bigger picture.
So basically, if that’s correct, don’t do such drugs unless you want that type of effect, and this dynamic makes you stuck in a way that forces a violation of conservation of expected evidence - but given everyone knows what to expect, if someone abandons their job after taking ayahuasca, my guess is they effectively made their decision first and then because of that decision they went on the drug trip. The Mask Comes Off(To be sure everyone sees this, reiterating: While I stand by the rest of the section from last week, I made two independent mistakes regarding Joshua Achiam: He is the head of OpenAI mission alignment not alignment, and I drew the wrong impression about his beliefs regarding existential risk, he is far less skeptical than I came away suspecting last week, and I should have made better efforts to get his comments first and research his other statements. Steven Zeitchik at Hollywood Reporter decides to enter the arena on this one, and asks the excellent question ‘ According to Zeitchik, Mira Murati’s exit should concern us.
The rest of the post covers well-known ground on OpenAI’s recent history of conflicts and departures. The claim on Murati, that she left over safety concerns, seemed new. No color was offered on that beyond what is quoted above. I don’t know of any other evidence about her motivations either way.
This seems mostly fine to me given their current stage of development, if it can be financially sustained. It does mean they are bleeding $5 billion a year excluding stock compensation, but it would be a highly bearish statement on their prospects if they were overly concerned about that given their valuation. It does mean that if things go wrong, they could go very wrong very quickly, but that is a correct risk to take from a business perspective.
The Quest for Sane RegulationsCSET asks:
And here’s a summary thread.
The legal framework discusses mens rea, state of mind, potential legal personhood for AIs similar to that of corporations, who is the principle versus the agent, future industry standards, liability rules and so on. The obvious thing to do is to treat someone’s AI agent as an extension of the owner of the agent - so if an individual or corporation sends an agent out into the world, they are responsible for its actions the way they would be for their own actions, other than some presumed limits on the ability to fully enter contracts.
The Week in Audio
Rhetorical Innovation
Which is totally fine, in terms of not thinking about what the words mean. Except that it seems like she’s using this as an argument for ignoring the concepts entirely. Completely ignoring such possibilities without any justification seems to be her plan. Which is deeply concerning, given she has been playing and may continue to play key role in sinking our efforts to address those possibilities, via her political efforts, including her extremely false claims and poor arguments against SB 1047, and her advising Newsom going forward. Rather than anything that might work, she calls for things similar to car seatbelts - her actual example here. But we can choose not to buckle the safety belt, and you still have to abide by a wide variety of other safety standards while building a car and no one thinks they shouldn’t have to do that, said Frog. That is true, said Toad. I hope I don’t have to explain beyond that why this won’t work here.
One obvious reason ASIs won’t leave the rest of us alone: On the question of releasing open models, I am happy things have calmed down all around. I do think we all agree that so far the effect, while the models in question have been insufficiently capable,
The catch is that this is one of those situations in which you keep winning, and then at some point down the line you might lose far bigger than the wins. While the stressors from the models are tolerable it’s good. The problem is that we don’t know when the stressors become intolerable. Meanwhile we are setting a pattern and precedent. Each time we push the envelope more and it doesn’t blow up in our face, there is the temptation to say ‘oh then we can probably push that envelope more,’ without any sign we will realize when it becomes wise to stop. The reason I’ve been so worried about previous releases was mostly that worry that we wouldn’t know when to stop. This is especially true because the reason to stop is largely a tail risk, it is a one-way decision, and the costs likely only manifest slowly over time but it is likely it would be too late to do much about them. I believe that there is over a 50% chance that releasing the weights to a 5-level model would prove to mostly be fine other than concerns about national security and American competitiveness, but the downside cases are much worse than the upside cases are good. Then, if the 5-level model seems fine, that gets used as reason to go ahead with the 6-level model, and so on. I worry that we could end up in a scenario where we are essentially 100% to make a very large mistake, no matter which level that mistake turns out to be.
AI, especially AI existential risk, seems like an excellent place to sometimes decide to say exactly ‘I can’t refute your argument, but your conclusion still seems wrong and I don’t buy it.’ Or as I sometimes say: Wrong Conclusions are Wrong. You can invoke that principle if you are convinced the conclusion is sufficiently wrong. But there’s a catch - you have to be explicit that this is what you are doing. The Carbon QuestionNote in advance: This claim seems very wrong, but I want to start with it:
I start with that claim because if the argument was ‘GPT-4 training emitted as much CO₂ as five cars’ then it seems like a pretty great deal, and the carbon problem is almost entirely the cars? Everyone gets to use the model after that, although they still must pay inference. It’s not zero cost, but if you do the math on offsets seems fine. Then it turns out that calculation is off by… well, a lot.
If Dean is correct here, then the carbon cost of training is trivial. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
In findings that match my model, and which I had to do a double take to confirm I was covering a different paper This should not be a surprise. People willing to lie act the same way - the better they think they are at lying, the more likely they are to get away with it in their estimation, the more lying they’ll do.
Lying or hallucinating is the cleanest, simplest example of deception brought on by insufficiently accurate feedback. You should similarly expect every behavior that you don’t want, but that you are not smart enough to identify often enough and care about enough to sufficiently discourage, will work the same way.
Is it physically and theoretically possible to do this, in a way that would preserve human control, choice and agency, and would promote human flourishing? Absolutely. Is it a natural path? I think no. It is not ‘what the market wants,’ or what the technology wants. The broader strategic awareness, related elements and the construction thereof, is something one would have to intentionally avoid, despite the humongous economic and social and political and military reasons to not avoid it. It would require many active sacrifices to avoid it, as even what we think are narrow domains usually require forms of broader strategic behavior in order to perform well, if only to model the humans with which one will be interacting. Anything involving humans making choices is going to get strategic quickly. At minimum, if we want to go down that path, the models have to be built with this in mind, and kept tightly under control, exactly because there would be so much pressure to task AIs with other purposes. People Are Trying Not to Die
I’m all for the Don’t Die project, but that doesn’t actually parse? It makes tons of sense to talk about surviving to the ‘event horizon’ as an individual. If you die before that big moment, you’re dead. If you make it, and humanity survives and has control over substantial resources, we’ll likely find medical treatments that hit escape velocity, allowing one to effectively live forever. Or if we continue or have a legacy in some other form, again age won’t matter. This does not make sense for humanity as a whole? It is very difficult to imagine a world in which humans having longer healthy lifespans prior to superintelligence leads to humans in general surviving superintelligence. How would that even work? You're currently a free subscriber to |