---
subject: "My excellent Conversation with Ezra Klein"
from: "Marginal REVOLUTION <donotreply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-03-20 05:07:59
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tyler Cowen", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2466199532210586699", "UNREAD"]
---
Ezra is getting plenty of coverage for his very good and very on the mark new book with Derek Thompson, [Abundance](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=cefe54d3d3e4b2693e9009af5ed627403526e0158445f4f58406f5df2fe72704&blog_id=42693868&post_id=90287&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=04ad246c528dc284dccb6ac274d9eb5b&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=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&email_id=bee36ef94b4f64fb69db4d7af02e0633). So far it is a huge hit after only a few days. I figured this conversation would be most interesting, and add the most value, if I tried to push him further from a libertarian point of view (a sign of respect of course). Here is [the audio, video, and transcript](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=5c6152df2b03af5b75fcd51d88f5388384f6b9e11f878450d1bebf646be013fc&blog_id=42693868&post_id=90287&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=b75531d2eb9e79e2baa746976d3050e3&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly9jb252ZXJzYXRpb25zd2l0aHR5bGVyLmNvbS9lcGlzb2Rlcy9lenJhLWtsZWluLTMv&email_id=bee36ef94b4f64fb69db4d7af02e0633). Here is part of the episode summary:
In this conversation, Ezra and Tyler discuss how the abundance agenda interacts with political polarization, whether it’s is an elite-driven movement, where Ezra favors NIMBYism, the geographic distribution of US cities, an abundance-driven approach to health care, what to do about fertility decline, how the U.S. federal government might prepare for AGI, whether mass layoffs in government are justified, Ezra’s recommended travel destinations, and more.
Lots of good back and forth, here is one excerpt:
COWEN: Here’s a
[question from a reader], and I’m paraphrasing. “I can see why you would favor Obamacare and an abundance agenda because Obamacare throws a lot more resources at the healthcare sector in some ways. It did have Medicare cuts, but nonetheless, it’s not choking the sector. But if you favor an abundance agenda, can you then possibly favor single-payer health insurance through the government, which does tend to choke resources and stifle innovation?”KLEIN: I think it would depend on how you did the single-payer healthcare. Here, we should talk about — because it’s referenced glancingly in the book in a place where you and I differ — but the supervillain view that I hold and your view, which is that you should negotiate drug prices. I’ve always thought on that because I think in some ways, it’s a better toy example than single payer versus Obamacare.
I think you want to take the amount of innovation you’re getting very, very, very seriously. I’ve written
[pieces]about this, that I think if you’re going to do Medicare drug pricing at any kind of significant level, you want to be pairing that with a pretty significant agenda to make drug discovery much easier, to make testing much easier.
And:
COWEN: What should the US federal government do to prepare for AGI? We should just lay off people, right?
KLEIN: [laughs] I would not say it that way. I wouldn’t say just lay off people. I think that’s some of what we’re doing.
COWEN: No, not just, but step one.
KLEIN: Do you think that’s step one? Do you buy this DOGE’s preparation-for-AGI argument that you hear?
COWEN: I think maybe a fifth of them think that. Maybe it’s step two or step three, but it’s a pretty early step, right?
KLEIN: I think that the question of AI or AGI in the federal government, in anywhere — and this is one reason I’ve not bought this argument about DOGE — is you have to ask, “Well what is this AI or AGI doing? What is its value function? What prompt have you given it? What have you asked it to execute across the government and how?”
Alignment, which we have primarily talked about in terms of whether or not the AI, the superintelligence makes us all into paperclips, is a constant question of just near-term systems as well. I think the question of how should we prepare for AGI or for AI in the federal government first has to do with deciding what we would like the AI or the AGI to do. That could be different things to different areas.
My sense — talking to a bunch of people in the companies has helped me conceptualize this better — is that the first thing I would do is begin to ask, what do I think the opportunities of AI are, scientifically and in terms of different kinds of discoveries...
And this:
COWEN: Let me give you another right-wing view, and tell me what you think. The notion that the most important feature of
[state capacity]is whether a state has enough of its citizens willing to fight and die for it. In that case, the United States, Israel, but a pretty small number of nations have high state capacity, and most of Western Europe really does not because they don’t have militaries that mean anything. Is that just the number one feature of[abundance in state capacity]?
Recommended, obviously.