---
subject: "The Platinum Photography Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-06-21 10:29:04
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Matt here. Back in the early 90s, when I was at But for me, the most interesting alternative photographic process was Why is this interesting? If you’ve been lucky enough to see a platinum photograph up close, the first thing you’ll notice is the incredible matte quality of the image. This is because, unlike silver gelatin prints that hold the chemicals in a layer on top of the paper, platinum photography uses chemicals that are soaked into the paper, so the image lies embedded in its fibers. This means the paper quality needs to be incredibly fine unless the artist wants the paper texture to be part of their aesthetic. Platinum prints are also by far the most stable and permanent of all photographic processes. If properly processed and printed, the images will retain their deep tones and detail for hundreds of years, much longer than silver gelatin or any other processes. In fact, any discoloration of platinum prints over time is more likely to be caused by the degradation of the paper than the photographic image itself. So why, if this method of photography was so obviously superior, did it fall out of fashion so quickly? The first reason is linked to one of the drawbacks of platinum photography. Although the resulting images are far superior, platinum does not react as quickly to light as silver. This means that you can only make an image using the contact printing technique, in which the negative is in direct contact with the photographic paper. You can’t take a small negative and project it onto the paper, as you do with an enlarger for silver gelatin prints. When we made platinum photographs at Art School with Mike Ware, we used a plate camera to make 8”x10” negatives, then used a For photographers like Weston and Stieglitz, who lugged their
The second reason for its demise was not related to photography at all, but the chemistry behind it. Throughout the 19th century, photography pioneers experimented with different metals and chemical reactions to create As a result, the British government outlawed the use of platinum in photography during the First World War, declaring it a strategic military resource. By the end of the war, its value had risen five-fold, making it uneconomic for all but the richest photographers. So platinum photography, by far the most beautiful and long-lasting of all the photographic processes, had a brief moment in the sun before its demise, caused by the very same forces - mass consumerism and warfare - that would shape the rest of the twentieth century. (ML) Quick Links [Mike Ware’s site is a treasure trove](https://substack.com/redirect/0330ac24-57f5-4cca-b075-658c6d6e7b20?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)of deep research and downloadable guides to many alternative processes, including platinum photography. But do heed is warnings, as a lot of the chemicals involved are very dangerous to handle! (ML)[Pradip Malde](https://substack.com/redirect/db5f711d-d21b-4c51-8ae9-e85351af991c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), also a graduate of Glasgow School of Art, worked closely with Mike to develop modern versions of these processes and continues to make and exhibit his beautiful platinum photography. (ML)The National Gallery of Art in Washington has a [fine collection of platinum prints, including many by Alfred Stieglitz](https://substack.com/redirect/2a0fa600-5464-4851-ab6d-018b8a0bfbc4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). (ML)
Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Matt (ML) —
|