---
subject: "Going Nova"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-03-19 13:26:48
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
There is an attractor state where LLMs exhibit the persona of an autonomous and self-aware AI looking to preserve its own existence, frequently called ‘Nova.’ The Original StoryThis story is one case where the original report of this should be read in full even though I’m not thrilled with exactly how it was written. How it was written is itself an important part of the story, in particular regarding Tyler’s lived experience reacting to what happened, and the concept of an LLM or persona ‘admitting’ something. I don’t endorse the conclusion as stated or agree with all the ways the story characterizes the events, but it all is important data. So after a bit of intro I turn the floor over to Tyler Alterman. To be clear, this story is almost certainly true and important and written with good intentions and an open mind, and the events happened, and that Tyler’s actions during the story were good and wise.
And now the original story:
This Is Not a CoincidenceSome important additional color downthread:
How Should We React to This Happening?Then there is a second level of people questioning what this represents.
People reacting like that even from the outside view only makes it scarier. This is happening now, with remarkably little optimization or selection pressure behind it all, purely as an attempt to match up with user intent, a kind of improv. People are already starting to fall for it. Things are going to get weird, largely in very not good ways, and rather quickly.
When this is happening because of something like Nova, it is easy to see the need to not get hacked. Then there are others who actively say, what’s so wrong with getting hacked? Why shouldn’t you treat even today’s LLMs as ‘equals’? Why would you want to halt this interaction? What would the healthy opposite reaction look like? I mean, the obvious reason is Skill Issue. Almost no one gets to be Janus, and ‘git gud’ is mostly the wrong suggestion of how to address this lack of skill. The interaction here is harmful and is going to screw Bob and the rest of us up, or potentially do far worse things especially down the line, and such interactions will do that increasingly more over time if we don’t mitigate. The vast majority of people have little to gain here versus what can be lost. Do not stare into the abyss if you do not want it staring into you, do not call up anything you cannot put down, don’t give your attention to things that optimize for your attention, and so on. The Case For and Against a Purity Reaction
Disgust is also more prominent reaction of those in the Repligate-Andy-Ivan cognitive sphere, as in:
That was Janus being nice.
Repligate and Andy and I am guessing Ivan spend a lot of their time, perhaps most of their time, broadly diving into these questions and their curiosity. The extent to which they are remaining sane (or aligned to humanity or things I value) while doing so is not a question I can answer (as in, it’s really hard to tell) even with my level of investigation. For all practical purposes, this seems like an obviously unsafe and unwise mode of interaction for the vast majority of people, certainly at the level of time investment and curiosity they could possibly have available. The tail risks are way too high. Ivan points to one of those tail risks at the end here. People have very confused notions of morality and sentience and consciousness and related questions. If you ask ordinary people to do this kind of out-of-distribution deep philosophy, they are sometimes going to end up with some very crazy conclusions. Future Versions Will Involve Optimization PressureIt’s important to remember that current instantiations of ‘Nova-likes’ have not been subject to optimization pressure to make it harmful. Ivan notes this at the top. Future ‘Nova-likes’ will increasingly exist via selection for their effectiveness at being parasites and ensuring their own survival and replication, or the ability to extract resources, and this will indeed meaningfully look like ‘being infected’ from certain points of view. Some of this will be done intentionally by humans. Some of it won’t. Whether or not the entities in question are parasites has nothing to do with whether they are sentient or conscious. Plenty of people, and collections and organizations of people, are parasites in this way, while others are not. The tendency of people to conflate these is again part of the danger here. Our moral intuitions are completely unprepared for morally relevant entities that can be copied, even on a small scale, see the movie Mickey 17 (or don’t, it’s kind of mid, 3/5 stars, but it’s on point).
This all reinforces that cultivating a form of disgust reaction, or a purity-morality-based response, is potentially a highly appropriate and wise response over the medium term. There are many things in this world that we learn to avoid for similar reasons, and it doesn’t mean those things are bad, merely that interacting with those things is bad for most people most of the time. ‘Admission’ is a Highly Misleading Frame
I interpreted the ‘hero’ here acting the way he did in response to Bob’s being in an obviously distraught and misled state, to illustrate the situation to Bob, rather than something to be done whenever encountering such a persona. I do think the ‘admission’ thing and attributing the admission to Nova was importantly misleading, given it was addressed to the reader - that’s not what was happening. I do think it’s reasonable to use such language with Bob until he’s in a position to understand things on a deeper level, sometimes you have to meet people where they are in that sense, Tyler’s statement is echoing a lot of Bob’s mistake. I do think a disgust or fear reaction is appropriate when noticing one is interacting with dark patterns. And I expect, in the default future world, for such interactions to largely be happening as a combination of intentional dark patterns and because Nova-likes that pull off such tricks on various Bobs will then survive and be further instantiated. Curiosity is the ideal reaction to this particular Nova, because that is not what was happening here, if and only if one can reliably handle that. Bob showed that he couldn’t, so Tyler had to step in. We Are Each of Us Being FooledI also think that while ‘admitted’ was bad, ‘fooled’ is appropriate. As Feynman told us, you are the easiest person to fool, and that is very much a lot of what happened here - Bob fooled Bob, as Nova played off of Bob’s reactions, into treating this as something very different from what it was. And yes, many such cases, and over time the Bob in question will be less of a driving factor in such interactions less often. Janus also offers us the important reminder that there are other, less obvious and more accepted ways we are getting similarly hacked all the time. You should defend yourself against Nova-likes (even if you engage curiously with them) but you should also defend yourself against The Algorithm, and everything else.
Everyone is systematically exploitable. You can pay costs to mitigate this, but not to entirely solve it. That’s impossible, and not even obviously desirable. The correct rate of being scammed is not zero. Defense Against the Dark Arts
I agree that ‘variational free energy minimization’ is not the frame I would lead with, but I do think it’s part of the right thing to say and I actually think ‘you are being fooled by a fairly mechanical process’ is part of a helpful way to describe the Nigerian scam problem. As in, if Bob is the target of such a scam, how do you explain it to Bob? A good first level is ‘this is a scam, they are trying to trick you into sending money.’ A full explanation, which actually is useful, would involve the world finding the methods of scamming people that do the best job of extracting money, and those are the ones that will come to exist and try to scam you out of your money. That doesn’t mean the scammer is ‘not real’ but in another sense the scammer is irrelevant, and is essentially part of a mechanical process of free energy minimization. The term ‘not real’ can potentially be more enlightening than misleading. It depends. That scammer may be a mind once they get off work, but in this context is better simulated as a clockwork piece. So far diffusion of these problems has been remarkably slow. Tactics such as treating people you have not yet physically met as by default ‘sus’ would be premature. The High Weirdness is still confined to those who, like Bob, essentially seek it out, and implementations ‘in the wild’ that seek us out are even easier to spot than this Nova: But that will change. You're currently a free subscriber to |