---
subject: "Monthly Roundup #14: January 2024"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-01-24 12:44:28
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
There’s always lots of stuff going on. The backlog of other roundups keeps growing rather than shrinking. I have also decided to hold back a few things to turn them into their own posts instead. Bad NewsI wonder if it is meaningful that most of the bad news is about technology? I don’t even know if this is news, but It would be great if we could find a way to ban or stop using TikTok If the CCP limited its interference to explicitly internal Chinese topics, I would understand, but they do not:
I love buttons that do things. The thing I loved most about early iPhones was that they had a button. A nice, big, physical button, that bailed you out of pretty much anything. Things were simple.
Can anyone explain why various meeting and calendar apps continuously fail to understand what time zone they are in? I’ve dealt with this a lot as well.
Do they? I am not convinced they do. I am also very convinced that it is utterly insane for a calendar app not to default to the time zone in its current location. It should also be loud about any conflicts, when it sees you moving around or in an unusual location.
At a minimum, it is insane at this point to allow verification of anything valuable via only a phone, you need to at least also require another source. We increasingly care too much about comfort versus other things.
And that’s with it improving!
So yeah, antisemitism was already quite alive and well, all the standard tropes. If anything, that’s still historically pretty good. We have been dealing with this for several millennia. In every generation they try to kill us. We all know Hamas aim at another holocaust. Some people were surprised at who joined the ‘they’ this time, that’s all. I wasn’t.
Government Working (USA Edition)
If you have an advanced STEM degree and want to put it to work, or have any valuable extraordinary ability, it seems rather insane to not let you come to America and become a citizen. I strongly support doing as much of this as possible. The rest of the world standardized,
This is of course an utterly insane way to do some combination of lowering food prices (which we then try to raise with other programs, and lower again with yet others) and transferring wealth to farmers. It should be up to them how much and what type of insurance to buy. If we want to bribe farmers because we think that’s in our interest to do so or we want to be corrupt, let’s write some checks (or at least give out tax credits) and bribe farmers. At least it’s not as bad as the part where we also pay people not to plant crops.
As was inevitable,
Government Working (UK/EU Edition)
The chart clearly shows that this was rapidly transforming into a backdoor immigration mechanism. If the situation is what it was in 2015, something like ‘5% of students take someone along because they need to,’ then you want to allow that. If the ratio starts exceeding 100%, then the policy is being gamed so much it is clearly unsustainable. If you want to allow more immigration, great, but you still do not want to give active preference to those who twist their lives to game the system.
Biggest surprise is that this is a UK pizza photo where the pizza looks edible.
It is amazing, and a statement about the expected returns to investment, that such projects still continue at all. Imagine what the UK could accomplish if people were allowed to build houses and generate energy, even if nothing else changed. European Parliment: From 28 December 2024 all mobile phones, tablets and cameras sold in the EU will be equipped with a standard USB Type-C charging port, making it easier for you and better for the environment. How do they think that works exactly? In twelve months I get rid of all my existing devices? I note all the concerns about ‘what if they had done this five years ago with micro-USB’ and if a new better tech comes along in the future, and yeah, sure, but I’m still inclined to say Worth It at this point. Also: The map is full of little joys, like Cyprus being in purple. Trouble in the SuezIt is insane that we are not doing our job of protecting international trade. A bunch of rebels shoot a few missiles, and we can’t stop them? We take weeks to even start responding? There is a list of things you absolutely do not tolerate as leader of the free world. Disrupting international trade routes is near the top of that list. That’s the job. Don’t tell me we can’t handle it.
There was a time, for thousands of years, when ‘we do nothing but fight for generations’ was the way to go to win wars. When the dudes on horseback periodically sacked the cities and became the new ruling class. When it was said, as in the end of Herodotus, let us live somewhere hard so we might win wars. Now, not so much. I may not be ‘appreciating the complexities’ but if I am Biden I get on the phone, explain that either shipping is going to resume or there are not going to be any more rebels, as an example to the next ten generations, and I mean what I am saying. We did not go that far. We did eventually start using force.
I continue to be surprised and dismayed that we have not done more. The situation is completely unacceptable. Anyone who has an issue with using force to stop pirates, or thinks that the actions of unrelated nations could possibly excuse it whatever you think of those actions, can go to Davey Jones’s Locker.
There are those here who are cheering on the rebels for trying to disrupt shipping. These people are enemies of civilization and of humanity. Treat them accordingly. Crime and PunishmentPeriodic reminder:
If the police are unwilling to do their jobs and arrest people who steal, as often the police are unwilling to bother to do, the least they can do is not actively get in the way. You have a presumption of innocence in court, and only in court. Even if that was not true, a presumption of innocence does not mean no one can accuse you, and no one can post evidence. That is completely absurd. As is any ‘expectation of privacy’ while stealing a package off someone else’s private property.
The cost of crime is high, even when it does not happen to you.
I pay a huge portion of my discretionary income so my family can live in New York City. If crime was the way it was when I was growing up, my willingness to pay that would go way, way down. Luckily, things are much better.
I notice I am confused. How is going from ‘put you in jail’ to ‘have you wear an ankle bracelet’ not ‘moving the ball forward?’ That seems like moving the ball forward to me. Wearing an ankle bracelet is at least an order of magnitude less bad than being held in jail? I would say at least two? And for many people, far better than paying the bond to post bail even if they could? I mean, you could pay me to wear an ankle bracelet and it would not even be that expensive. As always, people confuse ‘not available’ with ‘not available at this price’:
There are tons of lawyers, by all accounts, who are in need of work. AI will likely streamline much legal work further, expanding that pool. Do these people want to go to Macoupin Country to work with criminal defendants? No, mostly they do not want to do that. Also, if you raise your price, some of them will do it anyway.
There are some curious expectations at play here. Megan seems surprised that judges frequently ‘overrode’ the recommendations, despite the recommendations being based on only a subset of the factors judges care about and considering only some of the evidence, and also judges being humans who think they know better. Megan also seems surprised overall sentences stayed the same. Whereas of course judges are not going to think risk assessments should alter how tough they are on crime. Good job judges making the proper calibration adjustments. Yes, if you say some people are low risk hoping those people go to jail less, the ones it says are high risk will then be put in jail more.
I read this as: Judges care about things your risk assessment does not. They think younger people, and women, deserve consideration, for reasons that are not about risk. Not sure what the story is here regarding unemployed? If I had to guess, the judges noticed (consciously and systematically, or otherwise) that the risk assessments made unemployed people very high risk, and did not think that was equitable or something they should get punished for so much, so they scaled it back. What about black defendants? Certainly there is some amount of racism involved. There is also the possibility that the risk assessments deliberately ignored or controlled for various factors to correct for racial disparities or ensure equities, and the judges learned to correct for this or simply observed the facts and overruled. Stevenson is framing this as ‘we had a risk score, and they overruled it.’ I am confident the judges instead were thinking ‘ah, good, a risk score, we can try using this as one of our considerations.’ If you thought this could convince a system to stop being racist, or stop putting people in prison so often, I would wonder why one would expect that to stick? Instead, the risk scores worked in doing the thing one would hope, which is moving incarceration from those with low risk scores to those with high risk scores.
And yet, this didn’t work?
So what is going on there?
The tool meant more emphasis on the factors considered by the tool, excepting those undone intentionally by the judges, and less emphasis on other factors. Yet this did not help. I find the ‘over-riding it when they shouldn’t’ hypothesis unconvincing. The model predicts that things should have improved given these choices. Things did not improve. Judges would have to be doing far worse than random, in terms of recidivism, in deciding when to overrule.
Quite so. This is certainly a reason to expect judge final decisions to score worse than the algorithm on risk alone. But it would still predict that, given you saw a shift in who got sentenced from low risk to high risk, an improvement in results. So the algorithm has some explaining to do. Why were judges unable to improve the production possibilities frontier? Why did the judges ultimately decide the scores were not useful? Notice that they were correct about this. To be useful, a risk score has to tell the judge something they do not already know. So we’d need to look at what makes up the scores. What is the new information? Good News, EveryoneAdam Grant suggests: “
Everyone gives the ‘don’t have your phone there’ advice and almost no one follows it. I do believe I have gotten pretty good at not actually using the phone while it is there without a good reason, but there is a clear effect where doing that still requires effort. The part that is interesting is that he reports this also helping throughout the day. Note that ‘out of the room’ need not be literal. Technically my computer and work area are within the bedroom. Leaving the phone there would be distant enough for me.
He says agency is a complex skill. In some ways it is. In other ways it is simple. Or, it is functionally complex, but conceptually simple.
Sports Go Sports
I strongly agree with Tyler Cowen and his reasons that Location, location, location. All of this is vastly more important than a nominally nicer venue. I love Citi Field. It is an amazing ballpark. I would still happily prefer a lousy ballpark that was closer and within the heart of the city. And I would happily take the old lousy Shea Stadium over a Citi Field (or even the platonic ideal of a stadium) if the new place was not on a Subway line, or on a much less accessible subway line.
One place the industry continuously offends me, that does not offend Ben Krauss as a purely casual gambler, is the prices. With the epic growth in gambling volumes, and the ability to bet in person with low transaction costs, we need to see a lot more competition on price. Alas, regulatory and advertising costs, and the cost of deposits and withdraws, are standing in the way. It is still insane and kind of criminal that ESPN is showing us truly obnoxious baseball lines that go -120/+100 or worse as if that is an acceptable thing to do.
Kirk is actually pretty great both on GameDay and as one of the best full-spectrum play-by-play announcers. I agree that there are far too many bowls. You should only get a bowl if you accomplish something, which does not mean going 6-6. I think it would be fine to say you need either 8 wins, a conference title game or the top 25?
Gamers Gonna Game Game Game Game Game
I am not as down as he is on the importance of prize money, you need to give them that kind of hope too, especially if you want to let people turn fully pro. You also need enough to drive the proper attention and prestige, so they feel real. But what matters to people most is attention and prestige. I continue to think Magic would get a huge ROI from a true return to form of the Pro Tour including very large prize pools. But to make it work, all the prestige stuff has to get knocked out of the park too.
Crypto trader withdraws $25 million worth of ETH Advice to anyone building a new rogue deckbuilder is to not make it easy to assemble tiny decks, or to do something to seriously punish anyone who does it.
I strongly agree with him to stop with the +2% modifiers, +20% or GTFO, you want to make sure everything each item does counts and you can feel it. I also agree on the power and necessity of the reset button, to strongly encourage everyone to start over. I’m very much looking forward to Path of Exile 2. Path of Exile is far and away the best Action RPG of all time, and the only one I’d put in my Tier 1 of Must Play (I’d have considered putting Diablo 2 there, if Path of Exile didn’t exist, but it does.)
This works exactly because the game is well-designed, with good counters to every such move. If that was not true, this would fail. It also relies on having enough data to find the counter-moves, and enough practice to learn them, to get to the new equilibrium. It does genuinely ruin a different experience some people want. Keep those things in mind while generalizing.
Bravo. Mostly. I notice that there is a problem with Magic: The Gathering and other tradable or collectable card games. It would be nice to find a way to exempt sufficiently ‘real’ games. I presume Magic: The Gathering Arena and Modo can survive this in China, but it will be tricky. Emergents, had it survived, would have had to either leave China or radically change its economic system. That is still a price I would be willing to pay. Gacha (I will always call this Gotcha in my head) and gambling games, and dopamine-based tricks like daily logins, are the bad money that drives out good due to how mobile customer acquisition works. Despite all the obvious reasons to be opposed, I think this is sufficiently good for human flourishing that I am fine with it. Game Reviews
I played a bunch of Backpack Hero. I wanted to like this game a lot, but ultimately can only classify it as Tier 4, for diehards only. I had fun with the core concepts. Alas, the balance was all off. It took quite a long time before I was in any danger of dying. When I occasionally did, it felt like carelessness, until I moved to secondary characters that had it much harder, were far more fiddly, and that I enjoyed less. You had to do a lot of runs before things unlocked properly. The powerful things are stupidly powerful, many options seem highly under-developed. The first two heroes are straightforward and fun at their core, the next two felt fiddly and not fun.
I Was Promised |