---
subject: "Infra #2"
from: "River Kenna from Infra <riverkenna@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-07-15 11:05:17
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "River Kenna", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3010718370428876194", "UNREAD"]
---
StrataYou can’t stop people from making art. We haven’t, as a civilization, adequately reckoned with that fact. Like at all. Imagine if, when you were a kid, the adults treated engineers as impractical flakes, a bit immature and potentially unbalanced. Imagine if you came home excited about biology class, and your parents gently reminded you that while biology is fun and all, it’s not a serious option to really dedicate yourself to. Imagine if construction work required feverish devotion, obsession even, for years and years—and if at the end of those years, you managed to get a fraction of minimum wage for what you’d built. And you were counted one of the lucky ones to get what you did. No other field could survive the kind of treatment art gets. And still: art thrives. Folks keep devoting themselves to it. They craft songs only a few people will ever hear, they get PhDs in Literature, they spray-paint neon calligraphic vistas on brick walls while their friends watch for cops. You can’t stop people from expressing what wants to come through us. We haven’t adequately reckoned with the fact that humans are, first and foremost, creatures who convey visions. Encounter
One of the best things about using body-based metaphors: they’re never just metaphors. ArtifactI came back across this diagram that I do think that the specifics of the bullet points change, from round to round of the cycle—and that the amplitude changes a fair bit—but I do love the perceptive simplicity she manages to capture here. It’s a good totem to remember in the highs and lows. It’s all a process, and I’m exactly where I need to be right now. Infra is free and will stay free, but if you get something out of my work, consider giving something back. Share my writing with friends & followers, pick up my |