---
subject: "The Nutgraf: Wazirx seizes the silence"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-08-03 05:43:24
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
This whole thing is complicated, so I’m going to explain it using a fictional analogy.
Let’s say that you find out on the news tomorrow that there’s been a massive cyber attack on India’s National Stock Exchange (NSE). Preliminary reports state that unknown hackers from another country broke into the NSE’s online system and transferred shares worth a few thousand crores out of the exchange. These shares belong to large, listed companies that trade on the NSE. By the time the hack is discovered, the hackers take these valuable shares, execute a series of complicated financial swaps, and convert it to an international currency, which they proceed to withdraw through a Swiss Bank. All attempts are being made to trace these attackers, but the search doesn’t look promising because this was a fairly sophisticated attack.
At the end of the day though, Indian investors are impacted. Thousands of retail investors, plus mutual funds and other institutions, held stock of these three companies in their portfolio.
So what should the NSE do?
You may have an answer—perhaps you’ll say that the NSE had the responsibility to keep these shares safe, so it’s really the NSE’s problem, and that they need to buy these stolen shares back and make the investors whole again. Perhaps you’ll say that these things need to be insured, so the insurance company has to pay for it. Or perhaps you’ll say that India’s regulators need to step in and fine the people who were responsible for the shocking security lapse. Some of you may even argue that the three companies can simply annul the stolen shares and issue new ones back to the original investors. So many possibilities. All plausible.
But imagine if the NSE came out the next day and said that its master plan was to distribute the amount lost in the hack across every single person who traded on the exchange regardless of whether they originally owned these shares or not. So everyone’s portfolio is reduced by a significant value, say by half, and the remaining amount is placed into a fixed deposit (which is locked for now). Essentially a haircut. So if you had a hundred shares of a company (any company, not just the three companies that were hacked) and you login to your trading portal, you’d find just half of those allocated to you. If you had shares of those three companies, the NSE would just replace it with a basket of similar shares… again worth half the value. In the press conference, the NSE CEO would justify this move saying, “Look, we considered all the other solutions, but they’re all quite cumbersome, so we decided to distribute the losses across all investors so everyone could resume trading again. Isn’t this good for everybody?”
Ahem.
In a controversial move, cryptocurrency exchange WazirX announced plans to “socialise” the $230 million loss from its recent security breach among all its customers.
On July 18, the cryptocurrency exchange was hit by a cyber attack that led to the loss of over 45 per cent of its total digital assets. The attack, which it characterised as a “force majeure” event, was not only the biggest breach of a cryptocurrency firm in India but is also among the top hacks in the world.
WazirX has outlined a strategy to resume operations within a week or so while implementing a “fair and transparent socialised loss strategy” to distribute the impact “equitably” among its user base.
WazirX will “rebalance” customer portfolios on its platform, returning only 55 per cent of their holdings while locking the remaining 45 per cent in USDT-equivalent tokens. This will also impact customers whose tokens were not directly affected by the breach, with the company stating that “users with 100 per cent of their tokens in the ‘not stolen’ category will receive 55 per cent of those tokens back.”
WazirX to ‘socialise’ $230 million security breach loss among customers, [The Hindu](https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/info-tech/wazirx-to-socialise-230-million-security-breach-loss-among-customers/article68457484.ece)
Look, you’re probably thinking that this whole thing is either crazy or one giant scam. This is bizarre. Why would an exchange do this to its customers? Yes, all correct, but this is crypto we are talking about, and all the rules are upside down in this universe. In fact, allow me to blow your mind—Wazirx isn’t even the first crypto exchange to get hacked and then try to socialise the losses. That distinction goes to Bitfinex, which tried this tactic for the first time back in 2016. Now let me blow your mind even further—it [worked](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2017-05-17/inside-bitfinex-s-comeback-from-a-69-million-bitcoin-heist) for Bitfinex. They were able to pay back all of their customers in the next eight months. So what Wazirx is proposing isn’t entirely unprecedented, but I must caveat that the details are quite different. Anyway, in the crypto world, this is how they deal with cyber attacks.
On one hand, this whole thing feels a little hypocritical? Wazirx wasn’t socialising the gains with its customers—only its losses. When did crypto go from anonymity and decentralised ownership to “we’re all in this together bro, please understand, vote for my poll, share the burden, and download a copy of Communist Manifesto”? A lot of people, including CEOs of other [crypto companies](https://x.com/smtgpt/status/1817844272064012304), have called attention to how unfair this whole situation is to Wazirx’s users.
However, I think the real question isn’t why Wazirx is doing this, but why nobody else is able to stop them from doing it. The regulators are silent and missing. Customers are upset and outraging on Twitter (now X), sure, but nobody is really able to take action. Any other company would have been dragged to the National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) by now, at the very least (hello Byju’s). Someone would have filed a petition in a court somewhere, which would’ve issued a summons. A couple of labour unions may have gotten involved. Wazirx claims to have 16 million users. Presumably most of them are Indians. This is not a small number. All of them have reasons to be upset.
But beyond the outrage, where’s the crackdown?
The reason why none of this is happening is because, like... This is an abbreviated version of The Nutgraf emailed to Free Users. The Nutgraf is a weekly newsletter available only to paying subscribers. Upgrade to a paid subscription to get access to all newsletter editions and other premium benefits, including: Regards,
Subscribe to The Ken to unlock the full edition
[Upgrade now](https://the-ken.com/pricing/?utm_source=web&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=nutgraf)
Praveen Gopal Krishnan