---
subject: "Housing Roundup #11"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-04-01 16:19:49
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
The book of March 2025 was Until then, it seems high time for the latest housing roundup, which as a reminder all take place in the possible timeline where AI fails to be transformative any time soon. Federal YIMBY
It’s great to see mention of expanding housing supply, but I don’t see real intent. This is mostly just Trump saying lower all the costs, increase all the supplies, during a barrage of dozens of such orders. If you have 47 priorities you have no priorities. If you want to do real work on housing at the Federal level, you need an actual plan.
I do think there are some promising things to explore, even if the Trump administration is not willing to strongarm states. In particular and as an example without going into too much detail, the Federal Government has a lot of control over mortgage availability. Currently, they are using this in ways that handicap manufactured housing, whereas they could instead use it to reward innovation and new construction, such as by refusing to count house value that is the result of NIMBY building restrictions and the resulting shortages. Another example is that they could universalize a reasonable building code to do away with things like dual staircase requirements. Alas, this Administration’s true priorities very clearly lie elsewhere. But at least they want to build more housing rather than less housing. Being directionally correct is far better than their position in other places of actively being against growth and trade. Rent Control
Rent Passthrough
Which in turn is saying that rents are massively inefficient, because landlords are not anything like efficient profit maximizers, potentially more like low information satisficers in many cases. Weird, and I suppose evidence that tools to learn the ‘proper market rent’ could indeed have a large impact. Yes, Construction Lowers Rents on Existing BuildingsOne cannot stress this enough. If you want lower rents, build more housing. We’ve been over this, and you can make complicated arguments, but: Supply, meet demand, how is this even a question, sigh. Also, Studies Show.
Here’s another study:
If We Wanted To, We WouldThe reason we don’t build those new buildings is we have decided not to build them.
We certainly have the necessary space: Aesthetics Are a Public Good
Aesthetics are an obvious externality issue. If you create a beautiful thing, you capture only a small portion of the gains. So we want a way to financially reward beautiful and punish ugly, as measured by what is around them, in order to motivate better choices in the future. What people actually think seems like an excellent way to do that. You don’t want to a NIMBY-style veto system. You want financial incentives that generate a race to the top. Indeed, if we want beautiful, this is only half the battle. The other half is we have to make such places actually legal to build. I am confident that cities that implement this will benefit greatly. But you need a way to judge aesthetics that actually rewards good over bad. Which is not our custom, because… Urban Planners Are Wrong About EverythingIt’s a bold claim and of course it’s not actually correct. There are plenty of things that planners are uncontroversially correct about. You don’t notice those things. But also there’s a lot of things they do that are purely shooting the city in the foot for no gain.
It’s nice to hear the claim that planning the profession has figured out it got all these things wrong, but what good is that if the wrong things keep getting implemented? What is planning planning to try and fix our planning planning? BlackstoneBlackstone is investing in buying up houses and renting them out. There are insane claims going around that Blackstone is somehow intentionally having a massive effect on housing prices by doing this. Instead, as any economist would tell you, the effects here are very small. This is mentioned here partly to clear up that confusion in case anyone was misled, but mainly as a clear case of a journalist pushing a certain kind of narrative, and how they react when it is pointed out.
It is rather insane that a claim that Blackstone owns a third of American housing made it to publication. That claim makes absolutely zero sense on any level.
The actual figure is Blackstone owns 0.07% of American housing stock, so it is off by about four orders of magnitude. They have essentially zero market power. Rent Pricing SoftwareI got
No question the software leads to less variation in pricing, cutting down on underpricing and also on overpricing. This means less time on average spent with each unit on the market, and less time spent by prospective tenants searching since returns to search are lower. Also note that, by lowering search costs, you lower the ability of the landlord to hold up the tenant by threatening to force them to move, and give both sides in that negotiation much better information on market conditions - worst case the tenant can simply look at a few similar places on the market. I don’t see the OPEC parallel, given supply if anything should be entering the market rather than leaving it, as this makes it easier to be a low-information landlord. The question raised here is, could it be good to have the old inefficient rent pricing, despite all that, because it allows valuable price discrimination? I can see the argument if I squint. Those who have high willingness to pay end up with higher rent, and this subsidizes people who need a bargain allowing the bargain hunters to live where they wouldn’t otherwise be able to afford to rent? That depends on what determines elasticity of supply. If landlords can collectively respond to the ability to price discriminate by building more housing, since there’s now more overall demand and some pay higher prices, then plausibly that can be worth a lot. But if all this does is change the distribution of tenants and prices, then it seems very hard for that to justify the additional transaction costs. We shouldn’t underestimate those transaction costs. When I rented an apartment in New York City, which I did several times, I effectively lost multiple weeks each time. Immigration Versus NIMBYImmigration does raise housing costs in the places you artificially constrain the supply of housing, since you add to demand and hold supply fixed. Which tempts you to compound your mistake, rather than realize you should stop restricting supply. Where supply isn’t restricted, immigration if anything is net helpful, as they disproportionately help build the new houses and they do it while on average buying less house.
We do have to face the reality here. Supply in many places is restricted. So this is currently a small downside to immigration, with gains captured by landlords. We could turn this back into a win-win by imposing a property tax, or better yet a tax on the unimproved value of land, in addition the obvious ‘let people build houses where people want to live’ solution. Preferences
Living in higher-SES neighborhoods costs more money in various ways, so this is not without its advantages. The period when I lived in Warwick allowed a dramatic cut in my living expenses - if I preferred that lifestyle, it would be very good for capital accumulation. It was not without its charms. Why do people so often assume that everyone will spend whatever they can afford on housing and other consumption? You don’t want to be The True CostsThinking of moving to a more productive area?
This ignores the skill and talent enhancement aspect of moving CZs. It presumes worker ability is fixed, whereas worker ability improves over time when among higher ability workers in a high opportunity area. So even if your consumption did not increase short term, you would still want to capture those gains, and also the additional housing costs come with access to a superior area. Also if you see comparatively larger gains from moving, especially as a ratio of housing requirements, you come out ahead that way as well. Society of course overall gains greatly when you move up the ranks, even if you don’t come out ahead directly. Mostly this says that our most productive areas are greatly undersupplying housing, in case that wasn’t already obvious. It also says that people are responding roughly correctly to the incentives involved. Minimum Viable Product
Various people said ‘oh that’s not shaming that’s complaining about housing costs in London’ and I would have agreed if it was only Sophia’s OP but then she kept going, including making claims that simply aren’t true - Alice is very nicely warning in advance about the noise, not saying the person wouldn’t be able to be at home at any given time. Like a Good Neighbor
This totally fits with my model of major cities as a game of ‘ One’s own access to the related services could be net good or net bad, but it sounds like the net impact here is minimal. I suspect that is people making a mistake. It is well known that exact distance makes a big difference for things like parks and restaurants, and I would expect that to apply here as well. Except it is entirely non-obvious which direction this should go. Flight to QualityThere are a lot of trends of this type these days: People place tons of value on top quality, and we have the wealth to bid it up quite high, while what used to be the Perfectly Good version lies unused.
Claude thinks this is mostly about location and other practical stuff, like temperature controls and elevators that work well, and keeping the building clean and safe. There’s a lot of marginal value in all that. The explanation for B-level buildings going unused is various bank loan covenants and obligations, tax advantages to keeping the place empty and general downward price stickiness in real estate. We can and should of course reverse the unintended tax incentives for places being empty - we should if anything punish, not reward, leaving the place idle. Housing for FamiliesBy default, high-rises include mostly one and two bedroom apartments, and don’t offer the amenities that make them good places to raise children. But is that necessarily the case? I think if you designed a high-rise with this in mind, you could offer tremendous value. You can build the entire place, from the beginning, with this goal in mind. The obvious place to start is to make the whole building larger apartments designed for families. That means floor plans more bedrooms, with the secondary bedrooms relatively small, plus a large common area, with multiple bathrooms. Simply having most of your neighbors have children will change norms dramatically. It would be far easier to make friends, to strike up conversations and so on. The next step is to add various communal areas for the families. This starts with an enclosed courtyard or other safe outdoor space, and a designed-to-be-safe roof. You can go from there, with various gym and sports areas, play areas, gaming areas and so on. Throw in some family friendly restaurants so you can go there without leaving the building. Giving up a small percentage of overall floor space is a big deal. The killer app, of course, is childcare. If it’s a big enough courtyard, you can have an adult there, same with the roof, and you can offer places where families can park their kids and pay by the hour. Maybe even have various styles, including a homework help room, tutoring, activities like chess and so on. You can even have a pool of building-based babysitters and even tutors that can be reserved or often requested on demand, including for short periods. You can use dynamic pricing for busy versus quiet times. The lifestyle impact there would be huge - if you have on-demand options for 1-2 hours of childcare, or even 15 minutes, at reasonable prices, it is a huge freaking deal. If you have activities readily available that also create natural friendships through repeat interactions? Wow. This seriously seems like an amazing business opportunity. If you made the first such building in Manhattan or another major city, there are those who would jump at it, and pay quite a lot more for the same amount of apartment than they would otherwise. Group House
This is also a great reason to encourage greater supply of larger houses and apartments, thus enabling more such arrangements. No One Will Have the Endurance To Collect on His InsuranceCalifornia has effectively made it illegal to profitably offer insurance via charging enough money to cover expected payouts.
Telling insurance companies they cannot set or raise prices works until it doesn’t. What people are complaining about is that they want to purchase assets and be insured against potential losses, and they want someone else to pay for the real cost of covering those losses in exchange for a smaller amount of money. That someone is going to have to be the State of California (or another state like Florida, as appropriate). The people still have to foot that bill, somehow. This is an extraction of rents by existing owners of risky properties, and those who construct new risky properties, at the expense of everyone else. If the full real cost of insurance had to be paid or the risk accepted, then the value of the property would decline accordingly, so those buying anew would break even. Cambridge
Six stories is below what you’d want in some places, but it’s a huge step up here, and you can get remarkably dense with that alone. Denver
Minneapolis
As usual, I interpret this as the maintenance costs being high while occupancy is low, and an inability to legally use it as residential space or useful commercial space, so the marginal value here is mostly option value and the price is essentially zero. New York City
Mayor Eric Adams has some issues, to say the least, but he does support the City of Yes, and general efforts to build more housing where people want to live, if not in the exact ways or to the degree I would prefer.
The richest places where people most want to live mostly voted yes. The poorer places, despite how the amendments ‘shielded them from change’ mostly voted no.
The latest A cool motivating factor, San FranciscoA fun fact about the world is that people remarkably rarely say ‘well, that would be a super bad look, maybe we should try and not appear maximally unreasonable so we don’t give them a great talking point.’ I mean, I respect the hell out of not doing that. It’s just, wow, all right then.
Silicon ValleyIt remains a bunch of suburbs at best, despite the immense amount of lost value.
Texas
Other Considerations
It’s remarkable how much people will sacrifice in the name of sunlight, then never consider that we might want to walk in the shade. You're currently a free subscriber to |