---
subject: "An Unexpectedly Modern “Fairy Wedding”"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-12-31 13:03:20
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
Charles Stratton was one of the biggest celebrities of the 19th century. Born to an ordinary Connecticut family — his father was a carpenter — in 1838, he started performing at age 5. Young Charles could do a little bit of everything; he sang, danced, did impressions, acted in plays, and bounced jokes off a straight man.
Stratton toured the United States before he was old enough to enter first grade, playing before thousands of people. He was a sensation and followed up with a tour of Europe. There, he charmed Queen Victoria (and got invited for an encore performance after hamming it up with the queen’s dog).
He went on to take France by storm. Crowds surrounded him on the streets of European capitals, and [women](https://substack.com/redirect/83d6af5d-a8d5-44d6-b838-54e7e7eb4e44?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) lined up for a kiss. [Ten thousand people](https://substack.com/redirect/a710d868-70c6-4442-ac46-2f968fc9fc95?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) gathered at the docks to see him off for a second tour of Europe in 1844, when he was 8 years old. A French magazine [wrote](https://substack.com/redirect/d8ab0f3b-04f5-4da8-a52e-d823a6cea11d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) that Stratton was
all fashion. He is the lady-bird of the season; the ladies are passionately fond of him, for the prettiest of them will eagerly press their lips of roses on the bluff cheeks of our little dwarf, who prides himself on having kissed a million of ladies.
Yes, Stratton was quite short. As an adult, he stood about 35 inches tall, a result of pituitary dwarfism. Between the ages of six months and adulthood, he grew only ten inches. Stratton’s height was the most unusual thing about him, but he was much more than a small person.
Stratton’s career began when the entertainer and promoter P.T. Barnum, who lived nearby, heard about this young man of unusual stature and visited his parents with an odd proposition: could Barnum [pay](https://substack.com/redirect/83d6af5d-a8d5-44d6-b838-54e7e7eb4e44?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) Stratton’s parents $3 per week and take him to New York to perform as part of a stable of “freaks?” The Strattons agreed, and Charles took his place among the bearded ladies and giants. Barnum, with his gift for branding, gave Stratton a new stage name: General Tom Thumb.
But Stratton quickly distinguished himself from the other “freaks” in Barnum’s lineup. He had genuine talent as a singer and comedian, which made him one of the most famous people in the world by the time he reached his teenage years, performing in front of millions.
Charles Stratton wasn’t the only little person in Barnum’s employ. Barnum also toured with Lavinia Warren, whom he had discovered performing on a riverboat in the Mississippi, and George “Commodore” Nutt, whom he had hired away from another circus.
Stratton and Warren, both in their 20s by the early 1860s, met on the road. Stratton took a liking to Warren and asked P.T. Barnum to set the two of them up. Having learned all too well how to mix his personal life with show business, he offered Barnum the opportunity to promote their wedding if it happened. Barnum happily agreed to play matchmaker.
There was one complication — George Nutt was in love with Warren, too. He was seven years younger than her, and by all accounts, she saw him as more of a little brother, but he pressed his case and got into at least one [altercation](https://substack.com/redirect/443df864-37fa-4a28-914a-de23210e8c91?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) with Stratton over her affections. But in the end, Lavinia Warren only had eyes for Stratton, and their wedding was scheduled for February 10, 1863, in New York City.
Let’s pause for a moment to think about the context of this wedding. The Civil War was entering its third year, having spiraled out into something far more horrific than most Americans thought possible. The Union was losing, its armies having been embarrassed at Fredericksburg in the last major battle. Turning points at Gettysburg and Vicksburg would not come until the spring and summer of 1863. Abraham Lincoln had just issued the Emancipation Proclamation on January 1, revolutionizing American ideas about freedom and slavery.
In those circumstances, who could possibly be interested in the wedding of two entertainers who were more known for their size than their talents?
Most of America, as it turned out. The wedding between Warren and Stratton became a national obsession. It’s hard to overstate the degree to which the events captivated the country. The New York Times [reported](https://substack.com/redirect/ad45c42e-5179-411d-9bab-f4ca1ce39e2a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) in the days leading up to the wedding that
At the appropriate moment the Times will duly, and with all proper ceremony, chronicle the happenings of the eventful act, but for the present will be content with a mere mention of the interest which surrounds the preparatory operations…
The [Barnum] Museum has been thronged by an average of 20,000 people daily, since the announcement of their engagement; applications reaching the incredible numeral of 15,000 have been made for the privilege of witnessing the ceremony, and presents amounting to thousands of dollars in value have been made them by friends, admirers, and others desiring reciprocal courtesy in the shape of cards to the wedding.
When the blessed day came, the Times [wrote](https://substack.com/redirect/810c7bb5-d16e-44b9-b777-2b39703b271a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) that
religious and civil parties sink into comparative insignificance before this one arbitrating query of fate — did you or did you not see Tom Thumb married?…
The marriage of Gen. Tom Thumb cannot be treated as an affair of no moment — in some respects it is most momentous. Next to Louis Napoleon, there is no one person better known by reputation to high and low, rich and poor, than he.
The ceremony, which would come to be known as the “Fairy Wedding,” became a national obsession despite — or perhaps because of — the terrible events happening around it. It seems that Americans were happy to read about something other than bloodshed and secession in the papers for a few days.
The event was covered breathlessly by newspapers around the country. Readers learned who designed Warren’s dress, what the couple received as presents, and that Queen Victoria provided the carriage that whisked them away from the reception.
Abraham Lincoln was happy to indulge in a little distraction, too. He invited the happy couple to the White House and made a [joke](https://substack.com/redirect/443df864-37fa-4a28-914a-de23210e8c91?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) about the difference between their heights and his own lanky frame: “Sometimes God likes to do funny things; and here you have the long and the short of it.”
This being a P.T. Barnum enterprise, the wedding was also a business proposition — the showman sold [tickets](https://substack.com/redirect/769ee887-e4de-45c2-9528-7aac8be84087?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) to the reception for $75, a hefty sum in 1863. The publicity around the wedding left many wondering whether it was genuine. Could this have been the first celebrity couple concocted by scheming agents and publicists? The couple insisted that this was a real love match. Stratton [told](https://substack.com/redirect/83d6af5d-a8d5-44d6-b838-54e7e7eb4e44?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) the press that
It is true we are little but we are as God made us, perfect in our littleness,” he wrote. “We are simply man and woman of like passions and infirmities with you and other mortals. The arrangements for our marriage are controlled by no showman.
The couple’s love did seem genuine; they stayed married until Stratton’s death 20 years later. They were now a double act and went back out on tour, [charging](https://substack.com/redirect/a710d868-70c6-4442-ac46-2f968fc9fc95?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) more for a ticket than before.
About a year after the marriage, Lavinia Stratton appeared in public with a baby. Though she never claimed that it was hers, the press jumped to the reasonable conclusion. Their apparent offspring fascinated the public for reasons of celebrity and morbid medical curiosity. Would the baby remain small like its parents? How, exactly, had she managed to give birth?
Well, she hadn’t. Her condition rendered that impossible. The baby had been provided to the couple by P.T. Barnum, who had picked it up from an orphanage and arranged for them to pose with it as a publicity stunt. They soon returned the child (who did not have dwarfism) to the orphanage because it was growing so large as to confound even P.T. Barnum’s ability to defy reality. But Barnum didn’t give up; for a time, he [arranged](https://substack.com/redirect/443df864-37fa-4a28-914a-de23210e8c91?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) for a new baby to be selected from an orphanage in each town on their tour; the couple would borrow the child for the day and then return it at night.
The couple capitalized on the curiosity around their personal lives to become even more famous. They embarked on a three-year [tour](https://substack.com/redirect/16ebde18-dd83-4661-bfaa-e48b278713a9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) around the world, playing before over 1,000 audiences and traveling more than 50,000 miles.
All this performing made them quite rich. They built a mansion and bought a yacht. They were wealthy enough that they could [help](https://substack.com/redirect/da5e0bdd-23b7-4789-9214-25be71bc00dc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) Barnum out when he ran into financial trouble later on.
Even after Stratton’s death in 1883 (from a stroke; he was 45), his legacy remained. Into the 20th century, people would [dress](https://substack.com/redirect/a48bef06-9523-4c48-9dd7-e7186071f485?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) their children up in little suits and dresses and “marry” them in cute little mock ceremonies. The events were called “Tom Thumb Weddings.”
You're currently a free subscriber to [Looking Through the Past](https://substack.com/redirect/3dc12fa5-fe13-41cc-a2f8-df8bff3b5f9b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). For the full experience, [upgrade your subscription.](https://substack.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.FEAoEu93OtT9u4q8JQP_lwEKDKhtjLyx5dzbv3HwL3o?&utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email&utm_content=postcta)