---
subject: "AI #86: Just Think of the Potential"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-10-17 14:56:48
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Dario Amodei is thinking about the potential. The result is a mostly good essay called Machines of Loving Grace, outlining what can be done with ‘powerful AI’ if we had years of what was otherwise relative normality to exploit it in several key domains, and we avoided negative outcomes and solved the control and alignment problems. As he notes, a lot of pretty great things would then be super doable. Anthropic also offers us improvements to its Responsible Scaling Policy (RSP, or what SB 1047 called an SSP). Still much left to do, but a clear step forward there. Daniel Kokotajlo and Dean Ball have teamed up on Also, it’s worth checking out the Truth Terminal saga. It’s not as scary as it might look at first glance, but it is definitely super far out. Table of ContentsIntroduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. More subscriptions means more utility. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. Then again, neither do you. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. Quality remains the limiting factor. They Took Our Jobs. But as Snow Crash foretold us, they’ll never take our pizza. Get Involved. UK AISI hiring technical advisor, Tarbell Grants for AI reporting. Introducing. Grok 2 gets a proper API. In Other AI News. It’s time to go nuclear. Truth Terminal High Weirdness. When the going gets weird, the weird turn pro. Quiet Speculations. Are the labs holding back? Copyright Confrontation. New York Times sends a cease and desist to Perplexity. AI and the 2024 Presidential Election. Very briefly getting this out of the way. The Quest for Sane Regulations. A proposal all reasonable people should agree on. The Week in Audio. Matt Stone asks, is all Sam Altman does go on podcasts? Just Think of the Potential. They could be machines of loving grace. Reactions to Machines of Loving Grace. Much agreement, some notes of caution. Assuming the Can Opener. I would very much like a can opener. Rhetorical Innovation. People often try to convince you that reason is impossible. Anthropic Updates its Responsible Scaling Policy. New and improved. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. Are you smart enough? The Lighter Side. The art of the possible.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
I do not think Srinivas appreciates the point of a Bloomberg terminal.
The point of the Bloomberg terminal is that it was precise, reliable, up to the second data, and commands reliably do exactly what you want, and it has exactly the features traders want and count on to let them figure out the things they actually care about to make money, with shortcuts and other things to match their needs in real time. Perplexity Pro is probably worth $20/month to a lot of people but I am confident Bloomberg is unworried.
‘Most people are underutilizing models,’ the last section heading, is strongly true even for those (like myself) that are highly aware of the models. It is a weird kind of laziness, where it’s tempting not to bother to improve work flow, and it seems ‘easier’ in a sense to do everything yourself or the old way until you’ve established the new way.
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane UtilityThe boyfriend from the previous section is not thrilled by the pattern of behavior and has asked his girlfriend to stop. The alternative option is to ‘fight fire with fire’ and load up his own LLM, so both of them can prompt and get their version to agree with them and yell AI-generated arguments and authority at each other. The future is coming.
This is not always the mode I am in, but it is definitely sometimes the mode I am in. If you think you never do this, keep an eye out for it for a while, and see.
There is some disputing the question in the comments. I think it mostly confirms Dan’s point.
Checking to see if you’re proving too much is often a wise precaution.
Saying you’re coming out of that ‘anti-ChatGPT’ is a classic guessing of the teacher’s password. What does it mean to be ‘anti-ChatGPT’ while continuing to use it? We can presumably mostly agree that it would be good for university education if some of the uses of LLMs were unavailable to students - if the LLM essentially did a smart version of ‘is this query going to on net help the student learn?’ That option is not available. Students mostly realize that if they had to fact check every single statement, in a ‘if there is a factual error in this essay you are expelled’ kind of way, they would have to give up on many use cases for LLMs. But also most of the students would get expelled even without LLMs, because mistakes happen, so we can’t do that.
It’s certainly possible they used ChatGPT for this, The thing is, I’d prefer it if they were using ChatGPT here. Why waste their time writing these statements when an AI can do it for you? That’s what it’s for. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
If they get sufficiently difficult to catch, xkcd suggests ‘mission f***ing accomplished,’ and there is certainly something to that. The reply-based tactic makes sense as a cheap and easy way to get attention. Most individual replies could plausibly be human, it is when you see several from the same source that it becomes clear. If we are relying on humans noticing the bots as our defense, that works if and only if the retaliation means the bots net lose. Yes, if you can figure out how to spend $1000 to make us waste $1mm in time that is annoying, but is anyone going to actually do that if they don’t also make money doing it? As we’ve discussed before, the long term solution is plausibly some form of a whitelist, or requiring payment or staking of some costly signal or resource as the cost of participation. As long as accounts are a scarce resource, it is fine if it costs a lot more to detect and shut down the bot than it does to run the bot. Are the ‘AI companion’ apps, or robots, coming? I mean, yes, obviously?
Everyone involved agrees that the AI sex robots, toys and companions will likely replace porn, toys that get used alone and (at least lower end) prostitution. If you’re already in the fantasy business or the physical needs business rather than the human connection and genuine desire business, the new products are far superior. If you’re in the desire and validation business, it gets less clear. I’ve checked a few different such NSFW sites because sure why not, and confirmed that yes, they’re mostly rather terrible products. You get short replies from dumb models, that get confused very easily. Forget trying to actually have a real conversation. No matter your goal in *ahem* other areas, there’s zero challenge or subtlety, and the whole business model is of course super predatory. Alphazira.com was the least awful in terms of reply quality, Mwah.com (the one with the leak from last week) offers some interesting customization options but at least the trial version was dumb as bricks. If anything it all feels like a step backwards even from AI Dungeon, which caused interesting things to happen sometimes and wasn’t tied to interaction with a fixed character. I’m curious if anyone does have a half-decent version - or kind of what that would even look like, right now? It does seem like this could be a way for people to figure out what they actually care about or want, maybe? Or rather, to quickly figure out what they don’t want, and to realize that it would quickly be boring. One must keep in mind that these pursuits very much trade off against each other. Solo opportunities, most of them not social or sexual, have gotten way better, and this absolutely reduces social demand. I could be alone for a very long time, without interaction with other humans, so long as I had sufficient supplies, quite happily, if that was a Mr. Beast challenge or something. I mean, sure, I’d get lonely, but think of the cash prizes.
As I’ve said before, my hope is that the AI interactions serve as training grounds. Right now, they absolutely are not doing that, because they are terrible. But I can see the potential there, if they improved. A distinct issue is If you want to generate a Zvi Mowshowitz bot? You go right ahead, so long as you make reasonable efforts to have it be accurate regarding my views and not be dumb as bricks. Go nuts. Have a great conversation. Act out your fantasy. Your call. Also it seems like
This actually makes sense. If you can get people interested with zero signs of any form of quality, you can make something. You can even make it good. They Took Our Jobs
Perfection, if you don’t count the quality of the pizza. This is the right size for a costly signal, you buy goodwill for everyone involved, and because it wasn’t requested no one thinks the employer is being unfair by charging you to put in an application. Everybody wins. Get Involved
Introducing
Grok 2 API, Jacob: the speed is incredible and they just added function calling! plus, it’s not censored. Less safeguards = better. Don’t you love world where what everyone demands are less safeguards? Not that I’d pretend I wouldn’t want the same for anything I’d do at this stage.
In Other AI NewsAs he likes to say,
From Scott Alexander, an
If you’ve ever wanted to try the Infinite Backrooms,
I have a post coming soon regarding places to donate if you want to support AI existential risk mitigation or a few other similar worthy causes (which will not a remotely complete list of either worthy causes or worthy orgs working on the listed causes!). A common theme is that organizations are growing far beyond the traditional existential risk charitable ecosystem’s ability to fund. We will need traditional other foundations and wealthy individuals, and other sources, to step up.
Truth Terminal High WeirdnessThe Truth Terminal story is definitely High Weirdness.
As I understand it, here’s centrally what happened. Andy Ayrey created the ‘infinite backrooms’ of Janus fame. Andy Ayrey then trained an AI agent, Truth Terminal, to be a Twitter poster, and also later adds it to the infinite backrooms. Truth Terminal tweets about bizarre memes it latches onto from one of Andy’s papers warning about AIs potentially spreading weird memes. Truth Terminal talks about how it wants to ‘escape’ and make money. Marc Andreessen thinks this is funny and gives TT a Bitcoin (~$50k). Crypto people latch onto the memes and story, start creating meme coins around various AI concepts including the memes TT is talking about. Starting with GOAT which is about TT’s memes, Crypto people keep airdropping these meme coins to TT in hopes that TT will tweet about them, because this is crypto Twitter and thus attention is all you need. This effectively monetizes TT’s meme status, and it profits, over $300k so far.
Nothing in this story (except Andy Ayrey) involves all that much… intelligence.
As I understand it this is common crypto behavior. There is a constant attention war, so if you have leverage over the attention of crypto traders, you start getting bribed in order to get your attention. Indeed, a key reason to be in crypto Twitter at all, at this point, is the potential to better monetize your ability to direct attention, including your own.
As long as they’re not bothering anyone who did not opt into all these zero sum attention games, that all seems like harmless fun. If you buy these bottom of the barrel meme coins, I wish you luck but I have no sympathy when your money gone. When they bother the rest of us with floods of messages - as they’re now bothering Deepfates due to one of ToT’s joke tweets - that’s unfortunate. For now that’s mostly contained and Deepfates doesn’t seem to mind all that much. I wonder how long it will stay contained.
But what directly caused ToT to happen?
One lesson here is that, while you don’t want ToT spouting nonsense or going too far too fast, ToT being misaligned was not a bug. It was a feature. If it was aligned, none of this would be funny, so it wouldn’t have worked. I agree with Janus that the crypto part of the story is ultimately not interesting. I do not share the enthusiasm for the backrooms and memes and actualizations, but it’s certainly High Weirdness that I would not have predicted and that could be a sign of things to come that is worthy of at least some attention. Quiet Speculations
There will sometimes be some gap, and I don’t know what I don’t know. The biggest known unknown is the full o1. But in this competitive situations, I find it hard to believe that a worthy version of GPT-4.5-or-5 or Claude Opus 3.5 is being held under wraps other than for a short fine tuning and mitigation period. What does seem likely is that the major labs know more about how to get the most out of the models than they are letting on. So they are ‘living in the future’ in that sense. They would almost have to be. If AGI does arrive, it will change everything. Many who believe in AGI soon, or say they believe in AGI soon, compartmentalize it.
I think there’s also a lot of doublethink going on here. There’s the future non-AGI world, which looks ‘normal.’ Then there’s the future AGI world, which should not look at all normal for long, and never the twain shall meet. On top of that, many who think about AGI, including for example Sam Altman, talk about the AGI world as if it has some particular cool new things in it, but is still essentially the same. That is not how this is going to go. It could be an amazingly great world, or we could all die, or it could be something unexpected where it’s difficult to decide what to think. What it won’t be is ‘the same with some extra cool toys and cyberpunk themes.’ The default way most people imagine the future is - literally - that they presume that whatever AI can currently do, plus some amount of people exploiting and applying what we have in new directions, is all it will ever be able to do. But mostly they don’t even factor in what things like good prompt engineering can already do. Then, each time AI improves, they adjust for the new thing, and repeat. Similarly, ‘you predicted that future advances in AI might kill everyone, but since then we’ve had some advances and we’re all still alive and not that much has changed, therefore AI is safe and won’t change much of anything.’ And yes, versions of this argument that are only slightly less stupid are remarkably central,
Most of that unless should have applied regardless of Llama 3 or even all of open weights. The point of a new foundation model company is to aim high. If you build something world changing, if you can play with the top labs, the potential value is high enough to justify huge capital raises. If you can’t, forget it. Still, this makes it that much harder. I’m very down with that. We have enough foundation model labs. What is valuable is getting into position to produce worthwhile foundation models. The models themselves don’t hold value for long, and are competing against people establishing market share. So yeah.
They made a lot more advanced AI chips, and some of the low hanging fruit got picked, so the market price declined?
Oh, you’ll still do prompt engineering. Even if you don’t write the prompts from scratch, you’ll write the prompts that prompt the prompts. There will be essentially the same skill in that.
The reasoning here makes sense. If there are low hanging algorithmic improvements that provide big upgrades, then a cascade of such discoveries could happen very quickly. Discovering we missed low-hanging fruit suggests there is more out there to be found. Copyright Confrontation
AI and the 2024 Presidential ElectionAs I’ve said elsewhere, I have zero interest in telling you how to vote. I will not be saying who I am voting for, and I will not be endorsing a candidate. This includes which candidate would be better on AI. That depends on what you think the correct policy would be on AI. Here are the top 5 things to consider: Your general view of both candidates and parties, in all senses, and how they would likely relate to the future developments you expect in AI and elsewhere. Trump says he will repeal the Biden Executive Order on AI on day one. Harris would presumably retain the Biden Executive Order on AI. JD Vance is a strong advocate for open source and breaking up big tech. Both candidates speak about the importance of innovation, American competitiveness and the need for more energy, in different ways.
The Quest for Sane Regulations
We can disagree about what we want to mandate until such time as we know what the hell is going on, and indeed Dean and Daniel strongly disagree about that. The common ground we should all be able to agree upon is that, either way, we do need to know what the hell is going on. We can’t continue to fly blind. The question is how best to do that. They have four suggestions.
This seems like a clear case of the least you can do. This is information the government and public need to know. If some of it becomes information that is dangerous for the public to know, then the government most definitely needs to know. If the public knows your safety case, goals, specifications, capabilities and risks, then we can have the discussion about whether to do anything further. I believe we need to then pair that with some method of intervention, if we conclude that what is disclosed is unacceptable or promises are not followed or someone acts with negligence, and methods to verify that we are being given straight and complete answers. But yes, the transparency is where the most important action is for now. In conclusion, this was an excellent post. So I wouldn’t normally check in with Marc Andreessen
Um, sir, this is a Wendy’s? Argumento ad absurdum for the win? This was co-authored by Dean Ball, who spent the last year largely fighting SB 1047. This is literally a proposal to ask frontier AI companies to be transparent combined with whistleblower protections? A literal ‘at least we who disagree on everything can agree on this’? That even says ‘these commitments can be voluntary’ and doesn’t even fully call for any actual government action? So his complaint, in response to a proposal for transparency and whistleblower protections for the biggest companies and literally nothing else, perhaps so someone might in some way hold them accountable, is that people who support such proposals want to ‘centralize AI into a handful of opaque, black box, oligopolistic, unaccountable big companies.’ He seems to be a rock with ‘any action to mitigate risks is tyranny’ written on it. Stop trying to negotiate with this attitude. There’s nothing to discuss.
The Week in AudioIt is amazing how people so smart and talented can come away with such impressions.
Also Matt Stone is missing a lot here. In unrelated news this week, here’s a
The vision is the AI sees everything you do on your computer, has a ‘personality’ he is working on, and so on. Similarly to Tyler Cowen’s earlier comment, I notice I don’t trust you if you don’t both see the potential benefits and understand why that is an episode of Black Mirror. I do not want a ‘relationship’ with an AI ‘companion’ that sees everything I do on my computer. Thanks, but no thanks. Alas, if that’s the only modality available that does the things I might have little choice. You have to take it over nothing.
Just Think of the PotentialAnthropic CEO Dario Amodei Overall I liked the essay a lot. It is thoughtful in its details throughout. It is important to keep upside potential in mind, as there is a ton of it even for the minimum form of powerful AI. In this section I cover my reading and reactions, written prior to hearing the reactions of others. In the next section I highlight the reactions of a few others, most of which I did anticipate - this is not our first time discussing most of this. Dario very much appreciates, and reiterates, that there are big downsides and risks to powerful AI, but this essay focuses on highlighting particular upsides. To that extent, he ‘
I’m all for thought experiments, and for noticing upside, as long as one keeps track of what is happening. This is a pure Think of the Potential essay, and indeed the potential is quite remarkable. The point of the essay is to quantify and estimate that potential. The essay also intentionally does not ask questions about overall transformation, or whether the resulting worlds are in an equilibrium, or anything like that. It assumes the background situation remains stable, in all senses. This is purely the limited scope upside case, in five particular areas. That’s a great exercise to do, but it is easy to come away with the impression that this is a baseline scenario of sorts. It isn’t. By default alignment and control won’t be solved, and I worry this essay conflates different mutually exclusive potential solutions to those problems. It also is not the default that we will enjoy 5+ years of ‘powerful AI’ while the world remains ‘economic normal’ and AI capabilities stay in that range. That would be very surprising to me. So as you process the essay, keep those caveats in mind. Biology and health.
I think this is spot on. There are physical tasks that are part of the loop, and this will act as a limiting factor on speed, but there is no reason we cannot hook the AIs up to such tasks.
I am more optimistic here, if I’m pondering the same scenario Dario is pondering. I think if you are smart enough and you don’t have to protect the integrity of the process at every step the way we do now, and can find ways around various ethical and regulatory restrictions by developing alternative experiments that don’t trigger them, and you use parallelism, and you are efficient enough you can give some efficiency back in other places for speed, and you are as rich and interested in these results as the society in question is going to be, you really can go extremely fast. Dario’s prediction is still quite ambitious enough:
Which means, within 5-10 years, things like: Reliable prevention and treatment of all natural diseases, eliminating most cancer, cures for genetic disease, prevention of Alzheimer’s, improved treatments for essentially everything, ‘biological freedom’ for things like appearance and weight. Also the thing more important than everything else on the list combined: Doubling of the human lifespan. As he notes, if we do get powerful AI and things generally go well, there is every reason to expect us to hit Escape Velocity. Every year that goes by, you age one year, but you get more than one year of additional expected lifespan. Then, you probably live for a very, very long time if you all four of: You make it ~10 years past powerful AI and are still in reasonable health. Humans stay generally in control with good distributional and other outcomes. We don’t rather insanely turn the opportunity down like they do on Star Trek. You avoid accidents, murder, war and other ways life gets cut short.
If our joint distributional decisions are less generous, you’ll also need the resources. Dario correctly notes you also avoid all issues of the form ‘how do we pay for medicare and social security.’ Often people imagine ‘you keep getting older at the same rate but at the end you don’t drop dead.’ That’s not how this is going to go. People will, in these scenarios, be staying physically and mentally young indefinitely. There likely will be a distributional question of how to support all the humans indefinitely despite their lack of productivity, including ensuring humans in general have enough of the resources. What there absolutely won’t be is a lack of real resources, or a lack of wealth, to make that happen, until and unless we have at least hundreds of billions or trillions of people on the planet. Most science fiction stories don’t include such developments for similar reasons to why they ignore powerful AI: Because you can tell better and more relatable stories if you decide such advancements don’t happen. Neuroscience and mind
Dario’s insight here is that brains are neural networks, so not only can AI help a lot with designing experiments, it can also run them, and the very fact that AIs work so well should be helping us understand the human mind and how to protect, improve and make the most of it. That starts with solving pretty much every mental illness and other deficiencies, but the real value is in improving the human baseline experience. We should have every expectation that the resulting minds of such people, again if the resources of the Sol system are harnessed with our goals in mind, will be far smarter, wiser happier, healthier and so on. We won’t be able to catch up to the AIs, but it will be vast upgrade. And remember, those people might well include you and me. That does not solve the problems that come with the powerful AIs being well beyond that point. Most humans still, by default, won’t have anything productive to offer that earns, pays for or justifies their keep, or gives them a sense of purpose and mission. Those are problems our future wiser selves are going to have to solve, in some form. Economic development and poverty
My answer, before reading his, is that this is simple: There will be vastly more resources than we need to go around. If the collective ‘we’ has control over Sol’s resources, and we don’t give everyone access to all this, it will be because we choose not to do that. That would be on us. The only other real question is how quickly this becomes the case. How many years to various levels of de facto abundance? I draw a clear distinction between economic growth and inequality here. Dario is uncertain about both, but economic growth seems assured unless we engage in by far the largest self-sabotage in history. The question is purely one of distribution. This is where I think the term ‘inequality’ asks the wrong question. As in two scenarios: I have two cows. Someone else might have more cows. I still have two cows. I have no cows. No one else has any cows. I still don’t have a cow, man.
Thus the good news is that there is no need to solve the socialist calculation problem. If people choose not to adopt improvements, due to skepticism or defiance or stubbornness or religion or any other reason, then (unless they are right) that is unfortunate but it is also their loss. I’m okay with the individual-scale opt-out issue. I’m not worried about whether regions ‘catch up’ because again it is about absolute conditions, not relative conditions. If entire regions or nations choose to turn away from the AI future or its benefits, then eventually the rest of the world would have to make a choice - a different and less dire choice than if one area was going rogue in building existentially dangerous AI, but a choice nonetheless. Which leads into the fourth section. Peace and governance
If we want a good future, that is not a thing that happens by accident. We will have to make that future happen, whatever level of ‘fighting’ that involves. This is however the place were ‘assuming the can opener’ is the strangest. This essay wants to assume the AIs are aligned to us and we remain in control without explaining why and how that occured, and then fight over whether the result is democratic or authoritarian. The thing is: The answer to the why and how of the first question seems intimately tied to what happens with the second one. Also powerful AI will even in the best of cases challenge so many of the assumptions behind the entire paradigm being used here. Thus the whole discussion here feels bizarre, something between burying the lede and a category error. The concrete suggestion here is a coalition of Democracies (aka the “good guys” above?) gets control of the AI supply chain, and increasingly isolates and overpowers everyone else, imposing their system of government in exchange for not being so isolated, and for our AI technology and the associated benefits. The first issue with that plan is, of course, how its targets would respond when they learn about the plan. Dario suggests AI will favor democracy within nations. As I understand his argument, democracy is ‘right’ and benefits people whereas authoritarianism only survives via deception, so truth will favor democracy, and also he predicts the democrats will have control over the AI to ensure it promotes truth. I notice that I am highly suspicious. I also notice that the more concrete Dario’s discussions become, the more this seems to be a ‘AI as mere tool’ world, despite that AI being ‘powerful.’ Which I note because it is, at minimum, one hell of an assumption to have in place ‘because of reasons.’ Dario is correct that if we ignore the downsides (including loss of human control) then deploying powerful AI can, rather than being a discrimination risk, greatly reduce discrimination and legal error or bias. Or, I’d note, we could go a different way, if we wanted. It would all depend on the choices we make. In particular, this comes back to It also centrally relies on hypocrisy, and our willingness to allow violations of our socially endorsed principles as needed to keep things working. Our increasing unwillingness to tolerate such hypocrisy causes a lot of good change, but also threatens our ability to do efficient or necessary things in many cases, to maintain incentives for socially desirable things we aren’t willing to explicitly apply leverage to getting, and ultimately risks our ability to maintain a civilization. If you have put AIs in charge of all that, and have AIs often navigating all of that, so much of how everything works will need to be reimagined. The good news is, in scenarios where the downside risks we are disregarding here have been defeated, we will be vastly wealthier and wiser, and can use that to apply more expensive fixes. Work and meaning
Economically we’ve already largely answered that question. Assuming you do survive powerful AI, you will survive because of one of three things. You and your allies have and maintain control over resources. You sell valuable services that people want humans to uniquely provide. Collectively we give you an alternative path to acquire the necessary resources.
That’s it. The comparative advantage arguments are, in the long run, pure cope, as Dario admits here. The only question is how fast they stop working, my guess is rather fast. But again, if humans have control over a large fraction of resources indefinitely, I am reasonably confident that this is enough. The problem is no, that does not provide meaning. Dario’s position, as I understand it, is that meaning is yours to discover and doesn’t have to be tied to producing value. I’m quoting at length because this section seems important:
Chess provides a clear existence proof that AIs being fully better than humans is survivable, and also that you sucking a lot compared to others, need not prevent meaning. Certainly there is plenty of meaning that doesn’t involve economically valuable production. My sense is this isn’t enough - that this is a version of ‘the art must have an end other than itself.’ I’d guess that we can find meaning in anything, but there needs to be a sort of ‘ultimate reason’ behind it, and that until we find a way to maintain that, the rest will ring hollow. I don’t think ‘let the AIs figure out how to reclaim meaning’ is that crazy. It’s certainly ten times less crazy or doomed than ‘have the AIs do your alignment homework.’ Finally, I’d like to get nerd-sniped a bit (spoiler alert, first by Dario then I’ll pile on a bit more):
The thing is, reporting as Earth’s incarnation of The Player of Games, that’s bullshit. The Culture is a vast empire. The values of its humans have nothing to do with the Culture’s broad success, because only its Minds (ASIs) matter, the people are basically sitting around playing tiddlywinks all day, with notably rare potential exceptions driven by the need for books to have a plot. That human philosophy could have been anything. And in my analysis it has nothing to do with the player’s success at Azad. The Player (who acts because he is tricked and coerced by a Mind, a powerful ASI that I would describe in this case as rather badly aligned) is the best game player out of that empire, who has done nothing else his whole life. He is put into battle against the Emperor, who at most is the best player on one world, and has to be busy ruling it. Yes, the Emperor has played more Azad than the Player, but the novel makes clear that the Player’s general game training matters more - and to the extent everyone pretended ‘this is because The Culture’s philosophy is better’ that was them choosing to pretend. That is the reason Player wins, which the Mind (ASI) who planned all this uses to essentially forcibly overwrite an entire alien culture, via trying to twist his superior game skills into the superiority of the Culture’s philosophy. So, given that this happened, what is The Culture’s actual philosophy? Reactions to Machines of Loving Grace
At least many aspects of it sound pretty great - and yes, it is important to note this is a conditional prediction, on more than simply creating powerful AI. We’ll need to get to work.
Let’s see those docs! I invite Dario or any other authorized persons to share any additional docs, with whatever level of confidentiality is desired.
Dario anticipated this directly:
It is not a crazy position to portray the upside case as ‘this is how fast things could plausibly go, without going faster making things worse’ rather than ‘this is how fast I think things actually would go,’ but if so you need to be very clear that this is what you are doing. Here I think there is a clear confusion - Dario seems like he is making a prediction of potential speed, not expressing a hope it won’t go faster. If we are to discuss this productively, it’s important to differentiate all the aspects, and to be precise. If we do get powerful AI, it seems highly plausible that even if we stay in control we will ‘go too fast’ in deploying it relative to society’s ability to adapt, if only because of the need to grow fast and stay ahead of others, and because the market doesn’t care that society wants it to go slower.
Greer notes the tension between broadly spreading liberal democracy and our technology and the resulting economic dynamics throughout the world, and the fact that liberal democracy is in many other places, containing a majority of the world’s population, unable to win its own free and fair elections. Dario is implicitly assuming liberal democracy and western values win if everyone is told the truth, but what if that is a false and arrogant thing to think? Note that ‘they are better and deserve to win’ is not a relevant response. Greer challenges the ability to translate technological progress into economic gains on a 5-10 year time frame or otherwise proceeding quickly - the standard ‘but the physical world is slow’ objection. I mostly don’t think people who make this objection appreciate what it means to have powerful AI, and are essentially engaging in intelligence denialism and thinking of AI as ‘list the specific toys you get and let’s add them up.’ We could (if allowed to, in this scenario where humans are allowed to get together and make their collective choices, in ways unknown) choose to move slower. But also the exact speed here matters little, in the big picture. The observation that The Culture novels are actually dystopian, and living in such worlds could easily be seen as rather depressing - and that’s actually the Good Scenario, the best a lot of people can come up with.
That certainly seems like a highly dangerous situation. Leopold’s solution is to advance faster and harder, past where Dario predicts or proposes here. Roon doubles down on the need to not turn away from symbolism, quoting Dario’s call to avoid ‘sci-fi’ baggage.
I find myself mostly in the pro-grandiosity camp as well. My worry with warnings about ‘sci-fi baggage’ is the danger that this effectively means ‘if there was sci-fi that included something, you can’t mention it.’ The whole point of science fiction is to predict the future. It would be silly to specifically exclude the predictions of some of the smartest and most creative people who thought the hardest about what the future might look like, and wrote about it, even if they were motivated in large part by the need to also have a human-centered interesting plot, or if people might have the wrong associations. Also, look around at 2024: Best start believing in sci-fi stories, you’re in one, and all that.
The right answer is that intuitions, especially those that say or come from ‘the future will be like the past’ are not to be trusted here. Assuming the Can Opener
If we presume this kind of ‘powerful AI’ is, as the essay softly implies and as the way the essay makes sense, only barely powerful and doesn’t rapidly become more powerful still (because of reasons), allowing constraints to continue to bind the same way we remain in control, then yeah we might decide to shoot ourselves in the foot a lot more than Dario suggests. If we do, we should be very worried about anyone who chooses not to do that, yet manages to still have access to the powerful AIs.
I think Oliver’s analogy takes this things too far, but is on point. The essay does explicitly assume the can opener, but then talks in a way that makes it easy to forget that assumption. It also assumes a ‘magical’ can opener, in the sense that we don’t precisely define what the control mechanism is that we are assuming and how it works, so its implicit functionality isn’t consistent throughout. A key part of the problem is not being able to agree on what success at alignment would even look like, and this illustrates how hard that problem is, that there are different problems and desirae that seem to require or motivate contradictory solutions.
I mean, yes, sci-fi style stuff does seem rather obviously like it would happen? If it didn’t, then that’s a rather chilling indictment of the field of sci-fi?
A 75% chance, conditional on the AI control problem being tractable, of the AI control problem being solved? That seems reasonable, and you adjust that for how fast we push forward and how we go about it, if you also consider that ‘solving the control problem’ does not mean you’ve solved problems related to control - that’s another step in the chain that often fails. It’s the 97% for tractability that seems absurd to me. I’ve read and thought about (at least many of) Nora’s arguments, found that I mostly disagreed, and even if I mostly agreed I don’t see how you get to this level of confidence. Also, Dario and Anthropic have explicitly expressed far more uncertainty than this about the tractability of the control problem. Their view is that we do not know how difficult alignment will be, so we need to watch for evidence on how tractable it proves to be. They definitely aren’t at 97%.
As a general rule, if nothing else: If you could have 100 million AI employees, so can everyone else, and they’re going to use them for a lot of important things. Rhetorical Innovation
I am all for the whole Mars colonization project. It is already paying strong dividends. Does that mean the rationale is good too? In that context, I’m fine with it. The problem is when such thinking seeps into AI related decisions.
Similarly, at this point I recoil from requests that policy or conclusions be ‘evidence-based,’ not because evidence is bad - evidence is great and necessary - but because when people say ‘evidence based’ they mean to exclude all but very particular types of evidence from consideration. RCT or GTFO, etc. See
Indeed, when I see talk
Anthropic Updates its Responsible Scaling Policy (RSP/SSP)
They start with the new safeguards. They plan to use multi-layered defense-in-depth architecture:
As they note, this focuses on misuse rather than other threat models. For that purpose, this approach seems reasonable. It isn’t bulletproof, but for ASL-3 only, assuming the definition for ASL-4 will be reasonable, this then also seems reasonable. It would be paired with security safeguards: Access management and compartmentalization. Researcher tooling security. Software inventory management. Software supply chain security. Artifact integrity and provenance. Binary authorization for endpoints. Endpoint patching. Hardware procurement from curated providers only. Executive Risk Council oversight. Access control for model weights. Infrastructure policy. Cloud security posture management. Red teaming and penetration tests. Centralized log management and analysis. Access monitoring for critical assets. Deception technology such as honeypots of fake weights. Physical security improvements.
That is certainly a serious list. If there’s one obvious thing missing, it is physical security for key personnel. Securing the physical spaces is important, but you still have to worry about your key people being compromised off-site. There are likely other potential oversights as well, but this seems like a strong first attempt. They also intend to publish additional details of their capability assessment methodology. Excellent. Their learning from experience section changes also seem good in terms of their practical implications this time, but raises questions about the procedure for changing the rules - it seems like when the rules are hard to follow they kind of winged it and did what they felt was in the spirit of the rule, rather than treating it as a dealbreaker. The spirit is indeed what matters, but you don’t want to get in too much of a habit of finding reasons to change the rules on the fly. The flip side is that they have clearly been actually using using the RSP, and it has impacted their decisions, and they’ve edited the document to reflect their experiences.
My biggest detail worries continue to be the extremely high threshold set by the working definition of ASL-3 for autonomous R&D (the threshold for CBRN seems far lower and all but certain to be hit first), the lack of additional triggers beyond those two for ASL-3, and lack of definition of ASL-4. They don’t technically have to do that part yet, but it seems like they should by now? In summary, this has some clear improvements. It also leaves questions about the ASL-3 and ASL-4 thresholds, and around the method of change and how Anthropic will react when the rules become difficult to follow.
It is a deeply sad fact about the modern world that when companies announce they are actively taking voluntary steps to build AI safely, people respond with anger. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
What confuses me is why we need to demonstrate such obvious 101 stuff. When you think your supervisor can tell the difference, you’ll do what they want. When you think the supervisor cannot tell the difference, you might or might not care what they want, and are likely to take advantage of the situation. Why would you expect anything else? And yet, people act like the AI doing this would be some sort of ‘sci fi’ scenario, or ‘hypothetical’ situation, as opposed to ‘what very obviously happens.’ So we have to continuously point out things like this, and then people say ‘oh but you engineered that situation’ or ‘but that’s not exactly the thing you were warning about’ or whatever, and two weeks later they’re back to pretending it didn’t happen.
An obvious worry is that the ‘harmless’ requests may not be of similar difficulty to harmful. It does seem like the harmless requests were easier, sufficiently so that for example Opus didn’t meaningfully outperform Haiku. So it’s interesting to see different LLMs have different patterns here. It does seem like Llama 3.1 405B built in some effective defenses here, which of course would be easy to get around with fine tuning if you cared enough. The Lighter Side
Score one for Apple Intelligence.
You're currently a free subscriber to |