---
subject: "Sleep and the meaning of life, how to be a star student of the world,  the bittersweet true love story behind 'Frankenstein'"
from: "The Marginalian by Maria Popova <newsletter@themarginalian.org>"
to: ""
date: 2026-02-08 11:01:43
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Maria Popova", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_464868432690921211", "UNREAD"]
---
One of [the most important things I have learned about living](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=46d9dd2da3&e=a81b7681f8) is that, in any life of purpose and creative vitality, you must be as religious and disciplined about your sleep as about your work. And yet one of the great self-betrayals of our culture is the way it wears the lack of sleep as a badge of honor on the lapel of the ego of achievement — the cult of productivity gone past [the sacrifice of presence](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=4526893339&e=a81b7681f8), sacrificing even that precious nightly absence of conscious thought and metabolic urgency necessary to recover, to reset, to recalibrate so that we may [begin again, in the deepest sense](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=ccdc17bc89&e=a81b7681f8), in the new day.
Trouble sleeping both troubles living and signals a troubled life — because sleep is how most of the body’s physical systems recover; because, ever since [evolution invented REM in the bird brain](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=e006472fb1&e=a81b7681f8), it has been [helping us regulate our negative emotions](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=0eca762c5b&e=a81b7681f8); because sleep goes beyond the physical, the mental, and the emotional to touch the existential.
No one has written more passionately or more perceptively about that existential dimension of sleep than the Portuguese poet and philosopher [Fernando Pessoa](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=800dbd53dd&e=a81b7681f8) (June 13, 1888–November 30, 1935) throughout [The Book of Disquiet](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=c7abee9cb6&e=a81b7681f8) ([public library](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=81b0df7fc7&e=a81b7681f8)) — the posthumously published masterpiece that also gave us Pessoa on [how to be a good explorer in the lifelong expedition to yourself](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=3c1f0f810c&e=a81b7681f8), [the trouble with love](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=4de3dcb4c9&e=a81b7681f8), and [how to unself into who you really are](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=e568d5152e&e=a81b7681f8).
Pessoa recognizes that, more than a biological impediment, all those unsolved disquietudes and subtle estrangements from ourselves that keep the eyelids from closing the curtain on the day are emissaries of our existential angst. Wrestling with his own, he writes:
I’m going to life’s bed wide awake, unaccompanied and without peace, in the ebb and flow of my confused consciousness, like two tides in the black night where the destinies of nostalgia and desolation meet.
While Kafka is reverencing [the creative power of insomnia](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=4df5102c6a&e=a81b7681f8) a dozen degrees of latitude north, Pessoa discovers in his sleeplessness a strange metaphysical power:
The clock in the back of the deserted house (everyone’s sleeping) slowly lets the clear quadruple sound of four o’clock in the morning fall. I still haven’t fallen asleep, and I don’t expect to. There’s nothing on my mind to keep me from sleeping and no physical pain to prevent me from relaxing, but the dull silence of my strange body just lies there in the darkness, made even more desolate by the feeble moonlight of the street lamps. I’m so sleepy I can’t even think, so sleepless I can’t feel. Everything around me is the naked, abstract universe, consisting of nocturnal negations. Divided between tired and restless, I succeed in touching — with the awareness of my body — a metaphysical knowledge of the mystery of things.
Illustration by Tom Seidmann-Freud from [David the Dreamer: His Book of Dreams](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=64ed9c74f7&e=a81b7681f8), 1922.
The portal into that mystery, Pessoa realizes, is the cessation of selfing that marks waking life:
To cease, to sleep, to replace this intermittent consciousness with better, melancholy things, whispered in secret to someone who doesn’t know me! … To cease, to be the ebb and flow of a vast sea, fluidly skirting real shores, on a night in which one really sleeps! … To cease, to be unknown and external, a swaying of branches in distant rows of trees, a gentle falling of leaves, their sound noted more than their fall, the ocean spray of far-off fountains, and all the uncertainty of parks at night, lost in endless tangles, natural labyrinths of darkness! … To cease, to end at last, but surviving as something else: the page of a book, a tuft of dishevelled hair, the quiver of the creeping plant next to a half-open window, the irrelevant footsteps in the gravel of the bend, the last smoke to rise from the village going to sleep, the wagoner’s whip left on the early morning roadside… Absurdity, confusion, oblivion — everything that isn’t life…
Behind me, on the other side of where I’m lying down, the silence of the house touches infinity.
Art by Ishita Jain from [Midnight Motorbike](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=44a295a5af&e=a81b7681f8) — a South Indian lullaby for the sleepless
It is sleep, Pessoa comes to believe, that most readily allows us to empty ourselves of our selves and touch the infinite:
There are moments when the emptiness of feeling oneself live attains the consistency of a positive thing. In the great [men](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=864dbb7869&e=a81b7681f8) of action, namely the saints, who act with all of their emotion and not just part of it, this sense of life’s nothingness leads to the infinite. They crown themselves with night and the stars, and anoint themselves with silence and solitude. In [them] the same feeling leads to the infinitesimal; sensations are stretched, like rubber bands, to reveal the pores of their slack, false continuity… And in these moments both types of men love sleep, as much as the common man who doesn’t act and doesn’t not act, being a mere reflection of the generic existence of the human species. Sleep is fusion with God, Nirvana, however it be called. Sleep is the slow analysis of sensations, whether used as an atomic science of the soul or left to doze like a music of our will, a slow anagram of monotony.
Pessoa eventually experiences [one such moment himself](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=8d6e876384&e=a81b7681f8) — a moment of profound unselfing, on the other side of which he comes to feel that one is most awake to life, to its essence and its mystery, when asleep:
It was just a moment, and I saw myself. I can no longer even say what I was. And now I’m sleepy, because I think — I don’t know why — that the meaning of it all is to sleep.
Illustration by Judith Clay from [Thea’s Tree](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=2d9c884d0b&e=a81b7681f8)
This may be so because meaning is so often muddled by interpretation, but sleep disables the whipping hand of the analytical mind, quells all the rationalizations that pass for reason, returns us to a state of pure being before the storying of identities and opinions. Pessoa writes:
When asleep we all become children again. Perhaps because in the state of slumber we can do no wrong and are unconscious of life, the greatest criminal and the most self-absorbed egotist are holy, by a natural magic, as long as they’re sleeping.
[…]
All life is a dream. No one knows what he’s doing, no one knows what he wants, no one knows what he knows. We sleep our lives, eternal children of Destiny. That’s why, whenever this sensation rules my thoughts, I feel an enormous tenderness that encompasses the whole of childish humanity, the whole of sleeping society, everyone, everything.
Art by Maurice Sendak from [Where the Wild Things Are](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=3287f50b6d&e=a81b7681f8)
This essay is adapted from Traversal.
“Death may snatch me from you, before you can weigh my advice,” [Mary Wollstonecraft](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=1ff617ad72&e=a81b7681f8) wrote in the philosophical novel she wouldn’t live to finish, addressing a daughter she was yet to have. “Always appear what you are, and you will not pass through existence without enjoying its genuine blessings, love and respect.”
In late 1791, as important men were sitting down in America to make ten amendments to the young country’s constitution, which they called a Universal Bill of Rights, Wollstonecraft was sitting down in England to complete A Vindication of the Rights of Woman: with Strictures on Political and Moral Subjects — the beacon of political philosophy, inspired by Paine’s treatise, that would expand the universal to include all chromosomal arrangements, “demanding justice for one half of the human race” and laying the foundation of women’s political power, not by shaming and blaming the oppressor but by painting a passionate portrait of possibility.
When Wollstonecraft’s publisher invited her to a dinner celebrating one of those important men — Thomas Paine, whose landmark insistence on the right of the people to overthrow their rulers had inspired Wollstonecraft’s treatise — another of the publisher’s most successful and controversial authors was also there: the radical political philosopher [William Godwin](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=e3668f0933&e=a81b7681f8).
William Godwin (portrait by James Northcote) and Mary Wollstonecraft (portrait by John Opie)
Both Wollstonecraft and Godwin, who had never before met, had made their reputations on the bold denunciation of institutions, including the institution of marriage: Wollstonecraft in her Vindication and Godwin in An Enquiry Concerning the Nature of Political Justice, which issued a rigorously reasoned eight-book call for a society of equals, indicting government, religion, and marriage as oppressive forces that limit individual freedom and gape the abyss of inequality. Government and religion, Godwin argued, would be rendered obsolete with sufficient advancement of human knowledge and morality. “Marriage, as now understood,” he wrote, “is a monopoly, and the worst of monopolies. So long as two human beings are forbidden, by positive institution, to follow the dictates of their own mind, prejudice will be alive and vigorous.”
Wollstonecraft inveighed against marriage as the only means for women to “rise in the world,” which in turn reduced their aspirations to those of “mere animals” and made them act as children once they did enter this institution of wholesale dependency. What she called for instead — equal access to education and an emphasis on the intellectual and moral development of girls, rather than their looks, dress, and manners — seems banal by our present standards, almost embarrassing. The luxury of being embarrassed by it — in just five human lifetimes, in a species 7,500 generations old — is the measure of our progress.
She had seen firsthand the moral, emotional, and bodily tyranny of an institution that considered the wife property of the husband, a creature owed as much sympathy and tenderness as a boot. As a child growing up in a house shaken by the cries of her own mother, regularly raped and beaten by her alcoholic husband, Wollstonecraft had stood sentinel before her mother’s door to keep her father from entering, which only aggravated his brutality. In a culture where just four women successfully obtained a divorce in the whole of a century, she came to see that to salvage the family, one had to revise the entire political foundations of society.
When the two philosophers met at their publishers’ dinner, the balding and reserved Godwin — a man so afraid of emotion that he never cared for music — found Wollstonecraft — a woman of symphonic intellect and unselfconscious passions — too eager to dominate the conversation with Paine. The middle child in a brood of thirteen, Godwin had always been introverted, awkward, and greatly challenged at attuning to the emotional states and needs of others. He regarded his peculiarity with both self-awareness and genuine bafflement:
I have a singular want of foresight on some occasions as to the effect what I shall say will have on the person to whom it is addressed. I therefore often appear rude, though no man can be freer from rudeness of intention and often get a character for harshness that my heart disowns.
Wollstonecraft was extroverted, her quick mind coupled with a kind of social magnetism, but the very capacity for large thought and feeling that made her so magnetic also made her capable of despair so fathomless that she came to regard herself as “a strange compound of weakness and resolution,” marked by a great “defect” of mind and a “wayward heart” that creates its own misery.
For the two philosophers, love did not barge through the barn door of animal passion — it entered slowly, quietly, through the sun porch of shared ideals and mutual respect. Respect begot friendship begot love. Wollstonecraft came to see the “tender affectionate creature” from which Godwin’s coolly reasoned idealism sprang — his pursuit of political justice was at bottom a philosophy of universal sympathies and unconditional kindness, impulses of which his own nature was woven. Godwin discovered above the gratifications of being admired the gladness of being seen:
After all one’s philosophy it must be confessed that the knowledge that there is some one that takes an interest in one’s happiness, something like that which each man feels for his own, is extremely gratifying.
There is something singularly endearing in his matter-of-fact account of how their relationship developed:
The partiality we conceived for each other was in that mode which I have always considered as the purest and most refined kind of love. It grew with equal advances in the minds of each… When in the course of things the disclosure came there was nothing in the matter for either party to disclose to the other. There was no period of throes and resolute explanations attendant upon the tale. It was friendship melting into love.
In his autobiography, never published in his lifetime, he would eventually acknowledge that “there is nothing that the human heart more irresistibly seeks than an object to which to attach itself.” When he did attach himself to Wollstonecraft, it was a molecular bond that staggered him, altered him.
In the first days of spring in 1797, in the small churchyard of St. Pancras, four months into her pregnancy, Mary and William entered a trailblazing marriage of equals, then took up residence together in a home where they shared a bed and a value system but kept separate studies, Wollstonecraft writing and receiving visitors in a room of her own, and Godwin in his. The choice to marry against their stated credos had puzzled both their public admirers and their private circle. It mattered little, even the response from Godwin’s mother, spiked with the fine quills of passive aggression of which only mothers are capable: “Your broken resolution in regard to matrimony encourages me to hope that you will ere long embrace the Gospel.”
Convinced that their child was to be a boy, the parents-to-be named him William. Wollstonecraft resumed work on a book of moral lessons for children, which William Blake would later illustrate. Godwin channeled their daily conversations about how to bring up happy, intelligent, and morally elevated children in a series of essays later published as [The Enquirer](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=42039f97b5&e=a81b7681f8) his most timeless, if least known, book: an incisive inquiry into how we become who we are, laying out a radical new vision for optimal parenting and early childhood education.
“William” arrived on August 30, 1797, and was corrected, without fret or fanfare, to a Mary. After nine hours of labor and a difficult birth, the placenta and fetal membranes failed to leave Wollstonecraft’s uterus. A surgeon was summoned to extract it, rushing in from the street to plunge his hands into her flesh.
Within hours, the young mother was shivering with a savage fever.
* * *
Exactly fifty summers later, the Vienna General Hospital — one of the best teaching hospitals in the world — found itself the epicenter of a menacing medical mystery blackening the crucible of life with death: Young women were dying in agony by the legion shortly after giving birth.
The hospital had two maternity wards — one staffed by elite obstetricians and their medical students, the other by midwives with no formal medical training. (This was an era when [the world’s university doors were closed to women](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=60dfa336a0&e=a81b7681f8).) Tenfold more mothers were dying of puerperal fever in the first.
The medical elders initially assumed that the students were treating the pregnant women too roughly. But retraining didn’t change the ratio. Baffled, these thoroughly trained scientists fell to superstition — a priest walked through the doctors’ ward ringing a bell for each death and a theory emerged that the haunting sound was terrifying the living mothers into dying.
A young Hungarian doctor by the name of Ignaz Semmelweis, in his first year as assistant professor at the hospital, [wrote in his diary](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=01fb749aab&e=a81b7681f8):
Even to me myself it had a strange effect upon my nerves when I heard the bell hurried past my door; a sigh would escape my heart for the victim that once more was claimed by an unknown power. The bell was a painful exhortation to me to search for this unknown cause with all of my might.
Ignaz Semmelweis
When the pastor was asked to stop making his bell rounds, the deaths continued and the sigh kept bellowing in the young doctor’s heart as he bent his mind around the mystery. He catalogued all the visible variables and pored over the data, but it told no discernible story. Because the unknown will always be greater than the sum of all our analyzable knowns, because the sum is always [“simpler than its parts,”](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=4d06187ac1&e=a81b7681f8) the history of science, the history of knowledge, is a rosary of breakthroughs that arrive through the side door of our reasoned theories. One day, Semmelweis’s mentor was teaching dissection at the morgue when a student accidentally nicked the professor’s finger with the scalpel while cutting open the cadaver on the table. Within days, he died a horrific death. A familiar death. It devastated Semmelweis, but it also pressed his face against the revelation — the doctors and medical students at the hospital were doing the exact same thing with the pregnant women: dissecting cadavers at the morgue, which none of the midwives did, and immediately going into the maternity ward to touch open flesh.
The young doctor realized that the men’s hands transferred some particle of death to the vulnerable living. He called them “cadaver particles” and set about devising ways to eradicate them, experimenting with various washing solutions and testing his results by smell alone — did his hands still have the putrid cadaver smell after washing them in the different agents. Eventually, he settled on a solution of chlorine and lime — bleach not strong enough to burn his hands, but strong enough to vanquish the other and, with it, the cadaver particles he theorized. When he implemented the protocol at his ward, the death count plummeted to that of the other ward.
That year, Louis Pasteur began his crystallography research that would lead to the birth of germ theory more than a decade later. The notion that some invisible unit of matter could unravel a body was still inconceivable. Semmelweis was a brilliant theorist and a fine empiricist, but a terrible communicator. He took the opposite of Mary Wollstonecraft’s approach, pouring polemics into letters to every major hospital and medical school, pummeling colleagues with that least effective of all behavioral change strategies: shaming. He went as far as calling doctors who didn’t wash their hands murderers and warned medical students that unless they adopted his protocol, they would be accomplices in an epochal crime.
Unsurprisingly, Semmelweis was largely dismissed; unsurprisingly, he grew increasingly cantankerous. By the time he was in his early forties, the idealistic young doctor had undergone a staggering physiological and psychological change — he looked at least sixty, had frequent detonations of temper, and suffered baffling lapses of memory in the midst of lectures. The mysterious malady — possibly early-onset Alzheimers, possibly tertiary syphilis, likely some parallel discomposure of body and spirit — made him unbearable to be around.
One day, a colleague lured him to an asylum on the pretext of seeing a new facility. When Semmelweis realized he was about to be committed against his will, he raged to get away, but was brutalized by the wardens and put into a straitjacket.
He died two weeks later from an infection contracted from the beating.
Haemolytic streptococcus
Four years later, two French scientists discovered the microbes en chainettes — “microbe chains” — of his hypothesized “cadaver particles,” which Pasteur would identify as the bacterium haemolytic streptococcus a decade later. It was ultimately a nurse — Florence Nightingale — whose [extraordinary data diagrams](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=3fa33cb171&e=a81b7681f8) and passionate advocacy persuaded the medical establishment to standardize hospital sanitization.
* * *
Just before eight on a late-summer morning ten days after giving birth, Mary Wollstonecraft drew her last breath, leaving behind a fragile baby girl, a baffled philosopher stony with heartache, and an angel-winged William Blake etching.
[The Child Mary Shelley (at her Mother’s Death)](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=2ea997208a&e=a81b7681f8) by William Blake
For Godwin, who had spent his life sieging religion with the artillery of reason, the loss was total and irrevocable. The notions of personal immortality and reunion with loved ones in an imaginary afterlife were the pacifier of puerile minds. And yet loss unlatches an emotional trapdoor beneath our firmest cerebral convictions, plunging us into elemental questions that live beyond our reasoned beliefs, childlike in their disbelieving sincerity. It was such a question that sprang unbidden to my atheist engineer grandmother’s lips as she stood over the hospital bed holding the dead body of my atheist engineer grandfather, her love of half a century: Where did you go, my darling?
The guarded Godwin kept a diary more like a ship’s log than a discursive journal of an inner life:
“Seneca, Ep. 8, 9.”
“Call from Coleridge.”
“Queen dies.”
On the day of his beloved’s death, this man of factual records could not bring himself to name the fact. All he wrote in the ledger was “20 minutes before 8,” followed by an interminable sequence of dashes suturing the unspeakable.
“– — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — ”
By evening, he was able to write to his oldest friend with a confused fusion of dissociation and disconsolation:
My wife is now dead. She died this morning at eight o’clock… I firmly believe that there does not exist her equal in the world. I know from experience we were formed to make each other happy. I have not the least expectation that I can now ever know happiness again. When you come to town, look at me, talk to me, but do not — if you can help it — exhort me, or console me.
In the corner, his baby daughter was sleeping in her crib. She would learn to read by tracing the letters on her her mother’s tombstone and would come to write, while still a teenager, an epochal reckoning with the eternal interplay of life and death.
The year her Frankenstein was published, Ignaz Semmelweis was born in a Hungarian hospital.