---
subject: "The Daoist Image of Control (I)"
from: "Maxim Raginsky from The Art of the Realizable <realizable@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-11-28 05:05:14
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Maxim Raginsky"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3440436245007788095"]
---
Though Karl Popper is better known for his Now, language is a World 3 entity par excellence. The Popperian partial autonomy of language lies in its generativity in the Chomskyan sense.¹ Language, as a cultural technology residing in World 3, is a means of The current debate about the internal workings of Large Language Models is, I think, best viewed through this Popperian lens. We mine World 3 for training data to feed into these massive systems and expect them to interact with, and causally affect, World 1. The Popperian interactionist stance would be that the accumulating empirical successes of LLMs provide evidence for the reality of their mental states, their ability to represent their world and to reason about it. However, one could also argue that the successes of LLMs are actually evidence against the universality of interactionism—it may be possible to bypass World 2 of mental states and still use World 3 objects to control World 1. To put it differently, this debate really comes down to the question of the role of language—is it a means for representing and describing reality or is it a tool for coordinating and regulating action? Popper seems to come down on the former side. He takes it for granted that language is descriptive and argumentative, so the World 2 links between Worlds 1 and World 3 are propositional, deductive, Aristotelian. He shares this view with the logical positivists of the Vienna circle. On the other hand, someone like Wittgenstein² or Heidegger would come down on the latter side. Most of our behavior and interaction with World 1, being-in-the-world, is not propositional, it is embodied in routines, to use
Now, this being-in-the-world described by Heidegger is still bound to language, though the bonds are not those of propositional notion of truth. While reasoning is obviously involved, it is not a syllogism-on-paper type reasoning that Popper seems to have in mind as the prime example of World 2 as interface between Worlds 1 and 3. It is a pragmatic reason, focused on empirical success. With this, comes a different view of the role of language—as a control technology, rather than a means of filing and representing facts. This, according to Chad Hansen’s fascinating book
According to Hansen, a good way to grasp the difference between the Indo-European view of language, centered on propositional truth, and the Chinese daoist view of language, centered on effective and reliable behavior in the world, is through what he calls, interestingly, the computer analogy:⁴
He further writes:
Hansen’s use of “program,” and his overall take on language, is very similar to (to be continued) 1 "Hold the newsreader's nose squarely, waiter, or friendly milk will countermand my trousers." 2 In his Philosophical Investigations era. 3 Hat tip to 4 Hansen’s list of acknowledgments is curious and informative: apart from Wittgenstein, Quine, and Sellars, he also thanks Stephen Stitch, David Lewis, Daniel Dennett, Richard Montague, Michael Sandel, Saul Kripke, Richard Rorty, Hilary Putnam, John Rawls, Richard Grandy, Tyler Burge, Thomas Nagel, and Derek Parfit. The Art of the Realizable is free today. But if you enjoyed this post, you can tell The Art of the Realizable that their writing is valuable by pledging a future subscription. You won't be charged unless they enable payments. |