---
subject: "Based Beff Jezos and the Accelerationists"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-12-06 15:54:09
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
It seems Forbes decided to doxx the identity of e/acc founder Based Beff Jezos. They did so using voice matching software. Given Jezos is owning it given that it happened, rather than hoping it all goes away, and people are talking about him, this seems like a good time to cover this ‘Beff Jezos’ character and create a reference point for if he continues to come up later. If that is not relevant to your interests, you can and should skip this one. Do Not Doxx PeopleFirst order of business: Bad Forbes. If you do doxx them, at least own that There is absolutely nothing wrong with using a pseudonym with a cumulative reputation, if you feel that is necessary to send your message. Say what you want about Jezos, he believes in something, and he owns it. Beff Jezos Advocates Actions He Thinks Would Probably Kill EveryoneWhat are the things Jezos was saying anonymously? Does Jezos actively support things that he thinks are likely to cause all humans to die, with him outright saying he is fine with that? Yes. In this case it does.
I am rather confident Jezos would consider these statements accurate, and that this is where ‘This Is What Beff Jezos Actually Believes’ I want to be clear: A Matter of Some DebateSo if that’s what Beff Jezos believes, that is what he should say. I will be right here with this microphone. I was hoping I mean, even by December 2023 standards, wow. This guy. I wonder if Jezos believes the absurdities he says about those he disagrees with?
Jezos is now instead claiming he will have the debate with Connor Leahy, who I would also consider a sufficiently Worthy Opponent. They have yet to announce a moderator. I suggested Roon on Twitter, another good choice if he’d be down might be Vitalik Buterin. Eliezer Yudkowsky notes (
Regardless of the debate and civility and related issues I, like Eliezer Yudkowsky, strongly disagree with Jezos’s plan for the future. I think it would be a really mind-blowingly stupid idea to arrange the atoms of the universe in this way, it would not provide anything that I value, and that we should therefore maybe not do that? Instead I think that ‘best for everyone’ and my personal preference involves people surviving. As do, to be fair, the majority of people who adapt the label ‘e/acc.’ Again, #NotAllEAcc. My model of that majority does not involve them having properly thought such scenarios through. But let’s have that debate. Response to the DoxxI have yet to see anyone, at all, defend the decision by Forbes to doxx Beff Jezos. Everyone I saw discussing the incident condemned it in the strongest possible terms.
Which is totally the right strategic play.
Whether or not she defined it, my understanding is that Beff Jezos, as noted above, literally does think growth, technology and capitalism must come at the complete expense of nearly everything else, including the risk of human extinction. And that this isn’t a characterization or strawman, but rather a statement he would and does endorse explicitly. So, seems fair? As opposed to, as Solana states here, saying ‘e/acc is not a cult (as Effective Altruism, for example, increasingly appears to be). e/acc is, in my opinion, not even a movement. It is just a funny, technologically progressive meme.’ Yeah. No. That is gaslighting. Ubiquitous gaslighting. I am sick of it. Memes do not declare anyone who disagrees with them on anything as enemies, who they continuously attack ad hominem, describe as being in cults and demand everyone treat as criminals. Memes do not demand people declare which side people are on. Memes do not put badges of loyalty into their bios. Memes do not write multiple manifestos. Memes do not have, as Roon observes, persecution complexes.
So What is E/Acc Then?
I expect a lot of not taking kindly to e/acc positions would happen no matter their presentation, because even the more reasonable e/acc positions are deeply unpopular. The presentation they reliably do choose is to embrace some form of the e/acc position as self-evident and righteous, all others as enemies of progress and humanity, and generally to not consider either the questions about whether their position makes sense, or how they will sound either to the public or to Very Serious People.
If you intentionally frame the debate as ‘e/acc vs. decel’ on the theory that no one would ever choose decel (I mean did you hear how that sounds? Also notice they are labeling what is mostly a 95th+ percentile pro-technology group as ‘decels’) then you are in for a rude awakening when you leave a particular section of Twitter and Silicon Valley. Your opponents stop being pro-technology libertarian types who happen to have noticed certain particular future problems but mostly are your natural allies. You instead enter the world of politics and public opinion rather than Silicon Valley. You know what else it does? It turns the discourse into an obnoxious cesspool of vitriol and false binaries. Which is exactly what has absolutely happened since the This sounds like a strawman,
Asking almost any form of the binary question - are you pro acceleration or a doomer (or increasingly often, because doomer wasn’t considered enough of a slur, decel)? - is super strong evidence that the person asking is taking the full accelerationist position. Otherwise, you would ask a better question. Here is a prominent recent example of what we are increasingly flooded with.
Vinod Khosla is completely missing the point here on every level, including failing to understand that Eliezer and myself and almost everyone worried about existential risk from AI is, like him, radically 99th percentile pro-nuclear-power along with most other technological advancements and things we could build. I highlight it to show exactly how out of line and obscenely unacceptably rude and low are so many of those who would claim to be the ‘adults in the room’ and play their power games. It was bad before, but the last month has gotten so much worse. Again, calling yourself ‘e/acc’ is to identify your position on the most critical question in history with a Waluigi, an argumenta ad absurdum strawman position. It is the pro-technology The whole thing is almost designed to generate a backlash. Will it last? In a sane world the whole e/acc shtick would have all indeed stayed a meme. Alas the world we live in is not sane. This is not a unique phenomenon. One could say to a non-trivial degree that both the American major parties are Waluigis to each other. Yet here we go again with another election. One of them will win. ConclusionI offer this as a reference point. These developments greatly sadden me. I do not want to be taking this level of psychic damage to report on what is happening. I do not want to see people with whom I agree on most of thee important things outside of AI, whose voices are badly need on a wide variety of issues strangling our civilization, to discard all nuance and civility, and then to focus entirely on one of the few places in which their position turns out to be centrally wrong. I still hold out hope that saner heads will prevail and trade can occur. E/acc has successfully raised its voice to such high decibel levels by combining several exclusive positions into one label in the name of hating on the supposed other side: Those like Beff Jezos, who think human extinction is an acceptable outcome. Those who think that technology always works out for the best, that superintelligence will therefore be good for humans. Those who do not believe actually in the reality of a future AGI or ASI, so all we are doing is building cool tools that provide mundane utility, let’s do that. Those who think AGI or ASI is not close, so let’s worry about that later. Those who want to, within their cultural context, side with power. Those who don’t believe they like being an edge lord on Twitter.
The degree of reasonableness varies greatly between these six positions. I believe that the majority of those adapting the e/acc label are taking one of the more reasonable positions. If this is you, I would urge you, rather than embracing the e/acc label, to if desired instead state your particular reasonable position and your reasons for it, without conflating it with other contradictory and less reasonable positions. Or, if you actually do believe, like Beff Jezos, in a completely different set of values from mine? Then Please Speak Directly Into This Microphone. You're currently a free subscriber to |