---
subject: "Trying Again On Fideism"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-02-15 23:14:45
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX"]
---
[apologies for an issue encountered when sending out this post; some of you may have gotten it twice] Thanks to Chris Kavanagh, who wrote Now that I'm calmed down, do I disagree with anything I wrote when I was angrier? Chris was too nice to really defend himself, but a few other people posted what I think of as partial arguments for the position I mocked as "fideism". For example,
In thinking about these kinds of questions, I find it helpful to consider three reflexive naive positions towards conspiracy theories (and cults, and misinformation, and general false ideas). All of these are caricatures, but hopefully they’ll help refine the borders of the debate: Idiocy: Conspiracy theories are a thing dumb people sometimes fall for. If you understand that facts require evidence, and you’re not a Nazi trying to explain why the Jews caused 9-11, then there’s basically no chance you fall for them. You mostly have to stay away from Intellect: There is no difference between conspiracy theories and any other theory, except that the conspiracy theories are worse. There are some theories that the smartest experts give 50-50 odds of being true, like “high wages caused the Industrial Revolution”. There are some theories that the smartest experts give a 10-90 odds of being true, like “endocrine disruptors are a major cause of rising LGBTQ identification”. And there are some theories that the smartest experts give 0.001 - 99.999 odds of being true, like “the Illuminati singlehandedly caused the French Revolution”. All of these theories should be treated approximately the same way, as intellectuals discussing difficult questions and sometimes, if they’re not smart enough to be up to the task, coming to the wrong answer. Infohazard: Conspiracy theories are deadly traps lying that lie in wait for everyone, including smart people. If you stumble on one unprepared, it will eat you up, turn you into an adherent, and leave you and society worse off. You should exercise standard infohazard precautions around them, like putting wax in your ears if you’re passing through somewhere you might hear them discussed, or tying yourself to the mast if you’re out of wax. If you have neither wax nor a mast, you can usually come out unscathed by reciting “trust experts . . . trust experts . . . trust experts” over and over as a mantra. One advantage of the Idiocy perspective is that it makes conspiracy theories low status. Most people don’t want to seem like idiots; if their friends think anyone who believes in conspiracy theories is an idiot, they’ll take extra care to stay away from them. But a disadvantage - one I find overwhelming - is that when you do come across a conspiracy theory, you’re totally blindsided by it. Since you “know” conspiracy theories only sound convincing to idiots, and you “know” you’re not an idiot, this convincing thing you just heard can’t be a conspiracy theory! It must be a legitimately true thing that Big Pharma is suppressing! Everyone knows Big Pharma sometimes suppresses stuff, that’s not a . . . This is why I stress, again and again, that good conspiracy theories have lots of convincing-sounding evidence in their favor, and may sound totally plausible to a smart person reasoning normally. When people shrug off conspiracy theories easily, it’s either because the conspiracy theory isn’t aimed at them - the equivalent of an English speaker feeling smug for rejecting a sales pitch given entirely in Chinese - or because they’re biased against the conspiracy theory with a level of bias which would also be sufficient to reject true theories. Sure, everything went well this time - they were able to resist believing the theory - but one day they’ll encounter a sales pitch in English, on a topic where it accords with their biases. Then they’ll be extra-double-doomed because of how sure they are that they’re immune to propaganda. When people criticize me, they act like I’m 100% taking the Intellect perspective. I admit I have some sympathies in that direction. Ivermectin is an especially clear case: for a while, most doctors and epidemiologists suspected that it worked, because there were impressive studies in favor. Then those impressive studies were gradually found to be flawed or fraudulent, better studies gradually came out showing that it didn’t work, and the experts gradually shifted to doubting it. At what point in this process - which second of which day - did it switch from plausible-but-false scientific theory to conspiracy theory? Obviously there’s no single moment (cf. philosophy of science’s long failure to solve the But I think this meshes just fine with the Infohazard perspective. There are many arguments, very closely resembling correct arguments, that play on various biases and subtle errors of reasoning, and end out unfairly convincing. I like to call biases “cognitive illusions”, by analogy to optical illusions, which can also be unfairly convincing: This is my favorite illusion. The top and bottom chess sets are the same color, and only look black vs. white because of contrast effects. This one is harmless, because it affects everyone equally, nobody cares about it too much, and you can easily check via Paint or Photoshop or something. The Infohazard perspective claims conspiracy theories are potentially this convincing, but in a much more pernicious way: they only hit some people (not necessarily the dumb ones!), and they subvert the checking process so that it appears to give pro-conspiracy results (see All factual claims can become the basis for emotional/social coalitions. I agree that everyone (including smart people) needs to be constantly vigilant of this possibility, and that any suggestion otherwise risks placing a stumbling block before the blind. II. Where I differ from Alexander is something like - quick analogy, there used to be a thing where some therapists would avoid asking patients if they were suicidal, because they didn’t want to “plant the idea” in their head. People would argue that you shouldn’t talk at length about the reasons for and against suicide, because that was highlighting it as an option, or dignifying it with a response. We currently live in a world where: There are big studies in prestigious journals finding that ivermectin works There are open letters from well-respected critical care doctors saying that ivermectin works The medical guidelines of several countries recommend that doctors in those countries use ivermectin. Several of the top universities and hospitals in the world have done studies on whether or not ivermectin works. Experts have testified before Congress saying that ivermectin works Several United States Senators have stated, on national television, that ivermectin works.
Consider the possibility that the cat is already out of the bag, and that me writing a negative article, against ivermectin, on ACX isn’t going to extract the cat any further. “C’mon, bro, just one more chance, bro, denying it of oxygen will totally work this time, bro, please, just one more chance!” At some point, you have to acknowledge that people who want to hold up examples of people taking ivermectin seriously can already point to the critical care doctors and senators and guideline-makers, and that maybe the time has come to start arguing against it in some way. Eliezer Yudkowsky’s position is III. I worry Scott Aaronson thinks I’m saying you shouldn’t trust the experts, and instead you should always think for yourself. I’m definitely not trying to say that. I’ve tried to be pretty clear that I think experts are right remarkably often, by some standards basically 100% of the time - I realize how crazy that sounds, and “by some standards” is doing a lot of the work there, but see I also try to be pretty clear that reasoning is extremely hard, it’s very easy to get everything wrong, and if you try to do it then a default option is to get everything wrong and humiliate yourself. I describe that What I do think is that “trust the experts” is an extremely exploitable heuristic, which leads everyone to put up a veneer of “being the experts” and demand that you trust them. I come back to this example again and again, but only because it’s so blatant: the New York Times I come back to this example less often, because it could get me in trouble, but when people do formal anonymous surveys of IQ scientists, And I genuinely think this is part of why ivermectin conspiracies took off in the first place. We say “trust science” and “trust experts”. But there were lots of studies that showed ivermectin worked - aren’t those science? And Pierre Kory MD, an specialist in severe respiratory illnesses who wrote a well-regarded textbook, supports it - isn’t he an expert? Isn’t it plausible that the science and the experts are right, and the media and the government and Big Pharma are wrong? This is part of what happens when people reify the mantras instead of using them as pointers to more complicated concepts like “reasoning is hard” and “here are the 28,491 rules you need to keep in mind when reading a scientific study.” IV. All of this still feels rambly and like it’s failing to connect. Instead, let me try describing exactly what I would advice I would give young people opening an Internet connection for the first time:
I hope something like this is more useful than any of the three naive positions I mentioned earlier. You're currently a free subscriber to |