---
subject: "The Nutgraf: Perplexity’s audacity"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-07-19 04:32:34
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
Before I jump into today’s edition, I’m thrilled to announce The Ken’s next live event—as some of you may have already heard, it’s titled ‘How AI is breaking and remaking the way products are built’. Several of my wonderful colleagues and volunteers are working on making the event a success, and for the first time, we’re not just doing it in-person at the Bangalore International Centre, we’re also livestreaming it to subscribers.
I’m going to be moderating the event with Rohin, and personally, I really want to find out how people, products, and even power structures at Indian startups and organisations are changing thanks to AI.
Oh, I’m also using the subscriber survey I shared here last week about how you are using AI products at your workplace to anchor the event. In case you haven’t done it already, [I recommend taking it here](https://theken.typeform.com/to/HLb4zczH). Some of the questions aren’t what you’d normally expect.
If you’re planning to attend, I’d suggest getting your tickets soon. Our last three events sold out several days in advance, and at the current pace, this one’s likely to do the same. You can purchase tickets (for both in-person and livestream) below:
[https://the-ken.com/event/how-ai-is-breaking-and-remaking-the-way-products-are-built/](https://the-ken.com/event/how-ai-is-breaking-and-remaking-the-way-products-are-built/?utm_source=nutgraf&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=bfo_product)
Also, if you are a corporate interested in bulk booking, or if you’d like to sponsor the event itself, just write to me directly at [pgk@the-ken.com](mailto:pgk@the-ken.com)
With that out of the way, let’s jump into today’s edition.
Earlier this week, a little over 300 million people in India heard about a company called Perplexity for the first time.
How? Well…
Airtel partnered with Perplexity to offer 12-month Perplexity Pro subscription free of cost to all its 360 million customers. Perplexity is an AI-powered search and answer engine that offers real-time responses to users in a conversational language.
Perplexity Pro version provides enhanced capabilities for professionals and heavy users. Perplexity Pro includes more daily Pro searches per user, access to advanced AI models (e.g., GPT 4.1, Claude) and the ability to select specific models, deep research, image generation, file uploads and analysis, as well as Perplexity Labs, a unique tool that brings ideas to life.
The Perplexity Pro subscription is available to all Airtel customers (Mobile, Wi-Fi and DTH) for one year. Airtel users can avail this offer by logging-on to the Airtel Thanks App.
Airtel to offer one year free Perplexity Pro subscription to its users, The Hindu
There are many ways to look at this. The laziest take is what I call the “India is a 1% conversion country” argument. You’ll recognise it when someone says, “Even if just 1% of people who get this for free end up paying…” and then jumps straight to a big, hopeful revenue projection. This is just one flavour. There are several others like the “masterstroke take”, or the “win-win” take, or the “data is the most important thing” take.
All of that is fine—but what really stood out to me about the Perplexity-Airtel deal was something odd: it made Perplexity Pro available to all Airtel users. Not just postpaid. Not just prepaid. Everyone.
I can’t stress how unusual this is. There have been telecom partnerships before, most notably with OTT platforms like Netflix, Hotstar, and Amazon Prime. I’ve written about [some](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/netflix-is-losing-in-india-but-not-for-the-reason-you-think/) [of these](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/disney-hotstar-is-not-a-streaming-service/) [earlier](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/netflix-climbs-down-india-ladder/), and what’s notable about nearly all of them is that they’ve never been universal. They’ve usually been bundled with postpaid plans, or sometimes with higher value prepaid topups. To the best of my knowledge, nobody has ever gone to Airtel and said, “We want you to give our product away for free to all of your subscribers…. yes, all 360 million of them… send us a quote.”
The most intriguing aspect of the Perplexity-Airtel deal is this kind of full-scale buyout of distribution.
Tune in to The Ken’s premium audio experience
From original podcasts to writer-narrated versions of our subscriber newsletters, existing Premium subscribers can listen to all our premium audio, available exclusively via our subscriber apps. Discover them all at [the-ken.com/podcasts](https://the-ken.com/podcasts), including the [latest volume](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/the-nutgraf/perplexitys-audacity/) of this newsletter.
Not a Premium subscriber? You can subscribe to [The Ken Premium](https://podcasts.apple.com/in/channel/the-ken-premium/id6744577070) on Apple Podcasts for an easy monthly price (Rs 299 in India).
I have a theory about why this happened, but to explain it, I’ll have to tell you a little bit about Perplexity itself.
Perplexity is interesting, and somewhat of an outlier for an AI company. Amidst the wave of hot new AI startups like Claude, OpenAI, Midjourney, and others, Perplexity stands out for one intriguing reason—it’s an AI company without an obvious moat.
This is not how it began. Perplexity started off as a company that offered a newer, and a better way to search the web. Founded in early 2022 by Aravind Srinivas, Denis Yarats, Johnny Ho and Andy Konwinski, Perplexity didn’t even call itself a search engine—it called itself a “conversational answer engine”, i.e., instead of giving a set of links to pages, it would provide direct, cited answers. Think of it as web-search combined with a large language model (LLM). The idea was to create a product that was fast, simple, and made you go, “wow, that’s the answer I was looking for”.
And for a while, it worked. While multiple startups were building LLMs to answer complex questions, Perplexity was one of the earliest to deploy them to do real-time searches on the internet.
This earned Perplexity a distinct label—many began calling it a “Google killer.”
This is a hopeful, and somewhat inaccurate way to characterise Perplexity. First, the numbers itself don’t really add up—even after three years, Perplexity is used by a few million users and has a couple hundred thousand paid subscribers at best. According to The Information, the [company](https://www.theinformation.com/articles/google-challenger-perplexity-growth-comes-high-cost) made a little over $30 million in revenue last year, but it burnt through $68 million. It sells an expensive subscription, but also heavily discounts them, likely because it’s bundled through partners (like Airtel). Google probably spends more on coffee beans over a weekend.
Despite these somewhat tepid numbers, Perplexity’s rise in valuation has been astronomical… and rapid. Just a couple of months ago, it was valued at $9 billion. Last week, that number [doubled](https://www.ft.com/content/4e05a5c5-84ad-4f8a-991a-d7f3842de76d) to $18 billion. That’s a revenue multiple of nearly 500X. When people tell you that AI startups are hyped and overvalued, they are usually talking about companies like Perplexity.
Once again, such valuations aren’t unusual for Silicon Valley, but what makes it somewhat crazy is that Perplexity doesn’t really have a defensible product. It does not create the LLMs it uses to search the web—it hooks up other models created by Open AI, Claude, and others. Perplexity does not own any patents. It started off as a novel idea, but now, with multiple AI startups—including OpenAI, Claude, and even the mighty Google itself—integrating web search into their products, Perplexity has started to feel somewhat irrelevant.
So what exactly is Perplexity’s secret? How does it, and how will it, stay relevant?
From Perplexity’s perspective, the approach seems to be: do a lot, do it loudly, and hope the rest take time to catch up. Move fast and… just keep doing things.
This is why Perplexity has done strange things on the marketing side to stay in the news. Last year, they announced that they were interested in acquiring Tiktok’s US assets. Then, they made a loud, and somewhat weird ad with the Squid Game guy. And Arvind Srinivas, Perplexity’s CEO, has created quite a reputation for himself for being outspoken and even dismissive of Google’s ability and intention to execute.
This has also been matched by a similar kind of “do a lot of things all over the place” product strategy. Just this week, Perplexity announced the launch of a browser called Comet, which would use agentic AI to help users do tasks. It takes a lot to convince users to switch browsers. And yet, Perplexity seems to want to take on Chrome. All of this has given Perplexity some measure of attention. Both Meta and Apple have held partnership and acquisition talks with the company (which haven’t yet materialised).
Seen through this lens, the Airtel deal makes sense. Perplexity was probably less interested in slicing and dicing Airtel’s customers to find the “optimal” combination that made economic sense. It simply just did what it knows best—move fast, close big deals, make big announcements, and move on to the next one before others figure out what they need to do to respond to it.
Regards,
Praveen Gopal Krishnan