---
subject: "The Nutgraf: AI has changed search forever"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-07-12 04:39:38
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
Before I get to today’s newsletter, I have an announcement—I’m launching a new subscriber survey: How Are You Using AI at Work?
As longtime readers of this newsletter know, my interest in AI has been anything but linear. In fact, thanks to a subscriber, I got early access to GPT-3 almost exactly [five years ago](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/the-machines-are-here/), where I used it to write the introduction to an edition of The Nutgraf (it did a pretty decent job). My view of AI since then has swung between awe and skepticism. Sometimes, I’m convinced that it’s really transformative, but other times, I keep seeing founders say things like “X% of all our code is written using AI!”, which frankly makes no sense. And yet, the anecdotes and data both tell me that AI is being used at the workplace—it’s just that the people who talk about how their companies are getting transformed using AI are not the ones who know what’s actually happening on the ground.
Instead, I want to hear from the people who are actually using it: you.
I’ve leaned on subscriber surveys in the past to sort through confusing and conflicting opinions. Last year, I asked you to tell me why you stick to certain quick-commerce apps and why you “cheat” on them, and we [found](https://the-ken.com/story/1500-stories-about-indias-complex-relationships-with-swiggy-instamart-blinkit-zepto-and-bigbasket/) out some really surprising things about Swiggy, Blinkit, Zepto, and Bigbasket. A few months later, a thousand product managers from across India [opened up](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/who-made-the-frauduct-manager/) about their hopes, dreams, and vulnerabilities, and how they see product management as a career path and as a role inside their companies.
And now, I want to hear about how you use AI, what kind of tools you use, and what you use it for. I want to know who are the folks who are really adopting AI in your organisation. And most importantly, I want to learn how and whether AI has changed some core beliefs about your role, job, and ultimately your career.
Just like the last couple of surveys, this one is also anonymous—I won’t ask you your name or the organisation you work for. However, I’ll ask you to be honest. One of the biggest problems with AI is that, just like the product, the people using them also tend to hallucinate occasionally. It’s okay if you believe that AI is going to be something transformative (I do too). All I ask is that you tell me how you’re using it today.
You can take the survey here: [https://theken.typeform.com/to/HLb4zczH](https://theken.typeform.com/to/HLb4zczH)
Oh, and as a bonus, I’ll unveil the results of the survey at The Ken’s next subscriber event scheduled for 26 July in Bengaluru.
In case you can’t make it, I’ll analyse everything you’ve told me and share the results with you in a future edition—maybe a couple of weeks after the event.
With that, on to today’s edition.
Tune in to The Ken’s premium audio experience
From original podcasts to writer-narrated versions of our subscriber newsletters, existing Premium subscribers can listen to all our premium audio, available exclusively via our subscriber apps. Discover them all at [the-ken.com/podcasts](https://the-ken.com/podcasts), including the [latest volume](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/the-nutgraf/ai-has-changed-search-forever/) of this newsletter.
Not a Premium subscriber? You can subscribe to [The Ken Premium](https://podcasts.apple.com/in/channel/the-ken-premium/id6744577070) on Apple Podcasts for an easy monthly price (Rs 299 in India).
A few days ago, a subscriber forwarded me an Amazon India [blog post](https://www.aboutamazon.in/news/retail/rufus-ai-shopping-assistant-launch-in-india) announcing the launch of Rufus, the company’s AI shopping assistant, across both mobile and desktop platforms. As the post states, “Rufus is an expert shopping assistant trained on Amazon’s product catalogue and information from across the web, to answer customer questions on shopping needs, products, and comparisons, make recommendations based on this context, and facilitate product discovery in the same Amazon shopping experience customers use regularly.”
My first reaction when I saw this release was, “How many people are going to use this really?”
Shopping is almost as old as the internet. And while AI may have its uses, I hardly believe it’s powerful enough to change the way people have been buying stuff online for the last 30 years. Consumers are generally stubborn, and like their old habits.
Well, turns out, Rufus is more popular than you might expect. Some people [crunched](https://www.ecomtent.ai/blog-page/rufus-now-appears-in-the-amazon-search-bar) the numbers and discovered that ~14% of all searches on Amazon’s website in October 2024 may have been handled through Rufus. The number is almost certainly higher today than it was back then. In their post, Amazon also said that about 10 million customers have used Rufus since launch.
Of course, if you are a sceptical person, you’d say that none of this means anything definitive (yet). There are many creative ways to nudge and make adoption numbers of products look impressive, and Amazon is filled with enough smart and motivated people.
This could be true, but for a change, I’ll take the other side.
A few days ago, when I was in a conversation with someone who has worked at multiple product tech companies in India, he said pretty much the same thing, i.e., AI’s most obvious consumer-facing use-case was for search. I think he’s right.
Because if you think about it, AI is an obvious answer to one of the hardest and most annoying problems in e-commerce.
One of my favorite questions to ask product managers in interviews used to be: “If Google search works so well, why does e-commerce search still feel so broken?”
I’ve heard several reasons for why this is the case (all of which are true in varying degrees), but in my experience, it primarily it comes down to three things.
First, e-commerce search has a different goal from, say, Google search. In e-commerce, a good search result isn’t necessarily based on relevance—it’s also based on which result has the highest probability of a transaction. Now, you could argue that Google also optimises search results based on the likelihood of a click, but I’d say that’s not nearly as powerful a signal as a purchase. Sure, Google search results today may feel like you are standing in the middle of Times Square but in e-commerce, it’s often worse. A large share of search results go to products that pay to appear on the feed, not necessarily the ones most relevant to your query. Just open, say, Amazon, search for something, and count the number of “Sponsored” results on your page. For most categories, nearly all of the first row of results are ads that are pretending to be relevant search results.
This is one of the reasons why e-commerce search feels… bad. Some apps treat the user with a bit more respect than others, but I can’t think of anyone who’s great at it.
Second, there’s significant ambiguity about user intent in search, and this makes e-commerce search much more… dubious. If you open a fashion e-commerce website and search for “balance shoes”, the site needs to be intelligent enough to figure out if you are looking for a brand or just shoes that are great at balance. It also does not know enough to suggest New Balance sneakers to you.
Users often search based on incorrect or partially inaccurate information and expect machines to understand what they mean. E-commerce websites, across most categories, struggle to figure this out.
And finally, e-commerce websites operate with limited data. They run their searches on their catalog on their own products, which may intuitively sound like it’s a good thing, but actually might make things harder. Google has access to the world’s information and understands how users at scale interact with it. E-commerce websites rely on their manufacturers uploading the right set of keywords to describe their products. If someone messes up a spelling or neglects to mention something important in a product description, that product may never show up on search results of certain keywords and the system has little recourse in trying to correct it.
AI solves most of these problems for e-commerce search today. Since it’s in the early stages, it has still not been [enshittified](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/two-by-two/are-we-in-the-enshittification-phase-of-indian-consumer-tech/) by advertising, so it prioritises relevance and authenticity in its responses. It’s able to deduce what users want to say using semantic search, which infers meaning and doesn’t just blindly try to match keywords. And because all search is driven by LLMs and models, the site probably has access to a greater range of context beyond the catalog of products itself. This is probably why we can search “can you find me nice earphones under Rs 1,000 in red which can be delivered to me before Sunday” in Rufus, and it’ll give you a set of relevant results. You could have gotten there the old-fashioned way, but this just feels more intuitive and magical.
Of course, beyond all this, the final reason why I believe search is going to be the first major consumer use-case for AI is a psychological one—we expect search to be bad and often irrelevant.
Over the last several years, we’ve always seen search as something that we do to get a bunch of results which are somewhat subjective, and not objective. Search for “best newsletter in India” on Google, and there’s a good chance that The Nutgraf will show up, but there’s also a good chance that it won’t (shocking). In other words, search is probabilistic and not deterministic, which makes it perfect for AI, which currently operates in this sphere. You’d trust AI to tell you answers to things like “good gift ideas for my mother” on an e-commerce website, but you wouldn’t trust it to answer something like “buy me the latest Bose headphones using my credit card”. The former is low-stakes and probabilistic. The latter is high-stakes and deterministic.
Paradoxically, the reason why AI may be perfect to solve searches is because over the years, we’ve been trained with bad search results.
Regards,
Praveen Gopal Krishnan