---
subject: "Stargate AI-1"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-01-24 15:14:20
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
There was a comedy routine a few years ago. I believe it was by Hannah Gadsby. She brought up a painting, and looked at some details. The details weren’t important in and of themselves. If an AI had randomly put them there, we wouldn’t care. Except an AI didn’t put them there. And they weren’t there at random. A human put them there. On purpose. Or, as she put it: THAT was a DECISION. This is the correct way to view decisions around a $500 billion AI infrastructure project, announced right after Trump takes office, having it be primarily funded by SoftBank, with all the compute intended to be used by OpenAI, and calling it Stargate. The Announcement
Note that ‘intends to invest’ does not mean ‘has the money to invest’ or ‘definitely will invest.’ Intends is not a strong word. The future is unknown and
And then… jobs? American… jobs? Um,
If you listen to Altman’s announcement,
If you want to spend way too much money on a technology project, and give the people investing the money a remarkably small share of the enterprise, you definitely want to be giving Masayoshi Sun and Softbank a call. “Sam Altman, you are not crazy enough. You need to think bigger.”
This proves there is real activity, also it is a tell that some of this is not new.
Increase consumption of compute is different from Azure as sole compute provider. It seems OpenAI expects plenty of compute needs to go around.
Can’t stop, won’t stop, I suppose. ‘Enable creative people to elevate humanity’ continues to miss the point of the whole enterprise, but not as much as talking ‘jobs.’ Is That a Lot?Certainly $500 billion for this project sounds like a lot. It’s a lot, right? Microsoft is investing $80 billion a year in Azure, which is $400 billion over 5 years, and I’d bet that their investment goes up over time and they end up spending over $500 billion during that five year window.
The number $500 billion is distributed throughout many sites and physical projects. If it does indeed happen, and it is counterfactual spending, then it’s a lot. But it’s not a sea change, and it’s not obvious that the actual spending should be surprising. Investments on this scale were already very much projected and already happening. It’s also not that much when compared to the compute needs anticipated for the scaling of top end training runs, which very much continue to be a thing.
$500 billion is a lot is to the extent all of this is dedicated specifically and exclusively to OpenAI, as opposed to Microsoft’s $80 billion which is for everyone. But it’s not a lot compared to the anticipated future needs of a frontier lab. One thing to think about is that OpenAI recently raised money at a valuation of approximately $170 billion, presumably somewhat higher now with o3 and agents, but also potentially lower because of DeepSeek. Now we are talking about making investments dedicated to OpenAI of $500 billion. There is no theoretical incompatibility. Perhaps OpenAI is mining for gold and will barely recoup its investment, while Stargate is selling pickaxes and will rake it in. It does still seem rather odd to presume that is how the profits will be distributed. The reason OpenAI is so unprofitable today is that they are spending a ton on increasing capabilities, and not serving enough inference to make it up on their unit economics, and also not yet using their AI to make money in other ways. And yes, the equilibrium could end up being that compute providers have margins and model providers mostly don’t have margins. But OpenAI, if it succeeds, should massively benefit from economies of scale here, and its economics should improve. Thus, if you take Stargate seriously, it is hard to imagine OpenAI being worth only a fraction of $500 billion. There is a solution to this puzzle. When we say OpenAI is worth $170 billion, we are not talking about all of OpenAI. And that is the part that has the vast majority of the expected net present value of future cash flows of OpenAI. So OpenAI the entire enterprise can be worth quite a lot, and yet ‘OpenAI’ the corporate entity you can invest in is only worth $170 billion. This should put into perspective that the move to a for-profit entity truly is in the running for the largest theft in the history of the world. What Happened to the Microsoft Partnership?Didn’t they have an exclusive partnership?
Microsoft is one of the providers here. Reports are that the Microsoft partnership Where’s Our 20%?Remember that time Altman promised 20% of compute would go to superalignment, rather than blowing up a sun?
So that’s a no, then. I do expect Roon to push for more compute. I don’t expect to get anything like 20%. Show Me the Money
If you take the companies collectively, they absolutely have the money, or at least the ability to get the money. This is Microsoft and Nvidia. I have no doubt that Microsoft is, as its Nadella affirmed, ‘good for its $80 billion.’ That doesn’t mean SoftBank has the money, and SoftBank explicitly is tasked with providing the funding for Stargate. Nor does the first site in Texas prove anything either way on this. Remember the wording on the announcement: “which intends to invest $500 billion over the next four years.” That does not sound like someone who has the money. That sounds like someone who intends to raise the money. And I presume SoftBank has every expectation of being able to do so, with the aid of this announcement. And of working out the structure. And the financing.
But that’s why you say ‘intend to invest’ rather than ‘will invest.’ Things between Musk and Altman did not stop there, as we all took this opportunity to break open the International Popcorn Reserve.
Musk’s not exactly wrong about that. He also said and retweeted other… less dignified things. It was not a good look for either party. Elon Musk is, well, being Elon Musk. Altman is trying to throw in performative ‘look at me taking the high road’ statements that should fool no one, not only the one above but also:
There’s a subtle art to doing this sort of thing well. The Japanese especially are very good at it. All of this is, perhaps, the exact opposite of that.
Altman, you made it weird. Also guache. Let’s all do better.
|