---
subject: "Ishan, are you a storyteller or a number cruncher?"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2020-06-21 03:30:53
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031"]
---
Last week, I began reading Narrative and Numbers, a book by Aswath Damodaran, professor of finance at New York University's Stern School of Business and the leading authority on equity valuations. In it, he describes how all people belong to either one of these two tribes—they are, when it comes down to it, looking at the world through the lens of either a storyteller or a number cruncher.
In his book, he argues that we need both. Storytelling without the numbers “can lead us into fantasyland quickly”. Numbers, he says, allow us to be disciplined. “Without stories behind them, they [numbers] become weapons of intimidation and bias rather than discipline. The solution is simple. You need to bring both stories and numbers into play in investing and business,” he writes.
This balance is something we strive to be consistent about at The Ken. We understand the value of numbers and metrics, but if there’s one thing that we also obsess about, it's the story behind the numbers.
And that’s not just restricted to the editorial team. It applies to every department in the organisation—every All-Hands meeting has a narrative. Every pitch deck is a story.
In the five pieces that we put out this week, we saw businesses performing great feats because of the story behind them; the story they told their consumers and investors. Sometimes their numbers backed their story. Sometimes, the numbers didn’t add up.
Here’s a recap.
This week, we
[wrote about](https://link.the-ken.com/uni/ss/c/aX9wIf2EaINWwJhuQmbIagDixGG3_DAmYxoviM0wkM1ynNz0r8aYBI74D1YtImpvVD_Ly5-EWGN6r9RTkBafSY-fpz5K25fJmYySh-h2w-3zW6HlVR2iwn83D1QF2Dxx1GH-1sKzUTC2BVOYBqIIOGvHeAuTa88hezOhhBnKjrBiTzQ2aoeWWG1TzOLqkUQl/32t/89d1LCSdSLynP0WxlGtTKA/h0/1zLVwlRxBZDwQj8wWDF70ybsuvLE930RHc86xihm0r0) Postman, a six-year-old SaaS startup with a $2 billion valuation. However, with an annual recurring revenue of just $30-40 million, it is much smaller in scale compared to other SaaS startups with similar valuations. Sumanth gives a three-part answer to the question—what story justifies Postman’s $2 billion valuation?
This week also had a contribution from writer Edd Gent, who
[wrote about](https://link.the-ken.com/uni/ss/c/aX9wIf2EaINWwJhuQmbIagDixGG3_DAmYxoviM0wkM1i98zeL0J0LWnvq5y5apaKHTS1TasS9mzHJPgi5HZYpZBxVWKoa7CVKd4R8DUJJIMEJDodAAV6tsirE-oszbFd23ukfmpleBc50lBS-CSxIzTSUmfc_ozmZIBgsargxR2xtSpfdNx5c4Qsr3soJ_6B9cvYBcJ2itY96Gwgqky14A/32t/89d1LCSdSLynP0WxlGtTKA/h1/PR_J0_0PETo4-eUwm-rUeyhpy26RxoX5Rrs9tcufImY) medtech company Sigtuple. The company promised to reduce the cost of medical testing using Artificial Intelligence (AI) and solve India’s chronic shortage of pathologists in one go. Makes for a compelling story, right? On the back of this, it was able to raise over $40 million. But three years into existence, with its flagship product facing problems, the company did something rather unexpected. It got new ideas, wanted to do other things. In short, it tried to build a new narrative. And failed.
We took a behind-the-scenes
[look](https://link.the-ken.com/uni/ss/c/aX9wIf2EaINWwJhuQmbIagDixGG3_DAmYxoviM0wkM0vtPke-oEe-uyCZrcZrN8cy7CHOYUs0paBAzrr3mxcAQzl9ff7Afs09VU7ICjD66116KQuBI7OWy2THXkQsKHFpNomEw2XCszlS_E2bSxqUkGD5Ruz49YXvy7TLPvvII8yYtX5UEsCdloEAi809zar/32t/89d1LCSdSLynP0WxlGtTKA/h2/cAddvBjVYcJ9Tci8SuDb_Mk6U9Fsfmzduv1boEXe3rY) at TravelTriangle, believed to be one of the market leaders in the online holiday packages segment. But that narrative alone failed to convince investors, existing and new, as the cash-bleeding startup struggled to raise additional funding. With the founders’ stake in the company diluted to less than 10%, here’s what happened next, as our training editor Savio summarised in his introduction email:
"The founder-CEO was to be fired last year > the courts stopped that > then he was fired last month > and unfired > is still CEO, but with 0 people reporting to him and a ridiculous cost-cutting target."
This is also our free read for the week, so please read and
[share widely](https://link.the-ken.com/ss/c/aX9wIf2EaINWwJhuQmbIagDixGG3_DAmYxoviM0wkM0vtPke-oEe-uyCZrcZrN8cy7CHOYUs0paBAzrr3mxcAUoBRge-UlBgNvEtdF88WVw4rNMhO6FGLsc9kJcs5arNDharOWsiBPh98G0RX6UKV_r9Co2Q0t-YvwprPPZrCLLtmRnvqNGVFzpY0HnPb_nMGriBnrw0NQl0tOm5qAKlCuel2IjL6DQc9CsUHCXPxDM/32t/89d1LCSdSLynP0WxlGtTKA/h3/PSpyVCEooFeYCbnrwZPid1ki1Aee_iJ3zx-fIZ7OIWs).
From Mumbai, Seetharaman
[analysed](https://link.the-ken.com/uni/ss/c/aX9wIf2EaINWwJhuQmbIagDixGG3_DAmYxoviM0wkM3bwcD9WZ21WvuI_9i1cjUAKY_tl5ZHP--U_TEZRBv4Qhcw8UC_Ny2XZ7NooAQUlCGeVh-yrcNwcHYLobJisoatCCPKPnnpXTDhRNgy7uXdlM4vibyk4xvHWAv6HG0iifD9bhTDwAstk6s1xYJiFYsUTTCeBToTixYsVnp61nVgT8RkcL5_nXhujGZGOTmkPI0/32t/89d1LCSdSLynP0WxlGtTKA/h4/pgnUIRWQXK_J49wqNg1JFQhTYreO0toGeQZtlSB3LHc) how Covid-19 will have a lasting impact on a lot of consumer habits. Fewer people are likely to use ride-sharing, go to the office, gyms, or restaurants. But he predicts that the death of some habits will also be coupled with the formation of new ones. Like cooking, streaming, and interestingly, dishwashing. Companies that adapt to this new narrative quickly are likely to win big.
And finally, I want to tell you about
[another incumbent](https://link.the-ken.com/ss/c/aX9wIf2EaINWwJhuQmbIagDixGG3_DAmYxoviM0wkM3FyOxNw9Z_GDLRUM1-vn3RlxjMFLldqN3pa1jzmfzWqCezgZF4VW7-rEhUftusKELTq4WsWz9w-wbX04cPB2avu8MjZJpV0Jn2LSHeYl3iEI0tSRcg4l_NhaCGFvsj9Uo/32t/89d1LCSdSLynP0WxlGtTKA/h5/R0_KXtuqjf5HxSkRtD43UJhhpBJuy2CYqg53zDHtzs8) facing a new reality—Amazon Web Services (AWS). After capturing the lion’s share of the startup ecosystem as clients, AWS has saturated that market. Pratap analyses how AWS is matched against Google and Microsoft to unlock the next phase of cloud growth. Something likely to come from a very different kind of customer—large Indian enterprises.
That’s all we had this week :)
In case you were wondering, I am more comfortable with numbers. I am a product manager and numbers form an integral part of what I do. But I'm also challenging myself to exercise my storytelling side here at The Ken (as evidenced by this email). Because, as Damodaran puts it, "We remember stories better than spreadsheets".
What comes more naturally to you? Number crunching or storytelling? I’d love to hear about it. Let me know
[here](https://link.the-ken.com/ss/c/aX9wIf2EaINWwJhuQmbIaqKg6FCdkYn0Is1d_THKVBGXjYV3aiw5Bx2jIXnY3FqBcHwzVhPtMVDaWHREbCuuTNrWW5_bqxi2PKvaYAZkK8PZYxmptEzp7Vzo7-GY2ePO/32t/89d1LCSdSLynP0WxlGtTKA/h6/eGEstoTaTK4O7uYmjXPIwQZT6MD6O2m40DsmDcBVJzM).
Have a great Sunday!