---
subject: "The Decline of Deviance"
from: "Adam Mastroianni <experimentalhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-10-28 15:21:33
labels: ["Adam Mastroianni", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_7809102548325458452", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Just a reminder: for the next two days you can support the blog at 50% off the normal rate by going I’m excited to share this week’s post with everyone—I’ve been collecting this data for over a year, and now it’s finally ready to see daylight. There are a lot of pictures and graphs, so if your email program cuts ‘em off, just click the title to see this post on the web. People are less weird than they used to be. That might sound odd, but data from every sector of society is pointing strongly in the same direction: we’re in a recession of mischief, a crisis of conventionality, and an epidemic of the mundane. Deviance is on the decline. I’m a) very recent, and therefore likely caused by the internet, when in fact most of them began long before b) restricted to one segment of society (art, science, business), when in fact this is a culture-wide phenomenon, and c) purely bad, when in fact they’re a mix of positive and negative. When you put all the data together, you see a stark shift in society that is on the one hand miraculous, fantastic, worthy of a ticker-tape parade. And a shift that is, on the other hand, dismal, depressing, and in need of immediate intervention. Looking at these epoch-making events also suggests, I think, that they may all share a single cause. 1. THE DISAPPEARING MISCREANTSLet’s start where the data is clear, comprehensive, and overlooked: compared to their parents and grandparents, teens today are a bunch of goody-two-shoes. For instance, high school students are They’re also less likely to Surprisingly, they’re also less likely to All of those findings rely on surveys, so maybe more and more kids are lying to us every year? Well, it’s pretty hard to lie about having a baby, and teenage pregnancy has also 2. THE GROWN-UPS HAVE FALLEN IN LINEAdults are also acting out less than they used to. For instance, crime rates have Here’s some Serial killing, too, is Another disappearing form of deviance: people don’t seem to be joining cults anymore. Philip Jenkins, a historian of religion and author of Crimes and cults are definitely deviant, and they appear to be on the decline. That’s good. But here’s where things get surprising: neutral and positive forms of deviance also seem to be getting rarer. For example— 3. PEOPLE ARE STAYING PUTMoving away from home isn’t necessarily good or bad, but it is kinda weird. Ditching your hometown usually means leaving behind your family and friends, the institutions you understand, the culture you know, and perhaps even the language you speak. You have to be a bit of a misfit to do such a thing in the first place, and becoming a stranger makes you even stranger. I always figured that every generation of Americans is more likely to move than the last. People used to be born and die in the same zip code; now they ping-pong across the country, even the whole world. I was totally wrong about this. Americans have been getting less and less likely to move This effect is These days, “ 4. CULTURE IS STAGNATINGCreativity is just deviance put to good use. It, too, seems to be decreasing. A few years ago, I analyzed a bunch of data and found that The story is the same in TV, music, video games, and books— You see less variance even when you look only at the new stuff. According to analyses by The Pudding, popular music today is now Also, But wait, shouldn’t we be drowning in new, groundbreaking art? Every day, people post ~
5. THE INTERNET AIN’T INTERESTING ANYMORERemember when the internet looked like this? That era is long gone. Take a stroll through the Every site has converged on the same look: sleek, minimalist design elements with lots of pictures Website aesthetics changed a lot from the 90s to the 2000s and the 2010s, but haven’t changed much from the 2010s to now
A few examples: This same kind of homogenization has happened on the parts of the internet that users create themselves. Every MySpace page was a disastrous hodgepodge; every Facebook profile is identical except for the pictures. On TikTok and Instagram, every No doubt, the internet is still basically a creepy tube that extrudes a new weird thing every day: 6. THERE’S LESS TEXTURE IN ARCHITECTUREThe physical world, too, looks increasingly same-y. As Every new apartment building looks like this: The journalist Kyle Chayka has documented how People usually assume that we don’t make interesting, ornate buildings anymore because it got too expensive to pay a bunch of artisans to carve designs into stone and wood.⁶ But the researcher Samuel Hughes 7. BRANDS? MORE LIKE...BLANDS. HEH YEAH, GOT ‘EMBrands seem to be converging on the An analysis of branded twitter accounts found that Most cars are now When a British consortium of science museums analyzed the color of their artifacts over time, they found a 8. SCIENCE IS STUCKScience requires deviant thinking. So it’s no wonder that, as we see a decline in deviance everywhere else, we’re also seeing You can spot this scientific bland-ification right away when you read older scientific writing. As This isn’t just an aesthetic shift. Standardizing your writing also standardizes your thinking—I know from firsthand experience that Whenever I read biographies of famous scientists, I notice that a) they’re all pretty weird, and b) I don’t know anyone like them today, at least not in academia. I’ve met some odd people at universities, to be sure, but most of them end up leaving, a phenomenon the biologist 9. THESE COMPLAINTS ARE NEWWhenever you notice some trend in society, especially a gloomy one, you should ask yourself: “Did previous generations complain about the exact same things?” If the answer is yes, you might have discovered an aspect of human psychology, rather than an aspect of human culture. I’ve spent a long time studying people’s complaints from the past, and while I’ve seen plenty of gripes about how culture has become stupid, I haven’t seen many people complaining that it’s become stagnant.⁹ In fact, you can find lots of people in the past worrying that there’s too much new stuff. As Likewise, previous generations were very upset about all the moral boundaries that people were breaking, i.e.:
Back then, as far as I can tell, nobody was encouraging young Americans to party more. COUNTERPOINT: AM I WRONG?That’s the evidence for a decline in deviance. Let’s see the best evidence against. As I’ve been collecting data for this post over the past 18 months or so, I’ve been trying to counteract my confirmation bias by keeping an eye out for opposing trends. I haven’t found many—so maybe that’s my bias at work—but here they are. First, unlike other forms of violence, mass shootings have become Baby names have gotten And when you look at timelines of fashion, you certainly see a lot more change from the 1960s to the 2010s than you do from the 1860s to 1910s: That at least hints the decline of deviance isn’t a monotonic, centuries-long trend. And indeed, lots of the data we have suggest that things started getting more homogenous somewhere between the 1980s and 2000s. There are a few people who disagree at least with parts of the cultural stagnation hypothesis. Literature Substacker Maybe I’m missing all the new and exciting things because I’m just not cool and plugged in enough? After all, I’ll be the first to tell you there’s a lot of writing on Substack (and the blogosphere more generally) that’s very good and very idiosyncratic—just look at the winners of my blog competitions Anyway, I know that it’s easy to perceive a trend when there isn’t any (see: It really does seem like we’re experiencing a decline of deviance, so what’s driving it? Any major social trend is going to have lots of causes, but I think one in particular deserves most of the credit and the blame: WE CARE MORE ABOUT BEING ALIVELife is worth more now. Not morally, but literally. This fact alone can, I think, go a long way toward explaining why our weirdness is waning. When federal agencies do cost-benefit analyses, they have to figure out how much a human life is worth. (Otherwise, how do you know if it’s worth building, say, a new interstate that will help millions get to work on time but might cause some excess deaths due to air pollution?) They do this by asking people how much they would be There are, I suspect, two reasons we hold onto life more dearly now. First: we’re richer. Generations of economic development have put more cash in people’s pockets, and that makes them more willing to pay to de-risk their lives—both because they can afford it, and because the life they’re insuring is going to be more pleasant. But as Linch points out, the value of a statistical life has increased faster than GDP, so that can’t be the whole story. Second: life is a lot less dangerous than it used to be. If you have a nontrivial risk of dying from polio, smallpox, snake bites, tainted water, raids from marauding bandits, Our super-safe environments may fundamentally shift our psychology. When you’re born into a land of milk and honey, it makes sense to adopt what ecologists refer to as a “ ( I think about it this way: both of my grandfathers died in their 60s, which was basically Plus, both of my grandpas were drafted to fight in the Korean War, which couldn’t have surprised them much—the same thing had happened to their parents’ generation in the 1940s and their grandparents’ generation in the 1910s. When you can reasonably expect your government to ship you off to the other side of the world to shoot people and be shot at in return, you just can’t be so precious about your life.¹¹ My life is nothing like theirs was. Nobody has ever asked me to shoot anybody. I’ve got a big-screen TV. I could get sushi delivered to my house in 30 minutes. The Social Security Administration thinks I might make it to I know life doesn’t feel particularly easy, safe, or comfortable. What about climate change, nuclear war, authoritarianism, income inequality, etc.? Dangers and disadvantages still abound, no doubt. But look, 100 years ago, In fact, adopting a slow life strategy doesn’t have to be a conscious act, and probably isn’t. Like most mental operations, it works better if you can’t consciously muck it up. It operates in the background, nudging each decision toward the safer option. Those choices compound over time, constraining the trajectory of your life like bumpers on a bowling lane. Eventually this cycle becomes self-reinforcing, because divergent thinking comes from divergent living, and vice versa.¹³ This is, I think, how we end up in our very normie world. You start out following the rules, then you never stop, then you forget that it’s possible to break the rules in the first place. Most rule-breaking is bad, but some of it is necessary. We seem to have lost both kinds at the same time.¹⁴ THE STATUE OF LIMITATIONSThe sculptor Arturo di Modica
Meanwhile, “Fearless Girl”, the statue of a girl standing defiantly with her hands on her hips that was installed in front of the bull in 2017, was Who would live di Modica’s life now? Every step was inadvisable: don’t run away from home, don’t study art, definitely don’t study sculpture, don’t dig your own basement, don’t dump your art on the street! Even if someone was crazy enough to pull a di Modica today, who could? The art school would force you to return home to your parents, the real estate would be unaffordable, the city would shut you down. The decline of deviance is mainly a good thing. Our lives have gotten longer, safer, healthier, and richer. But the rise of mass prosperity and disappearance of everyday dangers has also made trivial risks seem terrifying. So as we tame every frontier of human life, we have to find a way to keep the good kinds of weirdness alive. We need All of this is within our power, but we must decide to do it. For the first time in history, weirdness is a choice. And it’s a hard one, because we have more to lose than ever. If we want a more interesting future, if we want art that excites us and science that enlightens us, then we’ll have to tolerate a few illegal holes in the basement, and somebody will have to be brave enough to climb down into them. 1 I’d love to read a version of Robert Putnam’s Bowling Alone specifically about the death of cults. Drawing Pentagrams Alone? 2 Whenever I tell people about the cult deficit, they offer two counterarguments. First: “Isn’t SoulCycle a cult? Isn’t Taylor Swift fandom a cult? Aren’t, like, Lububus a cult?” I think this is an example of Second: “Aren’t conspiracy theories way more popular now? Maybe people are satisfying all of their cult urges from the comforts of their own home, kinda like how people started going to church on Zoom during the pandemic.” It’s a reasonable hypothesis, but the evidence speaks against it. A team of researchers tracked 37 conspiracy beliefs over time, and found 3 There is 4 According to 5 Thanks to 6 Or 7 Cracker Barrel tried to do the same thing recently and was hounded so hard on the internet that they 8 Note that this data comes from Poland, but if you look up images of American parking lots in previous decades vs. today, you’ll find the same thing. 9 For instance, T.S. Eliot,
10 Dee’s original article is now paywalled, so I’m linking to a summary of her argument. 11 Almost all the data I’ve shown you is from the US, so I’m interested to hear what’s going on in other parts of the world. My prediction is that development at first causes a spike in idiosyncrasy as people gain more ways to express themselves—for example, all cars are going to look the same when the only one people can afford is a Model T, and then things get more interesting when more competitors emerge. But as the costs of being weird increase, you’ll eventually see a decline in deviance. That’s my guess, anyway. 12 Fast life strategies are still possible today, but they’re rarer. Once, in high school, I was over at a friend’s house and his mom lit a cigarette in the living room. I must have looked shocked, because she shrugged at me and said, “If the cigarettes don’t kill me, something else will.” I could at least understand where she was coming from: her husband had died in a car accident before he even turned 50. When you feel like your ticket could get punched at any time, why not enjoy yourself? 13 Perhaps that’s also why we’ve become so concerned about the safety of our children, when previous generations were much more laissez-faire. This 14 There’s a paradox here: shouldn’t safer, wealthier lives make us more courageous? Like, can’t you afford to take more risks when you have more money in the bank? Yes, but you won’t want to. I saw this happen in real time when I was a resident advisor: getting an elite degree ought to increase a student’s options, but instead it makes them too afraid to choose all but a few of those options. Fifty percent of Harvard graduates go to work in In fact, the richest students are the most likely to pick the safest careers: Also c’mon this chart is literally made by someone named Kingdollar. Thanks for reading! To support the blog and get every post (like |