---
subject: "The Doha Airport Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-07-30 13:31:04
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Rebekah Sanderlin is a writer, marketing strategist and copywriter, and a former (and still sometimes) journalist based in Virginia Beach, Virginia. Rebekah here. Living in mid-sized cities all my life, layovers have always been a miserable, unavoidable part of travel. What I’ve gained in lower cost of living and access to nature in smaller metropolitan areas, I’ve lost in days spent in awful food courts, jockeying for outlets and workstations. But, when my travel itinerary features a layover in Doha, Qatar’s Why is this interesting? Doha has, quite possibly, the world’s greatest airport. Certainly, it’s the best one I’ve ever been to. Forget everything you know about airports. Doha is different. Sure, it’s clean and efficient and there are numerous lounges available for people who qualify to use them. There’s even a whole private lounge But, really, the airport is a destination in itself. With stores like Tiffany, Valentino, Hermes Doha’s airport has positioned itself as a gateway to the world, and that’s not just marketing-speak. Home to 48 airlines and serving 190 global passenger destinations, at any place in the airport, at any time of day, you’ll see fabulously wealthy Qataris in thobes, gutras, shaylas, and abayas shopping, dining, and strolling—for some reason they never seem to have to rush—to their gates. But, woven amongst them, you’ll see migrant workers from all over the world en route to somewhere with more opportunities. You’ll also see Aussies in backpacks; Americans in cropped tops and short shorts; Chinese, Japanese, Singaporeans, Filipinos, Indians, and many others in transit west or further east; South Americans and Europeans headed home or on vacation; and because the airport is the hub and home base for the fantastic Qatar Airways, Africans from every country on the continent also pass through Doha on their way to anywhere else. It’s a head-spinningly delightful mish-mash of people watching, and in fact, after my first time passing through, I was disappointed to only have a four-hour layover there on my return flight. Four hours was barely enough time to find my gate and clear security twice—a obnoxious necessary measure for flights back to the U.S.—and not enough time to enjoy the amenities. My first layover there had been 10 hours and—brace yourselves—I actually think that was a perfect amount of time. Why? Well, with 10 hours to kill, I booked the very convenient As a woman traveling alone, I was more than comfortable the entire time, and I was back to the airport and through security with three hours to spare—enough time to visit the Al Maha Lounge and take a shower. (Qatar is very hot and humid, and I needed one after all that walking around.) But even if I hadn’t taken the tour, I could have easily entertained myself inside the airport for five hours or more. I’ve traveled through Doha four times now. The next time I’m passing through, I plan to try to arrange the longest layover possible. (RS) — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Rebekah (RS) —
You're currently a free subscriber to |