---
subject: "The Foreign Morning Run Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-08-12 10:40:09
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Colin here. I have an on-again, off-again relationship with running. During early COVID days, it was a mental respite and a way to get out of the house. Many took it further, pushing their limits My most memorable runs are the ones where you get a little lost, and the activity turns into an adventure in a place you don’t know by heart. I can remember a freezing cold winter run at night in Munich, which was intense and multisensory. Dodging ice patches made it seem like a video game. There was also an epic run around the Imperial Palace Gardens in Tokyo, starting out from the Imperial palace gardens from above Why is this interesting? The foreign city runs have an extra appeal, because it allows you to tap into a place and feel the natural early morning (or late night) rhythms that you might miss if you’re just hauling yourself into an Uber or taxi en route to a meeting. Bonus points if it is early. You see the breakfast stalls and food sizzling near the MTR station. On a beach run in Dubai in the morning, on a bouncy red running track set back from the sand, you can see fishermen coming in from the morning catch a bit south of the The thing for me is I can’t really recreate this in places I actually live. The familiarity with the rhythms, sounds, smells, and traffic ruins the illusion. But when I am somewhere I am not from, everything seems just a bit more … interesting. I don’t care if the weather is 100 percent humidity and 107 degrees, as it was the other day in Downtown Dubai where I ran past the Burj Khalifa. The appeal of the early morning run is too great to let external factors deter the mind. The senses are sharpened—and even if it isn’t particularly a great run, the multisensory elements make it fulfilling.(CJN) — WITI x McKinsey: An ongoing partnership where we highlight interesting McKinsey research, writing, and data. Sustainability and innovation in fashion. The leader of a cutting-edge institute talks about innovative new materials that “eat” carbon and may enable cotton to grow without irrigation, as well as the potential for building the world’s shortest supply chain in two 40-foot containers. Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) —
You’re a free subscriber to |