---
subject: "The Nutgraf: The quick-commerce monster demands greater sacrifices"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-12-07 04:47:42
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
I imagine we’ll look back at 2024 as the year when quick commerce really took off in India. Just consider what happened this year. Blinkit went from strength to strength. Swiggy became a public company. Zepto raised as much money as companies usually do over a decade. Bigbasket chose 10-minute deliveries over slotted deliveries. And Flipkart finally woke up.
As I’ve written before, there are divided opinions on the future of quick commerce. Some believe that this cannot continue indefinitely and that the pendulum will swing back. Others believe that this is a fundamental shift, and that quick commerce is going to be an integral part of India’s future.
The competition is heating up, and now, a more urgent question is appearing before all these companies—if you are a quick-commerce company, what exactly is your differentiator?
This is a question I explored earlier this year when [I conducted](https://the-ken.com/story/1500-stories-about-indias-complex-relationships-with-swiggy-instamart-blinkit-zepto-and-bigbasket/) a quick-commerce survey with subscribers. At that time, speed was still a differentiating factor—Zepto and Blinkit were generally perceived as being great on speed as opposed to, say, Instamart and Bigbasket.
I imagine this isn’t true anymore. Practically everyone delivers products now in less than 10 minutes, so I can’t see too many consumers sticking to a specific app because it delivers disproportionately faster than the others do. Another possible point of differentiation is pricing. However, as you can see above, except perhaps for Bigbasket’s users, the remaining companies are practically at the same level.
So finally, the points of difference between quick-commerce companies end up becoming… categories and selection, i.e., what can you deliver in less than 10 minutes?
This is what everyone is fighting to solve right now.
When I surveyed users who rely on quick commerce, one question I asked them was what products they would never buy on 10-minute delivery apps. The answers I received clustered users across two distinct categories.
A big chunk of respondents said that they’d never buy electronics and clothes on 10-minute delivery apps. On the other side, another chunk said that they’d never buy fruits and vegetables.
Well, it looks like 10-minute delivery companies looked at what their consumers said and decided to challenge them.
Over the last few months, all these companies have expanded their offerings decisively into electronics in a bid to stand out from the others. Electronics is a key part of the offerings of Flipkart Minutes, Bigbasket, and Blinkit. To the extent that it’s forced other players such as Croma to switch to same-day deliveries just to keep up. At one point, it seemed like madness to buy a Playstation on a 10-minute delivery app. Now, it doesn’t seem that crazy anymore.
And well, speaking of apparel, there were reports that Myntra is [expanding](https://www.hindustantimes.com/business/myntra-enters-quick-commerce-market-with-m-now-to-deliver-goods-in-30-minutes-101733404936422.html) into 10-minute delivery for some categories. Blinkit and Instamart already sell several fast-moving apparel products on their apps, so I imagine this is going to intensify going forward.
However, as this grows, I imagine all 10-minute delivery apps are going to sell some selection of electronics, apparel, and groceries. This, in and of itself, isn’t going to be much of a differentiator.
At some level, you can see quick commerce as a monster that’s eating everything in traditional retail. It began with groceries, then fresh products, then electronics, then apparel. As 10-minute deliveries grow, so do the demands and expectations. Everyone is pushing the boundaries to deliver all kinds of products in less than 10 minutes. The monster needs to be fed.
So the real prize that all 10-minute delivery companies are eyeing are two categories that are perfect for quick commerce, but don’t exist right now. Winning the race to crack these is what’ll give them a decisive advantage over the others. And unlike electronics and fresh produce, these are categories that have demand from consumers, but have restrictions on supply. Whoever solves the supply problem will unlock a pool of demand that’s much bigger than other categories.
Last week, Flipkart went after the first one.
Flipkart is set to shortly start delivering medicines within 10 minutes, likely becoming the first quick commerce service to do so, intensifying competition in this red-hot market.
The Walmart-owned company’s Flipkart Minutes service has started enlisting local chemists in the metros from where the products will be sold using its last mile delivery partners, said a senior industry executive aware of the plans.
Flipkart is hurrying since it wants to be the first quick commerce service to sell prescription medicines. To be sure, the company’s partnerships with local chemists needs to be in sync with India’s drug norms for foreign-backed e-commerce operators which bars owning inventory. Also, Flipkart can forge tie-ups only with registered chemists.
“Flipkart wants to develop Flipkart Minutes into a full-fledged quick commerce platform. Medicines is a hitherto untapped opportunity since existing platforms deliver products in an hour to even 3-5 days,” said the executive cited above. “Flipkart will provide the platform for these orders and undertake the last mile fulfilment with its logistic partners, while the product will be sold by the local pharmacies who have all the valid licences,” the executive said.
Flipkart Minutes eyes 10-min drug delivery to outpace its rivals, [The Economic Times](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/healthcare/biotech/pharmaceuticals/flipkart-minutes-eyes-10-min-drug-delivery-to-outpace-its-rivals/articleshow/115908792.cms?from=mdr)
Delivering prescription medicines online may be an incredible market opportunity, but it’s also heavily regulated. In fact, as news broke about Flipkart’s plans to deliver medicines, so did the protests and warnings from powerful pharmaceutical companies and lobbies. Last month, when Swiggy announced that it would pilot medicine delivery with Pharmeasy, the All India Organisation of Chemists and Druggists (AIOCD) expressed concerns in a letter to the Drugs Controller General of India. In the letter, the association [said](https://www.businesstoday.in/industry/story/can-cause-serious-health-threats-swiggy-pharmeasys-10-minute-medicine-delivery-sparks-alarm-among-chemists-association-452374-2024-11-03), “This partnership is likely to ignore important standards like proper prescription checking and patient identification, which may endanger the health of common citizens”.
There are good reasons why nobody has really managed to crack medicine delivery. It’s a heavily regulated market with a strong association that is [resistant](https://www.outlookbusiness.com/start-up/news/quick-commerces-love-for-medicine-delivery-gets-shrouded-in-criticism) to disruption. Just look up the long list of startups that raised funding with the promise of delivering medicines and then failed. Even the ones that wanted to do it well have put off their plans. Zepto had indicated it would [experiment](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/tech/startups/instant-grocery-delivery-startup-zepto-explores-pharmacy-foray/articleshow/91734039.cms?from=mdr) with medicine delivery in early 2022, and those intentions have still not materialised. I imagine Zepto dug deeper and decided not to poke this bear… at the time. But they’ll probably be forced to do it now.
The other category that everyone is eyeing is less talked about, but equally lucrative—alcohol. Here’s a story from back in July.
State authorities are gathering feedback from e-commerce platforms and spirits manufacturers about the potential benefits and drawbacks of online alcohol delivery. An executive noted, “This is to cater to a growing expat population especially in larger cities, changing profiles of consumers who perceive moderate alcohol-content spirits as recreational drinking along with meals, and women and senior citizens who have flagged buying from traditional liquor vends and shop-front experiences as unpleasant.” Currently, Odisha and West Bengal allow home delivery of alcohol.
Industry executives report that online deliveries have led to a 20-30% increase in sales for premium brands in West Bengal and Odisha. Rahul Singh, chief executive of The Beer Cafe, commented, “By enabling online home deliveries of liquor, states can enhance consumer convenience, drive economic growth, and align with global trends while ensuring responsible and regulated alcohol distribution.”
Concerns about unregulated online sales have been addressed with measures like mandatory eKYC, purchase caps, and OTP verifications. An executive stated, “Delivery services can implement strict age verification and compliance measures, potentially offering more controlled and regulated sales than traditional retail outlets. This can help prevent underage drinking and ensure responsible consumption.”
Swiggy, Zomato, Blinkit, Bigbasket may soon start online liquor delivery in these states. [The Economic Times](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/cons-products/liquor/soon-you-may-order-liquor-online-through-swiggy-zomato-blinkit-bigbasket/articleshow/111772729.cms?from=mdr)
Buying alcohol online is a lot like pharma. There’s a massive latent demand for it, but the constraints that need to be figured out are primarily regulatory, not operational.
Until now, companies have tried to bring these sectors online and failed to do so, for several reasons. Startups have tried to solve it, with a combination of hustle and hack, and they’ve usually not managed to make much headway. Bigger companies like 1mg and Pharmeasy did their bit, but it’s not the same as 10-minute deliveries.
As we enter 2025, the quick-commerce monster demands more sacrifices.
And now, finally, lured by the opportunity, these two categories may finally give in.
Regards,
Praveen Gopal Krishnan