---
subject: "Ed Set Go: Shortages, revivals, and the higher-education balm for the ‘marriage penalty’"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-11-04 01:32:13
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
Ed Set Go
Mon, 04 Nov 24
Your weekly newsletter on the most critical pivots in edtech and education in India.
Good Morning Ishan,
A belated Happy Diwali to all those who celebrated last week. Here in DC, we did a hybrid “Diwaloween” and tried to figure out costumes that would blend both occasions! I have an express version of Ed Set Go for you this week on account of the holidays.
Many of you wrote back after the last edition on teachers and how an increasing number of Indian educators are being trained to teach abroad. Most commonly, readers wondered whether India’s newest export—teachers—would make the teacher shortage problem even worse in India.
Niti Aayog, in 2023, [reported](https://theprint.in/india/governance/mergers-addressing-teacher-shortage-niti-aayog-report-on-improving-indias-public-schools/1846529/) over a million teacher vacancies in India’s schools. Rural schools face the brunt of this shortage, with student-to-teacher ratios often as poor as 47:1. One solution, the report says, is to utilise limited resources better.
The first suggestion made as part of structural intervention includes school consolidation, including the merger of sub-scale schools. The report goes on to explain that these are schools with less than 50 students and just one or two teachers. The challenges faced by these schools, the report adds, were lack of individual attention to students owing to multi-grade and multi-level teaching (one teacher teaching multiple classes), limited time for teaching, and inadequate learning infrastructure.
In 2018, the report says over 4,300 schools in Jharkhand were merged, which improved the ratio between teachers and students and led to an improvement in teaching quality. The report goes on to talk about supporting teachers to make better instructional interventions in classrooms.
A [report](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/377963345_State_of_Teachers_Teaching_and_Teacher_Education_for_India_The_Right_Teacher_for_Every_Child) on the state of teaching by the Tata Institute of Social Sciences also noted that in 2023, the median age of the school teacher was 38. While teachers in early childhood education were closer to 40, teachers in primary grades tended to be about 38 or 39.
This tells us that teachers are mostly middle-aged and are likely to be married, have children, and ageing parents. This would have implications for their financial needs and obligations, and could also have implications for their openness to job transfers to remote locations.
This age group presents an interesting challenge for policymakers. They aren’t at a place where moving locations—or countries—is very easy. But the financial strain of caring for a family on a teachers’ salary may also push them to look for greener pastures.
If there’s one sector that’s desperately waiting for someone to write its revival story, it has to be edtech. The dramatic story arcs, the larger-than-life founders, the money that flowed into the sector all of a sudden and then not at all. For a while, edtech had an inflated sense of self, was humbled, and is now looking for a comeback.
At least, that’s the story we’re being told. Eruditus has been in the [news](https://www.business-standard.com/companies/news/biz-fundamentals-rekindling-investor-confidence-in-edtech-eruditus-ceo-124110100516_1.html) these last few weeks, highlighting their decision to reconstitute their business in India. The move from Singapore also indicates that Eruditus, at some point in the future, will launch a public offer in the country.
A recent headline in the Business Standard [quoted](https://www.business-standard.com/companies/news/biz-fundamentals-rekindling-investor-confidence-in-edtech-eruditus-ceo-124110100516_1.html) Ashwin Damera, the founder of Eruditus, on how the strong “business fundamentals” of his upskilling platform has “rekindled investor confidence” in edtech. Eruditus, which offers online upskilling courses in collaboration with about 80 universities globally, recently raised US$150 million at a valuation of over US$3 billion in a funding round led by TPG, an American private equity investor.
Eruditus has claimed that its revenue grew by 70% in January 2024, with losses shrinking by 66%. Damera also made a case for India as a destination for edtechs, again.
“We started working with some Indian universities only in 2019, but India is a fast-growing segment for us. India was about less than 10% three years ago and now it’s about 20%. Maybe in the next three years, it will be about a third of our operations,” said Damera.
Damera was clear though, that this edtech revival won’t just come from strong business metrics. The “integrity and quality of the management team” matters, too, in building up trust in edtechs again. Damera’s subtle dig at edtech’s past in India wasn’t lost on those of us who’ve watched this space for a long time.
That women disproportionately lose out on economic opportunities post marriage and childbirth is not news, but a recent World Bank [study](https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/entities/publication/6fde6256-6d8b-4de9-9b4e-609651bb5f4a) finds that in South Asia, it is actually marriage that has a higher chance of impacting or even ending women’s professional careers.
Recent studies have shown how child penalties affect women’s labor market outcomes. However, a marriage penalty may emerge even before childrearing, either because of optimal household task specialization or social norms that prevent married women from working outside the home. In the context of South Asia, We show that the marriage penalty for women is substantially larger than the child penalty. This suggests that it is not the burdens of childrearing, per se, that inhibit female labor force participation in South Asia. Instead, low female labor supply in the region emerges after marriage and before children.
According to the study’s authors, the most effective way to mitigate this “marriage penalty” is by getting more women into higher education.
We find that a woman’s education—and not that of her husband—substantially reduces the marriage penalty. Since greater female education has the potential to both change gender norms and improve women’s opportunities in the labor market, it is hard to disentangle these two mechanisms with this test alone. Still, we note that husband’s education, which should affect household norms but not women’s labor market outcomes, does not affect the marriage penalty. Regardless of the mechanism, the results clearly show that increasing education for women has the potential to mitigate the marriage penalty, potentially helping them realize their labor market potential.
Key insights for Indian policymakers, clearly, who are even now faced with ramping up a female labour force participation rate that remains below 40%.
That’s all for this week, folks! Write to edsetgo@the-ken.com with your thoughts and suggestions, or leave a comment on our onsite edition.
Regards,
Olina
Got a tip? If you have a lead for a great story that The Ken can pursue, please send it to tips@the-ken.com or share it through this [form](https://theken.typeform.com/got-a-tip). To find out more about how to do this securely, read [our blog post](https://the-ken.com/blog/help-the-ken-tell-the-next-big-story/) about sharing tips with The Ken.