---
subject: "The Monday Media Diet with Megan Gibson"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-11-21 12:11:29
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Tell us about yourself. I am a journalist and the international editor at Describe your media diet. Unwieldy! I have digital subscriptions to The Financial Times, The Washington Post, The Atlantic and The New York Times, so I check their sites every morning and often throughout the day. I also regularly browse The Guardian, New York Mag, The Globe and Mail, Foreign Policy, Bloomberg, Politico and Gawker. Then there’s the sites I try to check in on semi-regularly: the English versions of foreign papers, like Le Monde and El Pais; Hazlitt; The New Republic; The Nation; LRB; NYRB; The Diplomat; and At the moment I only have print subscriptions to The New Yorker and The New Statesman (gotta support the team), but I will buy the London Review of Books, The Gentlewoman, The Economist, Businessweek and Vanity Fair on the newsstand. I also subscribe to way too many newsletters: I never read them all and I end up feeling guilty about it. But the ones I do open pretty consistently include Politico’s London Playbook, WaPo’s Today’s World View, Matt Levine’s Money Stuff, and The Monocle Minute. I also read Substacks by I’m flaky when it comes to podcasts but occasionally when I cook I’ll listen to an episode of I rely on Twitter for any news, features, theories, clips and gossip that I haven’t come across elsewhere. I know a lot of people say they hate it — which, fair enough — but mostly I think it’s great. I hope Elon doesn’t ruin it. What’s the last great book you read?
WITI Classifieds: We are experimenting with running some weekly classifieds in WITI. If you’re interested in running an ad, Nudge, get customer insights with ease. The finest micro-creators across all platforms (TikTok, YouTube, Reddit, more!) in one place. What are you reading now? I always have a few different things on the go, which I don’t recommend as a strategy; it’s the offline equivalent to having too many open tabs. I gravitate toward fiction, mostly, when I’m not reading for work. Right now I’m alternating between What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication? I skim the contents and then flip to the pieces by the writers I admire most or on the subjects I’m most interested in. After I’ve read those, I go back and flip through from front to back, looking at every page but usually only stopping when something grabs me. I love magazines but don’t feel obliged to read everything; for me, it’s more about whether the mix of pieces makes sense. Who should everyone be reading that they’re not? I struggled with this question most of all! But let’s say Gwendoline Riley. She is just staggeringly talented. What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone? I actually kinda hate apps. I don’t even love any of the famous ones, if I’m honest. I use about five on my phone with any regularity. Plane or train? I mean, I live in Europe so I sort of have to say train, don’t I? But I do love a long-haul flight. What is one place everyone should visit? Another impossible question but I will go with Helsinki. It’s just a gorgeous, accessible, cool city filled with the best things — saunas, amazing modernist architecture and fun dive bars. Go in the summer if you hate the cold. Stay at the St. George Hotel, have dinner at Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into. I am obsessed with literary and media rivalries (historical or contemporary). So when Vanity Fair recently published a Anyway after I finished the piece, I read everything I could find online about Babitz’s career as well as her and Didion’s shared friends and acquaintances trying to create a more complete timeline of their relationship in my head. A very enjoyable way to spend a couple of hours. (MG) Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Megan (MG) —
|