---
subject: "Resilience in the face of unsuitable environments"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-07-30 03:33:53
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
Last week, I found myself having to take a sudden trip to Mumbai. Before I get any further, I’d like to clarify: this city is home, and I grew up and studied here until I moved to Pune for my undergrad. Now forgive me for this is about to get dreary.
It’s been raining cats and dogs since I came here. However, apart from the two hours it took me to get home from the airport, I felt little impact from it.
For several days, it poured enough for us not to be able to see beyond a few hundred metres from our window. And yet our milk was delivered to our doorstep, our help showed up right in time, and my father went to work.
By this point, I’ve received enough education on how this shouldn’t be made out to be some glorified Mumbai spirit. Instead, it is borne of bad infrastructure and employees’ compulsion and desperation to make ends meet in one of the most expensive cities in the country.
And that’s what makes someone brave torrential rains to deliver packets of milk, travel long distances for a meeting despite flood warnings, and take the local train with backpack full of jars of sardines alongside hundreds of others.
This pivotal relationship between an employee, the work they do, and the environments they often put up with was also something we explored at The Ken at length last week.
My colleague Rounak started the week with a detailed [story](https://the-ken.com/story/axis-bank-puts-citi-employees-in-the-hot-seat-of-a-bruising-workplace/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) on a $1.6 billion merger between two of the country’s private lenders, Axis Bank and Citibank. At the heart of it is now culture: former Citibank employees grapple with a chaotic culture at Axis Bank, as the latter needs those employees to crack its ambitions for premiumisation and retain Citibank’s customers.
On Tuesday, we took a hard look at Urban Company, which—shaken by mounting losses and yearning for profits—is now putting pressure on its nearly 40,000 partners. The situation is so bad that several of these gig workers are now protesting and seeking the labour department’s help. In her debut story, my colleague Shivani [captures](https://the-ken.com/story/urban-company-is-caught-between-angry-customers-and-angrier-partners/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) how the events unfolded.
On Wednesday, Pratap wrote about the comings and goings of one of the who’s who of India’s technology industry. “Am likely to have a larger canvas to do more for India,” wrote Anant Maheshwari, Microsoft India president, in a message to an industry executive as he exited the tech giant. Though he took the company’s India wing to $2.8 billion in revenue—and some of its best performance—Pratap’s [reporting](https://the-ken.com/story/how-microsoft-india-chiefs-quest-to-rev-up-revenues-drove-discontent-among-employees/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) brings forth the question of whether achieving lofty targets and having positive work cultures are mutually exclusive goals.
On Thursday, Aayush [looked](https://the-ken.com/story/sellers-wanted-say-phonepe-and-paytm-after-bringing-buyers-to-ondc/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) at why both Phonepe and Paytm—who have rolled out buyer-side platforms on the government’s e-commerce initiative, Open Network for Digital Commerce—now want to roll out seller-side applications. However, it’s turning out to be much harder than the feat they have achieved before.
On Friday, Kaushal, in one of my favourite stories of the week, [looked](https://the-ken.com/story/nses-order-on-1-6b-worth-stockbroker-lays-bare-systemic-rot/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) at Angel One—India’s third-largest stockbroking company. The firm was recently levied a Rs 1.6 crore ($195,000) fine by the National Stock Exchange (NSE). This laid bare widespread non-compliance cases by several of its authorised partners. But even as it initiates a clean-up—by suspending several of its APs in the process—Angel One is in a fix as it depends on these very partners to execute its long thought-out expansion plans.
That’s it from us this week. We’ll return tomorrow with another fresh story for you.
PS: Do write to me if you want to share a silver lining or something that keeps you going during unsuitable conditions.
Regards,
Anushka
[anushkaj@the-ken.com](mailto:anushkaj@the-ken.com)
What you just read is the personalised daily introduction to The Ken's story. Written by a different person each day. Often insightful, sometimes witty, and very rarely boring. Someone sent this to you? [Sign up for free](https://the-ken.com/?modal=register&utm_source=footer&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=morning_email_ind_recap). [Dont like these? You can unsubscribe](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/unsubscribe/?user_id=2349339&data=DnzPdwy4UFUfA6ArXkL3R5GJYLNMTFA2r-oFbj15EeNoMDAwdTAwMK8znfPTvUK-pjmYfx2YlBrr_vQ4N4ovXcB_TgjXoxM9MT_m7nVYK3ZUjvClHicBAiMsK5rVqwRdWJWv6i37Ek5GJiUWGIR-cg8Ju3PQ3r-N-UhK22ikb-IHxDMskY2MfBnAwdV7PL0i1yDIgkZcnb4DunwEMRoMy9sb67wW0K4L0XUmuAQDni9D8cgoeT6W23p8gj3o3GGWTNJrSUyzThULuhe46TiLN6eiC5mX3isMgN1gRqmjwXfqf85q6uVuA_Xsw-SQLGKNhSQeAesEDY42nlshymLw51uFdL6QcaLCTybH6vOK2ueczvEBBzyeZPlXCmwYn_7PnR-qVRpyQs3FY9JJYlh5OVbrUdpNxaIHGTxXuiFU8kf3zYrXYHserL8g0Syl5VKe81L_3pQTLttVsJZBypPAfynzeUKmfEuAvX0UgnJrK2xGXMv63rEatsD7ByxFaCFf4WdaL-7Ae-gcO4GWu3I6ZLMWh5PfKCSlacVU9uJJSPx3DZxApwK77fH-MDIf1dVDInZuzweVB8E=) Dont want to hear from us again? [ Unsubscribe from our emails here](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/?user_id=2349339&data=vhfNzR1TgICa3N54j_1YMzSj0mkL6psgsr6n0JZchSdoMDAwdTAwMNc3dfKAgghvbxJSZ4r7bNWXRSHhxrnXrX4q1EEiz4FcnbjbwRGZ5exbzbhD5_esFL9gsEuJOrkGuzXEe2uD-8L80w6sWOBaKaAqeLi8a-jw1HiTg_YcPDbUD53lCRlgtf1ZRd38GcyFZbpZsM7VmodkSMRq2h8iJQafCbX0TGY7naROijrklsFRjJ8vJqYmYWTsyV1vZtxupPJ-U2rwfJD80mT2UxQQElLGzzbSLI3dEcV35A-Hb9WajhtdX9naFSLQLB78lOIqhVKm-BqRL9Fy9SkYrS4IcHQkyWXvYJZIilTxUHeVtRK9hJbCsttcutcpIbxH90zvfJ6PfSb7tOJF1gAVZXcQLYZ-1NW5FjIwFgAMZjPCiPZWahj-rwrk9sQYvblwYp3VJlx_zevo7UAKBPK0C0r58mLVy_gGv1lSi12_BM5RdmzHeeDU5WW3Pg-A2_NQC7mO7l_-kFeyJwfD0Pv4oUsz4DE1WHMrP5UM2gjwGjD_Y-g30m1nNR7y9Q==).
Something wrong? Tell us at [support@the-ken.com](mailto:support@the-ken.com)