---
subject: "Links For April 2025"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-04-22 11:32:02
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
[I haven’t independently verified each link. On average, commenters will end up spotting evidence that around two or three of the links in each links post are wrong or misleading. I correct these as I see them, and will highlight important corrections later, but I can’t guarantee I will have caught them all by the time you read this.] 1: 2: In a 2003 Belgian election, the Communist candidate got 4096 extra votes; 3:
This is the main data point that keeps me from 100% believing the “it’s all ketamine” theory. Related: 4: Did you know there’s It’s okay, but the poem itself is too repetitive to set to music directly, so they had to reset it into a different rhyming, rhythmic form, and taking one of the best English poems and re-writing it without making it worse is a tough order that I’m not sure they managed. 5: 6: 7: A common sociological claim is that relative income matters more for happiness than absolute income. 8: 9: Twelve years ago, I wrote about some interesting medical hypotheses on the productive border between crackpottery and consensus. One was Drs. Gat and Goren’s claim that prostate disease comes from venous insufficiency and can be treated surgically. Norman Yarvin 10: In my 11: Update on 12: 13: Local pharma startup founder Trevor Klee is working on 14: Did you know that 15: From @msamalam: 16: 17: Wikipedia on
18: I complained that Elon Musk’s idea of “truth-seeking AI” was 19: 20: 21: More new-ish AI policy substacks potentially worth your time: You may remember Helen Toner from the OpenAI board drama, but she’s also an experienced and thoughtful scholar on AI policy and now has a Substack, [Rising Tide](https://substack.com/redirect/78c277ee-6784-4406-bc07-82cd007343c7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). I especially appreciated[Nonproliferation Is The Wrong Approach To AI Misuse](https://substack.com/redirect/1aff638d-0bec-4b2c-8bed-5a1a8e74478e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).You may remember Miles Brundage from OpenAI Safety Team Quitting Incident #25018 (or maybe 25019, I can’t remember). He’s got [an AI policy Substack too](https://substack.com/redirect/a6b8e27b-61ac-4ae9-aa73-f26a4fd5eba2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o),[here’s](https://substack.com/redirect/79a261a1-ab86-40d2-9c23-13d3ee9998cf?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)a dialogue with Dean Ball.You may remember Daniel Reeves from [Beeminder](https://substack.com/redirect/5a2a96fa-bea2-4558-b173-d2bc379af655?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), but he has an AI policy Substack too,[AGI Fridays](https://substack.com/redirect/5c7e0eca-8c40-4e72-a35a-e0d07504c3b9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Here’s his post on[AI 2027](https://substack.com/redirect/ad52fdf1-da19-401a-96d3-0927e2d968e4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).If you’re at all familiar with AI policy you already know Dean Ball (Substack [here](https://substack.com/@deanwball)), but congratulate him on[being named White House senior policy advisor](https://substack.com/redirect/11211230-51e1-464c-932e-c61247feffed?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).
22: And speaking of the board drama, a new book finally reveals most of the story, and the real reason behind Altman’s firing was . . . he wasn’t consistently candid. Not sure what I expected. The article doesn’t explain why the board did such a poor job communicating their grievances, maybe it’s in the full book. It does sound like part of board’s problem was that they were leaning heavily on Mira Murati but she was playing both sides off against each other. 23: And the Forethought Institute has been putting out some great analysis lately, including 24: 25: University of Austin 26: 27: Claim from 28: 29: Am I living in a conservative filter bubble? I keep hearing how we need a “reckoning” over the government’s disastrous anti-COVID policies, but 30: A California legislator proposed a bill that would ban OpenAI’s nonprofit → forprofit conversion, backed by a suspiciously specific interest group, the 31: Remember, asking where someone is from ‘originally’ is a microaggression, but inferring it yourself based on their “mildly platyrrhine, high-rooted nose” is A-OK! 32: Farmkind has 33: Not going to waste your time listing every bad thing Trump has done this month, but among the worst is sending innocent people to horrible Salvadorean prisons ( [Zaid Jilani](https://substack.com/redirect/9a6dcdc1-40b6-457a-b995-b3a1577fe689?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)points out that if immigrants don’t get a right to due process, citizens also don’t get a right to due process, because the government can kidnap citizens, claim they’re immigrants, and the citizens can’t prove otherwise since they don’t get due process.The Supreme Court [has long maintained](https://substack.com/redirect/971e128d-ec99-4716-96f7-52659cdbbc65?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)that immigrants have a right due process, including such bleeding-heart liberals as Antonin Scalia.If you want to maintain a taboo, it often helps to keep things that look identical to it taboo. For example, to maintain the taboo against child porn, you might also want to ban AI-generated child porn where no actual children are harmed, because if you allow this, then the difference between a taboo act (watching real child porn) and an allowed act (watching AI-generated child porn) is just checking the label to see how a porn video was made, and it’s hard to maintain social outrage against people who are doing the same thing as lots of other people but except for checking labels. In the same way, colleges and other communities mix citizens and immigrants together so closely that it’s hard to tell who is who without asking. If the government can punish immigrants for speaking freely, then it’s hard to maintain bright-line outrage against it punishing citizens for speaking freely when the only difference is who has a green card vs. a passport, something that the person’s community might not even know.
34: Related: the Trump administration seems to be 35: One bright spot in the political climate: 36: AI 37: 38: 39: 40: California’s experiment to see how high they could raise the minimum wage before getting visible employment effects has 41: You're currently a free subscriber to |