---
subject: "The Monday Media Diet with Daniel Giacopelli"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-05-15 09:32:53
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Daniel Giacopelli (DG) has been a longtime friend of WITI and recently swapped London for Los Angeles. We are delighted to have his great taste on the page today. -Colin (CJN) Tell us about yourself. I’m Editor-at-Large for I was raised on Long Island, went to college in upstate New York, and moved to London for grad school, where one year somehow turned into a 12-year stint and British citizenship. Life! Six months ago I left Europe with my French wife Kim, I’m a passionate street photographer and Describe your media diet. Part of my job is to hunt down intriguing ideas/brands and bring them into Courier's editorial reactor, plus recruit new voices around the world. Which means I’m constantly talking to people who work in niche industries and hearing what’s new in their patch. It’s media from the horse's mouth. I’m a big print guy and a luddite, I guess (whatever), so I buy forests of magazines. It was a lot easier in London – there’s a newsagent or WHSmith on every corner. In LA? Not so much. When I first moved here, I thought it was easier to find a special edition bookazine on keto diets or ghosts than The Economist. But I’ve slowly discovered hidden gem shops and indie kiosks that sell great stuff. I enjoy reading New York, Harper’s, I get my news news from NYT, LA Times, BBC and Twitter. When I was living in London, I’d savor a print copy of FT Weekend over breakfast. LA Times is great, but not as weighty. I’ll also browse websites like Dezeen, I subscribe to lots of Substacks. Mostly friends. Favorites are And photo books… I’m a photo book hoarder and recently made my first pilgrimage to the delightful What’s the last great book you read?
What are you reading now? I’m at various stages with… [The Complete Walker](https://substack.com/redirect/e04563d6-bd5e-4610-81b5-b9606f5c92af?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)by Colin Fletcher. The OG backpackers guide. Late 1960s. The book that kickstarted a movement. I found a secondhand copy of volume 1 at Bart's Books in Ojai. Incredible. His wit and insight is top notch.[Flights](https://substack.com/redirect/82ca894e-1da2-4cf2-be14-9fc9a11e45f8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)by Olga Tokarczuk. Brought this on a recent trip back to London and really enjoying it.[Breath](https://substack.com/redirect/0014f8f8-f3be-4f5d-82f6-ab86a2cafa8a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)by James Nestor. Learning that mouth breathing is a cardinal sin and the root of all evil and bad health.[2666](https://substack.com/redirect/1cf9a3ba-3d6c-461d-92dc-755a22875687?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)by Roberto Bolaño. Magic.[Big Sur & Hwy 1](https://substack.com/redirect/14af7658-0d8b-416f-97e2-82a797211563?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)by Wildsam. Planning a birthday trip.
What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication? I dip in and out. I rarely read one magazine (or book) in a single sitting. I’ve got giant stacks of mags, photo books, novels and travel guides piling up around my place. Who should everyone be reading that they’re not?
What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone?
Plane or train? Train, if I can help it. What is one place everyone should visit?
Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into. I burrow another hole every night before falling asleep. At the risk of becoming Mark Corrigan from Peep Show, I’ll never pass up the opportunity to learn about some ancient engineering feat. I also went embarrassingly deep on Napoleon for a few months last year. Streaming algorithms have picked up on all of this and my viewing recommendations are now Dad-worthy. I was in Hawaii last month and dove headfirst into the history of Aloha shirts, and also mid-century fonts on buildings. Highly recommend Dale Hope's Another long-term obsession is the concept of a deep map. I fell into this hole after buying an old copy of Prairyerth (1991) by William Least Heat-Moon. I’d never heard of him or the book. But in 600+ pages he paints a gorgeous, detailed portrait of a single county in Kansas (Chase County, pop. 3000). Part travelog, investigation, science report, collage, oral history. He calls this sort of thing a ‘deep map’ – and I’m now obsessed with the concept. — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Danny (DG) —
|