---
subject: "How I became a British meme"
from: "Adam Mastroianni <experimentalhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-04-15 14:35:58
labels: ["Adam Mastroianni", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_7809102548325458452", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Thanks for reading! For the next two weeks, you can support the blog at 50% off the usual rate by Experimental History exists thanks to paid subscribers, which is why I express my appreciation with MYSTERY POSTS like the one below. Signing up will also get you posts like Thanks to everyone who makes this possible—you’ve changed my life forever for the better. It is a pleasure to serve at the pleasure of the internet. Be back soon with posts for everyone! -Adam In 2016, I accidentally became a bit character in UK history. I had bumbled my way onto a British reality show called Come Dine with Me, where four strangers take turns hosting, attending, and rating each other’s dinner parties, and the person with the highest score at the end of the week wins an extremely modest £1,000. Usually, the show is low-stakes—its version of “drama” is when someone sticks a whole whisk in their mouth. It’s the kind of trashy, easy-viewing TV you might watch while you’re recovering from having your appendix removed. My episode was different. On the final day, when a contestant named Peter realized he had lost, he delivered a now-iconic denunciation of the winner and kicked the rest of us out of his house. The clip is routinely scrubbed from YouTube for copyright violations, but here’s a version that has lived on (I’m the guy in blue sitting sheepishly on the couch): This is tame by American standards, of course, where our reality shows involve Most memes die, but a few transcend. This one transcended. “You won, Jane” became a permanent part of British memetic vernacular, right up there with “Keep Calm and Carry On”, destined to be resurrected and remixed to fit whatever’s in the headlines. For instance, when covid struck, this appeared: When England lost a soccer game: When Keir Starmer became prime minister last year: When Chappell Roan revealed the original title of her hit song “Good Luck, Babe!”: If you went to the Edinburgh Fringe Festival in 2023, you could go see live actors reenact the whole Come Dine with Me debacle, with Every generation casts down the memetic gods of their forefathers, and so I expect “You won, Jane” to eventually be displaced by Gen Z’s pantheon of I have resigned myself to the fact that, no matter what I do for the rest of my life, if I am remembered for anything at all, it will be the for the thirty seconds I spent sitting idly by while a man ruined his life on national television. I haven’t said much about the whole episode since then, for reasons that will become clear later. But now that we’re nearly 10 years out, it’s time to unburden myself of these secrets I’ve been carrying ever since. Because what they show on TV ain’t the whole story. It ain’t even close... Subscribe to Experimental History to unlock the rest.Become a paying subscriber of Experimental History to get access to this post and other subscriber-only content. A subscription gets you:
|