---
subject: "Invisible Efficiencies"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <the-diff@ghost.io>"
to: ""
date: 2024-05-13 14:22:04
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX"]
---
|
|
In this issue: - Invisible Efficiencies—If you're looking for the impact of AI in macroeconomic data, keep in mind that some of its effects will show up as an increase in the supply of labor, because better job matching means more people working. This is still an efficiency gain, but can easily lead to lower measured output per hour, at least in the short term.
- Making a Market—GameStop finds a new trade to offer to its favorite counterparty.
- Outsourcing—Sometimes a superficially expensive product is actually the cheapest option.
- Multicloud—What happens when a cloud provider accidentally deletes a customer?
- Can Frackers Collude?—Frackers' economics have improved since they stopped drilling so much. If they wanted to form a cartel, though, could they pull it off?
- Infrastructure—China revises its economic model.
- Area Man Tweets—RoaringKitty is back.
Invisible EfficienciesThe other day, my wife and I bought a new washer/dryer, which, because it's a consumer product in the year 2024, means that it And that's the basic story of a surprising share of year-to-year economic growth: big discoveries matter a lot, but the way they show up in GDP is when they're scaled to a large population. And once those discoveries are operating at full scale, they create a platform for incremental improvements. Two recent stories highlight this trend, both as a source of economic growth and as a form of invisible-by-default growth: The Economist has These stories help answer the current version of what's been a surprisingly durable question: today, people ask why, if AI is such a big deal, its economic footprint is so small. OpenAI is worth Measuring productivity runs into some tricky paradoxes, though.
There are some companies whose economic impact is that they've unlocked a previously inaccessible cohort of workers. Uber and DoorDash have made it so that someone who can work in increments of a few hours at a time, with an unusual and inconsistent schedule, can still earn money. If they were trying to put in their fifteen hours a week at some business that operated on pen and paper, it would require saintly patience from management to get the maximum value out of them. But if they're driving for Uber or delivering for DoorDash, all they have to do is open an app, or decide not to. A cycle or two earlier, companies buying online content at piecework rates were basically monetizing the labor slack of stay-at-home moms who had enough time to earn some extra money but couldn't spend forty hours a week at an office. When these companies get more efficient, some of what they're doing is inducing more demand: Uber increases the amount of traveling people will do by making some otherwise-inconvenient trips possible. But DoorDash isn't doing much to increase aggregate food consumption, just changing the mix away from restaurants and home-cooked meals and towards delivery and takeout. To the extent that they impact GDP, it will show up as an increase in the labor supply, an increase in employment, and some combination of an increase in the price of food and an increase in the consumption of transportation. To the extent that users of these products are using some of their extra time to work, and are earning enough to justify it, there might be a marginal productivity impact. But again, it's showing up in the wrong place: higher labor input gets measured, but less time spent driving to and from Chipotle in your own car is not part of measured economic output, so it won't show up in productivity per hour. None of this is truly a problem with GDP, since GDP does a surprisingly good job of what it's trying to measure. But what it's really trying to measure is the scope of the taxable economy; it's impractical to assess a sales tax on the markup in value between a home-cooked meal and its ingredients. There are efforts to Meanwhile, these kinds of productivity gains have a subtler effect on the discourse. There's a lot of demand for either more renewables, more nuclear, or both, because these are discrete investments that get made in a public way and in regulated industries. There isn't much lobbying for the logistics system to continue getting incrementally more efficient, even though that would amount to a universal tax cut weighted to the consumption of physical goods. And that lobbying would be pointless, because the companies involved all have direct incentives to do exactly that. Uber knows that the less time drivers spend between gigs, the less those drivers need to get paid per minute they're actually driving; McDonald's knows that the more jobs it can make literacy-optional, the larger the labor pool it can hire from; DoorDash is perfectly aware that better predictions of demand spikes mean more satisfied customers, more optimally-busy drivers, and thus better contribution margins from its existing cohorts. DoorDash's revenues are a cut of the efficiency gain, so the result is visible there, but the aggregate impact on productivity is weak because of how the result gets measured. So if you're looking for broad-based productivity gains from the deployment of efficiency-improving technologies, focus on anecdotes over data: if the product is convenient, and someone's making money from it, then there are two possibilities: either it's unsustainable because one or more participants are getting a bad deal, or it's a productivity gain in disguise. I'd take the "AI" claim more seriously if there were some way to give it feedback, so its drying model would gradually calibrate to different consumer preferences and local climates. But, as with many phases of technology deployment, there's a long wait between when you can buy something that says it will change your life and when it actually does so in the way it says. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/819281df?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)Not just a platform for creating them, but for monetizing them. A good shorthand for explaining why so many of the most lucrative companies sell digital ads is that they're a business with a tight connection between marginal efficiency gains and revenue improvements: if GM finds a way to improve a car's fuel efficiency by 0.1%, it might make a marginal difference in sales over time, but if Google gets 0.1% better at targeting ads, that immediately means more ad spending, and it means that Google is capturing most of that upside. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/4e5c26b0?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)That last one doesn't get anyone to their destination any faster, but does occasionally calm people down, and it means that the airline's employees are spending less time answering the same question from dozens of irate passengers. So it's still an energy saving, in a sense. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/7113912e?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
You're on the free list for The Diff. This week, paying subscribers read about Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. See a sampling of current open roles below: - A seed-stage startup is using blockchains to enforce commitments and is in need of a fullstack developer with Solidity experience. (Remote)
- A top prop trading firm is looking for an intellectually curious, mathy generalist to work on projects spanning business strategy, technology, and markets. (NYC)
- A concentrated crossover fund is looking for an experienced full stack software engineer to help develop and maintain internal applications to improve investment decision-making and external applications to enable portfolio companies. (SF)
- A seed-stage startup is helping homebuyers assume the homeseller’s low-rate mortgage, and is in need of an experienced product manager. (NYC)
- A well-funded startup is building a platform to identify compliance risks associated with both human- and AI-generated outputs. They are looking for a cloud infrastructure engineer to join their team of world-class researchers. (NYC)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. ElsewhereMaking a MarketMarket-makers pay brokers for the privilege of trading with investors who aren't going to have much of a short-term edge in predicting prices. This is an old phenomenon—it's mentioned not just GameStop, too, is OutsourcingThe bull case for consulting firms is that no company has a comparative advantage at everything, and sometimes it's advantageous to lease that advantage from McKinsey or BCG. The bear case is that consulting firms are in the business of spending an institution's money to give leadership in that institution legitimacy to do whatever it is that they'd planned to do all along. And somewhere in the middle of that is Multicloud620,000 Australian investors spent a week being unable to access their accounts because—yes, this buries the lede a bit—Google Cloud (Disclosure: Long AMZN and MSFT, one of which was very likely to be the unnamed third backup provider.) Can Frackers Collude?One of the world's most popular conspiracy theories is that companies constantly collude to raise prices for consumers and lower wages for workers. One thing that helps this theory out is that it is always, to some degree, true: saying that a company exists to maximize profits for shareholders and saying it's a conspiracy to supress wages and maximize prices is a distinction in terminology, not in underlying claims. What matters is whether or not they're able to pull this off. Oil companies, particularly frackers, have InfrastructureFor a long time, a key element of China's economic model was that a skimpy welfare state forced workers to save, and those savings got channeled into badly-needed infrastructure. China has since gone well past the point where additional roads, railroads, and ports are automatically high-ROI, and some of their showier projects have ended up being the most expensive: [China's high-speed rail network Area Man TweetsChina's capital allocation model is far from perfect, but "perfect" does not exist, and the US model has flaws of its own. By what is no doubt popular demand: |
||||||||||
|
|
|
||||||||||
|