---
subject: "The Nancy Meyers Leaf Blower Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-08-29 15:34:18
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
This concludes our archive dip during our summer break. It was good to have a rest from the pace of WITI. And what better way to wrap it up then with this absolute heater from Reilly Brennan. Word on the street this melted some faces in the Strategist offices when it first ran. See you next week and for subscribers, see you Saturday for our links drop. -Colin (CJN)
Reilly here. When Hollywood filmmaker Nancy Meyers opened up her Los Angeles residence for a recent The most winsome of all was not an interior shot, but a single photograph of Ms. Meyers on the lawn, one-handing a Milwaukee M18 leaf blower, model Miles Dumont voice: Legend has it, when the Milwaukee M18 blows, anything can happen. Why is this interesting? The modern consumer power tool industry is both propelled and protected by the magical, efficient lithium battery. Power tools like your standard household drill have around 100 years of history. Battery-powered (cordless) models emerged only in the 1960s, although most were either too heavy or underpowered to beat corded equivalents for tough, continuous work. The best tools in your grandparent’s workshop were likely corded, housed in an aluminum case, and often stamped with the Craftsman logo. After some false starts with less efficient battery chemistries like Lithium-ion is expensive, however. Those high costs necessitated battery interchangeability as brands realized that consumers would be unlikely to pay for packs for each device. The secondary effect of that was game-changing: the high cost of batteries breeds a natural lock-in habit with consumers. Once you’ve bought one Milwaukee leaf blower with an expensive lithium-ion pack, you’ll likely buy from Milwaukee again if you need a drill, sander, grinder, or Makita’s line of 18V LXT battery packs can fit a mind-boggling portfolio of 300 different products. The message is clear: you never have to leave us. Power tool companies have become battery-moated customer retention businesses. And since larger manufacturers can buy cells at scale, there’s been an all-out race to consolidate power tool brands under massive holding companies, lock up supply contracts, and go big. Just 18 megabrands control over 90% percent of the global power tools market. Of those, four companies control 48% of all sales. In the future, more consolidation is expected. Nancy Meyers might not realize that she holds in her hand the scale purchasing power of Hong Kong-based TTI, corporate brethren of Ryobi, Oreck, and Dirt Devil. But maybe Nancy can afford to just buy lithium-ion packs for whatever she wants. You’re supposed to be the leading lady in your own life, for God’s sake. (RPB) — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Reilly (RPB) —
You're currently a free subscriber to |