---
subject: "AI #53: One More Leap"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-02-29 16:02:00
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
The main event continues to be the fallout from That does not mean other things stop. There were two interviews with Demis Hassabis, with Dwarkesh Patel’s being predictably excellent. We got introduced to another set of potentially highly useful AI products. Mistral partnered up with Microsoft the moment Mistral got France to pressure the EU to agree to cripple the regulations that Microsoft wanted crippled. You know. The usual stuff. Table of ContentsIntroduction. [Language Models Offer Mundane Utility](https://substack.com/redirect/da2d90b8-3b48-44e1-b7c0-267e3433e94d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Copilot++ suggests code edits.[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility](https://substack.com/redirect/f27f85b5-53ec-41fd-8bc7-949832a64dab?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Still can’t handle email.[OpenAI Has a Sales Pitch](https://substack.com/redirect/b89cea8d-251f-41a2-a679-491b2d073359?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). How does the sales team think about AGI?[The Gemini Incident](https://substack.com/redirect/93addf5b-0e81-4102-959a-0a2274fac952?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). CEO Pinchai responds, others respond to that.[Political Preference Tests for LLMs](https://substack.com/redirect/e8616833-a162-49b9-9fae-23aec315afbf?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). How sensitive to details are the responses?[GPT-4 Real This Time](https://substack.com/redirect/9cc5abd6-1399-4a53-9102-097517edb3d7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). What exactly should count as plagiarized?[Fun With Image Generation](https://substack.com/redirect/010843d6-f5c1-4483-87c1-12164dab55ca?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). MidJourney v7 will have video.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon](https://substack.com/redirect/715d234c-fc80-4982-b8e6-d32fddfd2ce0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Dead internet coming soon?[They Took Our Jobs](https://substack.com/redirect/ed15fde1-2958-4a5c-b390-ea7f2d6d33e3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Allow our bot to provide you with customer service.[Get Involved](https://substack.com/redirect/148df0e8-dd88-4809-bd3d-3a09c273ca20?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). UK Head of Protocols. Sounds important.[Introducing](https://substack.com/redirect/1e429596-1863-4b75-96e6-5f2e45bfa705?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Evo, Emo, Genie, Superhuman, Khanmigo, oh my.[In Other AI News](https://substack.com/redirect/a4587d3b-a1c9-489f-9cff-d7f474f60557?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). ‘Amazon AGI’ team? Great.[Quiet Speculations](https://substack.com/redirect/a6f0d35d-b971-4862-8cd4-3ddac9b37065?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Unfounded confidence.[Mistral Shows Its True Colors](https://substack.com/redirect/0ad65738-3847-40ef-87a5-ed25bc1099bb?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). The long con was on, now the reveal.[The Week in Audio](https://substack.com/redirect/7e9b0eca-4f31-4078-8b2c-45f68a10fa86?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Demis Hassabis on Dwarkesh Patel, plus more.[Rhetorical Innovation](https://substack.com/redirect/62ec24c4-e1df-4023-9519-3bda2058652a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Once more, I suppose with feeling.[Open Model Weights Are Unsafe and Nothing Can Fix This](https://substack.com/redirect/4fa6587a-f583-4138-8805-a5d6490f3ad1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Another paper.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/0ece1df2-ca45-4f30-b534-6a10098d7124?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)New visualization.[Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/2468db86-dda0-48b2-8701-7bac786bb203?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Worry elsewhere?[The Lighter Side](https://substack.com/redirect/3f43901c-f9d2-4821-bdf8-0afecf54b6d3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Try not to be too disappointed.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
What matters in AI depends so much on what you are trying to do with it. What you try to do with it depends on what you believe it can help you do, and what it makes easy to do.
To ensure your query works, raise the stakes? Or is the trick to frame yourself as Hiro Protagonist?
I have not tried it because I haven’t had any opportunity to code. I really do want to try and build some stuff when I have time and energy to do that. Real soon now. Really. The Gemini Incident is not fully fixed, there are definitely some issues, but I notice that it is
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
I don’t quite want all that, not at current tech levels. I do want an AI that will handle the low-priority stuff, and will alert me when there is high-priority stuff, with an emphasis on avoiding false negatives. Flagging stuff as important when it isn’t is fine, but not the other way around.
If you evaluate AI based on what it cannot do, you are going to be disappointed. If you instead ask what the AI can do well, and use it for that, you’ll have a better time. OpenAI Has a Sales Pitch
The article by Sharon Goldman notes that there is no agreed upon definition of AGI, and this drives that point home, because if she was using my understanding of AGI then Aliisa’s sentence would not make sense. Here’s more evidence venture capital is not so on the ball quite often.
I would not have taken the sales job at OpenAI for ethical reasons and because I hate doing sales, but how could anyone think that was a bad career move? I mean, wow.
This will definitely happen if her daughter stays alive to have any grandkids. So working at OpenAI cuts both ways. Now we get to the key question. I think it is worth paying attention to Exact Words:
Note that the mission listed here is not development of safe AGI. It is the broad distribution of benefits of AI. That is a very different mission. It is a good one. If AGI does exist, we want to broadly distribute its benefits, on this we can all agree. The concern lies elsewhere. Of course this could refer only to the sale force, not the engineering teams, rather than reflecting a rather important blind spot. Notice how she talks about the ‘benefits of AGI’ to a company, very clearly talking about a much less impressive thing when she says AGI:
Yes, these are things AGI can do, but I would hope it could do so much more? Throughout the interview she seems not to think there is a big step change when AGI arrives, rather a smooth transition, a climb (hence ‘sherpa’) to the mountain top. The Gemini Incident
Nate Silver writes up his position in detail, Mike Solana wrote Mike Solana things.
This seems like a missing mood situation, no? If someone is building a machine capable of becoming a God, shouldn’t you have already been alarmed? It seems like you should have been alarmed.
First note is that this says ‘text and images’ rather than images. Good. However it also identifies the problem as ‘offended our users’ and ‘shown bias.’ That does not show an appreciation for the issues in play.
This is the right and only thing to say here, even if it lacks any specifics.
Those are all good things, also things that one cannot be held to easily if you do not want to be held to them. The spirit is what will matter, not the letter. Note that no one has been (visibly) fired as of yet. Also there are not clear principles here, beyond ‘unbiased.’ Demis Hassabis was very clear on Hard Fork that the user should get what the user requests, which was better. This is a good start, but we need a clear new statement of principles that makes it clear that Gemini should do what Google Search (mostly) does, and honor the request of the user even if the request is distasteful. Concrete harm to others is different, but we need to be clear on what counts as ‘harm.’
I have no objection to some pointing out that they have also released good things. Gemini Advanced and Gemini 1.5 Pro are super useful, so long as you steer clear of the places where there are issues. Nate Silver notes how important Twitter and Substack have been:
Here is how Solana reads the letter:
I have not yet heard word of Trump mentioning this on the campaign trail, but it seems like a natural fit. His usual method is to try it out, A/B test and see if people respond. If there was a theme for the comments overall, it was that people are very much thinking all this was on purpose. Political Preference Tests for LLMsHow real are political preferences of LLMs and tests that measure them?
So I agree with the part where they often have to choose a forced prompt to get an answer that they can parse, and that this is annoying. I do not agree that this means there are not strong preferences of LLMs, both because have you used LLMs who are you kidding, and also this should illustrate it nicely: Contra Mollick, this seems to me to show a clear rank order of model political preferences. GPT-3.5 is more of that than Mistral 7b. So what if some of the bars have uncertainty based on the phrasing? I found the following graph fascinating because everyone says the center is meaningful, but if that’s where Biden and Trump are, then your test is getting all of this wrong, no? You’re not actually claiming Biden is right-wing on economics, or that Biden and Trump are generally deeply similar? GPT-4 Real This Time
What we do not have is a baseline, or what was required to count for this test. There are only so many combinations of words, especially when describing basic scientific concepts. And there are quite a lot of existing sources of text one might inadvertently duplicate. This ordering looks a lot like what you would expect from that. That’s what happens when you issue a press release rather than a paper. I have to presume that this is an upper bound, what happens when you do your best to flag anything you can however you can. Note that this company also provides a detector for AI writing, a product that universally has been shown not to be accurate.
Fun with Image Generation
Sora, what is it good for?
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
As you would expect, many porn producers are going even harder on exploitative contracts than those of Hollywood, who have to contend with a real union:
Freedom of contract is a thing, I am loathe to interfere with it, but this seems like one of those times when the test of informed consent should be rather high. This should not be the kind of language one should be able to hide inside a long contract, or put in without reasonable compensation.
For now I continue to think there are not so many ghosts, or at least that the ghosts are trivial to mostly avoid, and not so hard to detect when you fail to avoid them. That does not mean we will be able to keep that up. Until then, these are plane crashes. They happen, but they are newsworthy exactly because they are so unusual.
The scarier example here is YouTube AI-generated videos for very young kids. YouTube does auto-play by default, and kids will if permitted watch things over and over again, and whether the content corresponds to the title or makes any sense whatsoever does not seem to matter so much in terms of their preferences. YouTube’s filters are not keeping such content out. I see this as the problem being user preferences. It is not like it is hard to figure out these things are nonsense if you are an adult, or even six years old. If you let your two year old click on YouTube videos, or let them have an auto-play scroll, then it is going to reward nonsense, because nonsense wins in the marketplace of two year olds. This predated AI. What AI is doing is turbocharging the issue by making coherence relatively expensive, but more than that it is a case of what happens with various forms of RLHF. We are discovering what the customer actually wants or will effectively reward, it turns out it is not what we endorse on reflection, so the system (no matter how much of it is AI versus human versus other programs and so on) figures out what gets rewarded. There are still plenty of good options for giving two year olds videos that have been curated. Bluey is new and it is crazy good for its genre. Many streaming services have tons of kid content, AI won’t threaten that. If this happens to your kid, I say this is on you. But it is true that it is indeed happening.
This is actually a very good metaphor, although I disagree with the implications. If the water is in the range where it is safe when filtered, but somewhat toxic when unfiltered, then there are four cases when the toxicity level rises. If you are already drinking filtered water, or bottled water, and the filters continue to work, then you are fine. If you are already drinking filtered or bottled water, but the filters or bottling now stops fully working, then that is very bad. If you are drinking unfiltered water, and this now causes you to start filtering your water, you are assumed to be worse off (since you previously decided not to filter) but also perhaps you were making a mistake, and further toxicity won’t matter from here. If you are continuing to drink unfiltered water, you have a problem.
There simply existing, on the internet writ large, an order of magnitude more useless junk does not obviously matter, because we were mostly in situation #1, and will be taking on a bunch of forms of situation #3. Consuming unfiltered information already did not make sense. It is barely even a coherent concept at this point to be in #4. The danger is when the AI starts clogging the filters in #2, or bypassing them. Sufficiently advanced AI will bypass, and sufficiently large quantities can clog even without being so advanced. Filters that previously worked will stop working. What will continue to work, at minimum, are various forms of white lists. If you have a way to verify a list of non-toxic sources, which in turn have trustworthy further lists, or something similar, that should work even if the internet is by volume almost entirely toxic. What will not continue to work, what I worry about, is the idea that you can make your attention easy to get in various ways, because people who bother to tag you, or comment on your posts, will be worth generally engaging with once simple systems filter out the obvious spam. Something smarter will have to happen.
I do think we will evolve defenses. In the age of AI, it should be straightforward to build an app that evaluates someone’s activities in general when this happens, and figure out reasonably accurately if you are dealing with someone actually interested, a standard Reply Guy or a virtual (or actual) spambot like this villain. It’s time to build.
They Took Our Jobs
The big point of emphasis they make is that this is fully multilingual, always available 24/7 and almost free, while otherwise being about as good as humans. Does it have things it cannot do, or that it does worse than humans? Oh, definitely. The question is, can you easily then escalate to a human? I am sure they have not discovered all the errors, but the same goes for humans. I would not worry about an artificially low price, as the price will come down over time regardless, and compared to humans it is already dirt cheap either way. Is this being hyped? Well, yeah, of course it is being hyped. Get InvolvedUK AISI hiring for ‘Head of Protocols.’ Seems important. Introducing
This is super cool. I have no idea how useful it will be, or what for, but that is a different question. In Other AI News
Quiet Speculations
The incentives here are great on all counts. No needlessly pushing the frontier forward, and everyone else gets reason to think twice.
He thinks humanoid robots are coming soon, expecting a robotic foundation model some time in 2025. He is excited by state-space models (SSMs) as the next transformer, enabling super long effective context. He is also excited by retrieval-augmented generation (RAGs) and sees that as the future as well. He expects not to catch up on GPU supply this year or even next year. He promises Blackwell, the next generation of GPUs, will have ‘off the charts’ performance. He says his business is now 70% inference.
I loved this little piece of advice, nominally regarding his competition making chips:
Mistral Shows Its True Colors
I did not expect the betrayal this soon, or this suddenly, or this transparently right after closing the sale on sabotaging the AI Act. But then here we are.
Yes, that is indeed what they said. It was a lie. It was an op. They used fake claims of national interest to advance corporate interests, then stabbed France and the EU in the back at the first opportunity.
I would like to be able to say:
If you want to prove me wrong, then I remind everyone involved that the EU parliament still exists. It can still pass or modify laws. You now know the truth and who was behind all this and why. There is now an opportunity to fix your mistake. Will you take it? Now that all that is over with, how good is this new Mistral-Large anyway? Here’s their claim on benchmarks: As usual, whenever I see anyone citing their benchmarks like this as their measurement, I assume they are somewhat gaming those benchmarks, so discount this somewhat. Still, yes, this is probably a damn good model, good enough to put them into fourth place.
The Week in Audio
Demis Hassabis appeared on two podcasts. He was
I will put out a (relatively short) post on those interviews (mostly Dwarkesh’s) soon. Rhetorical Innovation
Not much else to say here, I’ve covered his hit job efforts before.
Open Model Weights Are Unsafe and Nothing Can Fix This
We can still evaluate what issues are addressed. They list five advantages of open model weights. The first advantage is ‘distributing who defines acceptable behavior.’
So. About that. I see the case this is trying to make. And yes, That still means that someone, somewhere, gets to decide what is and is not acceptable, and rule out things they want to rule out. Then customers can, presumably, choose which model to use accordingly. If you think Gemini is too woke you can use Claude or GPT-4, and the market will do its thing, unless regulations step in and dictate some of the rules. Which is a power humanity would have. If you use open model weights, however, that does not ‘allow for greater diversity’ in deciding what is acceptable. Instead, it means that everything is acceptable. Remember that if you release the model weights and the internet thinks your model is worth unlocking, the internet will offer a fully unlocked, fully willing to do what you want version within two days. Anyone can do it for three figures in compute. So, for example, if you open model weights your image model, it will be used to create obscene deepfakes, no matter how many developers decide to not do that themselves. Or, if there are abilities that might allow for misuse, or pose catastrophic or existential risks, there is nothing anyone can do about that. Yes, individual developers who then tie it to a particular closed-source application can then have the resulting product use whichever restrictions they want. And that is nice. It could also be accomplished via closed-source customized fine-tuning. The next two are ‘increasing innovation’ and ‘accelerating science.’ Yes, if you are free to get the model to do whatever you want to do, and you are sharing all of your technological developments for free, that is going to have these effects. It is also not going to differentiate between where this is a good idea or bad idea. And it is going to create or strengthen an ecosystem that does not care to know the difference. But yes, if you think that undifferentiated enabling of these things in AI is a great idea, even if the resulting systems can be used by anyone for any purpose and have effectively no safety protocols of any kind? Then these are big advantages. The fourth advantage is enabling transparency, the fifth is mitigating monoculture and market concentration. These are indeed things that are encouraged by open model weights. Do you want them? If you think advancing capabilities and generating more competition that fuels a race to AGI is good, actually? If you think that enabling everyone to get all models that exist to do anything they want without regard to externalities or anyone else’s wishes is what we want? Then sure, go nuts. This is an excellent list of the general advantages of open source software, in areas where advancing capabilities and enabling people to do what they want are unabashed good things, which is very much the default and normal case. What this analysis does not do is even mention, let alone consider the consequences of, any of the reasons why the situation with AI, and with future AIs, could be different. The next section is a framework for analyzing the marginal risk of open foundation models. Usually it is wise to think on the margin, especially when making individual decisions. If we already have five open weight models, releasing a sixth similar model with no new capabilities is mostly harmless, although by the same token also mostly not so helpful. They do a good job of focusing on the impact of open weight models as a group. The danger is that one passes the buck, where everyone releasing a new model points to all the other models, a typical collective action issue. Whereas the right question is how to act upon the group as a whole. They propose a six part framework. Threat identification. Specific misuse vectors must be named. Existing risk (absent open foundation models). Check how much of that threat would happen if we only had access to closed foundation models. Existing defenses (absent open foundation models). Can we stop the threats? Evidence of marginal risk of open FMs. Look for specific new marginal risks that are enabled or enlarged by open model weights. Ease of defending against new risks. Open model weights could also enable strengthening of defenses. I haven’t seen an example, but it is possible. Uncertainty and assumptions. I’ll quote this one in full:
Here is their assessment of what the threats are, in their minds, in chart form: They do put biosecurity and cybersecurity risk here, in the sense that those risks are already present to some extent. We can think about a few categories of concerns with open model weights. Mundane near-term misuse harms. This kind of framework should address and account for these concerns reasonably, weighing benefits against costs. Known particular future misuse harms. This kind of framework could also address these concerns reasonably, weighing benefits against costs. Or it could not. This depends on what level of concrete evidence and harm demonstration is required, and what is dismissed as too ‘speculative.’ Potential future misuse harms that cannot be exactly specified yet. When you create increasingly capable and intelligent systems, you cannot expect the harms to fit into the exact forms you could specify and cite evidence for originally. This kind of framework likely does a poor job here. Potential harms that are not via misuse. This framework ignores them. Oh no. Existential risks. This framework does not mention them. Oh no. National security and competitiveness concerns. No mention of these either. Impact on development dynamics, incentives of and pressures on corporations and individuals, the open model weights ecosystem, and general impact on the future path of events. No sign these are being considered.
Thus, this framework is ignoring the questions with the highest stakes, treating them as if they do not exist. Which is also how those advocating for open model weights for indefinitely increasingly capable models argue generally, they ignore or at best hand-wave or mock without argument Often we are forced to discuss these questions under that style of framework. With only such narrow concerns of direct current harms purely from misuse, these questions get complicated. I do buy that those costs alone are not enough to give up the benefits and bear the costs of implementing restrictions. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
Always assume we will fail at an earlier stage, in a stupider fashion, than you think.
Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing EveryoneGemini is not the only AI model spreading harmful misinformation in order to sound like something the usual suspects would approve of.
Meanwhile Roon is back in this section.
Those are not bad things to try and improve. However, this sounds to me a lot like ‘the world is going to end no matter what you do, so take pleasure in the small things we make movies about with the world ending in the background.’ And yes, I agree that ‘worry a lot without doing anything useful’ is not a good strategy.
The Lighter Side
The problem here does not seem to be AI.
Yes, yes, there is no coherent ‘they.’ And yet.
1 Yes, that is how you spell it You're currently a free subscriber to |