---
subject: "Brain Food"
from: "Brian Klaas <brianklaas@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-04-15 10:11:51
labels: ["Brian Klaas", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_1599487573263287548", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
A quick note: On April 27th, I’m running the London Marathon to raise money for UNICEF, a charity that helps the poorest kids in the world. With massive foreign aid cuts from Trump (and the UK government), this help is more essential than ever. I’m personally matching donations up to £1,000 ($1,350) to double the impact. If you are able to give even a few dollars, consider donating by Fruit Fly RobotsThe 21st century is shaping up to be the golden age of neuroscience. Some of the breakthroughs will be unequivocal positives, free from moral dilemmas. The possibility of ending or delaying neurodegenerative disease, such as Alzheimer’s, now seems within plausible reach. Breakthroughs are swift and astonishing. However, there is a potentially dark side, too. For the first time in history, our understanding of brains has advanced to such a degree that we are on the cusp of truly dystopian methods of directly controlling minds. This is not science fiction, but science—as has been proven in a Researchers have long used fruit flies, Drosophila melanogaster, as a model species to study complex biology in a comparatively simple organism. Last year, scientists were able to fully map the entire neural connections in the brain of fruit fly, a precursor to more complex neuroscience in more sophisticated species. (Researchers just last week announced a While studying Drosophila, it has become clear that fruit fly brains are predictably responsive to certain stimuli, including certain visual cues and smells. For example, flies use moving visual cues to navigate. “Essentially, the fly attempts to maintain a steady course by adjusting its flight or walking direction in response to perceived motion. For instance, if a pattern moves from left to right in the fly’s field of view, the fly will turn to the right, effectively trying to follow the motion.” The upshot is this: if you present a fly with a pinwheel image that rotates clockwise, the fly will turn right in unison with the image. If you make the pinwheel image rotate counterclockwise, the fly will turn left. (The researchers also manipulated the fly’s movement using an array of olfactory cues—smells—though it required some more complicated interventions). With this method, the scientists were able to predictably control 94 percent of the fly’s movements. Their degree of control was so substantial that they could get the flies to spell out words on demand. Below, the figure shows the theoretical operation of how the cues work (A & B) to spell out the prompt "HELLO WORLD,” followed by actual tracking data from how the flies spelled out the words successfully. Diagram C shows the fly movements when scientists used visual clues, compared to Diagram D when it was based on scents (which was slightly less effective). Moreover, while flies, unlike dogs, are not intrinsically motivated by balls, the researchers were able to use visual cues to get flies to move toward a ball, engage with it, and ultimately move it around on command. Without their interventions, the flies would—as predicted—ignore the ball. But the scientists could effectively prompt the flies to “do work,” pushing the ball from one place to another. At this point, it’s not just flies who have their antennae alert, because my ethics antenna is tingling: scientists have effectively found a way to enslave flies to do our bidding. This field of research, known as “microrobotics,” explicitly refers to these living creatures as robots, terminology that makes me uncomfortable, especially as such neural manipulations will not only be used on flies in the future. Worse, the researchers highlight that future research will allow them to explore directing flight while forcing the flies to carry payloads at the direction of humans. This research, they note with no apparent awareness of how dystopian this sounds, remains uncertain “particularly with respect to how much weight a backpack can add while still allowing flight and effective guidance signals.” Maybe this makes me a biological luddite, but the notion that we can turn animals into robots through deliberate mind control seems like the kind of manipulation that could lead to some rather dark futures. It also speaks to the urgent need for careful, informed regulation to keep apace with technological advances, particularly with artificial intelligence and neuroscience, as it’s already becoming scientifically possible to Prehistoric PsychopathsAre humans naturally violent creatures who can only be tamed by the threat of punishment, or are we a naturally peaceful species, spoiled by a few violent rotten apples? Whether human nature exists—and what it is if it does—has triggered fierce debates for thousands of years. But in the modern era, for the first time, we can bring data to the debate—and answer these burning questions with a bit more empirical evidence. Two scholars,
Humans were likely less violent in the hunter-gatherer prehistoric past than in the era of subsistence farming and agricultural cultivation (which began around 12,000 years ago).¹ Some scholars argue that violence increased when controlling territory became valuable due to farming, whereas in the hunter-gatherer period, there was no need to control specific bits of land. Moreover, as agricultural production rose and cities emerged, inequality soared, which created the impetus for violence. (I explore this notion, which I call the “War and Peas” hypothesis—and its relationship to the emergence of power hierarchies and greater inequality—in the second chapter of However, as social cohesion intensified—both through Worse still, our species has seemingly even more to answer for, because it’s not just that our prehistoric past was violent; it’s also that it was far more violent than other animals. Hunter-gatherer humans killed each other far more often than other primates—and orders of magnitude more than most other mammals. And yet, there’s perhaps reason to be hopeful—to disprove Hobbes—even with such striking differences. Halstead and Thomson point out two key features of human societies that can take that data and allow us to re-interpret it with a much rosier sheen. First, humans are both uniquely lethal and uniquely vulnerable.
In other words, the rates of human-on-human homicides will understandably be elevated relative to peer species not because we’re more vicious to each other, but because our intra-species conflicts lead to more deaths. Plenty of other species attack each other without anyone dying; we are better at killing and less able to survive attacks, which manifests itself in comparatively higher death rates. Perhaps our higher homicide rate isn’t a reflection of a rotten human nature, but a statistical artefact of these unique traits. (I’ve written about how our unique ability to use ranged weapons has modified social structures—in the link below). Second, adding to this more optimistic interpretation of human nature is the notion that most killing is often carried out by a few violent psychopaths within any given group of humans. The researchers point to research on a modern, heavily-studied hunter-gatherer group, the !Kung, in which the majority of murders over a thirty-five year period were carried out by just two people. This interpretation is a double-edged sword. On the one hand, it provides clear and convincing evidence that humans are not innately depraved. On the other hand, as I argue in Corruptible, modern systems of power often allow psychopaths to wield control over entire societies, magnifying their ability to kill on a scale that was never before possible. When sociopaths get nukes, we’re in danger. The key, then, is to more carefully engineer society—to relegate the violent psychopaths to the fringes, far removed from power, while designing social structures that amplify our widespread and astonishing tendency for cooperation, decency, and problem-solving. This is not going to be easy, but that challenge represents, to me, the defining social goal of the 21st century. Ping, You’ve Got WhaleThis Every year, thousands of whales are struck by ships and boats and either injured or killed. Many of those deaths are caused by container ships, the backbone of global supply chains, which are so massive that they can’t turn fast enough to avoid striking a whale even if they visually spot one and try to avoid it. The technology is rapidly improving, getting rid of false alarms that cause ships to distrust alerts, and is on the cusp of being able to reliably provide warning of nearby whales from up to four miles away. The key, as with so many unequivocally good technologies, will be to get companies to adopt it when the only benefit is not profit, but saving majestic, innocent creatures who don’t deserve to die on the altar of global consumerism. How Silica Gel Took Over the WorldThose little silica packets are everywhere these days, warning us not to eat them.
The author, Spencer Wright, notes that these properties mean that a single tiny packet of silica gel could theoretically produce the “internal surface area of eight hundred square meters—the size of almost two basketball courts.” As a result, they can “absorb up to 40% of its own weight in water vapor,” which makes them excellent at keeping products dry from potentially ruinous moisture and humidity. Silica gels have been around for centuries and were The reason for the recent surge of those little packets isn’t because of a recent technological breakthrough, or a sudden realization that it’s useful to keep stuff dry. The longer that something needs to travel to get to the consumer, the greater the risk of spoilage from humidity. Locally made products that are to be opened upon arrival rarely need silica gels. The rise of those little packets is simply an indicator of globalization. Quick LinksA profoundly moving essay about recently losing his mother to cancer. Read it. “ A lovely rumination on why humans engage in pointless status games, blatant selfishness, rigid stubbornness—and how we can be better with some quick, useful, and amusing tests to examine our own behavior.
On the inevitable marriage between authoritarian populism and corruption in the Trump White House. Film: Nightcrawler (2014)I’m 11 years late to watching this 2014 Jake Gyllenhaal film, but I accidentally timed my viewing perfectly. It’s a story about an overly ambitious sociopath who wants to make it, no matter the costs, and stumbles upon the freelancing career of filming gruesome crime video for local TV news in Los Angeles. Watching it in 2025, I realize how prescient Nightcrawler was at warning us about the perils of the attention economy—and the social devastation that people will eagerly churn up to get ahead, earn money, and capture eyeballs and clicks. Film: Black Bag (2025)If you like artistic spy thrillers, then this is the movie for you. The taut dialogue is over-the-top (nobody talks like that), the impeccable fashion is over-the-top (spies don’t dress like that), but it all just adds to the ambiance. And the ending is great. Book: Marble Hall Murders (2025)Longtime readers will know that I love well-crafted murder mysteries and Anthony Horowitz simply doesn’t miss. This new book, which is the third in a trilogy involving the sleuthing book editor Susan Ryeland, repeats the plot device used in Magpie Murders and Moonflower Murders. The clues to the modern day mystery are hidden within a cosy detective novel set in the 1950s with Atticus Pünd, a German version of Hercule Poirot. I have read—and loved—both of his Sherlock Holmes novels, all five of his Hawthorne & Horowitz series, and now all three of the Susan Ryeland mysteries. If you like murder mysteries, I’d recommend starting with the Hawthorne & Horowitz series or Magpie Murders. Book: Metazoa (2020)This isn’t a quick or easy read, but it is fascinating. The SCUBA diving philosopher Peter Godfrey-Smith, author of Other Minds, moves on from the sexy topic of octopus intelligence to the perhaps less obviously exciting world of ancient animals. However, in the process, he convincingly explores a mind-bending question: how did intelligence and consciousness first emerge? Thank you for reading The Garden of Forking Paths. This edition was free for everyone, but I rely exclusively on paid subscribers to keep researching and writing, so please consider upgrading to support my work—and fully unlock nearly 200 essays in the 1 The 2022 study that this essay is based on finds rates of violence in this prehistoric period that are four times lower than the estimates used by Steven Pinker in his book The Better Angels of Our Nature. But there’s a lot of statistical uncertainty here. 2 Thankfully, we are not close to the worst species on this metric. Nearly 20 percent of meerkats are killed by another meerkat; other Invite your friends and earn rewardsIf you enjoy The Garden of Forking Paths, share it with your friends and earn rewards when they subscribe. |