---
subject: "Notes on Maputo (Mozambique)"
from: "Marginal REVOLUTION <donotreply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-11-04 05:56:29
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tyler Cowen", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2466199532210586699", "UNREAD"]
---
[An excellent piece](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=5ff609f9053095d60214d759d114934b2a079ab57295ea39d9a6f192f61dffa2&blog_id=42693868&post_id=91789&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=e54f844b8df12951060d083915f34eac&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly9qb3NlcGhsZXZpbmUuc3Vic3RhY2suY29tL3Avbm90ZXMtb24tbWFwdXRv&email_id=aade2f2ad4467a45721a0397b046c39d) by Joseph Levine, do read the whole thing, here is one excerpt:
Yango is the local ride-hailing app and makes life really easy. It’s a Dubai-based company, split off from Russian Yandex in 2024. Today it’s available as a ride-hailing app in 30+ African countries. Yango rides are really cheap, cheaper than taxis in Freetown or Kanifing, and quality was much higher. A 15 minute ride from my house to my office cost $0.23 on a motorbike, $0.58 in a tuk-tuk, $1.05 in a car, and $1.20 in the equivalent of an Uber Black car. I usually ended up taking the cheaper car option, because you can’t easily sit next to or talk to the driver of a tuk-tuk.
Yango eliminates the ability of taxi drivers to price discriminate. When I walked out of the airport, the taxi drivers wanted ~$20 for the drive to my flat, and I talked them down to $10. On Yango, the drive is $3. My general model of digital marketplaces is that they enable price discrimination (e.g., Uber surge pricing), but in Mozambique it’s the opposite.
Drivers are often professionals working a full-time job, or graduate students. I met a dentist, an engineer working at the new
[Total plant], several accountants. They also made up the majority of the Muslim Mozambicans whom I met. Most Muslims in Maputo are first- or second-generation immigrants from the northern provinces. One driver, Ismael, grew up on Mozambique Island, about 1,000km north of Maputo; it has a population of 10,000, but most of the young people move to Maputo. He came down to study engineering and now works at a terminal exporting natural gas.Because I wasn’t on the local mobile money system, I paid for each Yango ride in cash. The car drivers rarely had change (tuk-tuk drivers always did). Alongside rating the driver in the Yango app out of 5 stars, you have to reply yes/no to the question “Did the driver ask for extra cash?” This led to the drivers being very reluctant whenever I told them to keep the change, even when I showed them I had already selected “no”. So we often went around to fruit sellers asking if they would break a twenty.
And:
Mozambique shares a timezone with all the other Southern African countries. As the easternmost country in the timezone, this feels really weird! When I arrived, sunrise was at 5:20am, and sunset about 12 hours later. The early sunsets move business and social events earlier throughout the day. I’m a morning person, but it would usually be considered rude to suggest a 7am in-person meeting. Not here!
The Kalashnikov is a prominent national symbol in Mozambique; it’s on the flag. In particularly touristy areas, hawkers would try to sell me flags, jerseys, banners, scarves with ever-larger AK-47s on them.
Recommended, there should be [more travel writing like this](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=8556d9849aba441bd72c49047eb59d7e51dd6a14e0e55e9fe1a2886a644076bf&blog_id=42693868&post_id=91789&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=123a3482099b84c19f55876ae2eb243d&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly9wYXRyaWNrY29sbGlzb24uY29tL3RyYXZlbA=&email_id=aade2f2ad4467a45721a0397b046c39d).