---
subject: "The winter of platform discontent"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2019-11-05 02:36:15
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031"]
---
Look around you and platforms are everywhere. Uber and Ola in ride-sharing. MakeMyTrip in travel. OYO in budget hotels. Swiggy and Zomato in food delivery. Flipkart and Amazon in e-commerce. Digital middlemen today straddle large swathes of commerce, controlling the experience on both sides of a transaction, and by virtue of that, taking a cut.
There’s nothing wrong with that, of course, as platforms help bring convenience, trust and scale that would otherwise be impossible for either consumers or businesses to access.
But while consumers are still happy with platforms, thanks largely to the fact that they’re still being courted with discounts and offers, sellers are increasingly turning against platforms. Large platforms that were content losing money in return for more transactions—by subsidising both sellers (with incentives) and buyers (with discounts)—are now gradually shifting focus to making money. And that means getting sellers to pay higher commissions and a plethora of fees.
Sellers don’t like it, of course. Many of them have fought hopeless battles against the mega platforms, only to realise they were hopelessly outmatched. So, now, they’re banding together. The association of hoteliers. The association of restaurateurs. The association of online sellers. These associations are using multi-pronged strategies to corner platforms, sometimes filing legal cases and other times calling on members to boycott platforms.
Some early attacks on platforms were stymied. For instance, budget hotel platform OYO managed to get a court order preventing the hoteliers associations from boycotting it. Many cases seeking antitrust action against platforms were dismissed because courts and regulators didn’t view them as dominant.
But something changed last week. India’s antitrust regulator, the Competition Commission of India (CCI), kickstarted a 150-day investigation into the allegedly anti-competitive practices and behaviours of MakeMyTrip and OYO (with a much narrower scope). It’s an investigation that could have ramifications on not just those two, but practically all dominant digital platforms operating in India.
PS: Over 175 teams at companies like Flipkart, Deloitte, Google, Swiggy, Raymond, Cisco and Uber have already signed up for a corporate subscription at The Ken. Is your team among them? If not, just [sign up here](http://link.the-ken.com/wf/click?upn=qny-2FHLEm-2BHfwGyyMlkUM-2FbV4ulJB9YxzgDrLWXctKZJp03qfES-2Be1-2BjjkTyMjqfEKkT5TdxEwxlPWkRo2C-2FjTg6H-2FNDozJkrLqgf7IJ9A6Z0KHWZOZx9yfStoFl2dm-2F7vN6-2FbSKxNt4cjlD4jo9HaWKJH-2FVh0zUrksunzwGykEtWsutyevlkIChizllNOKxuz-2F3vmbhr9DAxhHQOryOcFVJdufSuPlltT-2BDCDEdnA4h01QPq8VV0YNgMazmeCbEGWNYaifJ9Dbeo9gGqNppXfgEsERq-2BLqnRwgqkAu7tmq81mNwCanHo1UOSsTsVdUf48zHWkb1ZCZaRFans2JrdJlwOuF-2BMg44ZVhYa6QaqfjBLNRl7PDA-2FUSP-2FM6Fu1-2FmUEmlcs6YanVV7O1y3o8US-2Fg2lXR3UNKI9Ewzet-2F5xvvrmyxk2zmKtUiralWuGXSJ0EfSUS30RFL29gspYu3m5sdOmryiu-2BJY7ZvlF-2BtAOgS7Ypab5Fz3hc49YxmgQmcDJdOYnWbCLuckB0iV0Mh25CdGMaD3sDAS4aeUP4rRqDC36i-2FNNR4z3BLuhY14cU-2FGBhoIgNIQVMbVNuQgm8AbQ1DSaKRCHafvQCV9BnGaSnQGyXt72kRVmmPCW7KLbk6NYOY9pp1tOt01D0VdW6Ck-2BLs1pRaU5Yt5LqZ-2FhDR88F4XRNJze3n-2B3A0QCxv7FYKh-2BPadNG-2B1zKwxMyYxpnShdANNNUsjnldvFAfZk-2F8QM8xnfXWTT9G3Wy1m5NMLFRYGSJrKjoqVVDXolSeR7kr3ggpDjdo-2FjlRTY-2F4kAgXEF8-2F05bO3n7Ugd19tgDsp0yykaAwmU0ThhAvMYmCgrxCNk0-2B42R7tXB3U1wAuY6tfLDBJxAhxIB2hjqXo-2F46Iq7LBaUCQgoe1M196Gam7Yw7Hqag-3D-3D_S4jLOsNx-2Fv6Jev2nvow8b7P9pBCWGd8KNZfb200gkZLAhbR1bIARaL-2BPT4EQXSIa8dzXzzvkJmd7fFgMzVIEvUNgAl-2BK6jsaZHyWiJSWxk2aBy65v4MErT9ejdYV-2Bjo1D82qOLmhCeDlGxNJeM7lnad-2F-2F35FRn4KtJ3TMe3DMoKVCQM7TjHNTwTOsro4odfUUNiH-2FwJZq62DNCh6tPQ-2Fj9l0nhuo6lhFTStTX1ju7b3FooXWfpjQt0iqZOQhjyvNhgUzhqVmqLs3ZNnZCTU02HzQ-2BS6n2a0VEn-2FcsTD6xwRk2eCT-2FDNaKe6CHzqTZyxDTf-2BWpXxM4vD8BZzxG9tWmmeb2DSX6KMoNgAmT1-2BtMUK1HOXB6e-2FOgMzxsFc8vrXZVtvGq37zVIBj2loSbL0wZA-3D-3D). Add 10 members or more and we will instantly activate a 30-day trial for your team. Cost-free.