---
subject: "AI #114: Liars, Sycophants and Cheaters"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-05-01 13:49:32
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Gemini 2.5 Pro is sitting in the corner, sulking. It’s not a liar, a sycophant or a cheater. It does excellent deep research reports. So why does it have so few friends? The answer, of course, is partly because o3 is still more directly useful more often, but mostly because Google Fails Marketing Forever. Whereas There’s real harm here, at least in the sense that o3 and Sonnet 3.7 (and GPT-4o) are a lot less useful than they would be if you could trust them as much as Gemini 2.5 Pro. It’s super annoying. It’s also indicative of much bigger problems down the line. As capabilities increase and more RL is done, it’s only going to get worse. All the things that we’ve been warned are waiting to kill us are showing up ahead of schedule, in relatively harmless and remarkably easy to spot form. Indeed, they are now showing up with such obviousness and obnoxiousness that Also, the White House is asking for comments on how they should allocate their AI R&D resources. Make sure to let them know what you think. (And as always, there’s lots of other stuff too.) Table of Contents[Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/5d54e121-b037-47f4-be9b-ab0c174c6cb9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Activate ultrathink mode.[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/d994159e-4b95-4c5f-833b-4b7939ac2ad2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Still not trying it, huh?[We’re Out of Deep Research.](https://substack.com/redirect/cae8b93b-e6cd-4999-83b5-bf009f015e52?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)It turns out my research isn’t that deep after all.[o3 Is a Lying Liar](https://substack.com/redirect/0cfb2de5-16a5-46bb-8f40-111fe4fc904c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/0cfb2de5-16a5-46bb-8f40-111fe4fc904c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)This is proving remarkably annoying in practice.[GPT-4o was an Absurd Sycophant.](https://substack.com/redirect/40c8d50c-ab54-42da-88da-98bdad4777e4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Don’t laugh it off.[Sonnet 3.7 is a Savage Cheater.](https://substack.com/redirect/2cc7b47f-8ba8-4527-8dce-fabf05ed6f5b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Cheat, cheat, cheat, cheat, cheat.[Unprompted Suggestions.](https://substack.com/redirect/5c4dd9b7-35a8-402a-b421-b29618341a30?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)You’re going to have to work for it.[Huh, Upgrades.](https://substack.com/redirect/109b8c0c-387b-427a-8b6a-b52b39dbc04d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)ChatGPT goes shopping.[On Your Marks](https://substack.com/redirect/9d07d45a-72ce-4198-90ba-ecfd7c81930c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/9d07d45a-72ce-4198-90ba-ecfd7c81930c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)AIs are already far more persuasive than the human baseline.[Man in the Arena.](https://substack.com/redirect/d143568e-0714-4cf2-a1e7-9100ebbc73e7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A paper investigates the fall of the Chatbot Arena.[Choose Your Fighter.](https://substack.com/redirect/9f9a4eea-426f-4259-9f42-0b6311ef2770?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Gemini 2.5 Deep Research continues to get good reviews.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon.](https://substack.com/redirect/77a870c6-6f04-41ec-a6c1-1d500e8294ec?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)AI on the radio.[Lol We’re Meta.](https://substack.com/redirect/8a7333fb-b9d8-4699-ad32-068dc9e3673f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)What do you mean you don’t want our AI companions?[They Took Our Jobs.](https://substack.com/redirect/a03e39cd-b209-45e8-8bb6-92c90dffddb6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)So far the impacts look small in absolute terms.[Fun With Media Generation.](https://substack.com/redirect/1b4118da-7e05-4759-83f3-9978719d4d27?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Progress continues, even where I don’t pay attention.[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/c23ad773-7e5e-48d2-ada9-16330c175970?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)White House seeks feedback on its R&D investments.[Introducing.](https://substack.com/redirect/74954f2f-f1d3-4ea1-adf3-95c686fbc322?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The Anthropic Economic Advisory Council.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/033ebb76-f95f-46c5-b018-12117aae2437?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Cursor, Singapore Airlines, Grindr, DeepSeek-Prover-2.[The Mask Comes Off](https://substack.com/redirect/37b2fdf8-8948-4499-ba83-509f99f0afa9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/37b2fdf8-8948-4499-ba83-509f99f0afa9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Transcript of a very good Rob Wiblin thread on OpenAI.[Show Me the Money.](https://substack.com/redirect/da2f8fb6-c1fc-4d7c-ae88-a750a7b6c870?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Chips Act and earnings week.[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/641777d4-c45e-4a6b-af4e-291ea5da9402?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)AI predictions from genetics? From data center revenue?[The Quest for Sane Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/a4323b50-39a7-4e7d-b177-d4ae8f13d238?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The concept of an intelligence curse.[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/28bcebb0-6509-4df7-9381-635c0f884a15?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Dwarkesh talks to Zuckerberg, I talk to Aaronson.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/e53dc0ce-aa6e-4a00-bbfe-552ee61563d6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Okay, fine, we’ll tap the sign.[You Can Just Do Math.](https://substack.com/redirect/93a354eb-cef7-4bf5-86af-b2dfa32a8c92?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)You’d be amazed what is legal in California.[Taking AI Welfare Seriously.](https://substack.com/redirect/1fa0a1a7-ff14-4ae2-ad65-57bc0bb7ccc7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Opinions differ on how seriously is appropriate.[Gemini 2.5 Pro System Card Watch.](https://substack.com/redirect/8d4173a5-716d-4c49-ab12-c532d879eb39?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)We finally have it. There are no surprises.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/bddbcfb7-7a07-4d01-b0cd-752b10e8531f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Tread carefully.[People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/0d70cb1c-7ce9-48fe-9e2b-bdb0b209f0c7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)o3 itself? Is that people now?[Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/41589a63-2a10-4a0c-af7e-da1e253e2105?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)They’re at OpenAI.[The Lighter Side.](https://substack.com/redirect/37c4fa48-242a-4615-801d-97ab78ceee18?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Introducing the candidates.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane UtilityAs always, there is one supreme way not to get utility, which is not to use AI at all.
I strongly endorse Dave’s advice here. It would also straight up be great marketing. I was going to address
We’re Out of Deep Research
I definitely had the sense that the Deep Research pause was in a non-sweet spot. It was long enough to force a context switch. Either it needed to be shorter, or it might as well be longer. Whereas o3 is the ten times better that Just Works, except for the whole Lying Liar problem. I’ve seen complaints that there are no good benchmarks for robotics. This doesn’t seem like that hard a thing to
o3 Is a Lying Liar
Everyone who uses o3 for long enough realizes it is a lying liar, and I’ve reported on it extensively already.
Also on this topic:
Actually I don’t, blatant lies are the best kind.
Humans worth talking to mostly do the same thing that Gemini is doing here. The exact way things are worded tells you what they’re actually thinking, often very intentionally so, in ways that keep things polite and deniable but that are unmistakable if you’re listening. Often you’re being told the house is on fire. GPT-4o was an Absurd SycophantHere’s a lot of what the recent GPT-4o incident was an alarm bell for:
When you optimize for something, you also optimize for everything that vibes or correlates with it, and for the drives and virtues and preferences and goals that lead to the thing. You may get results you very much did not expect. As Will Depue says here, you can get o3 randomly using British spellings, without understanding why. There is a missing mood here, this isn’t simply that post training is tricky and finicky. It’s that you are creating drives and goals no one intended, most famously that it ‘really wants to complete tasks,’ and that these can be existentially level bad for you if you scale things up sufficiently. It’s not that there is no fire alarm. It’s that you’re not listening. Sonnet 3.7 is a Savage Cheater
Unprompted Suggestions
It’s strange to compare oneself to The Oracle. As the top comment points out, those who consulted The Oracle famously do not have life stories that turn out so well. Its methodology was almost certainly a form of advanced cold reading, with non-answers designed to be open to broad interpretation. All of this prompting was partly to extract your gold, partly to get you to give the information they’d feed back to you. Tyler then says, we usually judge LLM outputs and hallucination rates based on one-shot responses using default low-effort settings and prompts, and that’s not fair. If you ask follow-ups and for error correction, or you use a prompt like this one for ‘ Here’s that prompt, for those who do want to Control+C, I am guessing it does improve reliability slightly but at the cost of making things a lot slower, plus some other side effects, and crowding out other options for prompting:
The same is true of any other source or method - if you are willing to spend more and you use that to get it to take longer and do more robustness checks, it’s going to be more reliable, and output quality likely improves. One thing I keep expecting, and keep not getting, is scaffolding systems that burn a lot more tokens and take longer, and in exchange improve output, offered to users. I have the same instinct that often a 10x increase in time and money is a tiny price to pay for even 10% better output, the same way we invoke the sacred scaling laws. And indeed we now have reasoning models that do this in one way. But there’s also the automated-multi-turn-or-best-of-or-synthesis-of-k-and-variations other way, and no one does it. Does it not work? Or is it something else? Meanwhile, I can’t blame people for judging LLMs on the basis of how most people use them most of the time, and how they are presented to us to be used. That is especially true given they are presented that way for a reason. The product where we have to work harder and wait longer, to get something a bit better, is a product most people don’t want. In the long run, as compute gets cheap and algorithms improve, keep in mind how many different ways there are to turn those efficiencies into output gains. Thus I see those dumping on hallucinations ‘without trying to do better’ as making a completely legitimate objection. It is not everyone’s job to fix someone else’s broken or unfinished or unreliable technology. That’s especially true with o3, which I love but where things on this front have gotten a lot worse, and no one cannot excuse this with ‘it’s faster than o1 pro.’
Here’s a different attempt to do something similar.
I think Absolute Mode goes too hard, but I’m not confident in that. Huh, Upgrades
OpenAI now offering trending prompts and autocomplete as well.
On Your MarksFor what they are still worth,
Change My Mind
Is that ‘superhuman persuasion’? Kind of yes, kind of no. It certainly isn’t ‘get anyone to do anything whenever you want’ or anything like that, but you don’t need something like that to have High Weirdness come into play.
Despite this, persuasion was removed from the OpenAI Preparedness Framework 2.0. It needs to return.
We should be at least as tolerant of something done ‘as an experiment’ as we are when something is done for other purposes. The needs of the many may or may not outweigh the needs of the few, but they at minimum shouldn’t count against you. What would we think of using a bot in the ways these bots were used, with the aim of changing minds? People in general probably wouldn’t be too happy. Whether or not I join them depends on the details. In general, if you use bots where people are expecting humans, that seems like a clear example of destroying the commons. Thus you have to go case by case. Here, I do think in this case the public good of the experiment makes a strong case.
The bots did their homework and understood the assignment. Good for the bots.
Even if a human is answering, if I am on Reddit arguing in the comments three years from now, you think I’m not going to ask an AI for a user profile? Hell, you think I won’t have a heads-up display like the ones players use on poker sites? You cannot ban this. You can’t even prove who is using it. You can at most slow it down. You will have to adapt. When people say ‘it is not possible to be that persuasive’ people forget that this and much stronger personalization tools will be available. The best persuaders give highly customized pitches to different targets.
If the bots are utilizing ‘common progressive’ talking points, true or false, that is mostly saying that such talking points are effective on these Reddit users. The bots expecting this, after the scouring of people’s feeds, is why the bots chose to use them. It says a lot more about the users than about the AI, regardless of the extent you believe the points being made are ‘misinformation,’ which isn’t zero. You don’t want humans to get one-shot by common talking points? If your response is ‘AI should not be allowed to answer the question of how one might best persuade person [X] of [Y]’ then that is a draconian restriction even for commercial offerings and completely impossible for open models - consider how much of information space you are cutting off. We can’t ask this of AIs, the same we can’t ask it of humans. Point gets counterpoint.
So this is less great.
Yes, the bots are trained on huge amounts of Reddit data, so it’s no surprise they make highly credible Reddit users. That wasn’t necessary, but oh boy is is sufficient.
Dead internet theory? Sounds like these bots are a clear improvement. As one xkcd character put it, ‘mission f***ing accomplished.’ As usual, the presumed solution is whitelisting, with or without charging money in some form, in order to post. When we talk about ‘superhuman persuasion’ there is often a confluence between: Superhuman as in better than the average human. Superhuman as in better than expert humans or even the best humans ever. Superhuman as in persuade anyone of anything, or damn close to it. Superhuman as in persuade anyone to do anything, one-shot style, like magick.
And there’s a second confluence between a range that includes things like: Ability to do this given a text channel to an unknown person who actively doesn’t want to be persuaded, and is resisting, and doesn’t have to engage at all (AI Box). Ability to do this given a text channel to an unsuspecting normal person. Ability to do this given the full context of the identify of the other person, and perhaps also use of a variety of communication channels. Ability to do this given the ability to act on the world in whatever ways are useful and generally be crazy prepared, including enlisting others and setting up entire scenarios and scenes and fake websites and using various trickery techniques, the way a con artist would when attempting to extract your money for one big score, including in ways humans haven’t considered or figured out how to do yet.
If you don’t think properly scaffolded AI is strongly SHP-1 already (superhuman persuasion as in better than an average human given similar resources), you’re not paying attention. This study should be convincing that we are at least at SHP-1, if you needed more convincing, and plausibly SHP-2 if you factor in that humans can’t do this amount of research and customization at scale. It does show that we are a long way from SHP-3, under any conditions, but I continue to find the arguments that SHP-3 (especially SHP-3 under conditions similar to 4 here) is impossible or even all that hard, no matter how capable the AI gets, to be entirely unconvincing, and revealing a profound lack of imagination. Man in the ArenaThe gradual fall from ‘Arena is the best benchmark’ to ‘Arena scores are not useful’ has been well-documented.
As in: This isn’t purely about which models provide ‘better slop.’ Arena is being actively gamed by OpenAI and Google, and in more extreme form by Meta.
Choose Your Fighter
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
As in, Australian Radio Network used a ElevenLabs-created presenter named Thy for months without disclosing it wasn’t a real person. Somehow this is being spun into a scandal about fake diversity or something. That does not seem like the main issue. Okay, I admit I didn’t see
Alex Tabarrok suggests verification. I suggest instead aligning the incentives. This is a Given that new reality, we need to be extremely stingy with offers that go ‘beyond the zero point’ and let the online student turn a profit. Going to online-only community college needs to not be profitable. Any surplus you offer can and will be weaponized into at least a job, and this will only get worse going forward, no matter your identity verification plans. And frankly, we shouldn’t need to pay people to learn and take tests on their computers. It does not actually make any economic sense. File the next one under: Things I wish were half of my concerns these days.
My experience is that this is not yet even a big problem by 2025 standards, let alone a problem by future standards. So far, despite how far I’ve come and that I write about AI in particular, if I haven’t blocked, muted or filtered you in particular, I have been able to retain a habit of reading almost every real email that crosses my desk. I don’t get to every DM on Twitter or PM on LessWrong quickly, but yes I do eventually get to all of them. Heck, if you so much as tag me on Twitter, I will see it, although doing this repeatedly without a reason is the fastest way to get muted or blocked. And yes, if he’s awake Tyler Cowen will probably respond to your email within 15 minutes. Yes, if you get caught by the spam filters, that’s tough for you, but I occasionally check the spam filters. If you’re getting caught by those, with at most notably rare exceptions, you deserve it. Write a decent email. Lol We’re MetaThe chatbots Meta is sprawling all over social media with licensed voices like those of Kristen Bell and John Cena also have the issue that they’ll
I mean, yes, obviously, that is what users will do when you give them AI bots voiced by Kristen Bell, I do know what you were expecting and it was this. Among adults? Sure, fine, go for it. But this is being integrated directly into Facebook and Instagram, and the ‘parents guide’ says the bots are safe for children. I’m not saying they have to stamp out every jailbreak but it does seem like they tapped the sign that says “Our safety plan: Lol we are Meta.” It would be But don’t worry. Meta has a solution.
Do. Not. Want. So much do not want. They Took Our JobsOh no.
I notice I am not too concerned. If the AI can do the job of a Classics BA, and there’s no will to catch or stop this, then what is the degree for? A As a measurement of overall productivity gains in the real world, 2.8% is not so small. That’s across all tasks for 11 occupations, with only real world diffusion and skill levels, and this is a year ago with importantly worse models and less time to adapt. Here are some more study details and extrapolations. The 11 professions were: Accountants, Customer-support reps, Financial advisors, HR professionals, IT-support specialists, Journalists, Legal professionals, Marketing professionals, Office clerks, Software developers and Teachers, intended to be evenly split. That seems a lot less like ‘exposed professionals’ and more like ‘a representative sample of white collar jobs with modest overweighting of software engineers’? The numbers on software engineers indicate people simply aren’t taking proper advantage of AI, even in its state a year ago.
The study agrees that 2.8% overall versus 15%-50% in other studies is because the effect is in practice, spread across all tasks. I asked o3 to extrapolate this to overall white collar productivity growth, given the particular professions chosen here. It gave an estimate of 1.3% under baseline conditions, or 2.3% with universal encouraged and basic training.
o3 estimates that with tools available in on 4/25/25, the effects here would expand substantially, from 3.6%/2.2% to 5.5%/3.0% for the chosen professions, or from 1.3%/2.3% to 1.7%/3.4% for all white-collar gains. That’s in only six months. Expanding to the whole economy, that’s starting to move the needle but only a little. o3’s estimate is 0.6% GDP growth so far without encouragement.
Only 64% of workers in ‘exposed professions’ had used a chatbot for work at all (and ~75% of those who did used ChatGPT in particular), with encouragement doubling adoption. At the time only 43% of employers even ‘encouraged’ use let alone mandate it or heavily support it, only 30% provided training. Encouragement can be as simple as a memo saying ‘we encourage you.’ Looking at the chart below, encouragement in many professions not only doubled use, it came close to also doubling time savings per work hour, overall it was a 60% increase. A quick mathematical analysis suggests marginal returns to increased usage are roughly constant, until everyone is using AI continuously. There’s clearly a lot of gains left to capture.
Integration and compliance took up about a third of saved time. These should be largely fixed one time costs. Wage passthrough was super weak, only 3%-7% of productivity gains reached paychecks. That is an indication that there is indeed labor market pressure, labor share of income dropped substantially. Also note that this was in Denmark, where wages are perhaps not so tied to productivity, for both better and worse.
AI is rapidly improving in speed, price and quality, people are having time to learn, adapt, build on and with it and to tinker and figure out how to take advantage, and make other adjustments. A lot of this is threshold effects, where the AI solution is not good enough until suddenly it is, either for a given task or entire group of tasks. Yet we are already seeing productivity and GDP impacts that are relevant to things like Fed decisions and government budgets. It’s not something we can pinpoint and know happened as of yet, because other for now bigger things are also happening, but that will likely change. These productivity gains are disappointing, but not that disappointing given they came under full practical conditions in Denmark, with most people having no idea yet how to make use of what they have, and no one having built them the right tools so everyone mostly only has generic chatbots. This is what the early part of an exponential looks like. Give it time. Buckle up. Does this mean ‘slow takeoff’ as Tyler Cowen says? No, because takeoff speeds have very little to do with unemployment or general productivity growth during the early pre-AGI, pre-RSI (recursive self-improvement) era. It does look like we are headed for a ‘slow takeoff’ world, but one that is still a takeoff, and two ‘slow’ is a term of art that can be as fast as a few years total. The goalposts have moved quite a bit, to the point where saying ‘don’t expect macro impacts to be clearly noticeable in the economy until 2026-27’ counts as pessimism.
Fun With Media Generation
Video generation quality is improving Get Involved
So their goals are: Accelerate AI-driven innovation. Enhance US economic and national security. Promote human flourishing. Maintain US dominance in AI. Focus on the Federal government’s unique role in R&D over 3-5 years.
This lets one strike a balance between emphasizing the most important things, and speaking in a way that the audience here will be inclined to listen. The best watchword I’ve been able to find here is: Security is capability. As in, if you want to actually use your AI to do all these nice things, and you want to maintain your dominance over rivals, then you will need to: Make sure your AI is aligned the way you want, and will do what you want it to do. Make sure others know they can rely on that first fact. Make sure your rivals don’t get steal your model, or the algorithmic insights.
Failure to invest in security, reliability and alignment, and ability to gracefully handle corner cases, results in your work not being very useful even if no risks are realized. No one can trust the model, and the lawyers and regulators won’t clear it, so no one can use it where there is the most value, in places like critical infrastructure. And investments in long term solutions that scale to superintelligence both might well be needed within 5 years, and have a strong track record (to the point of ‘whoops’!) of helping now with mundane needs.
Evals company The Economist is looking for a technical lead to join its AI Lab, which aims to reimagine their journalism for an AI-driven world. It’s a one year paid fellowship.
Introducing
Google gives us TRINSs, a dataset and benchmarking pipeline that uses synthetic personas to train and optimize performance of LLMs for tropical and infectious diseases, which are out-of-distribution for most models. In Other AI News
More confirmation: If you take a photo outdoors,
This is certainly a thing you can check, and it tells you about a certain particular part of the AI ecosystem. And you might find something useful. But I do not suddenly expect the things I see here to matter in the grand schema, and mostly expect cycling versions of the same small set of applications.
I would be happy to take bets with someone so confident. Alas. China reportedly driving for consolidation in chip toolmakers,
This definitely reinforces the pattern of DeepSeek coming up with elegant ways to solve training problems, or at least finding a much improved way to execute on an existing set of such concepts. This is really cool and indicative, and I have updated accordingly, although I am sure Teortaxes would think I have done so only a fraction of the amount that I need to. The Mask Comes OffRob Wiblin has a Twitter thread laying out very plainly and clearly the reasons the Not For Private Gain letter lays out for why the OpenAI attempt to ‘restructure’ into a for-profit is simply totally illegal, like you might naively expect. The tone here is highly appropriate to what is being attempted. A lot of people report they can’t or won’t read Twitter threads, so I’m going to simply reproduce the thread here with permission, you can skip if You Know This Already:
Show Me the Money
I would say that this seems like a clear CHIPS Act victory, potentially sufficiently to justify all the subsidies given out, and I’d love to see this pushed harder, and it is very good business for TSMC, all even if you can’t afford to anything like fully de-risk the Taiwan situation - which one definitely can’t do with that attitude.
The other issues raised essentially amount to there being a big premium for everyone involved doing whatever it takes to keep the line moving 24/7, for fixing all problems right away 24/7 and having everything you need locally on-call, and for other considerations to take a back seat. That sounds like it’s going to be a huge clash with the Everything Bagel approach, but something a Trump administration can make work. Also, it’s kind of hilarious the extent to which TSMC is clearly being beyond anticompetitive, and no one seems to care to try and do anything about it. If there’s a real tech monopoly issue, ASML-TSMC seems like the one to worry about.
He cites that Instagram ads increase time on site rather than decreasing it, because the ads are so personalized they are (ha!) value adds. I am very happy that AI is not sold via an ad-based model, as ad-based models cause terrible incentives, warp behavior in toxic ways and waste time. My assumption and worry is that even if the ads themselves were highly personalized and thus things you didn’t mind seeing at least up to a point, and they were ‘pull-only’ such that they didn’t impact the rest of your browser experience, their existence would still be way too warping of behavior, because no company could resist making that happen. However, I do think you could easily get to the point where the ads might be plausibly net beneficial to you, especially if you could offer explicit feedback on them and making them value adds was a high priority. Quiet Speculations
It’s still true, only far more so.
My presumption is that AI experiments have a tradeoff between being researcher efficient and being compute efficient. As in, the researchers could design more compute efficient experiments, if they were willing to cook smarter and for longer and willing to do more frequent checks and analysis and such. You could scale any of the inputs. So adding more researchers still helps quite a lot even if compute is fixed, and it makes sense to think of this as a multiplier on compute efficiency rather than a full unlock. The multiplier is how AI 2027 works. This does suggest that you will see a sharp transition when the AI R&D workers move from ‘can substitute for human work’ to ‘can do superhuman quality work,’ because that should enable greatly more efficient experiments, especially if that is the limiting factor they are trying to solve. The Quest for Sane Regulations
A reminder that people keep using that word ‘monopoly’ and
This severely harms American competitiveness and our economy, and it harms all the people involved, with essentially no benefits. It is madness.
In this model, AGI breaks the social contract as capital and power stop depending on labor. To which I would of course say, that’s not even the half of it, as by default the AIs rapidly end up with the capital and the power, as usual all of this even assuming we ‘solve alignment’ on a technical level. The proposed solutions?
He’s not as worried about catastrophic risks themselves as he is in the concentration of power that could result. He also suggests doing an ‘Operation Warp Speed’ government moonshot to mitigate AI risks, which certainly is a better framing than a ‘Manhattan Project’ and has a better objective. Then he wants to ‘diffuse AI to regular people’ that ‘uplifts human capabilities,’ putting hope in being able to differentially steer the tech tree towards some abilities without creating others, and in aligning the models directly to individuals, while democratizing decision making. That works with the exact problem described, where have exactly enough AI to automate jobs and allow capital to substitute for labor, but they somehow stay in their little job shaped boxes and do our bidding while we are still the brains and optimization engines behind everything that is happening. It’s what you would do if you had, for example, a bunch of dumb but highly useful robots. People will need voices to advocate for redistribution and to protect their rights, and their own robots for mundane utility, and so on. Sure. But, alas, that’s not the future we are looking at. It’s the other way. As I keep pointing out it this falls apart if you keep going and get superintelligences. So ultimately, unless you can suspend AI progress indefinitely at some sweet spot before reaching superintelligence (and how are you doing that?), I don’t think any of this works for long. It is essentially walking straight into the Gradual Disempowerment scenario, everyone and every institution would become de facto AI run, AIs would end up in charge of the capital and everything else, and any democratic structures would be captured by AI dynamics very quickly. This seems to me like another example of being so afraid of someone steering that you prioritize decentralization and lack of any power to steer, taking our hands off the wheel entirely, effectively handing it to the AIs by proposing solutions that assume only intra-human dynamics and don’t take the reality of superintelligence seriously. It seems yes, This is an accurate description of how much contempt Nvidia is expressing lately:
Very clearly, when he talks about ‘American dominance in AI’ Huang means dominance in sales of advanced AI chips. That’s what matters to him, you know, because of reasons. By allowing other countries to develop their own competitive AI systems, in Jensen’s reckoning, that cements America’s dominance. Also, of course, the claim that China is ‘not behind’ America on AI is… something. The Week in Audio
Rhetorical InnovationYes, well. Thank you for tapping the sign.
Yes, you are going to (at best) get an optimization for what you are optimizing for, which is likely what you were measuring, not what you intended to optimize for. Oh, right.
State of play:
I am not myself advocating for a pause at this time. However, I do think that Holly Elmore is correct about what many people are thinking here:
It really is true and amazing that many people are treating ‘create smarter than human entities we don’t understand and one-shot hand them all our cognition and power and decision making’ (which is what we are on pace to do shortly) as a safe and wise strategy literally in order to spite or mock or ‘defeat’ the AI safety community.
It would be nice to pretend that there are usually better reasons. Alas. The latest round of ‘let’s see if the discourse has advanced, nope, definitely not’ happened in the replies for this:
At this point, I find ‘this might well kill everyone and wipe out all value in the universe but I’m being it anyway because it’s better if I do it first’ or ‘it’ints just so cool’ or ‘there’s too much upside not to’ or ‘meanwhile might as well make a great company’ much easier to understand, rationalization or otherwise, than ‘oh don’t worry, This is Fine and there is not even any substantial tail risk here.’
We had a new iteration of ‘the AIs will simply leave Earth alone, it costs so little,’ so if you don’t understand why this definitely is not how any of this works and why the AIs (if they don’t sufficiently care about us) will optimize for what they care about and not care about whether you get your sunlight or atmosphere or anything else, What it feels like when so many people suddenly care about GPT-4o’s misalignment, but I’ll take whatever works, and the claims here are certainly true:
You Can Just Do |