---
subject: "Specify it only somewhat"
from: "Gordon Brander from Squishy Computer <subconscious@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-01-25 18:53:54
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Gordon Brander", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8580891911269121157", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Reading Eno was an early pioneer in the field of generative music. His Eno stitched each loop together at a different length, It’s a cybernetic approach to composition. Music as a system. As Eno puts it,
He later contrasts this bottom-up generative approach to the top-down approach of traditional musical scores. In a traditional score, you play the music. In a generative score, you play with the system that plays the music. It seems to me that AI agents are turning all of us into generative composers. Instead of writing the code, we write a generative score for agents to write the code. Instead of playing the music, we’re playing the system. If you’re a programmer, this isn’t exactly new. We don’t actually write the ones and zeros the computer executes. We haven’t done that in a long time. Instead, we write the code that writes the code that writes the code that writes the ones and zeros. So, in a sense, an AI coding agent just adds another layer to the cake. Agents generate code, which generates code, which generates code… However, the critical difference with agents is in the expressiveness of the generative system. Sure, a programming language like JavaScript allows us to express ourselves using higher-level concepts, and these are later compiled into ones and zeros. Yet JavaScript is still a formal language. It describes exact instructions, and the same script will generate the same exact instructions, every time. This is a bit like the traditional musical score, specifying how to play the music within fairly tight tolerances. A coding agent, by contrast, takes an English prompt, and extrapolates it into code. The agent is making an intuitive leap, from informal language, to a formal language, from a gesture, to a fully-specified set of instructions. There is a lot of ambiguity in that extrapolation process. The same prompt may generate different programs each time it is run. But what if we see this ambiguity as a creative opportunity? Take Terry Riley’s In C, another generative piece. Its score is unusual:
There’s a lot of ambiguity here. That ambiguity results in radically different performances. So here is a performance with Terry Riley, …and another one, this time incorporating kora, balafon, and tama. …and my personal favorite, by Invisible Polytechnic. It’s so energetic and cheerful.
The ambiguity of the instructions is what makes In C so special. There is no one exact way to play it. Individual performers are given the freedom to interpret the instructions for themselves, making every performance a surprise to the audience, and to the performers themselves.
How might we adopt this creative stance toward AI agents? There is no “correct” version of In C. The variety is the point… which is another way to look at this. In traditional programming, the coder has
But working with an AI agent is different. Some of the complexity gets transferred out of our head, and into the head of the agent. The agent gains variety. Much more variety than a compiler. By working with it, we sacrifice some of our requisite variety, and lose some of our direct control over the system. But what if that’s good? Can we work with variety as a creative material? How would What if, as Eno suggests, our role as programmers, artists, designers, and thinkers, expands beyond playing the music, to playing with the system? To sculpting the variety of our agentic systems? Squishy Computer is free today. But if you enjoyed this post, you can tell Squishy Computer that their writing is valuable by pledging a future subscription. You won't be charged unless they enable payments. |