---
subject: "Infra #6"
from: "River Kenna from Infra <riverkenna@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-09-01 14:08:05
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "River Kenna", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3010718370428876194", "UNREAD"]
---
StrataThe word monster is an etymological sibling of demonstration. The family resemblance is striking, once you see it. A monster demonstrates what can go wrong. For example, it’s good to be in touch with your mammal nature, but werewolves demonstrate the limits of that virtue. It’s good to have drive, ambition, libido, but hungry ghosts demonstrate where drive becomes empty craving. We all have our own monsters. We’ve all met people who demonstrate what we might become, if we lean too far into imbalanced urges. Every culture has its own monsters—those people who demonstrate the rot lurking at the core of its values, the near enemies of its greatest virtues. We can all think of at least one public figure who shows what happens when you separate a single cultural value from the balancing ecology of other virtues. A monster is a demonstration — who are your monsters, both inner and outer? Encounter
I love Laing’s writing, the fractured flow of his passages—but it also seems worth explicitly simplifying the above passage here, to un-soften the punch: “If you split Being down the middle, the dissociated evil impulse permeates the good and turns it evil.” Splitting experience produces monsters. ArtifactMy own artifact for this week. Stitching things into a forced coherence can be monstrous—but only if I stop too soon. Infra is free and will stay free, but if you get something out of my work, consider giving something back. Share my writing with friends & followers, pick up my |