---
subject: "New Statement Calls For Not Building Superintelligence For Now"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-10-24 17:35:05
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Building superintelligence poses large existential risks. Also known as: We should not build superintelligence until such time as that changes, and the risk of everyone dying as a result, as well as the risk of losing control over the future as a result, is very low. Not zero, but far lower than it is now or will be soon. Thus,
Their polling says there is 64% agreement on this, versus 5% supporting the status quo. A Brief History Of Prior Statements
This letter was absolutely, 100% a call for a widespread regime of prior restraint on development of further frontier models, and to importantly ‘slow down’ and to ‘pause’ development in the name of safety. At the time, I said it was a deeply flawed letter and I declined to sign it, but my quick reaction was to be happy that the letter existed. This was a mistake. I was wrong. The pause letter not only weakened the impact of the superior CAIS letter, it has now for years been used as a club with which to browbeat or mock anyone who would suggest that future sufficiently advanced AI systems might endanger us, or that we might want to do something about that. To claim that any such person must have wanted such a pause at that time, or would want to pause now, which is usually not the case.
This was a very good sentence. I was happy to sign, as were some heavy hitters, including Sam Altman, Dario Amodei, Demis Hassabis and many others. This was very obviously not a pause, or a call for any particular law or regulation or action. It was a statement of principles and the creation of common knowledge. Given how much worse many people have gotten on AI risk since then, it would be an interesting exercise to ask those same people to reaffirm the statement. This Third StatementThe new statement is in between the previous two letters. It is more prescriptive than simply stating a priority. It is however not a call to ‘pause’ at this time, or to stop building ordinary AIs, or to stop trying to use AI for a wide variety of purposes. It is narrowly requesting that, if you are building something that might plausibly be a superintelligence, under anything like present conditions, you should instead not do that. We should not allow you to do that. Not until you make a strong case for why this is a wise or not insane thing to do. This is something that those who are most vocally speaking out against the statement strongly believe is not going to happen within the next few years, so for the next few years any reasonable implementation would not pause or substantially impact AI development. I interpret the statement as saying, roughly: if a given action has a substantial chance of being the proximate cause of superintelligence coming into being, then that’s not okay, we shouldn’t let you do that, not under anything like present conditions. I think it is important that we create common knowledge of this, which we very clearly do not yet have. This does not have to involve asking for a concrete short-term particular policy or other intervention. Who Signed ItAs of writing this there are 32,214 signatories. The front page lists before the first break: Yoshua Bengio, Geoffrey Hinton, Stuart Russell, Steve Wozniak, Sir Richard Branson, Steve Bannon, Glenn Beck, Susan Rice, Mike Mullen and Joe Crowley. Here are some comments by signers:
Pushback Against the Statement
Okay, so should then, when faced with this choice, build a superintelligence shortly after it becomes possible to build one? That does not feel like a nice policy to sign. As I understand the position taken by Sriram and Dean, they don’t offer a meaningful third option. If you intend to stop the development of superintelligence from happening as rapidly as possible, you must end up with a ‘global organization with essentially unchecked power,’ and that’s worse. Those are, they tell us, our only choices, and the only thing you could be asking for if you express the desire for superintelligence not to be built at the first opportunity. I don’t think those are the only choices, and I certainly don’t think the way to find a third option is to tell us we can’t create common knowledge of opposition to door number one without endorsing door number two. But also don’t understand why, Responses To The Pushback
I agree with Daniel that I would expect the qualification would be seen by most people as a conciliatory/compromise/nuance clause. I also suspect that Dean’s model of himself here is incorrect, although his statement would have been different.
Exactly. This is creation of common knowledge around common sense thinking, not a request for a particular detailed policy.
Dean respectfully notes two things. First, that implementation of child labor restrictions is far easier, which is true, although I’m not convinced it is relevant. The principles remain the same, I think? And two that they importantly disagree about the nature of intelligence and superintelligence, which is also very true. Dean then gets to his central point, which is he prefers to focus on practical and incremental work that moves us towards good outcomes on the margin. I am all for such work, but I don’t expect it alone to be sufficient and don’t see why it should crowd out the creation of common knowledge or the need to consider bolder action. Dean offers to discuss the issues live with Max, and I hope they do that. Avoid Negative Polarization But Speak The Truth As You See ItDean Ball is the kind of Worthy Opponent you want, who has a different world model than you do but ultimately wants good things over bad things.
There certainly are those who actively seek to cause negative polarization of AI safety issues generally, who go full on ‘look what you made me do,’ and claim that if you point out that superintelligence probably kills us and ask us to act like it, the only reasonable response is to politicize the issue and to systematically work against any effort to mitigate risks, on principle, that’s how it works and they don’t make the rules. They are trying to make those the rules, and use everything as ammunition. I don’t think it is reasonable (or good decision theory) to say ‘therefore, because these people have power, STFU and only work on the margin if you know what’s good for humanity, or you.’ You're currently a free subscriber to |