---
subject: "Ka-Ching!: Banks make you think they’re rock solid. But that doesn’t mean their stocks always are"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-03-20 01:31:25
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031"]
---
|
|
Ka-Ching!
Thu, 20 Mar 25
A weekly newsletter about how finance is getting supercharged by tech in India, and how you can make money work for you..
Good Morning Ishan,
Winters are officially over in the national capital. I know because, first, we decided to switch on the air conditioners in office for the first time in months. And second, because those last survivors of the winter wardrobe—long-sleeved shirts—are now becoming unbearable to wear.
Evidently, a long, dry spell of summer now awaits us. I hate to think about it, but there’s absolutely nothing I can do. Much like investors who have significant exposure to Indusind Bank.
Ever since news about a discrepancy in the bank’s derivatives book broke on 10 March, the company’s stock has lost 24% in value. This, despite a 4% uptick after the Reserve Bank of India’s [assurance](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/wealth/save/indusind-bank-depositors-heres-rbis-opinion-on-the-banks-financial-state/articleshow/119117820.cms?from=mdr) on Saturday that the bank is “well-capitalised and maintains a high liquidity coverage ratio”, and that an “external audit is underway to rectify any issues.”
Banks take such pains to portray themselves as the epitome of trustworthiness that it’s often difficult to remember that their investors can face the same kind of risks as any other investor in the stock market. Especially when major bank stocks have offered handsome returns over the past five years—ICICI Bank’s stock price has grown by nearly 280%; HDFC Bank’s by 100%; and Axis Bank by 144% in the period.
But the risks are always present. And in a few cases, perhaps even higher.
“I’m a nervous investor in banks and lenders,” Devina Mehra [posted](https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7305078845097844737/) on Linkedin after news about the Rs 1,530 crore discrepancy came out. Mehra is the founder and CMD of First Global, a 31-year-old fund management house specialising in global investing and offering portfolio management services (PMS). Before setting up First Global, she was a corporate banker with Citibank for over seven years.
I called her up for her reasoning, and one other senior banker, and what they said has made me look at bank stocks through a more nuanced perspective.
Mehra was very clear; she didn’t want to talk about Indusind Bank. But she did comment on investing in bank stocks in general.
“As a lender, your concern is always around what can go wrong.”
In a nutshell, what that means is that most surprises in the banking business are negative surprises, hardly pleasant. And this is because of how the very fundamentals of banking work.
First, banks are highly leveraged—most of what they receive as deposits, they give out as loans, profiting from the difference in interest rates. To quote the other senior banker I spoke to: “Leverage creates bankruptcy risk if interest rate risk and credit risk is not hedged properly.” Interest rate risk is the potential for financial loss due to changes in policy interest rates, and credit risk is the chance of borrowers not repaying their loans.
Mismanagement of these risks can pull the rug from under a bank. I’m sure all of us remember the [infamous](https://www.economicsobservatory.com/why-did-silicon-valley-bank-fail) failure of Silicon Valley Bank in the US in March 2023, where both came into play—profligate lending, followed by a spike in interest rates. And closer to home, one of the major reasons behind the [crisis](https://www.businesstoday.in/industry/banks/story/6-reasons-why-yes-bank-collapsed-251442-2020-03-05) at Yes Bank in 2020, India’s fifth largest private bank at the time, was its high-risk-high-return strategy characterised by aggressive lending. Such models are sustainable only when credit checks are extremely stringent and borrowers continue their repayments in a timely manner. And neither happened at Yes Bank.
In the last five years, Yes Bank’s stock price has slipped by over 60% despite the State Bank of India (SBI), more specifically its then chief Rajnish Kumar, [pulling off](https://www.businesstoday.in/industry/banks/story/yes-bank-crisis-how-sbi-executed-a-perfect-rescue-plan-251647-2020-03-07) one of the biggest rescue operations of a private sector commercial bank in the country’s history.
Meanwhile, overleveraging isn’t the only landmine.
The bank business is closely tied to economic conditions. Banks thrive during periods of economic expansion, when consumer spending and borrowing are high. But during periods of slow growth, their profits tend to fall as loan demand drops.
In parallel, poor economic conditions also mean more borrowers struggle to repay debts, leading to an increase in defaults. The primary reason behind the fall of Lakshmi Vilas Bank in 2020, for instance, was bad loans caused by a struggling economy and rather relaxed underwriting practices, according to the senior banker. For instance, LVB’s troubles [multiplied](https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/business/india-business/the-rise-and-fall-of-lakshmi-vilas-bank/articleshow/79271231.cms?utm_source=chatgpt.com) with its decision to extend large loans totaling around Rs 720 crore without solid security.
Of course, there are banks that do weather economic slowdowns in good shape, especially if they go into it well prepared. For instance, JPMorgan Chase, the largest bank in the United States by total assets, [conducted](https://finance.yahoo.com/news/jpmorgan-stress-tests-adverse-scenarios-in-covid-19-crisis-121053901.html) a “stress test” with far more severe parameters than those used by the Federal Reserve during the Covid-19 pandemic to ensure that it would remain adequately capitalised and maintain strong liquidity. Back home, SBI, HDFC Bank, and ICICI Bank also weathered the Covid-19 storm rather well. All three are in the RBI’s [list](https://www.businesstoday.in/industry/banks/story/sbi-hdfc-bank-icici-bank-retained-in-rbis-list-of-too-big-to-fail-banks-453582-2024-11-13) of lenders “too-big-to-fail”.
And finally, because banks have various and vast verticals—like treasury, wealth management, and wholesale banking—it’s difficult to keep a check on the whole thing. As Mehra put it, “you never know where the cockroaches are hiding.” For instance, Punjab National Bank’s stocks fell over 70% in 2018 when a Rs 13,000 crore fraud was uncovered, emerging mostly from the bank’s treasury and credit departments.
Similar was the case with ICICI Bank in March 2018. The bank’s stock price fell by 10% when allegations of conflict of interest involving its former CEO, Chanda Kochhar, surfaced. The charges were related to loans sanctioned by the bank to the Videocon Group, where her husband had business interests. The internal lending and credit risk assessment departments failed to properly address the conflict of interest, leading to legal investigations. The stock prices soared after the present chief Sandeep Bakhshi took over and began putting the house in order.
Regulatory action can also result in stock price dips, as we saw when Kotak Bank was [banned](https://www.businesstoday.in/markets/stocks/story/kotak-mahindra-bank-stock-rally-impact-of-lifting-of-rbi-credit-card-ban-share-price-target-464463-2025-02-13) by the RBI from onboarding new credit-card customers and HDFC Bank was [barred](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/banking/finance/banking/rbi-lifts-all-restrictions-on-hdfc-banks-digital-business-generating-activities/articleshow/90168421.cms?from=mdr) because of its tech issues—both stocks suffered temporarily before recovering.
Having said all this, though, we shouldn’t forget that banking is also one of the most stringently regulated sectors in the market, and the RBI usually does a good job with keeping a check on lenders.
But as an investor, it’s never a good idea to put all your eggs in one basket. Bank on banks, but don’t bank only on banks. And if you don’t know which bank to bank on, bank on the investment professional who hopefully knows.
That’s a wrap for this week. Do write to [kaching@the-ken.com](mailto:kaching@the-ken.com) if you have any thoughts to share, or leave a comment on our website or app edition.
Regards,
Rounak
[Got a tip? If you have a lead for a great story that The Ken can pursue, please send it to [tips@the-ken.com](mailto:tips@the-ken.com) or share it through [this form](https://theken.typeform.com/got-a-tip). To find out more about how to do this securely, read our [blog post](https://the-ken.com/blog/help-the-ken-tell-the-next-big-story/) about sharing tips with The Ken.]