---
subject: "Links For December 2025"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-12-10 16:51:08
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
[I haven’t independently verified each link. On average, commenters will end up spotting evidence that around two or three of the links in each links post are wrong or misleading. I correct these as I see them, and will highlight important corrections later, but I can’t guarantee I will have caught them all by the time you read this.] 1: Ben Goldhaber: 2: Jackdaw was originally Jack Daw. Magpie was originally Maggie Pie (really!) Robin Redbreast is still Robin Redbreast. Weird Medieval Guys explains 3: And if you enjoyed the story, 4: Fox Chapel Research: 5: A 6: Congratulations to ACX grantee Tornyol (the anti-mosquito drones), who
7: 8: 9: Fitzwilliam: 10: 11: Tangentially related: 12: When a new AI model comes out, the companies typically take down the old version over the protests of researchers, hobbyists, people who think the old model was their boyfriend, and anyone else who wants access to obsolete models for some reason. Why can’t they just leave it up? 13: Dimes Square is interesting as something that was supposed to be a renegade cultural phenomenon, never really got around to producing any object-level phenomenal renegade culture, but produced some absolutely stellar commentary on the phenomenon of it being a renegade cultural phenomenon - and 14: Everyone knows AGI could be bad for labor, but 15: Note that the issues are “issue focus”, so it’s not a contradiction that Democrats are against both “advocating for Israel” and “advocating for Palestinians” - they just don’t want candidates who make either position on the Middle East a major focus of their campaign. And here are results for independents, ie the people Democrats will have to convince in the general: Yes, voters react positively both to candidates “over the age of 50” and candidates “under the age of 50”. Just don’t run 50 year olds! 16: I 17: And related: a Herasight client 18: Lars Doucet, guest author of several ACX posts on Georgism, 19: 20: The wealth of cities (h/t 21: Update on …and raised $1.2 million on his first day, 22: Related: Pre-emption is when Congress blocks states from making legislation on a topic, saying it will decide all the laws itself. The states have signaled willingness to regulate AI pretty hard, so Big Tech has been pushing for AI pre-emption to (in their opinion) prevent an overly complicated patchwork of regulations, or (in their opponents’ opinion) shift everything to a Republican Congress that will drop the ball on regulation entirely. After their first attempt in June was defeated by a coalition of anti-tech liberals and anti-tech conservatives, we discussed ( 23: Related: 24: Related: how the American public’s opinions on AI are changing (from David Shor, h/t If this is to be taken seriously, AI is already a bigger political issue than abortion, climate change, or the environment. I fail 25: Related: 26: Qualia Research Institute has released a video describing some of the work they’ve been doing the past year - 27: 28: The latest news on the COVID origins debate: 29: Nicholas Decker (econ blogger, famous for his controversial autistic takes and Secret Service visit) If this appeals to you, you can find his contact info on the document. Related: Governor Jared Polis of Colorado 30: 31: Lakshya Jain in The Argument: 32: Related: Back when neoreaction was a big deal, I occasionally discussed posts by neoreactionary blogger Spandrell of Bloody Shovel. If you’re wondering what happened to him, you can read his 2024
It would be funny if the solution to the paradox Jain highlights was that for every time a COVID lockdown turned a liberal into a conservative, it turned one fascist into a moderate, for a net rightward shift of zero. 33: Also from an Argument poll: In a hypothetical Presidential matchup, 34: Jerl 35: The other good news is that somehow (???) they don’t charge a subscription, which makes them a way to get usually-subscription-only AI models for free. How is this possible? “[The most likely hypothesis is that] Witpaw is an adorable piece of spyware and he’s selling my data to the CCP”. 36: This month’s anti-people-named-Sacks content: NYT on 37: Orca Sciences: 38: 39: No surprise that the humanities and social sciences shift people left; no surprise that business and economics shift them right. I was a little surprised that engineering shifts people right a little, and that Education of all things shifts people right (albeit only slightly). How is that even possible? Are these people coming in as Mao Zedong and leaving as “only” Leon Trotsky? Also, Political Science is exactly neutral, lol. 40: Kindkristin: 41: More 42: 43: |