---
subject: "SVB in Retrospect"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <byrne@thediff.co>"
to: ""
date: 2023-05-01 12:44:34
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
|
In this issue: - SVB in Retrospect
- And in Other Banking News
- States See Like Big Tech
- Aggressive Competition
- Agglomeration and Sports
- The Narrow Rally
- Diff Jobs
SVB in RetrospectLike so much in life, the banking system works best when it's just slightly overconfident. Banks are a partially-privatized public utility, for both practical and path-dependent reasons, with their public-utility goal being to make payments and credit creation possible. So the central paradox of banking regulation is that the regulator's job is to maintain an environment in which everyone has high confidence, but any time a regulator acts early to stop a looming problem from getting out of control, they threaten that very confidence. The recently released Whether a bank fails for liquidity reasons or for capital reasons—i.e. whether the first-order problem is the bank's solvency, or just depositors' perceptions thereof—governance is almost tautologically at fault: prudent governance is defined by the set of norms that keep banks from running into problems. One fun way to think about the Fed's report is that since banks are so regulated, and since the existence of private banks is basically a regulatory choice (a good one, to be clear, but not without tradeoffs), "governance" includes both the bank's internal processes and those of the regulators. And, as the Fed report is careful to point out, these regulators also failed to act in time. One telling case study:
(Links added to the original.) The issue was not so much that regulators were oblivious to the problems—an - SVB's problems started when the company grew deposits faster than it could identify profitable lending opportunities, and chose to take interest rate risk in order to maintain its margins. This would have been harder to do if the bank had been regulated like larger institutions, but
[because of a rule change in 2018](https://www.thediff.co/r/81d25005?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99), the bank wasn't covered by some stress-test rules. - SVB's deposit base acted more like flighty wholesale funding than like a stable deposit base. Wholesale funding is not technically more mobile than deposits—it's easier to convert some money in a checking account into cash right this minute than it is to convert an overnight borrowing. But it's behaviorally different on average. SVB's depositors, however, didn't behave like typical depositors. (And in the wake of the bank's failure, perhaps the typical depositor in general will act a bit atypically in the future.)
So a more relaxed timeline, appropriate for balancing the risk between inciting a panic and allowing liquidity problems to get out of control, made sense based on history but didn't make sense in light of SVB's exact situation. One important part of the blow-by-blow analysis in the report is a case where the right risk tool completely misfired because of timing. In the abstract, regulations are a list of rules, but concretely they're implemented by people, both the ones who implement the rules on the company side and who check the implementation and suggest changes on the regulators' side. The report notes that the number of hours regulators spent on SVB actually dropped more than 40% from 2017 to 2020, even as its balance sheet grew. Later in the report we get to the worst part: in February 2021, SVB's size meant that it was tracked as a new kind of bank (it had been a "Regional Banking Organization," but with over $100bn in assets it was now in the "Large and Foreign Banking Organizations" category). This meant stricter standards and a bigger team. And time spent did indeed increase. But on a lag: - The San Francisco Fed requested another twelve staffers to work with SVB in March of 2021.
- This request was approved in June of 2021.
- The net increase in staffers was seven by December 2022.
- In order to give banks time to adjust to new standards, the size-based restrictions were rolled out gradually. For example, SVB's size meant that it had to put together a plan for how it could be shut down with minimum disruption in the event that it failed. The requirement to write this plan took effect in mid-2021, and SVB delivered it in December 2022.
[[3]](#fn3)
SVB managers were aware that there was a problem. In fact, at one point in November 2022, the board saw a presentation from management on "Project Phoenix," a plan to realize some of the mark-to-market losses in their portfolio and then reinvest in higher-yielding assets. The bank decided against this because of several risks, including uncertainty about interest rates and their view that "investor reaction is expected to be very negative." Why didn't they just sell, realize some losses, perhaps raise more capital, and live to fight another day? If "your job" is defined as "what you get paid to do," then handling interest rate risk was There are a few broad lessons from all of this: - Rules need to operate at the pace of the markets they cover. And this can be embedded into the rules. A bank that grows from $50bn in assets to $100bn over the course of a few decades is very different from one that does so in a few quarters.
- Thresholds like "$100bn in assets" are a good rule of thumb, but a smoother gradient is probably more effective.
- There's a good reason for companies to over-index on tail risks, and to regularly think about them: you want it to be a routine topic of discussion because of how disturbed people will be if the company they work for suddenly starts talking about the risk of going under.
- It's a bad idea to privilege certain kinds of risk over aggregate magnitudes of risk. It turns out to have been much easier for banks to speculate on long-term interest rates than to speculate on dodgy structured products or construction loans, but the impulse to speculate will always be there.
- There should be a closer correspondence between the risk/reward function described by banking regulations and the risk/reward function that banks embed in their compensation arrangements. A great deal of inconvenience could have been avoided if SVB's executives had been compensated based on some measure of return on equity less value-at-risk, and fluctuations in the latter number might have led investors to focus more on the risks the company was taking than on the fact that, in an accounting sense, those risks were paying off until the very end.
While it's impossible to build a banking system in which banks never fail, it's important to build one in which an institution like SVB-circa-1983-through-2020 can succeed. It's intrinsically risky to convert demand deposits into long-term investments, but it's also how useful things get built. As [this newsletter has noted before](https://www.thediff.co/r/b92842ea?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)($), the distinction between payments and credit is somewhat artificial. Except in edge cases where someone exchanges a bearer instrument for a product that's immediately delivered, there's always some credit risk involved in handling payments. Which is another way of saying that a more efficient payments system is a form of credit expansion.[↩︎](#fnref1)One way to think about a bank's capital position is to invert it and ask how much credit a bank can create with an incremental dollar in profits. When the economy is growing, and the spread between high- and low-risk assets is low, it's not ideal for a bank that earns another $1 to invest a huge multiple of that into high-risk activities. On the other hand, during a recession, when there's plenty of spare capacity and asset prices are low, it's great for banks' incremental profits to produce a lot of credit to close the gap between what the economy could produce and what it’s actually doing. So if a bank's capital ratio went from, say, 12% at the peak ($1 of profits produces $8.33 in new lending or financial asset purchases) to 6% ($1 supports $16.67 of new loans or other assets), they'd tend to stabilize credit creation. One difficulty with this is that a bank's assets are more volatile at times when they've dropped in value, i.e. times when the bank's capital position is worse. And since this leverage works both ways, it means that every dollar of bank losses destroys more credit at the bottom of the cycle than it does at the top. Which means the ideal policy is one where the banking system calls the bottom of the economic cycle. This is hard to achieve, but if one feature of banking regulation is that banks get arbitrarily generous support when they're all collectively losing money, this can essentially be the outcome. [↩︎](#fnref2)This kind of lag between noticing a problem and understanding its magnitude happens elsewhere, too. The notorious SolarWinds hack, for example, [turns out to have been identified six months earlier than previously thought](https://www.thediff.co/r/19b1ccf5?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99), by both the Department of Justice and private security companies, but no one involved reported it publicly at the time.[↩︎](#fnref3)
You're on the free list for The Diff. Last week, paying subscribers also read about A Word From Our SponsorsThere are some questions search engines are good at answering. There are some questions large language models are good at answering. And there are some questions where the best way to get an answer is to ask people to make their arguments and place their bets. ElsewhereAnd in Other Banking NewsThis morning, States See Like Big TechFans and detractors alike would happily describe Singapore's government as the one that comes closest to operating like a big tech company—there are clear metrics, regularly-updated dashboards, and high compensation for top performers. The city-state is now experimenting with A city-state has to be more conscious than other locations of the network effect of Singapore. Part of what people are paying for when they move there is the agglomeration effect from other residents, and in a place with scarce and expensive real estate, an empty second home represents deadweight loss to the city. (For an overview of the more common reverse of this, where tech companies act like governments, see Aggressive CompetitionMicrosoft's days as the big tech company least worried about antitrust For an earlier look at the rising competition between big tech companies, see Disclosure: Long MSFT. Agglomeration and SportsFront Office Sports has The Narrow RallyOne feature of the market's year-to-date performance is Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. A sampling of current open roles: - A well funded seed stage startup founded by former SpaceX engineers is building software tools for hardware engineering. They're looking for a UX/frontend engineer interested in designing and developing software collaboratively with satellite, rocket, and other complex machine engineers. (Los Angeles)
- A VC backed company reimagining retirement wealth and building a 401k alternative is looking for fullstack engineers with prior experience in fintech. (NYC)
- A startup building a new financial market within a multi-trillion dollar asset class is looking for generalists with banking and legal experience. (US, Remote)
- A fintech startup that gives companies with complicated financials a single source of truth for managing their cash flows and understanding their unit economics is looking for a founding engineer with JS, Typescript, Node.js, and React experience. (Bay Area, Hybrid)
- A hedge fund is looking for an experienced alternative data analyst who can help incorporate novel datasets into systematic strategies (NYC).
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. |
||
|
|
|
|||
|