---
subject: "Links For July 2023"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-07-06 04:48:36
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
[Remember, I haven’t independently verified each link. On average, commenters will end up spotting evidence that around two or three of the links in each links post are wrong or misleading. I correct these as I see them, and will highlight important corrections later, but I can’t guarantee I will have caught them all by the time you read this.] 1: Throughout history, men of all lands and eras have asked “what if I name a town after Santa Claus and try to pitch it as a tourist attraction?” Hence the towns of 2: If you (like me) have a fourth-grader’s sense of humor, you may enjoy 3: 4: 5: 6: Derek Lowe explains the current consensus that 7: Italy 8: If it’s bad to romanticize the Nazis, why do people still romanticize Genghis Khan’s Mongol hordes? One possible answer: there’s still some tail risk of a Nazi resurgence, but the Mongols have disappeared from history so thoroughly that nobody can imagine them presenting a renewed threat, leaving us free to wax poetic about them as a symbol of savage manliness or whatever. In extremely related news, 9: Related: 10: Also related: The neighbors tried to let the local six-year-old walk two blocks to school on her own, but had to stop when people called the police to report an unattended child. I thought of this when reading Jeff Kaufman’s 11: Why did the British and their colonies 12: Big thanks to Adam Piovarchy, who included me as a coauthor in his recent article in Philosophical Studies, 13: Sort of distantly related: Roman “bayesyatina” Achisov and a group of Russian ACX fans (don’t you guys have other things to worry about over there?!) have turned my short story 14: Mark Lutter, former head of the Charter Cities Institute and one of the top authorities on charter cities, 15: Interesting moments in Islamic history: In 1924, 16: The Confederate States of America needed a navy, but they didn’t have much of an ironworking or shipbuilding industry. And if all you have is a hammer, everything starts looking like a nail. Thus was born 17: Several people have said nice things about the Rose Garden Inn, a rationalist events space where we hold Berkeley ACX meetups. Mingyuan, who helped decorate it, now has a 18: 19: Erik Hoel 20: Related: the most practical demand I’ve heard from people who take the current UFO rumors seriously is that AARO (the government’s new UFO investigation group) should get Title 50 authority (the right to demand classified information from intelligence services). Read their campaign ( 21: This month in social justice: 22: Related: affirmative action Supreme Court ruling links roundup: Will the ruling really change admissions policies, or will universities find a way around it? Humphrey on DSL works in the field and [says he thinks it will produce real change](https://substack.com/redirect/a335a3c5-4859-433e-9d0d-9feebe10a4b3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).Manifold market on changing Harvard demographics, for context the most recent Harvard class is 29.9% Asian (see also [% black](https://substack.com/redirect/2edff1dc-fa9b-45cb-99e4-d335b90052b7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)here):[Instapundit examines the ruling](https://substack.com/redirect/6abceb54-dbee-49f4-a8eb-c7467fae9fa2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)through the legal concept of “deference”[Twitter thread speculating that the next fight](https://substack.com/redirect/3110759e-83b3-4b53-a21b-2db0bda9feb5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)will be over colleges and magnet schools that accept “the top X% of every high school” as a way of getting geographic (and so by proxy racial) diversity. "In the first class admitting using [this policy], the offers made to Asian-American students fell by 19 percentage points, from 73% to 54% of all offers."
I feel bad linking this since it’s probably Chinese propaganda to demonstrate their technological superiority, but I think a good compromise would be that Americans are allowed to appreciate their accomplishment, as long as we also get busy finding a way to smuggle in thousands of drones to their next performance that form a giant bald eagle which eats the dragon. 24: Every so often a US city county will go through the motions of “seceding” from the Union to protest some form of mistreatment - 25: 26: The state of Wisconsin is infamous for its very literal line-item veto. This week: a bill increased school funding until the 2024 - 2025 academic year, and 27: Did you know: as part of their general program of racial purity, the Nazis 28: 29: This month’s AI links: OpenAI announces [Superalignment](https://substack.com/redirect/abbc7402-ac76-4d96-af53-bfb6b2cf5a19?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), a major investment into alignment research which will include co-founder and Chief Scientist Ilya Sutskever, the current alignment team led by Jan Leike, and “20% of the compute we’ve secured to date”. At least for me, this is strong evidence that they really care about alignment and aren’t just posturing; this is more resources than would be worth spending on a posture. They’re also hiring for various alignment-related positions; see the link above for more details. And[LW discussion here](https://substack.com/redirect/de94597c-8d03-4383-825d-77c4677097d0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).DeepMind founder Mustafa Suleyman and others announce that their new company, [InflectionAI](https://substack.com/redirect/027155c7-ec76-4520-92d1-4946a91075b7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), exists and has raised $1 billion in funding. Still, Manifold classes it as only a minor contender:Not technically an AI link, but I think of it as being one in spirit:
30: Claim: At the exact right time, when the stars align, a couple traveling NYC → Boston I wanted to see what planes cost, and flight aggregator kayak.com offered $140. But it also offered the two Amtrak tickets for $62. I’ve double-checked that the same two tickets on Amtrak.com cost $320. I don’t know why this is so different. But buy your train tickets on Kayak, I guess. 31: Freddie deBoer 32: History Supreme, sometimes listed as the world’s most expensive superyacht, You're currently a free subscriber to |