---
subject: "The Monday Media Diet with Kenta Osborn"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-10-13 10:28:29
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Kenta Osborn co-founded Tell us about yourself. I’m the co-founder of I started Keep Magazine at the start of this year with my friend I started doing design in 2019 when I was in middle school off of I’m currently based in Michigan, living with my partner and my kitten. Describe your media diet. My media diet recently has been consisting of YouTube, Instagram, and lots of music. When I watch videos, it’s usually something to do with travelling, clothing, podcasts, or interviews. Oh, and tons of Counter Strike videos. I miss playing that game, but I don’t have the time for it so I make up for it by watching it in the background as I work. With Instagram I mainly use it for business purposes. I run multiple pages on there, and I use it to communicate with people and find new people for Keep Magazine. Music is definitely one of the greatest things ever. If I had to pick to be blind or deaf forever I would definitely hesitate, but still choose deaf. My favorite artist right now is What’s the last great book you read?
What are you reading now? I’m not currently reading any books. But I’m reading lots of text messages. What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication? I don’t exactly have a favorite publication, but most of the books I read are self-help books. When I read those, I go to the table of contents and look for chapters that are related to things that I believe would actually help me. Who should everyone be reading that they’re not? Keep Magazine. What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone? Definitely Demus. It’s just YouTube and Soundcloud with no ads. Plane or train? There are multiple aspects to this. First is the pre-boarding experience. Airports are awesome, they look cool, you can walk around, go to shops, and sit at your gate and work at your laptop and feel productive. With train stations, you sort of just stand around. When you’re in the air on the plane, you get to see views from high up, but I tend to get headaches from the motion. When you’re in a train, you see views from ground level, and it tends to be a smooth ride for me. Finally, when exiting a plane, you can be waiting around for a while if there’s a lot of people. On the train, I can get off in a few minutes. In conclusion, train. What is one place everyone should visit? Definitely Japan. If you’re into clothing more specifically Harajuku. When I first went to Tokyo I thought Shibuya would be the most awesome spot, but there’s only really a couple streets with stores that I think are really cool. Harajuku on the other hand feels like entire neighborhood blocks just filled with endless small niche stores that are actually interesting and full of character. My favorite store in Harajuku is Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into.
You're currently a free subscriber to |