---
subject: "\"Through A Glass Darkly\" In Asterisk Magazine"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-06-26 21:48:13
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
I have an article summarizing attempts to forecast AI progress, including a five year check-in on the predictions in [Crash Testing GPT-4](https://substack.com/redirect/7ab8bc01-9b61-4b45-86d4-ce4c009f2bf7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o): Before releasing GPT-4, OpenAI sent a preliminary version to the Alignment Research Center to test it for unsafe capabilities; the detail that[made the news](https://substack.com/redirect/b28e01ce-4fa2-4b54-8e07-631bd0589020?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)was how the AI managed to hire a gig worker to solve CAPTCHAs for it by pretending to be a blind person. Asterisk interviews Beth Barnes, leader of the team that ran those tests.[What We Get Wrong About AI And China](https://substack.com/redirect/8911a62a-18d9-4bee-b07f-27eff8cde6ea?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o): Professor Jeffrey Ding discusses the Chinese AI situation. If I’m understanding right, China is 1-2 years behind the US, but that this number underplays the size of the gap, and if the US stopped innovating today, China wouldn’t necessarily push ahead in 3 years. Today’s[Marginal Revolution links](https://substack.com/redirect/aea63680-9590-42e0-b4da-612579cd4b48?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)included[a claim](https://substack.com/redirect/cf640863-987c-4fc2-86c2-cddf04e9bceb?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)that a new Chinese model beats GPT-4; I’m very skeptical and waiting to hear more.[The Transistor Cliff](https://substack.com/redirect/ffff4a52-6876-417b-9838-35b418aa7121?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o): Sarah Constantin on the future of microchips. Most predictions about the future of AI center around the idea that lower compute costs → bigger training runs → smarter models. But how sure are we that we can keep decreasing compute costs indefinitely? Will we reach physical limits or memory bottlenecks? What if we do?[A Debate About AI And Explosive Growth](https://substack.com/redirect/560c57be-52d1-40fe-be53-a39cc2de6e8a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o): Tamay Besiroglu vs. Matt Clancy. Will AI be just another invention that is probably good for the economy but leaves GDP trajectories overall unchanged? Or will it create a technoeconomic singularity leading to “impossibly” fast economic growth? A good followup for my recent[Davidson On Takeoff Speeds](https://substack.com/redirect/856f0af4-75cf-4af5-9f2c-a96ceea39ede?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). I don’t think they emphasized enough the claim that the natural trajectory of growth is a hyperbola reaching infinity in the 2030s,[we’ve only deviated from that natural curve since ~1960 or so](https://substack.com/redirect/86973eb0-d5b4-486d-9608-85eef348faa4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), and that we’re just debating whether AI will restore the natural curve rather than whether it will do some bizarre unprecedented thing that we should have a high prior against.
Plus superforecaster Jonathan Mann on Congratulations again to Clara, Jake, and the rest of the Asterisk team! As always, you can subscribe You're currently a free subscriber to |