---
subject: "Warm Countries’ Poverty & Mountains: Responses to Your Comments"
from: "Tomas Pueyo from Uncharted Territories <unchartedterritories@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-10-01 19:30:07
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tomas Pueyo", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_28238133486362596", "UNREAD"]
---
In the last article, In today’s article: Geographic arguments against the theory: Switzerland, Austria, Colorado, India, Cambodia, Indonesia, China… Has race had any role in warm countries’ poverty? Does this disregard colonialism?
In the premium article later this week: More arguments against this theory Does agriculture really matter in the 21st century? Is this mountain thing a correlation or causation? What other examples support the theory? Afghanistan, Papua New Guinea, Cameroon, US Is Air Conditioning really that important? What’s the role of institutions? Is GDP the right metric here? What other factors might have contributed that I haven’t mentioned yet?
Geographic Arguments Against the TheorySwitzerlandThe argument is: Switzerland is mountainous, yet rich. Therefore, mountains can’t cause poverty.
I wrote about Despite having lots of mountains, Switzerland’s inhabited area is not that high, and is extremely well connected with its neighbors: The Swiss live on a plateau that’s not that high. Geneva is at ~500 m elevation (1400 ft), lower than Madrid. It connects by river to Lyon in France (300 m / 900 ft). I assume the river is not naturally navigable, but the road between the two is not so difficult. From Lyon you can go to northern and southern France easily, so Geneva is well connected to both northern and southern France, and hence both the Atlantic and the Mediterranean. Zürich (450 m/ 1350 ft) and Basel (300 m / 900 ft) are both on the Rhine water basin, and the path from them to the Rhine navigable region (the richest region in Europe) is easy. Also, to be clear, the northeastern border of Switzerland is the Rhine. The Rhine Valley is the richest region in Europe.
Switzerland is a buffer state, which has played four empires against each other for centuries (France, Germany, Italy, Austria). It leeches on them by arbitraging taxes (attracting taxpayers and tax-dodging companies from these richer countries in terms of GDP; this is why its banking sector is so big and banking secrecy was such a big deal), and by taking advantage of the fact that none of these four powers could take on Switzerland, or the other three would jump at them.
Compare this with the Himalayas: The Nepalese capital Kathmandu is at 1,500 m / 4,500 ft, and it’s surrounded by mountains that peak at 2800 m / 8500 ft. To its north, the range reaches 8,800 m / 29,000 ft, and then has thousands of square kilometers of Tibet, which is ~4,500 m / 14,000 ft high. On one side it has poor India, on the other it has what was until recently poor China. In other words, if you put Switzerland in the Himalayas, it would be poor. Austria & Colorado
Austria’s rich region is in the plains. Vienna has an altitude of ~200 m / 600 ft and is on the Danube, one of the best navigable waterways in the world.
So just to clarify: The problem is not the presence of mountains. The problem is if mountains make transportation difficult. In northern regions, usually, people might establish themselves at the feet of mountains, because they’re going to get access to mountain mining plus river transportation. Meanwhile, in equatorial countries, people will live among the mountains themselves, because there the elevation is a plus, not a minus, for cooler temperatures, less disease etc. The trade-off is that it makes transportation much more expensive and conflict. India, Cambodia, Indonesia, ChinaThe other big concern is the opposite: Countries like India, Cambodia, Indonesia, and China all built great empires! They were very rich.
First, none of these countries are rich today, nor were they rich in the past, in terms of GDP per capita. I looked at the So why did they build empires? Because as long as you have a little bit of surplus, and low transportation costs, you can conquer your neighbor and extract her wealth. So yes, the Taj Mahal and Angkor Wat and Borobudur exist, but that doesn’t mean their respective civilizations were rich on a per capita basis. They just accumulated the wealth from big populations (which are perfectly compatible with low-lying warm areas). Note that these empires require cheap transportation costs, which access to the seas provides. Whereas mountains are poor because of expensive transportation, low-lying areas are poor despite cheap transportation, because of the warmth and moisture. Has Race Had Any Role in Warm Countries’ Poverty?In the original article, I stated that some people thought race also played a role in warm countries’ underdevelopment, without going further for obvious reasons: This is a viper’s nest. Some commenters support this theory:
Others disagree:
What do you think?
This is what I think—and since this is so contentious, and it’s not fundamental to my theory of mountains, it’s behind a paywall... Keep reading with a 7-day free trialSubscribe to Uncharted Territories to keep reading this post and get 7 days of free access to the full post archives. A subscription gets you:
|