---
subject: "The Omen A Zen Remembrance Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-01-03 10:37:54
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
We got a nice note about the Oman A Zen piece awhile back, so I figured I would re-share the piece. -Colin (CJN) Hey Colin, Thank you for writing about Mikio Shinagawa (品川) and Omen Azen. He was my grandmother's friend and business partner; being unfamiliar with New York, he provided a sense of comfort and hospitality to me, the naive college student. He showed deep care and respect in conversation, remembering details of my family and his memories of visiting my grandparents in Japan. He even knew my mother when she was a baby, so it was rough to see him pass. I am glad to see his spirit lives on in writing and through Omen Azen. Thank you again for your post. All the best, Henrik Colin here. If you spent any extended periods of time in Soho in the past 30 years, there’s a good chance you’ve stumbled upon Omen A Zen on Thompson Street—a discrete, longstanding Japanese restaurant prized by residents. In a city that constantly reinvents itself, Omen has remained a beautiful and non-changing entity prized equally by locals and the high-fashion set. When writing about Omen’s resonance in the Times,
When I first set foot in the restaurant 16 years ago, I knew little about the cultural significance and the love for the restaurant. I just felt the gravitas of the place. It is decidedly unshowy, with elegant, simple food, low-key surroundings, and good jazz playing in the background. No one, not even boldfaced names, is overly pampered or fawned over, but there’s a very Japanese baseline of hospitality that hums efficiently in the place. Since then, there have been birthdays, one-off warm bowls of noodles in the freezing winter months, and countless friends hosted. Why is this interesting? In November 2021, the world lost Omen’s proprietor, Mikio Shinagawa. In his beautifully written obituary, What is important about the restaurant is not just the food or the design. It is the intangible feeling that Mr. Shinagawa created. It was clear he was a fan of the arts, he trained as a painter and studied Buddhism early in his time in New York in the 1980s. And, in addition to nourishing through the healthy approach to the food, it was clear he also helped nurture and enable countless generations of artists and patrons by giving them a safe and serene place to convene. He showed a profound empathy to artists, which perhaps could explain the odd, magnetic appeal of an unfussy Japanese restaurant on a Soho side street. (CJN) WITI Classifieds: We are experimenting with running some weekly classifieds in WITI. If you’re interested in running an ad, BrXnd is a new project at the intersection of brands and AI. Have a play with the first experiment: AI brand collabs. January is a great time to begin working with a coach to meet your goals. It's insight, accountability, and support. |