---
subject: "Highlights From The Comments On Last Week's Model Cities Post"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-09-11 18:14:33
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Original post: Comments On The Solano County CityEcorche
Steve Sailer
We need a bigger map: The pink area is Flannery’s land for the new city (it doesn’t own all of it; their holdings are scattered throughout the area). It’s a 30 minute drive across several inconveniently-located bridges from the center of the city to the nearest BART (Bay Area transit) station in Antioch (orange circle). And from Antioch it’s a 1 hour drive (or 1 hour BART ride) to San Francisco City Center (at the far southwest of this map). Steve says it would make things easier if there were a bridge from the southern tip of the Flannery land straight to one of the two nearby BART stations. But maybe not much easier. From the center of Flannery to Antioch BART in a straight line over a hypothetical bridge is twelve miles; it will be hard to get peak transit times below 20 minutes. If you built a bridge and extended the BART line there (politically hard!) you could maybe get driving and commute times down to 1:10 each way. Steve is right that many working-class people with SF jobs commute from Stockton (2:00 drive, 3:00 public transit each way), so this could still be an improvement. (the three hour commute from Stockton involves some painful public transit connections; I wonder why there’s no commuter bus). Michael
Auros is a planning commissioner,
But
C1ue
I don’t know enough about how Proposition 13 works to contradict this, although my understanding is that if they sell the land (eg to developers or homeowners) that negates this benefit. A friend refers me to
Flannery started purchases in 2017. Presumably Sramek came up with the idea and pitched the company sometime before then, let’s say 2015. I find myself confused about how people feel about Big Tech / Silicon Valley. My impression on the ground is that everyone hates them, including Democrats, Republicans, Californians, Bay Areans, and tech workers themselves. But Given this confusing situation, I don’t know what to make of claims that trust in tech is “declining”, but My model - which I won’t justify here - is that non-tech elites have hated tech since about 2015 and tried to build a consensus against it, part of which involves using the media to convince everyone that everyone else hates tech. Ordinary people continued to trust tech a lot until about 2020 but are starting to waver. In 2015, Sramek might have reasonably expected that “tech leaders are founding a city” would have positive connotations - the Sustainable High-Tech Progress City of the Future! But it took him the better part of a decade to actually buy the land, and by now the story is Evil Billionaire Elites Attempt Land Grab And Will Probably Use Their City To Spread Misinformation And Violate Your Privacy. Thesis Driven’s conclusion is that trying to build a tech city in California was arguably a reasonable plan in 2015 but a bad plan now. Since Flannery is locked into it, they might as well see if they can pull off a miracle. But if they were starting this today, they should have tried working in Texas or Florida, just like everyone else who doesn’t want local government to ruin their lives. Shaked Koplewitz (
Commenter Tristan said he did his PhD thesis on this topic about found that “people who move to a place based on marketing for a walkable community are more willing to accept density than people who moved to the burbs with the goal of not being downtown”. You can read the thesis Hyolobrika asks:
Just because the city is founded by elites doesn’t mean it will be inhabited by them. Mark Zuckerberg is an elite, but that doesn’t mean Facebook is “a website for elites”. No elite wants to live in Solano County (unless it’s their summer ranch home or something). The natural demographic is people priced out of the Bay. So it’s not going to be for billionaires. Might it be skewed to professional class people as opposed to working class people? Maybe, maybe not. Even if it is, is the professional class so evil that building them decent houses where they can afford to raise families is worse than leaving the land fallow for cows to graze on? Exactly how much lose-lose class warfare are we committing to here? But also, there have been plenty of studies showing that if you build more houses for elites, then elites move into those houses instead of gentrifying other people’s neighborhoods, and the price of other people’s neighborhoods go down. So even if you build “a city for elites”, it’s about as good at lowering statewide housing costs as anywhere else. And again, if you’re gunning to be the spokesperson for a new anti-elite movement, you should probably not be named “Princess Washington”. Comments On ProsperaDamienCh
I also heard from Niklas Anziger, who’s in touch with Prospera’s leaders and legal team including technical secretary Jorge Colindres, and who was able to give me more clarity on the situation. Remember, the last government passed a constitutional amendment allowing ZEDEs. The new government has to repeal the amendment in order to ban them. The repeal process requires winning two votes in Congress within ~2 years. They won the first in spring 2022. Their deadline to win the second is January 2024. They’ve made no attempt to start the second vote and Niklas thinks the political climate has shifted and they wouldn’t win. So legally the ZEDE regime is still in place, so much so that people can even apply to start new ZEDEs (although the government would refuse the application). The government’s other option is to have the Supreme Court declare ZEDEs unconstitutional. This would be a bold strategy, since they were passed through constitutional amendment and it seems like the constitution should be constitutional by definition. But the new government has “packed” the Supreme Court with its allies (to be fair, so did the last government) and might be able to pull this off. But so far they haven’t tried this, and Prospera thinks even if they succeeded it would ban new ZEDEs but not affect existing ones. The legal battle matters only insofar as it gives the government cover to send in police to break up the ZEDEs by force. The government would like to do this, but doesn’t feel like they have enough legal justification yet. There might be some amount of legal victory which might not be enough to genuinely make the ZEDEs illegal by the letter of the law, but which would make the government feel like it could get away with doing this. Prospera is trying to prevent this amount of legal victory (which is a harder problem than preventing ZEDEs from genuinely being illegal) while also signaling to the government that they would get in lots of international-investment-law-trouble if they tried this. Prospera predicts that the socialists won’t be able to establish a legal fig leaf for shutting them down before the political winds shift again and Honduras elects a different government. According to Erusian
Christophe Biocca writes:
Trey Goff writes:
Cramz writes:
Too bad! I figured the original pictures were too beautiful to ever become real, but it’s sad to hear it confirmed. On Other Model City TopicsRomeo Stevens on
Rob
Throwaway Commenter
Sarah Constantin (
Arbituram on France
Thank you, I’ve looked further and it is, in fact, false. The original source seems to be Chris D’Angelo (
You're currently a free subscriber to |