---
subject: "AI #66: Oh to Be Less Online"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-05-30 14:10:04
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Tomorrow I will fly out to San Francisco, to spend Friday through Monday at the LessOnline conference at Lighthaven in Berkeley. If you are there, by all means say hello. If you are in the Bay generally and want to otherwise meet, especially on Monday, let me know that too and I will see if I have time to make that happen. Even without that hiccup, it continues to be a game of playing catch-up. Progress is being made, but we are definitely not there yet (and everything not AI is being completely ignored for now). Last week I pointed out seven things I was unable to cover, along with a few miscellaneous papers and reports. Out of those seven, I managed to ship on three of them: However, OpenAI developments continue. Thanks largely to The post on I also wrote a full post on a fourth, Reports of our Death, but have decided to shelve that post and post a short summary here instead. That means the current ‘not yet covered queue’ is as follows: DeepMind’s new scaling policy. Should be out tomorrow before I leave, or worst case next week.
The AI Summit in Seoul. Further retrospective on OpenAI including Helen Toner’s podcast.
Table of ContentsIntroduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. [You heard of them first](https://substack.com/redirect/d2cfeb56-49d0-4010-b9c0-ca97467e2e2f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).Not Okay, Google. A tiny little problem with the AI Overviews. OK Google, Don’t Panic. Swing for the fences. [Race for your life](https://substack.com/redirect/05768441-d590-4d77-b85e-f450278170a2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).Not Okay, Meta. Your application to opt out of AI data is rejected. What? Not Okay Taking Our Jobs. The question is, with or without replacement? They Took Our Jobs Anyway. [It’s coming](https://substack.com/redirect/c9ab820c-6018-488c-affc-e0365a9b463a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).A New Leaderboard Appears. Scale.ai offers new capability evaluations. Copyright Confrontation. Which OpenAI lawsuit was that again? Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. Meta fails to make an ordinary effort. Get Involved. Dwarkesh Patel is hiring. Introducing. OpenAI makes media deals with The Atlantic and… Vox? Surprise. In Other AI News. Jan Leike joins Anthropic, Altman signs giving pledge. GPT-5 Alive. They are training it now. A security committee is assembling. Quiet Speculations. Expectations of changes, great and small. Open Versus Closed. Two opposing things cannot dominate the same space. Your Kind of People. Verbal versus math versus otherwise in the AI age. The Quest for Sane Regulation. Lina Khan on the warpath, Yang on the tax path. Lawfare and Liability. How much work can tort law do for us? SB 1047 Unconstitutional, Claims Paper. I believe that the paper is wrong. The Week in Audio. Jeremie & Edouard Harris explain x-risk on Joe Rogan. Rhetorical Innovation. Not everyone believes in GI. I typed what I typed. Abridged Reports of Our Death. A frustrating interaction, virtue of silence. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. You have to try. People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Yes, it is partly about money. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Assumptions. The Lighter Side. Choose your fighter.
Language Models Offer Mundane UtilityWhich model is the best right now?
China being near the top, despite the Great Firewall, is interesting.
Use about 150 lines of Python code together with Gemini 1.5 Flash and ElevenLabs
Not Okay, GoogleWe presumably Google put out Gemini while it had, shall we say, some issues. The image model had some big issues, also the text model had some big issues. They had a bad time, and had to take down images of humans for a while. The models kept improving. At this point I am using a mix of Gemini, Claude and GPT-4o, depending on the exact task, sometimes comparing answers. It does seem, however, that the current version of the ‘AI overview’ on Google search has a rather large problem. In this case, it is not about accusations of wokeness or racism or bias. It is accusations of being
There’s the classic adding glue to your cheese so it sticks to the pizza,
I would have thought this one was better with Rule of Three, but no, this is The Way:
So what happened?
This is the second time that Google has gotten raked over the coals.
The ‘non-toxic’ modifier on the glue is not going to stop being funny.
As I put it then: In this case, it is largely justified. I do not remember ChatGPT going this stupid. There is a difference between questions designed to trick LLMs into looking foolish, and ordinary if a little absurd search queries. Also this is Google Search. I do think a higher standard is appropriate here than if these results were showing up on Gemini, the audience is less sophisticated.
I think this perhaps speaks badly to the priorities of our society, that we were outraged by hot button violations and mostly are amused by random copying of trolling Reddit answers. I notice that the answers quoted are wrong and often very funny and absurd, and if you believed them for real it would not go well, but are almost never offensive or racist, and the ones that seemed truly beyond the pale (like suggesting jumping off a bridge was a good idea) turned out to be fake. Information has an error rate. Yes, the rate on AI overview was much higher than we would like, but it was clearly labeled and I don’t think ‘we can find tons of absurd examples’ tells you about whether it is high enough that you need to pull the plug. Also the results aren’t showing up on Gemini? You only see this on the AI overview, not on the Gemini page. That goes back to the Reddit issue, and the tie-in with Google search. It is the combination of doing a search, together with using AI to select from that, and the need to produce an almost instantaneous answer, that is causing this disaster. If Google were willing to run the query through Gemini Pro, and ask it ‘does this answer seem reasonable to you?’ we wouldn’t be having this conversation. It is not as if we do not have solutions to this. What we don’t have solutions to is how to do this instantly. But I have to wonder, Gemini Flash is damn good, why isn’t it good enough to stop this? My plan was to test for how frequent the problem is by using GPT-4o to generate random absurd questions (such as “Can I replace my daily water intake with pure maple syrup?” and “Can I grow a money tree by planting a dollar bill in my backyard?) but they reliably failed to generate AI overviews for me, so no data. Also no AI overviews, which is fine with me in their current state.
You can also go to
There is that. There is also doing it a hybrid form of ‘manually’ via AI. Gemini is perfectly capable of noticing that you do not want to add glue to your pizza or that Applum is not a fruit. So it seems relatively easy and cheap to take every query that is made in identical (or functionally identical) format N or more times, and then check to see where the AI overview answer is from bonkers to clearly correct and fix accordingly. You would still be able to generate absurd answers by being creative and finding a new query, but ordinary users would very rarely run into an issue. OK Google, Don’t PanicWhat won’t help is blind panic. I saw this warning (the account got taken private so links won’t work).
Google+ failed. In that sense it was a fiasco, costing money and time and hurting brand equity. Certainly not their finest hour. What Google+ was not was a hysterical reaction, or a terrible idea. Meta is a super valuable company, with deep control over a highly profitable advertising network, and a treasure trove of customer data and relationships. They have super powerful network effects. They play a core role in shaping our culture and the internet. Their market cap rivals that of Google, despite Zuckerberg’s best efforts. They also are using those profits partly to lobby the United States Government to defeat any and all regulations on AI, and are arguably are on what is de facto a generalized crusade to ensure everyone on Earth dies. Google spent a few billion dollars trying to compete with what is now a trillion dollar business that has huge synergies with the rest of Google’s portfolio. If Google+ had succeeded at becoming a peer for Facebook, it seems reasonable to assign that a value of something on the order of $500 billion. The break-even success rate here was on the order of 2%. The fact that it did not work, and did not come so close to working, is not strong evidence of a mistake. Yes, the effort was in some ways uninspired and poorly executed, but it is easy for us to miss all the things they did well. Think of AI as a similar situation. Is Google going to create Jarvis? They seem like at worst the second most likely company to do so. Is the (non-transformational, Google still exists and is owned and run by humans) future going to involve heavy use of a Jarvis or Her, that is going to have a lot of lock-in for customers and heavily promote the rest of the related ecosystems? That seems more likely than not. You have to skate where the consumer need and habit pucks are going, and you need to bet big on potential huge wins. There are lots of places where one could slap on the word ‘AI’ or try to integrate AI and it would not make a lot of sense, nor would it have much of an upside. Nothing I saw that Google I/O was remotely like that. Every product and offering made sense. That in no way precludes Google’s internal logic and decision making and resource allocation being a giant cluster****. Google could be running around in chicken-sans-head fashion shouting ‘AI’ everywhere. But that also could be a rather strong second-best strategy. Not Okay, MetaWhile we are all noticing how scummy OpenAI has been acting, let us not
I’m not (all that) surprised up to this point. I’m not mad. So far I’m just impressed. That right there is some top shelf dark patterning. And then it… gets worse? You see, when they say ‘if’ they mean ‘if.’
All right, fine. I’m surprised now. Using dark patterns to discourage opt-outs, and using reposts and fan pages and so on as excused? I expected that. Actively refusing an artist’s opt-out request is something else.
The question, as always, is if we object, what are we going to do about it? Not Okay Taking Our JobsWhat happens if AI takes our jobs ‘without replacement?’
This is a tragedy of the commons model. As Kyle says later, it would work if the AI companies paid enough for data to sustain information generation, but that requires deals with each source of generation, and for the payments to be large enough. This is part of The natural solution is if deals are made like the ones OpenAI made with Newscorp and Reddit last week, or individual creators get compensation like on YouTube, or some combination thereof. If different AI companies compete for your data, especially your real time data, or a monopoly can internalize the benefits and therefore pay the costs, you can be fine without intervention. Nor do we always ‘need a plan’ for how markets solve such problems. As long as we are dealing with ‘mere tools’ it takes a lot to keep such systems down and we should be skeptical things will fail so badly. The light touch correction is the most promising, and the most obvious. Either you need to make a deal with the owner of the data to use it in training, or you need to pay a fixed licensing fee like in radio, and that is actually enforced. A plausible endgame is that there are various information brokerage services for individuals and small firms, that will market and sell your content as training data in exchange for a share of the revenue, and work to filter what you do and don’t want to share. The problems also seem self-correcting. If the AI information degrades sufficiently, and they can’t work their way around that, then people will stop using the AIs in the impacted ways. There is indeed the pattern, known as ‘the enshittification cycle,’ of ‘company builds platform with lock-in effects, customers get habits, company gradually makes it worse to raise revenue.’ That cycle is real, but wise platforms like YouTube stabilize at a reasonable balance, and eventually they all either pull back from the brink or get replaced by the new hotness, or both. Here, it seems obvious that the central problem of Google search is not that Google is getting overly greedy (even if it is), but instead the arms race with SEO, which is now an arms race with increasingly AI-powered SEO.
There is little doubt Google has lost ground and is losing ground right now, on top of any changes they made to enhance revenue. They are in a tough spot. They have to ‘play defense’ on everything all the time. They need to do so in a way customized to the user and context, in a way that is instantaneous and free and thus uses little compute per query. I do predict the pendulum will swing back. As the models improve and they get more experience, the defense should be favored. There is enough ‘old internet’ data, and ways to generate new bespoke or whitelisted data, to bootstrap initial AIs that can differentiate even with a lot of noise. They’ll figure out how to better precalculate and cache those results. If they can’t, I think that will be on them. They Took Our Jobs AnywayWe’ve been over similar ground before, but: There are various classic examples of ‘technology created more jobs.’ One of them
Yes, teller employment went up, but the population was expanding but the population increased from about 223 million to 310 million from 1980 to 2010. The number of tellers per capita went down, not up. Also, while ATMs certainly contributed to people using banks more, the population got a lot richer and things got more financialized over that period. The baseline scenario would presumably have seen a substantial rise in per capita bank tellers.
The general form is that in many cases AI and other technology starts off growing the category while decreasing labor intensity, which can go either way for employment but makes us richer overall. Then the automation gets good enough, and the category demand sufficiently saturates, and it is definitely bad for sector employment. With AI both phases will typically happen a lot faster. Then the question is, does AI also take away the jobs those humans would have then shifted to in other sectors? My answer is that at first, in the short run, AI will be bad for a few sectors but be very good for overall employment. Then if capabilities keep advancing we will reach a turning point, and by default AI starts being quite bad for employment, because AI starts doing all the newly demanded jobs as well. If someone keeps warning ‘even mundane AI will take all our jobs and we won’t have new ones’ without any conditions on that, then they are failing to notice the pattern of technology throughout history, and the way economics works and the giant amounts of latent demand for additional services and goods if we get wealthier. If someone keeps repeating the mantra ‘AI will mean more jobs because technology always means more jobs,’ and essentially treats anyone who expects anything else as an idiot who doesn’t know that farmers ended up with other jobs, they are treating a past trend like a law of nature, and doing so out of its distribution, with a very different type of technology, even if we restrict ourselves to mundane AI.
I notice if anything an anti-correlation between where I expect AI to take people’s jobs, and where people expect it to happen to them. Also these are very high rates of expecting to lose jobs within ten years. 54% said at least probably yes, 48% in America.
There’s something to the Indian attitude here. Jobs are easy come, easy go.
A New Leaderboard Appears
The design principles are: Private tests so no one can overfit. Domain experts are used for evaluations. Continuous updates with new data and models.
If executed well, that sounds great. A valuable community service. The obvious issue is that this requires trust in those doing the evaluations, and potentially vulnerable to idiosyncratic decisions or preferences. I especially appreciate their warning that a model can only be evaluated once, when an organization first encounters the prompts, to preserve test integrity, although I wonder what we do when the next generation of model comes out? One big worry is conflicts of interest.
I can imagine it not mattering, although of course I can also imagine it mattering. This is a longstanding problem, see for example mortgage bonds. There are clear examples of corruption in similar situations for almost no gain, and also clear examples of integrity despite great temptations. How reliable is Scale.ai here? My presumption is reliable enough for these to be a useful additional source, but not enough to be heavily load bearing until we get a longer track record. The most trustworthy part is the relative strengths of different models across different areas. One thing that helps is sanity checking the results. If the methodology is severely flawed or unreasonable, it should be obvious. That doesn’t cover more subtle things as robustly, but you can learn a lot. Another issue is lack of clarity on what the numbers represent. With Elo ratings, you know what a 30 point gap means. Here you do not. Also we do not get the fuller range of models tested, which makes calibration a bit harder. There is no ‘overall’ category, but clearly GPT-4o is on top and Claude Opus and Gemini 1.5 Pro (and GPT-4-Turbo) are competitive. Copyright Confrontation
The merits are highly correlated, so it is still plausible OpenAI runs the table. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
Also non-self images.
If you were wondering if there’s any fig leaf at all, no, there really isn’t. I get why it is impossible to stop people from going to websites to download these tools. I do not get why it is so hard to stop ads for them from appearing on Instagram. We are not exactly up against the best and brightest in evading filters. Ultimately you end up in the same place. Any unrestricted device will be able to use fully unlocked versions of such apps without technical expertise. They will make it easy, and the pictures will get harder to distinguish from real and stop all looking suspiciously like the same woman in the same pose if you think about it. This is the trilemma. Lock down the model, lock down the device, let people do what they want in private and filter your platform. You do at least have to do the last one, guys. Jesus. Meanwhile,
Note that the prizes are partly fake, although there is some cold hard cash. Alas, entries are long since closed, no one told me until now.
What I do know is that there is clear public consensus, and consensus among politicians, that using a clear copy of someone else’s voice for commercial purposes without permission is heinous and unacceptable. Where exactly people draw the line and what the law should ultimately say is unclear, but there is going to be a rule and it is going to be rather ironclad at least on commercial use. Even for personal non-sexy use, aside from fair use or other special cases, people are mostly not okay with voice cloning. (As a reminder: Some think that Sky being based on a different woman’s natural voice is a get-out-of-lawsuit-free card for OpenAI. I don’t, because I think intent can lie elsewhere, and you can get damn close without the need to give the game away but also they then gave the game away.) Get Involved
IntroducingFree ChatGPT users get browse, vision, data analysis, file uploads and GPTs, says OpenAI’s Twitter account, then the announcement post got taken down.
DeepMind’s
This comes on the heels of last week’s deal with Newscorp. OpenAI’s plan seems clear. Strike a deal with the major media organizations one by one, forcing the stragglers to follow suit. Pay them a combination of money and access to AI technology. In exchange you get their training data free and clear, and can use their information in real time in exchange for providing links that the users find helpful. Good plan.
Some people noticed. They were not happy. Nor had they been consulted.
Kelsey Piper will, once again, be the test. If the reassurances prove hollow, I presume she will let us know. At that point, there would be no question who OpenAI is. I do not see Google (or Anthropic or anyone else) competing with them on this so far. One possibility is that Google can’t offer to pay because then the companies would demand payment for Google search. In Other AI News
Karina Nguyen moves from Anthropic to OpenAI after two years,
This creates an odd almost bimodal situation. If you go big, you need something good enough to do what small cannot do, in a way that beats humans. Otherwise, you go small. But going big is expensive, so the question is, can you make it all worth it? Where ‘actually replacing people’ is one way to do that.
Software returns, the returns that most matter, look high, much higher than the economy overall, where Bloom (2020) found r ~ 0.32 and Epoch AI found r ~ 0.25. It makes sense this number should be higher, but I have no good intuition on how much higher, and it seems odd to model it as one number. My presumption is there is some capabilities level where you would indeed see a foom if you got there, but that does not tell us if we are getting there any time soon. It also does not tell us how far you could get without running into various physical bottlenecks, or what else happens during that critical period.
GPT-5 Alive
Here is the rest of the announcement:
It is good to see OpenAI taking the safeguarding of GPT-5 seriously, especially after Jan Leike’s warning that they were not ready for this. It is no substitute for Superalignment, but it is necessary, and a very good ‘least you can do’ test. We will presumably check back in 90 days, which would be the end of August. Given the decision to advance the state of the art at all, OpenAI did a reasonably good if imperfect job testing GPT-4. Their Quiet Speculations
The first statement is obviously true and has already happened. The second statement is obviously true as stated, they are unlikely to stop on their own. What is not clear is whether we will reach that point. If you agree it is plausible we reach that point, then what if anything do you propose to do about this? The third statement I believe is true as a matter is true in terms of the felt experience of many working at the labs. That does not mean their timelines will be realized, but it seems sensible to have a plan for that scenario. This is somewhat complicated by the overloading and goalpost shifting and lack of clear definition of AGI.
Whereas here are some future visions that don’t realize AI is a thing, not really:
I consider this to be very much ‘burying the lede’ on superintelligence, the continued assumption that somehow we still get ‘economic normal’ in a world with such things in it. I have ‘solved for the equilibrium’ in such cases. We do not seem involved. What would be the other equilibrium? Saying ‘you forgot to take into account impact on fiscal and monetary policy’ is a good objection, but ignores the much more important things also being ignored there. If you constrain your thinking short of superintelligence or transformational AI, then such considerations become far more important, and I agree that there is a deficit of good economic thinking. The problem is that the ones letting us down the most here are the economists. This issue goes far beyond dismissing existential risk or loss of control or anything like that. When economists model AI, they seem to come back with completely nonsensical projections that essentially say AI does not matter. They measure increased productivity or GDP in individual percentage points over a decade. Even if we assume all the bottlenecks stay in place and we have full economic normal and no loss of control issues and progress in capabilities stalls at GPT-5 (hell, even at current levels) the projections make no sense. The economists have essentially left, or rather declined to enter, the building.
While I too am concerned by some of our existing highly rapid cultural changes, especially related to the drop in fertility, I really do not know what to say to that. Something about ‘we are not the same?’ In the middle perhaps is Ben Thompson, Google is trying to be the Apple of AI, fully integrated on all levels. If Google can still build great products, ideally both software and hardware, they will win. Amazon’s AWS is betting everything is modular. Microsoft is in the middle, optimizing its infrastructure around OpenAI (while also trying to get its own alternatives off the ground, which I am skeptical about but could eventually work). Nvidia keeps working on its chips and has nothing to fear but true vertical integration like we see at Google, or technically competitors but not really. The other potential threat, which Ben does not mention, is alternative architectures or training systems potentially proving superior to what GPUs can offer, but the market seems skeptical of that. It has been good to be Nvidia. Meta is all-in on products and using Llama to serve them cheaply, so for now they benefit from optimization and thus open source.
The last section, on ‘AI and AGI,’ seems like Thompson not understanding how AI development works and scales. No, maximizing ‘every efficiency and optimization’ is unlikely to be the key to getting something approaching AGI, unless those gains are order of magnitude gains. Execution and actually getting it done matter a lot more. Google has big advantages, and data access, services integration and TPUs are among them. Even with his view Thompson is skeptical Google can get much model differentiation. My hunch is that even more than the rest of it, this part comes from Thompson not feeling the AGI, and assuming this is all normal tools, which makes all of it make a lot more sense and seem a lot more important. Notice he doesn’t care that Anthropic exists, because from his perspective models do not matter so much, business models matter.
What the AI UI does is let you bypass the rest of the interface, and automate a bunch of knowledge and memory and menus and capabilities and so on. The Copilot+ promise is that it remembers everything you ever did, knows how everything works, can help figure things out for you, code for you and so on. Great, if you can do that without privacy or security nightmares, good luck with that part. But why would I want to give up my keyboard? This goes, to me, even for VR/AR. When I tried the Apple Vision Pro, the killer lack-of-an-app was essentially an air keyboard. As in, I had no good way to type. With good enough cameras, I wanted to literally type in the air, and have it figure out what I was trying to do, although I am open to alternatives. Also of course I see AI has mostly doing something unrelated to all of that, this is a sideshow or particular use case. It is always fun to contrast the economists saying ‘it might raise GDP a few percent over ten years’ versus people who take the question seriously
I am less bullish until I see them building houses, but yes the AI thing is a big deal.
I completely disagree. Demand for compute will be very high even if capabilities do not advance. We are going to want these chips actual everywhere. These investments will not be so efficient, and are not so large considering what is coming, have you seen the market caps of Nvidia and TSMC?
I am happy to report I bet against that prediction. As I write this, it is at $1,116.
Claim that LLMs can’t plan, but
I continue to not see why this would be expected to work, but wish him luck and am happy that he is trying. Open Versus Closed
He notes that right now both coexist. At the high end of capabilities, especially the largest frontier models, closed source dominates. But for many purposes people value open weights and the flexibility they provide, and hosting yourself saves money too, so they are fine with smaller and less efficient but private and customizable open models. He also offers this very good sentence:
I very much appreciate the clear ‘baptists and bootleggers’ framing on open weights side, to go with their constant accusations of the same. As he points out, if Meta gets competitive on frontier models then Zuck is going to leave this coalition at some point when the economics of Llama and therefore his incentives change, and Elon’s position is I am guessing unstrategic and not so strongly held either. Thus Luttig’s core logic, which is that as costs scale the open system’s economics fail and they switch strategies or drop out. Using open weights looks cheaper, but comes with various additional burdens and costs, especially if the model is at core less efficient, and thus you either get a worse model or a more compute-intensive one or both versus using closed. I am not as convinced by his argument that free is reliably worse than paid as a pattern. Contrary to his claim, I would say Android is not worse than iOS, I am on Android because I think it is better, and I defy those who like Luttig claim a large quality gap the other way. OpenOffice is worse than Google Docs, but Google Docs is also free (albeit closed) and it is in practical terms better than the paid Microsoft Office, which is again why I don’t pay. Unity is an example of sufficiently obnoxious holdup issues I’d rather use an alternative even if Unity is technically better. And those are only his examples. Linux is for servers typically considered better than anything paid, and with Copilot+ it is a reasonable question whether it is time for me to switch to Linux for my next machine. I might trust my local machine to have universal memory with Linux levels of security. With Microsoft levels, not so much. Here is another very good sentence:
This is the same week we get LeCun saying that there exist no general intelligences, not even humans. So perhaps it is not Meta’s AI he does not believe in, but AI in general. If we lived in a world in which GPT-5-level models were as good as it was ever going to get in my lifetime, I would be on the open source side too.
Again, very well said. I am impressed that Tyler Cowen was willing to link to this. Ultimately, this was a very good post. I mostly agree with it. My biggest gripe is the title is perhaps overstated - as both he and I think, open weights models will continue to have a place in the ecosystem, for smaller systems where local control is valuable. And to be clear, I think that is good. As long as that stays below critical thresholds that lie beyond GPT-4, and that can expand at least somewhat once the frontier is well beyond that, the dangers I worry about wouldn’t apply, so let my people cook (brb applying for copyright on that phrase since I’ve never heard that exact phrasing.) Your Kind of People
But I think no? The chess test is still good, and the math test is still good, because your ability to get those skills is indicative. So what if AlphaZero can beat Kasparov, Kasparov could beat Thiel and also you already and that didn’t matter either. Math-style skills, and software-related skills, will be needed to be able to make sense of the AI era even if you are not earning your living by doing the actual math or coding or chess mastering. This is also a result of the ‘verbal vs. math’ distinction on various tests and in classes, which seems like a wrong question. You need a kind of symbolic, conceptual mastery of both more, and you need the basic skills themselves less thanks to your spellchecker and calculator and now your prover and you LLM. That doesn’t say much about which style of skill and advantage is more valuable. I do think there could be a window coming where the ‘physical manipulation’ skills have the edge over both, where it is the manual labor that gets the edge over both the math and verbal crowds, but I wouldn’t consider that a stable situation either. The real argument for verbal over math in the AI era to me is completely distinct from Thiel’s. It is that if AI renders us so unneeded and uncompetitive that we no longer need any skills except to ‘be a human that interacts with other humans’ and play various social games, where the AI can’t play, and the AI is doing the rest, then the math people are out of luck. As in, math (in the fully general sense) is useful because it is useful, so if people are no longer useful but are somehow alive and their actions matter, then perhaps the math people lose out. Maybe. My guess is the math crowd actually has a lot of edge in adapting to that path faster and better. The Quest for Sane RegulationsThe FTC under Lina Khan seems continuously unhinged,
I mean, sure, I can see problems you might have with that. But… antitrust? What? It seems the FTC’s new theory is that is the new everything police, regardless of what the laws say, because anything that is ‘unfair’ falls under its purview.
‘Antitrust’ now apparently means ‘any action Lina Khan does not like.’ Lina Khan thinks your contract you negotiated is uncool? Right out, retraoactively. Lina Khan thinks your prices are too high, too low or suspiciously neither? Oh no. Lina Khan thinks you are training on data that isn’t yours? General in the meme is here to tell you, also antitrust. We cannot have someone running around being the ‘this seems unfair to me’ cop. Once again, it feels like if someone runs over rule of law and imposes tons of arbitrary rules, the internet stops to ask if it might plausibly stop us from dying. If not, then they get a free pass. Can we at least be consistent?
In 'not AI but I feel your pain news’ What about optimal taxation policy? What these dismissals miss is that neutral taxation requires equalizing the tax burden between relevant alternatives. Suppose you can choose whether to pay an employee in San Francisco $100k to deal with customers, or buy cloud computing services and kiosk hardware and so on, and performance is similar. In the first case, the human gets a take home pay of roughly $60k, at a total employee cost of $112k. In the second case, if you pay $112k, let’s say that average gross margin for the largest providers is 65%, and their tax rate is typically 21%. Even if you threw in California corporate tax (which I presume they aren’t paying) and sales tax, that’s still only $29k in taxes versus $52k. That’s a not a complete calculation, but it is good enough to see the tax burdens are not going to equalize. This could easily result (and in practice sometimes does) in a situation where using computers is a tax arbitrage, and that takes it from uneconomical to economical. I do not consider this that big a deal, because I expect the cost of compute and other AI services to drop rapidly over time. Let’s say (in theory, for simplicity) that the fully neutral tax rate of tax on compute was 40%, but the actual effective tax rate was 20%. In many other settings that would be a huge deal, but in AI it is all orders of magnitude. So this only speeds up efficient deployment by a few months. The flip side is that this could be a highly efficient and productive tax. As always, we should look to shift the tax burden according to what we want to encourage and discourage, and when we are indifferent to ensure neutrality. I see a potentially strong economic argument for taxing compute and using that money to cut income taxes, but would want to see more research before drawing conclusions, and I would worry about competitiveness and tax jurisdiction issues. This is exactly the kind of place where a call to ‘model this’ is fully appropriate, and we should not jump to conclusions.
Bad ideas for regulations: California’s Lawfare and LiabilityDid we have sane regulations of future frontier models all along, in the form of existing tort law?
By default, for everything, we have the negligence standard. Everyone has a duty to take reasonable care to avoid causing harm, pretty much no matter what. This certainly is helpful and much better than nothing. I do not see it remotely being enough. Ex post unpredictable assignment of blame, that only fires long after the harm happens and for which ‘reasonable care’ is an excuse? While we have no industry standards worthy of the name and the damage could well be catastrophic or existential, or involve loss of control over the future, including loss of control to the AI company or to the AI? And also many damage scenarios might not involve a particular (intact) victim that could have proper standing and ability to sue for them? That won’t cut it here. They also argue that the ‘abnormally dangerous activities’ standard we use for tigers might apply to frontier AI systems, where a presumption of ‘reasonable care’ is impossible, so any harm is on you. I still do not think ‘they can sue afterwards’ is a solution, it still seems like a category error, but this would certainly help, especially if we required insurance. Alas, they (I think correctly) find this unlikely to be applied by the courts on their own. They then move on to ‘products liability.’ This is a patchwork of different rules by state, but it is plausible that many states will consider frontier AIs products, to which my attitude would be that they better damn well be products because consider the alternative things they might be. Lawfare’s attitude here seems to be a big ‘I don’t know when it would or wouldn’t apply what standard on what harms.’ There are advantages to that, a company like Google hates uncertainty. And it suggests that by ‘foreseeing’ various misuses or other failure modes of such AIs now, we are making the companies liable should they occur. But then again, maybe not. The right way to ensure responsible development of frontier AI systems, a potentially transformational or existentially risky technology, cannot be ‘ex post if something bad happens we sue you and then we have no idea what the courts do, even if we still have courts.’ They seem to agree? The main argument provided for relying on tort law is that we lack regulations or other alternatives. They also suggest tort law is more adaptable, which is true if and only if you assume other laws mostly cannot be modified in response to new information, but also the adaptations have to be fast enough to be relevant and likely to be the ones that would work. They suggest tort law is less vulnerable to regulatory capture, which is an advantage in what I call mundane ‘economic normal’ worlds. They suggest that tort law is how you get regulatory compliance, or investment in safety beyond regulatory requirements. Here I agree. Tort liability is a strong complement. Certainly I have no interest in granting frontier AI companies immunity to tort liability.
They list as issues: Tort law requires the right sort of causal chain to an injury. I strongly agree that this is going to be an issue with frontier AI systems. Any working definition is either going to miss a wide range of harms, or encompass things it shouldn’t. Tort law has a problem with ‘very large harms from AI,’ which they classify as thousands of deaths. If that was the maximum downside I wouldn’t be so worried. Tort law doesn’t work with certain types of societal harms, because there is no concrete damage to point towards. There’s no avoiding this one, even if the harms remain mundane. Either you accept what AI ‘wants to happen’ in various ways, or you do not, and tort law only stops that if it otherwise ends up a de facto ban. Tort law might move too slowly. No kidding. Even if a case is brought today it likely does not see a verdict for years. At the current pace of AI, it is reasonable to say ‘so what if we might be liable years from now.’ By that time the world could be radically different, or the company vastly bigger or gone. If and when the stakes really are existential or transformational, tort law is irrelevant. They warn of a winner’s curse situation, where the companies that think they are safest proceed rather than those that are safest. Or, I would say, the companies that have less to lose, or are more willing to gamble. A key problem with all safety efforts is that you worry that it can mean the least responsible people deploy first, and tort law seems to make this worse rather than better. Tort law could hinder socially desirable innovation. The question is the price, how much hindering versus alternative methods. If we indeed hold firms liable for a wide variety of harms including indirect ones, while they do not capture that large a portion of gains, and tort law actually matters, this is a huge issue. If we don’t hold them liable for those harms, or tort law is too slow or ineffective so it is ignored, the tort law doesn’t do its job. My gut tells me that, because it focuses on exactly the harms that we could deal with later, a tort law approach is more anti-socially-desirable-innovation than well-constructed other regulatory plans, at the same level of effectiveness. But also you can do so, so much worse (see: EU). The final concern is that judges and juries lack expertise on this, and oh boy would that be a huge problem in all directions. Verdicts here are going to be highly uncertain and based on things not that correlated with what we want.
I especially appreciate the note that regulatory rules moderate tort law liability. If you comply with regulatory requirements, that constitutes a partial defense against torts. They conclude with a classic ‘more research is needed’ across the board, cautioning against giving AI companies liability shields. I certainly agree on both counts there. I especially appreciated the nod to liability insurance. Mandatory insurance helps a lot with the issue that torts are an extremely slow and uncertain ex post process. SB 1047 Unconstitutional, Claims PaperFinally there is a The argument here that matters is simple - SB 1047 regulates code, and you can’t regulate code, and also neural network weights are also speech. And it says that it uses legal precedent to show that the Act is ‘an overreach that stifles innovation and expression in the AI field,’ although even if the Act were that I don’t know how precent could show that the act would do that - the potential stifling is a prediction of future impacts (that I disagree with but is not a crazy thing to claim especially without specifying magnitude of impact), not a legal finding. Section one goes over the classic ‘algorithms are speech’ arguments. I am not a lawyer, but my interpretation is that the code for doing training is not restricted in any way under SB 1047 (whether or not that is wise) so this is not relevant. In all these cases, the argument was that you could distribute your software or book, not whether you could run it for a particular purpose. You can yell fire in a crowded theater, but you are not protected by the first amendment if you light the theater on fire, even if it is one hell of a statement. Thus in my reading, the argument that matters is section two, the claim that the weights of a neutral network are speech, because it is a mathematical expression. If an inscrutable black box of numbers is speech, then given the nature of computers, and arguably of the universe, what is not speech? Is a person speech by their very existence? Is there any capability that would not be speech, in any context? The whole line seems absurd to me, as I’ve said before. And I think this line kind of shows the hand being played?
Wait, what? Which is it? Saying you have to meet safety standards sounds like we should be talking price, yet I do not see talk here of price afterwards. Instead I see a claim that any restrictions are not allowed. Oh boy, is this person not going to like the Schumer Report. But of course, since it is not explicitly motivated by making sure everyone doesn’t die, they haven’t noticed. In particular, there is talk in the Schumer Report of classifying model weights and other AI information, above a threshold, on the grounds that it is Restricted Data. Which is a whole new level of ‘F*** your free speech.’ Also phrases like ‘reasonable steps’ to ‘protect children.’ Yet here they are, complaining about SB 1047’s self-certification of reasonable assurance of not causing catastrophic harm. Section 3 repeats the misinformation that this could impact academic researchers. It repeats the false claim that ‘extensive safety evaluations’ must be made before training models. This is not true even for truly frontier, actively potentially deadly covered models, let alone academic models. The ‘reporting requirements’ could have a ‘chilling effect,’ because if an academic noticed their model was causing catastrophic risk, they really would prefer not to report that? What academia is this? I could go on, but I won’t. The rest seems some combination of unnecessary to the central points, repetitive and false. I do appreciate that there is a potential constitutionality issue here, no matter how absurd it might seem. I also reiterate that if SB 1047 is unconstitutional, especially centrally so, then it is highly important that we discover this fact as soon as possible. The Week in Audio
In particular, the vibe seemed completely normal, as if the situation is what it is and we are facing it the same way we would face other compounding pending problems. I would have a few notes, but overall, I am very impressed. If you had to point a low-shock-level normie towards one explanation of AI existential risk, this seems like our new go-to choice. For context on Gladstone: These are the people who Then they proposed extreme compute limits, that I believe go too far. California’s SB 1047 proposes light touch interventions at 10^26 flops, and neve proposes any form of pre-approval let alone a ban. Under the Gladstone proposal, you get light tough interventions at 10^23 flops (!), preapprovals are required at 10^24 flops (!!) and there is an outright ban at 10^25 flops (!!!) that would include current 4-level models. There are various requirements imposed on labs. A lot of the hysterical reactions to SB 1047 would have been highly appropriate, if the reaction had been talking about the Gladstone Report’s proposals as stated in the report, whereas it seemed many had no interest in noticing the differences. There is also of course Rhetorical Innovation
This explanation was in part a response to As a general rule on existential risk questions: I’ve learned that ‘respond to X’s response to Y’s response to Z’ gets frustrating fast and doesn’t convince people who aren’t X, Y or Z, so only do that if X is making a universal point. Don’t do it if X is telling Y in particular why they are wrong.
A true statement, although the emphasis on the decisions rather than the decision process perhaps suggests the wrong decision theories. Robin and I make different decisions in response.
The subsequent actions are a reasonable prediction of what would happen next, what many with power care about, the importance of a capabilities lead, the value of not giving up in the face of impossible odds, the dangers of various forms of misalignment, the need given our failure to step up in time to invent a deus ex machina for us all not to die, a dire warning about what happens when your source of creativity is used up and you use a fancy form of autocomplete, and more. Abridged Reports of Our Death
Strangest of all is his continued insistence that the stock market being up is evidence against AI existential risk, or that those who think there is substantial AI existential risk should not be long the market and especially not long all these AI stocks we keep buying and that keep going up - I wrote a post length response to make sense of it all, but have decided to shelve it. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is DifficultAgain, it is hard to do it when you do not try.
Another way is to say safety is a problem for future you: So… Little happens in a day, no matter what Elon Musk might demand. You need to start worrying about safety long before you actually have a potentially unsafe system. How do you build a culture of safety without caring about safety? How do you have a safety-compatible AI if you don’t select for that path? There are forms of safety other than existential, you need to worry even if you know there are stronger other models for purely mundane reasons. If this is your attitude, why are you going to be better than the competition?
Elon Musk understands that AI is dangerous and can kill everyone. His ideas about how to prevent that and what he has done with those ideas have consistently been the actual worst, in the ‘greatly contribute to the chance everyone dies’ sense. I do appreciate the straight talk. If you are going to not care about safety until events force your hand, then admit that. Don’t be like certain other companies that pay lip service and make empty promises, then break those promises. Then there is the not as straight talk, in the wake of
Investors in x.AI being motivated by something other than fundamental value. Investors in x.AI buying into the hype way too much. Investors in OpenAI getting an absurdly great deal. Investors in OpenAI charging a huge discount for its structure, the AGI clause and the risks involved in trusting the people involved or the whole thing blowing up in various other ways. Investors have very low confidence in OpenAI’s ability to execute.
Certainly OpenAI’s valuation being so low requires an explanation. But the same has been true for Nvidia for a while, so hey. Also a16z is heavily named in the x.AI fundraiser, which both is a terrible sign for x.AI’s safety inclinations, and also tells me everyone involved overpaid. Another note is that x.AI seems highly dependent on Twitter (and Musk) to justify its existence and valuation. So if it is raising at $18 billion, the Twitter price starts to look a lot less terrible. Zach Stein-Perlman The buck has to stop somewhere. There are basically three scenarios. Perhaps the trust will control the company when it chooses to do so. Perhaps the shareholders will control the company when they choose to do so. Perhaps both will have a veto over key actions, such as training or deployment.
The original intention seems, from what we know, to be something like ‘the trust is like the President and can veto or make certain executive decisions, and the shareholders are like Congress and can if sufficiently united get their way.’ The hope then would be that shareholders are divided such that when the decision is reasonable the trust can find enough support, but if it goes nuts they can’t, and the threshold is chosen accordingly. My worry is this is a narrow window. Shareholders mostly want to maximize profits and are typically willing to vote with leadership. A very large supermajority is likely not that hard to get in most situations. I have been assuming that Anthropic is mostly a ‘normal company’ on legal governance, and putting a lot more hope in management making good choices than in the trust forcing their hand. Also potentially worrying is that Anthropic recently lost a clearly highly safety-focused board member, People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone
Not entirely. But yeah, I kind of do. I think that the need to make the money in order to continue the work, and the need to make money in order to hire the best people, force everyone to race ahead specifically in order to make money. I think that the need to make money drives releases. I think that the more you need money, the more you have to turn over influence and control to those who focus on money, including Altman but much more so companies like Google and Microsoft. It is also the habit and pattern of an entire financial and cultural ecosystem. Of course it is also ego, pride, hubris, The Potential, fear of the other guy, desire to dictate the arrangement of atoms within the light cone and other neat stuff like that. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone
The context here is cellphones and teen depression. In general, modernity is good, we do not know how good we have it, and the statistics or other claims suggesting otherwise are bonkers. That does not mean everything is better. To pick three: The decline in time spent with friends is obviously real. The rise in opioid deaths is real. And the fertility rate decline, in some ways the most important statistic of all, is very real. You could say South Korea is doing great because it is rich. I say if women average less than one child the country is definitely not doing so great and I don’t care what your other statistics say, and if your answer is ‘so what everyone is so happy’ then I suggest watching some of their television because things do not seem all that happy. The Lighter SideNo, no, no, why not both, the AI assistant you should want, safety issues aside: Quoting from the ACX open thread announcements:
I do think it is typically a good use of time, if your project is relevant to their interests (which include AI safety) to apply to the Survival and Flourishing Fund. The cost is low and the upside is high.
You're currently a free subscriber to |