---
subject: "The Nutgraf: How Ola Electric blew its lead"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-10-26 04:37:53
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
When I was away on vacation, a friend texted me: “Bhavish is fighting with Kunal Kamra on X.”
Then an hour later, he added, “I think Kamra is winning.”
Frankly, I couldn’t have cared less. I was in Japan, and a bowl of ramen is infinitely more interesting than Bhavish Aggarwal’s public performances. And even though I’ve practically stopped using X, I’ve been on it long enough to know that people say and do outrageous things for engagement (and that was before Elon Musk started paying them for it).
Anyway, I’d forgotten about this whole episode altogether, until I saw this yesterday.
Facing a barrage of customer complaints amid poor after-sale service, Bhavish Aggarwal-run Ola Electric saw its stock plummet to a record low on Wednesday — below INR 80 apiece in the morning trade — as market experts said the share may soon trade below its debut price of INR 76. At the end of the day, the stock closed marginally higher at INR 81.76.
During the session, the share touched INR 79.15 on the lower side and INR 83 on the higher side. The EV company’s stock has fallen about 48 per cent from its highest level of INR 157.40.
Ola Electric’s shares were listed in August. After listing, a sharp rally was seen in the Ola Electric and the counter made an all-time high of INR 157.40.
Ola Electric’s stock may trade below its debut price of INR 76, no respite seen, [ET Auto](https://auto.economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/two-wheelers/ola-electrics-stock-may-trade-below-its-debut-price-of-inr-76-no-respite-seen/114575843)
This is not good for Ola Electric.
Long-time readers know that I don’t really place much stock in stock prices (hah!). But Ola Electric is a bit different—it’s the only startup that went public at a lower price. It was a bold decision, which paid off for Ola Electric. I’ve written about how when startups go for an IPO, it becomes apparent that [most of the value has already been extracted](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/how-much-longer-can-the-foie-gras-isation-of-startups-continue/) when it was private, leaving little for public investors. This is why the arc of most startups that go public looks like this:
One company that bucked this trend was Ola Electric. It made the bold decision to list at a lower valuation—essentially a downround from the last time it raised money from investors. At the time, Bhavish Aggarwal, CEO of Ola Electric, suggested that the company wanted the stock to be attractive to new investors. Not everyone bought this argument. In fact, my colleague Anand was unconvinced and wrote that [there are more opportunistic reasons](https://the-ken.com/story/the-real-reason-behind-ola-electric-slashing-its-ipo-valuation-in-a-booming-stock-market/) why Ola Electric did this.
Anyway, despite its motivations, there’s one thing that most investors and analysts agree with—Ola Electric got the IPO pricing right. The stock price zoomed post listing, and everyone was pleasantly surprised. Ola Electric demonstrated that it was possible for startups to list at a lower price, and then to provide a ‘pop’ to everyone.
With this context, you can see why Ola Electric falling below its list price is a problem. This has screwed up the one thing it got right. And this has some difficult implications for the company. It’s now harder for it to raise capital, either through equity or through debt. The former is going to face resistance from existing investors, and the latter is going to be more expensive. And this is a company that’s quite some distance from profitability, and will need to raise capital for a while. Until now, Ola Electric’s approach for doing this is to continually make optimistic proclamations about its future—profits, sales, and new products. All of this drove excitement and interest, which drove its stock price.
But Aggarwal’s somewhat petty quarrel with Kunal Kamra has changed all that. Now the focus has shifted away from Ola Electric’s products, profits, and sales to its service. No company wants to talk about its service, because companies can almost never win the service narrative. Sales is benchmarked against the company’s past performance. Service is benchmarked against a flawless, ideal performance, i.e., success is when the company makes all customers happy. Even one dissatisfied customer keeps the narrative going. Ola Electric’s pitch to new customers is essentially, “Forget about internal combustion bikes that you’ve been buying for the last five decades and switch to our all-new, cool, electric bikes instead.” Now it has to switch to saying less catchy things like, “[We fixed 99.1% of the problems](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/renewables/resolved-99-1-per-cent-complaints-received-from-customers-ola-electric/articleshow/114433353.cms?from=mdr) that the consumer body reported to us”, or, “[We have brought in EY](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/tech/technology/under-fire-ola-electric-taps-ey-india-to-get-back-on-track/articleshow/114260270.cms?from=mdr) to fix our service problems.”
There are other implications. For one, it increases the scrutiny on Ola Electric. Not from business media, consumer protection bodies, or stand-up comedians, but from government entities who wield actual power, and are important to Ola Electric’s future.
India’s heavy industries ministry has ordered an audit of Ola Electric’s service centres, ratcheting up pressure on the e-scooter maker which is already under government scrutiny after a slew of consumer complaints, according to a source and an official directive.
The audit by the industries ministry has been ordered to ensure Ola is maintaining its service centres and honouring the warranty given to consumers – conditions it must meet to be eligible for incentives under a government program to promote electric vehicles, according to the source with direct knowledge of the government directive.
The Automotive Research Association of India (ARAI), a testing and certification agency under the industries ministry, has been asked to conduct the audit after which the government will decide the next course of action, the person said.
“Ola Electric is a beneficiary under the scheme whose eligibility certificate … has been issued by ARAI. Therefore, you are requested to provide your comments,” the ministry said in a letter to ARAI.
If found to be in violation, Ola’s eligibility to receive incentives under the government program could be affected, the person said.
India orders audit of Ola’s service centres after consumer complaints, source and document reveal, [Reuters](https://www.reuters.com/world/india/india-orders-audit-olas-service-centres-after-consumer-complaints-source-2024-10-10/)
Again, I don’t expect any major action on Ola Electric just yet, but from the company’s perspective, this is the kind of attention it would rather not have in the first place.
But, you could ask, so what? How does any of this matter? The fortunes of companies go up and down all the time. Ola Electric’s stock price was up for a few months, now it’s down. It had great sales. In a few months, it’ll get its service sorted, and then Aggarwal will be back online, crowing victory. He may even do an interview with a sympathetic media outlet, explaining how hard the ordeal was, and how little he slept. I mean—we’ve seen the Hollywood [original movie before](https://www.cnbc.com/2018/04/11/elon-musk-says-he-is-sleeping-on-tesla-factory-floor-to-save-time.html), so it’s not hard to predict how the Indian remake is going to look like.
All true, but there are two specific reasons why this current situation will cost Ola Electric dearly.
And I don’t believe either of these are cyclical, or easily reversible.
The first is that this has squandered Ola Electric’s massive advantage, i.e., its market share. For several quarters, Ola Electric was the market leader.
In fact, last year, when it had a huge lead over its competitors, I stuck my neck out and wrote in my predictions for 2024:
On the face of it, this prediction is somewhat counterintuitive. As we end 2023, Ola Electric is in a fairly strong position. It commands the largest market share in electric two-wheelers in India. Last month, it recorded its highest sales ever, and it’s preparing for a massive IPO next year. In second place is TVS Motor, which sold 30% fewer vehicles than Ola Electric did in November. TVS and Bajaj Auto (in third place) have grown substantially in 2023, but Ola Electric still remains far ahead.
So what will change in 2024?
Until now, Ola Electric’s real differentiation came from being first to the market, its creation of a new category, and this subsidy. And it did really well for the last couple of years. But now, others are catching up. Since Ola Electric neither has a differentiated product or brand (I’ve written about this earlier and likened the company to a sprinter running a marathon), I don’t expect it to hold on to its lead for long. In 2024, I expect TVS Motors and Bajaj to unlock assets which they’ve built over decades—distribution, brand, and after-sales support. Both companies have been steadily growing their market share, and this year, they will see significant growth, at the cost of Ola Electric.
2024 predictions, [The Nutgraf](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/2024-predictions/)
Here’s the trend of Ola Electric’s market share, from the time I made my prediction.
I’m more convinced than ever that this trend will continue. Ola Electric had a decisive lead, but now it’s blown it, and others are coming closer and closer. Again, this is not an existential threat for Ola Electric, it’s not like the company will disappear. But it has given away a big advantage. Now, it’s forced to overinvest in service, and underinvest in new products and sales. This is going to cost the company dearly, and will set it back. Finding new customers is going to be harder. The damage is incalculable, and it’ll take much longer for Ola Electric to come back to where it was earlier.
The second reason why this entire episode matters is because it’s made one thing apparent—Ola Electric the company’s fortunes are intricately tied to its CEO, Bhavish Aggarwal.
My colleague, Seetharaman has written about this [orthogonally](https://the-ken.com/long_and_short/bhavish-aggarwal-and-the-death-of-the-boring-indian-ceo/) last week, but let me make a more forceful point—what exactly led to the fall of Ola Electric’s stock price? What changed? Ola Electric has been losing market share for several months now, so that’s not new information. The fact that it was having problems with service was also well-known and reported. In fact, HSBC, in an analyst report in September, [pointed out that Ola Electric needed to invest in service](https://www.cnbctv18.com/market/ola-electric-mobility-share-price-service-improvement-hsbc-buy-roadster-launch-market-share-19482793.htm), but also simultaneously maintained a “buy” recommendation on Ola Electric with a price target of Rs 140 (US$1.70). At this time, Ola Electric was trading at roughly Rs 104.
So what changed?
The only answer is that Bhavish Aggarwal changed. Until now, Aggarwal’s public proclamations looked studied and orchestrated, from [launching ‘products’](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/krutrim-is-whatever-ola-wants-it-to-be/) like Krutrim to [fighting imaginary battles](https://www.ndtv.com/feature/too-little-too-late-ola-ceo-bhavish-aggarwal-slams-google-for-slashing-maps-fee-6139067) with Google Maps. Investors understood all of this. This personality made sense to them. I imagine investors are fine with everything else, but this latest incident didn’t look like it was part of a plan. The quarrel with Kunal Kamra felt like an emotional response. And if Bhavish Aggarwal’s veneer has cracked, well, maybe one interpretation is that things are worse than they appear at Ola Electric.
I think it makes the fortunes of Ola Electric much more closely linked to Bhavish Aggarwal’s personality, and I’m not sure if that’s good for Ola Electric, or its investors.
Regards,
Praveen Gopal Krishnan