---
subject: "The Nutgraf: ONDC is losing"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-05-03 04:36:20
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
Sometimes, breakups can be messy.
It’s messier if both people have four-letter acronyms in their names.
A couple of days ago, Moneycontrol broke the story about a fallout between the National Restaurant Association of India (NRAI) and the Open Network for Digital Commerce (ONDC).
The National Restaurant Association of India (NRAI) has put the brakes on its plans to onboard members onto the Open Network for Digital Commerce (ONDC), citing operational instability and a lack of strategic commitment from the platform, people aware of the developments told Moneycontrol.
The move marks a significant shift in stance from India’s largest restaurant body, which had initially viewed ONDC as a potential counterweight to food delivery giants Swiggy and Zomato. Recently, NRAI alleged that both platforms were engaging in private labelling through the launch of their 10-minute food delivery services—Bistro by Zomato and Swiggy’s Snacc—raising concerns about fairness and competition.
NRAI had, in January, actively explored onboarding member restaurants onto ONDC – the government-backed initiative aimed at unbundling digital commerce. However, those plans have now been put on the backburner. The association is taking a wait-and-watch approach amid what it sees as ongoing operational instability within the network.
Restaurant body NRAI’s integration plans with ONDC go cold amid top-level churn, [Moneycontrol](https://www.moneycontrol.com/news/business/startup/restaurant-body-nrais-integration-plans-with-ondc-go-cold-amid-top-level-churn-13008711.html)
At this point, for the record, I must add that both the NRAI and the ONDC people put out a joint statement claiming that this report was “inaccurate and misleading”. Fine. Sure.
My scepticism comes from experience. When two parties are involved in some kind of an ongoing discussion—say, like a partnership, funding negotiations, or merger talks—at least one of those parties have an incentive to leak something to the press about the arrangement. Maybe it’s to create some FOMO to bring other people to the table, or to apply some external pressure during a negotiation, or to simply send a message to the market. Then, angry phone calls are exchanged, and both parties come out jointly denying everything. In fact, I’ve [written about this](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/the-real-reason-why-uber-and-ola-drivers-are-cancelling-your-rides/) earlier when Bloomberg reported news of a potential Uber India and Ola merger. This is quite common, and happens all the time.
What’s rare, though, is for the clarification to be undercut by one of the parties again.
The Ken’s premium audio experience is here!
From original podcasts to writer-narrated versions of our subscriber newsletters, you can now listen to The Ken each day. Discover them all at [the-ken.com/podcasts](http://the-ken.com/podcasts).
Existing Premium subscribers? You already have FULL access to ALL of our premium audio. They are available exclusively via our subscriber apps. If you don’t have them, just download one and log in to unlock everything. Premium subscribers on the app can listen to this edition of The Nutgraf [here](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/the-nutgraf/ondc-is-losing/).
Not a Premium subscriber? You can subscribe to [The Ken Premium](https://podcasts.apple.com/in/channel/the-ken-premium/id6744577070) on Apple Podcasts for an easy monthly price (Rs 299 in India). The channel will include ALL our premium podcasts and audio.
Around the time the NRAI and ONDC came out with their joint clarification, The Economic Times [quoted](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/small-biz/sme-sector/cooking-up-a-storm-rapidos-foray-into-food-delivery-will-be-a-game-changer-say-industry-experts/articleshow/120785547.cms?from=mdr) NRAI President Sagar Daryani: “At the moment, we want to align with the new leadership at ONDC. We will only proceed further once we have the structures in place. Till then, we will keep it on hold, but we are scheduled to have a meeting with them in May. It will give us more clarity on the future of our working relationship with them.”
Wasn’t this what the original story reported in the first place?
Look, maybe the NRAI and ONDC will eventually make up and get back together. But I doubt it. Frankly, I have a lot of sympathy for NRAI’s situation. Their frustrations with ONDC seem to be borne out by the fact that it’s not working out. Everyone involved can have good intentions… and still have poor outcomes.
NRAI has several reasons to be unhappy. It’s pretty much undeniable that ONDC is struggling to make its model work, especially in food delivery. Orders on the network have been dropping consistently, and almost all of the reduction has come from retail orders. Back in October, nearly half of all orders on ONDC were some form of e-commerce transactions. In March, that number fell to 29%. Meanwhile, restaurants in India are feeling the heat. Earlier, they were slowly being squeezed by bigger commissions levied by Swiggy and Zomato on their platforms. Now, they also have to compete with their 10-minute platforms like Bistro and Snacc. I imagine NRAI’s members are screaming themselves hoarse and ONDC isn’t being much help.
I suppose another reason why the discontent is rising is because the NRAI desperately wanted ONDC to work out. Multiple restauranters have made their views [pretty much public](https://www.moneycontrol.com/news/business/startup/social-farzi-cafe-founders-bat-for-ondc-as-swiggy-zomato-eat-up-55-of-order-values-11625581.html) about this. In fact, just a couple of months ago, we had Thomas Fenn, joint secretary of the NRAI, as a guest on an episode of [Two by Two](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/two-by-two/zomato-swiggy-and-the-rise-of-the-10-minute-dark-cafe/) after Swiggy and Zomato launched 10-minute food deliveries. When I asked him if he was optimistic about ONDC, he said, “I am very optimistic about the idea and the construct. That makes total sense to me.”
But he had an important caveat.
“We interact with the ONDC, the tech is done. But you need people to plug into the network also. It’s a two-sided market like that. You need the customers to also kind of explore alternate options that are not Zomato and Swiggy. It’s starting to happen on the auto side and the taxi side, etc. I think, in general, merchants also have to start buying it.
As long as this price parity clause exists, it is difficult because ONDC’s ultimate pitch was—“look, we’re doing all of this so that the customer wins”—which I’m with. So, if they’re actually doing this for a lower price and we can pass it on, if you have certain problematic behavior like this that does not allow you to do it, it kind of takes away customer behavior away from the platform again. So, to answer your question, I do believe in the idea.
I believe that it is possible, it is going to take a lot and a lot, it’s a pretty big mountain to climb, but I think it is one worth fighting for.”
Seen through the events of the past week, it seems like NRAI and ONDC differed on how much that was worth fighting for.
Another thing that most people don’t realise is that integrating into ONDC is a complicated process. It’s not as straightforward as integrating yourself into it. There’s a reason why Namma Yatri remains the only ride-sharing platform on ONDC. A senior executive at a ride-sharing firm once told me that they’d considered launching on the platform, but the complexity simply didn’t seem like it was worth it. Even Phonepe, which launched Pincode on ONDC with a lot of fanfare, [quietly scaled back categories](https://inc42.com/buzz/phonepes-pincode-pilots-20-mins-delivery-to-take-on-zepto-blinkit/) and is now operating a direct-from-kirana model largely outside the network.
Then, there’s the biggest reason. Just last month, Thampy Koshy, the founding managing director and CEO of ONDC, stepped down after nearly three years at the helm. His exit marks the third senior-level departure in six months, following the resignations of chief business officer Shireesh Joshi and non-executive chairperson R S Sharma.
The ONDC board has appointed an interim management committee to handle day-to-day operations. There are [no plans](https://www.livemint.com/companies/board-takes-lead-after-ondc-chief-thampy-koshy-steps-down-following-3-year-stint-11744226713903.html) to find a replacement for Koshy. ONDC appears to be taking the decentralised philosophy too far, to the extent of even running the organisation with it.
I’ll end with the most important, but also the most misunderstood reason.
In the original Moneycontrol story, someone affiliated with the NRAI said that they were losing confidence in ONDC because “consumers are still unclear about what ONDC represents”. This isn’t entirely accurate.
The bigger problem is that ONDC isn’t clear about what ONDC represents.
Take the example of something that Thomas Fenn brought up earlier—discounts.
Discounts on ONDC have always been a somewhat bizarre feature. On one level, ONDC touts itself as an open network that anyone can plug into, but on another level, it micromanages the amount of discounts that sellers and players can offer from a central position uniformly. At one point, ONDC’s biggest weapon against Swiggy, Zomato, and others was that it didn’t do deep discounting. Then it introduced incentives, which it dialled up or down depending on… well, it was hard to understand. For a few months, food delivery was cheaper on ONDC than on Zomato and Swiggy, but that didn’t last long. Earlier this year, ONDC switched to a “monetisation mode” and wanted to levy a transaction fee on seller apps that were connected to the network—a decision which it has postponed twice [already](https://inc42.com/buzz/ondc-again-delays-network-fee-implementation/), most recently yesterday.
It’s been nearly three years since it began operations. If it had to work, it should have worked by now.
ONDC behaves on some days like a protocol, on other days like a platform, and on some other days like a player.
These distinctions matter.
But despite how it sees itself, one thing is clear—ONDC is losing.
Regards,
Praveen Gopal Krishnan