---
subject: "Do (human) readers prefer AI writers?"
from: "Marginal REVOLUTION <donotreply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-11-18 05:21:51
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tyler Cowen", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2466199532210586699", "UNREAD"]
---
It seems so, do read through the whole abstract:
The use of copyrighted books for training AI models has led to numerous lawsuits from authors concerned about AI's ability to generate derivative content. Yet it's unclear whether these models can generate high quality literary text while emulating authors' styles/voices. To answer this we conducted a preregistered study comparing MFA-trained expert writers with three frontier AI models: ChatGPT, Claude, and Gemini in writing up to 450 word excerpts emulating 50 awardwinning authors' (including Nobel laureates, Booker Prize winners, and young emerging National Book Award finalists) diverse styles. In blind pairwise evaluations by 159 representative expert (MFA-trained writers from top U.S. writing programs) and lay readers (recruited via Prolific), AI-generated text from in-context prompting was strongly disfavored by experts for both stylistic fidelity (odds ratio [OR]=0.16, p < 10^-8) and writing quality (OR=0.13, p< 10^-7) but showed mixed results with lay readers. However, fine-tuning ChatGPT on individual author's complete works completely reversed these findings: experts now favored AI-generated text for stylistic fidelity (OR=8.16, p < 10^-13) and writing quality (OR=1.87, p=0.010), with lay readers showing similar shifts. These effects are robust under cluster-robust inference and generalize across authors and styles in author-level heterogeneity analyses. The fine-tuned outputs were rarely flagged as AI-generated (3% rate versus 97% for incontext prompting) by state-of-the-art AI detectors. Mediation analysis reveals this reversal occurs because fine-tuning eliminates detectable AI stylistic quirks (e.g., cliché density) that penalize incontext outputs, altering the relationship between AI detectability and reader preference. While we do not account for additional costs of human effort required to transform raw AI output into cohesive, publishable novel length prose, the median fine-tuning and inference cost of $81 per author represents a dramatic 99.7% reduction compared to typical professional writer compensation. Author-specific fine-tuning thus enables non-verbatim AI writing that readers prefer to expert human writing, thereby providing empirical evidence directly relevant to copyright's fourth fair-use factor, the "effect upon the potential market or value" of the source works.
That is from [a new paper](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=64b2799960d3772274ba2635d2bbb46834ee49d30dd2316bdcaf81b74f3f297d&blog_id=42693868&post_id=91850&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=299ab9324cc81c22800912be95e5b62d&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly9wYXBlcnMuc3Nybi5jb20vc29sMy9wYXBlcnMuY2ZtP2Fic3RyYWN0X2lkPTU2MDY1NzA&email_id=cbe192885da2adb68939349d4873e8bc) by Tuhin Chakrabarty, Jane C. Ginsburg, and Paramveer Dhillon. For the pointer I thank the excellent [Kevin Lewis](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=5b231b7d029ce6eb31ecdb947682b17f0c1f94b98242c2590c7ad17aeca0a96b&blog_id=42693868&post_id=91850&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=1e0c4384ac6bfca870fb14f417b72233&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cubmF0aW9uYWxhZmZhaXJzLmNvbS9ibG9nL2RldGFpbC9maW5kaW5ncy1hLWRhaWx5LXJvdW5kdXAvaW5zdGl0dXRpb25hbC1sb2NrZG93bg=&email_id=cbe192885da2adb68939349d4873e8bc). I recall [an earlier piece](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=e3a195ea77dac48c38301b554bae3af65646281c0535d6ec8eed1fc87986d359&blog_id=42693868&post_id=91850&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=b9442991d11244f311a7c3ab99ac97ad&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly9hcnhpdi5vcmcvYWJzLzI0MDQuMTMwNzY&email_id=cbe192885da2adb68939349d4873e8bc) showing that LLMs also prefer LLM outputs?