---
subject: "Who Invented the “Founding Fathers?”"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-05-21 13:12:22
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Quick, what do you know about Gouverneur Morris? If you’ve heard of Morris at all, you likely know just one thing: that he was a founding father, and therefore worthy of your reverence. I get the sense that most Americans picture the founding fathers as a bunch of staid, gentlemanly visionaries who changed history with their radical ideas about freedom and independence. And, yes, they certainly did change the course of human events. But these were men, not demigods, and He had a disfigured arm from a childhood accident with boiling water and had one leg amputated in 1780 after a violent carriage accident. The doctor told him after the surgery that the amputation had been unnecessary(!) Morris spent the rest of his life hobbling around on a peg leg. Despite his physical ailments, he was a notorious womanizer. Some of Morris’ contemporaries spread the rumor that he had actually broken his leg jumping out of a woman’s window to escape her husband. That may not have been true, but he carried on many torrid affairs with married women. John Jay, in a great understated quip, once expressed the wish that Morris “ [had lost something else](https://substack.com/redirect/eb0d8f94-1a6e-4009-875b-2cc3271f3373?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)” in his accident.When he finally married, it was to his housekeeper, more than two decades his junior, who had been accused of killing her baby (which may have been Morris’ child, conceived out of wedlock). He wouldn’t shut up, making more speeches than anyone else at the Constitutional Convention. But he did provide a valuable service as one of the final editors of the Constitution, cleaning up the language and making the document flow better. He was a big advocate of unity among the states, changing the Preamble’s beginning from “We the people of the States of…” (and then listing all the states) to “We the People of the United States.” He passionately opposed slavery, [saying](https://substack.com/redirect/3e2220df-0528-4de1-ab0d-a1bc214a66ed?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)at the Convention that “It was a nefarious institution. It was the curse of heaven on the States where it prevailed.”Despite his advocacy for unity, he encouraged his fellow New Yorkers to secede from the union during the War of 1812, believing that the war was a lost cause and had been engineered by the southern states. And he died the worst death of any of the founders, when he tried to do some DIY surgery to clear up a urinary blockage. His whalebone catheter didn’t work (he seems to have grievously injured his genitals), and he ended up dying of a painful infection in 1816.
I tell you all of this not only because it’s a captivating life story but to illustrate the fact that Gouverneur Morris, like all of the founders, was very, very human. He had some wonderful ideas and some terrible ones. He combined the bravery necessary for revolution with political ambition and a messy personal life. So when did Americans decide that guys like Gouverneur Morris were secular saints? Technically, Warren G. Harding — not exactly one of America’s great political figures — coined the term “founding fathers.” He was the first prominent person to use the phrase in a convention speech in 1916 and again in his 1921 inauguration
But others had referred to the politicians of the Revolutionary and Constitutional eras as fathers of the country long before that. John Adams understood early on that the country would make myths about his colleagues. He
Within a few decades, his prediction was coming true. Adams
Adams wouldn’t get his wish. The next generation of American leaders found it useful to engage in hagiography. His own son By the 1820s, artists were creating a visual hagiography of the founders. John Trumbull’s paintings of the signing of the Declaration of Independence (at the top of this post) and George Washington resigning his commission (below) were both placed in the rotunda of the Capitol during that decade. Trumbull used the techniques he had learned as a painter of scenes from the Bible to make two scenes with very little visual interest (a bunch of guys signing a document and a man quitting his job) more compelling. Trumbull tried to emphasize the “ But Americans in the As the nation tumbled toward civil war, leaders who wanted to keep the union intact tried once again to turn toward the founders as a unifying force. Abraham Lincoln in his 1860
And in his most famous speech, the
The memory of the founders wasn’t enough to prevent civil war, but American leaders turned back toward them after the conflict as part of a civil religion that could heal the nation’s divisions. The 100th anniversary of the Declaration of Independence in 1876 provided a perfect opportunity for a divided nation to unify itself with some mythmaking. George Washington, especially, became a figure of pop-culture adulation, as people bought up Authors of the late 19th century wrote admiring
By the time Warren Harding first used the phrase “founding fathers” in the early 20th century, the reputation of the men he referred to was clear. Each generation since has used the founding fathers for its own purposes. During the Progressive era, Charles Beard’s An Economic Interpretation of the Constitution of the United States looked at the founders as if they were robber barons, arguing that many of their actions were more in the name of economic self-interest than freedom and democracy. The generations who lived through world wars and the depression looked to the founders for inspiration, taking solace in their courage. By the 1970s, revisionist histories were emphasizing the founders’ hypocrisies and shortcomings. And then Lin-Manuel Miranda remixed the founding generation for the Obama era with his musical Hamilton. Now we find ourselves in a new period, one in which the values of our democracy are in danger and in which Americans are bitterly divided. Next year, we will celebrate the 250th anniversary of the signing of the Declaration of Independence. I have no doubt that the founders will get a great deal of attention over the next year — but how will we reshape their legacy for our own purposes this time around? This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are three ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: You can share the newsletter with others: You can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again on Sunday! You're currently a free subscriber to |