---
subject: "Book Review: What We Owe The Future"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-08-23 05:12:46
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
I. An academic once asked me if I was writing a book. I said no, I was able to communicate just fine by blogging. He looked at me like I was a moron, and explained that writing a book isn’t about communicating ideas. Writing a book is an excuse to have a public relations campaign. If you write a book, you can hire a publicist. They can pitch you to talk shows as So-And-So, Author Of An Upcoming Book. Or to journalists looking for news: “How about reporting on how this guy just published a book?” They can make your book’s title trend on Twitter. Fancy people will start talking about you at parties. Ted will ask you to give one of his talks. Senators will invite you to testify before Congress. The book itself can be lorem ipsum text for all anybody cares. It is a ritual object used to power a media blitz that burns a paragraph or so of text into the collective consciousness. If the point of publishing a book is to have a public relations campaign, Will MacAskill is the greatest English writer since Shakespeare. He and his book But what is “long-termism”? I’m unusually well-placed to answer that, because a few days ago a copy of What We Owe The Future showed up on my doorstep. I was briefly puzzled before remembering that some PR strategies hinge on a book having lots of pre-orders, so effective altruist leadership So fine. At the risk of joining on an already-overcrowded bandwagon, let’s see what we owe the future. II. All utilitarian philosophers have one thing in common: hypothetical scenarios about bodily harm to children. The effective altruist movement started with Peter Singer’s Drowning Child scenario: suppose while walking to work you see a child drowning in the river. You are a good swimmer and could easily save them. But the muddy water would ruin your expensive suit. Do you have an obligation to jump in and help? If yes, it sounds like you think you have a moral obligation to save a child’s life even if it costs you money. But giving money to charity could save the life of a child in the developing world. So maybe you should donate to charity instead of buying fancy things in the first place. MacAskill introduces long-termism with the Broken Bottle hypothetical: you are hiking in the forest and you drop a bottle. It breaks into sharp glass shards. You expect a barefoot child to run down the trail and injure herself. Should you pick up the shards? What if it the trail is rarely used, and it would be a whole year before the expected injury? What if it is very rarely used, and it would be a millennium? Most people say that you need to pick up the shards regardless of how long it will be - a kid getting injured is a kid getting injured. (do your intuitions change if you spot glass shards left by someone else, and have to decide whether to pick them up?)
So it would appear we have moral obligations to people who have not yet been born, and to people in the far future who might be millennia away. This shouldn’t be too shocking a notion. We talk about leaving a better world for our children and grandchildren, and praise people who “plant trees in whose shade they will never sit”. Older people may fight climate change even though its worst effects won’t materialize until after they’re dead. When we build nuclear waste repositories, we try to build ones that won’t crack in ten thousand years and give our distant descendants weird cancers.
I believe in making the world safe for our children, but not for our children's children, because I don't think children should be having sex. |
You’re a free subscriber to [Astral Codex Ten](https://substack.com/redirect/9b783115-ace0-4a08-bed7-99eff408acec?r=8o54n). For the full experience, [become a paid subscriber.](https://substack.com/redirect/2/eyJlIjoiaHR0cHM6Ly9hc3RyYWxjb2RleHRlbi5zdWJzdGFjay5jb20vc3Vic2NyaWJlP3Rva2VuPWV5SjFjMlZ5WDJsa0lqb3hORFUyTXpNeE9Td2lhV0YwSWpveE5qWXhNak14TmpBM0xDSmxlSEFpT2pFMk5qTTRNak0yTURjc0ltbHpjeUk2SW5CMVlpMDRPVEV5TUNJc0luTjFZaUk2SW1Ob1pXTnJiM1YwSW4wLjBWSUFtcUY3Y05YckozR2FVZGdMVWhVRlByWjdDaWUyMmh4ZnFwS0hXUFUmdXRtX3NvdXJjZT1wb3N0IiwicCI6Njk1OTQyMDQsInMiOjg5MTIwLCJmIjp0cnVlLCJ1IjoxNDU2MzMxOSwiaWF0IjoxNjYxMjMxNjA3LCJpc3MiOiJwdWItMCIsInN1YiI6ImxpbmstcmVkaXJlY3QifQ.rlOB7gTSvtvBx0K77l_cttNEeLTXjOG17XYpu_NvRmw?&utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email&utm_content=postcta)