---
subject: "GeoHistory Magazine | Q2 2025"
from: "Tomas Pueyo from Uncharted Territories <unchartedterritories@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-07-31 18:34:45
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tomas Pueyo", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_28238133486362596", "UNREAD"]
---
Each quarter, we apply the UT lens to the world’s chaos to extract clarity. Today, we’re looking at all the interesting GeoHistory themes that have emerged recently. This is not meant to be read cover to cover, but rather for you to jump to the topics you’re most interested in. Today: The Economics of Space Starbase Trade Wars Phantom Maps Druzes vs Syria Forgotten civilizations in the Sahara? A humorous and revealing map of Brazil The volcanic fall of the Roman Empire Poland vs Russia English as the Lingua Franca of the world Mountains vs flatlands Why do we see what we see, and not other types of light? An 11 meter painting that reveals a lot about China’s past Influencer strategy, 120 years ago We were right about global taxes
The Economics of SpaceIn As far as I can tell, the original source of this claim is Journalists speculate that if we brought this asteroid back to Earth, the quantity of metal available would be of gargantuan value: Iron At current metal prices. But of course, these metal prices would crash if we had such an asteroid available to mine. In fact, if it were indeed very high grade ore, virtually all metals it contains would become nearly worthless overnight. That said, this makes me think this could actually be a valuable project for the world, if we figured out a cheap way to get this metal to Earth. Yes, those metals would become worthless, making the venture a money-losing proposition, and killing many mining industries in the process. But what would happen next? Nearly all products that use these elements would suddenly drop in price. Across the world, many expensive things would become cheap, as their cost converges towards that of energy and logistics. Demand for these cheaper products would skyrocket. It would usher in a new era of abundance. What would that look like? Steel would become even more ubiquitous. Housing would contain much more steel. Big infrastructure like bridges, electric grids, ships, robots, rockets, and airplanes would drop in price. Mining would shrink, and with it, its ecological footprint. Starbase Is Now a City!Since we’re talking about space: On January 16th of this year, Trade WarsThe Japanese Mistakes that China AvoidsIn Redistribute land so that farmers are owners, care more about the output, and farming yields increase. Support and protect core private industries, under the condition that they must win in internationally competitive markets. Kill the companies that can’t win internationally. Intervene in financial markets so that people’s savings are used to finance point #2. Liberalize them little by little, once the industrial giants are well established and the economy can compete globally. Avoid too much debt and too much consumption.
Very clearly, China has been following this path. This is why Chinese people can’t invest abroad, why the stock market there is stifled, and why the government let the real estate bubble collapse, while at the same time propping up industries like drones, batteries, and solar panels. Internal consumption used to be discouraged. In this According to Rogoff, Japan could be 50% richer than it is today if it hadn’t followed that path. A country that was richer than the US will soon be poorer than Poland.
The yen doubled in value in three years. This caused a trade reversal, with exports crashing and imports spiking, and lots of companies suffering heavily. To offset the economic shock, Japan slashed interest rates and flooded the economy with cheap credit. This meant that Japanese banks had plenty of cash and a liberalized market; they went on a lending spree. They poured money into real estate and stocks with little risk assessment. Japan's stock market became worth more than the US stock market despite having half the population. The total value of Japanese real estate was 4x that of all US real estate! When the bubble burst in 1991, banks were left with massive amounts of bad loans. The entire financial system crashed, creating a "lost decade" of deflation and stagnation, and Japan has yet to fully recover. This is helpful context for understanding the trade war between the US and China, and why China doesn’t want to increase the value of its currency. That’s probably one of the reasons why the US prints a lot of money, in a process that depresses the USD’s relative value and boosts its exports. And this is not just a fertility or aging issue; Japanese workers are just less productive: Even if you only look at productivity per hour worked: Do Tariffs Work?One of the tools Japan, Taiwan, and South Korea all used to protect their industries was tariffs. But this is easier said than done: Tariffs can cause a lot of harm. Did these countries’ tariff approaches work? Or did their economies grow despite them? These countries prioritized infant industry protection, to protect young but important industries. Their governments had used the example of Germany and the US, which had used tariffs just as they had heavily industrialized. But according to Reduced labor productivity Made more, smaller companies Raised prices Employed more people Created more value internally
How? By weakening foreign competition, more local companies could exist, create value, and employ people, but that’s because companies that weren’t very productive could survive. This lack of productivity was reflected in higher prices. My shallow take on all of this is that protectionism for defense and infant industries is still valuable, but should be avoided for others. It also means that it makes sense to tax downstream products rather than upstream: Don’t tax things like ore, steel, cement, or heavy machinery, unless you want your country to develop it (whether for geopolitical or economic reasons). The closer a product is to end consumers, the more sense it makes to levy tariffs: They hinder consumption (so people do more saving, which can be reinvested in growth) They don’t hurt other industries downstream
Phantom MapsWe’ve done phantom maps of Poland and Germany. I Did mountains influence Ottoman presence, which in turn determined literacy? Next: Druzes vs Syria Forgotten civilizations in the Sahara? A humorous and revealing map of Brazil The volcanic fall of the Roman Empire Poland vs Russia English as the Lingua Franca of the world Mountains vs flatlands Why do we see what we see, and not other types of light? An 11 meter painting that reveals a lot about China’s past Influencer strategy, 120 years ago We were right about global taxes
Druzes...Keep reading with a 7-day free trialSubscribe to Uncharted Territories to keep reading this post and get 7 days of free access to the full post archives. A subscription gets you:
|