---
subject: "The Land Cruiser Series 70 Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-06-14 10:44:26
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Colin here. Toyota Land Cruisers are cult vehicles for a reason. They are extremely well made, look cool, and last for a long time. There’s a heritage, going back to the 1950s, and all of the eras hold their resale value well. Unfortunately, Toyota recently declined to sell the newest generation (300 Series) Land Cruiser in the US, and is focusing on international markets*. It will be replaced by its higher-end cousin, the Lexus version of the model, the LX 600. In many ways, it was a victim of its success and quality: owners hold onto their versions for a long time, and the brand wasn’t selling a lot of new ones in the US market. It was also pricing high—around 85k USD for the base level—which put it in a weird competitive space with Lexus, Toyota’s luxury brand. Despite its formidable offroading capabilities, Toyota instead focuses domestically on its 4Runner, Tacoma, and Sequoia models, leaving the Land Cruiser a tough fit strategically. *(Given the consumer uproar, rumors are circulating The modern version of the Land Cruiser. Why is this interesting? Of course, the modern 300-Series versions of the Land Cruiser will continue to be sold in places like Africa and the Middle East, where the vehicles are very much in demand. But as I was digging, I noted another version of the vehicle that is only sold in certain markets: The Landcruiser Series 70. It’s a truck that looks like it hasn’t changed in decades, with no conceit to modernity or luxury. It looks like the brawny, purpose-built work vehicle that it is—just as confident as a safari vehicle (where I first encountered this variant) or a pickup truck with space for gear (or troops) in the back. The spartan interiors are refreshingly analog in a world of too many touch screens and CarPlay interfaces. Physical buttons serve their intended function, and there’s just something very nice about a tried and true design that is durable and hyper-functional. A series 70. Though there are surely rabid fans that would like this workhorse on a Texas ranch, due to environmental reasons, it cannot be sold in the US.
It is a truck that is still in demand but remains frozen in time aesthetically—a near-perfect tool for the jobs it was designed for. (CJN) Thanks to Ryan M. for his read of an early draft. — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) —
|