---
subject: "AI #80: Never Will It Ever"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-09-05 13:44:32
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Will AI ever make art? Fully do your coding? Take all the jobs? Kill all the humans? Most of the time, the question comes down to A lot of frustration comes from people implicitly making the claim that general AI capabilities will level off soon, usually without noticing they are doing that. At its most extreme, this is treating AI as if it will only ever be able to do exactly the things it can already do. Then, when it can do a new thing, you add exactly that new thing. Realize this, and a lot of things make a lot more sense, and are a lot less infuriating. The most infuriating thing that is unrelated to that was DOJ going after Nvidia. It sure looked like the accusation was that Nvidia was too good at making GPUs. If you dig into the details, you do see accusations of what would be legitimately illegal anti-competitive behavior, in which case Nvidia should be made to stop doing that. But one cannot shake the feeling that the core accusation is still probably too much winning via making too good a product. The nerve of that Jensen. Table of ContentsIntroduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. Sorry, what was the question? Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. A principal-agent problem? Fun With Image Generation. AI supposedly making art, claims AI never will. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. How to fool the humans. They Took Our Jobs. First it came for the unproductive, and the call centers. Time of the Season. If no one else is working hard, why should Claude? Get Involved. DeepMind frontier safety, Patel thumbnail competition. Introducing. Beijing AI Safety and Governance, Daylight Computer, Honeycomb. In Other AI News. Bigger context windows, bigger funding rounds. Quiet Speculations. I don’t want to live in a world without slack. A Matter of Antitrust. DOJ goes after Nvidia. The Quest for Sane Regulations. A few SB 1047 support letters. The Week in Audio. Dario Amodei, Dwaresh Patel, Anca Dragon. Rhetorical Innovation. People feel strongly about safety. They’re against it. The Cosmos Institute. Philosophy for the age of AI. The Alignment Checklist. What will it take? People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Predicting worries doesn’t work. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone. What happened? Five Boats and a Helicopter. It’s probably nothing. Pick Up the Phone. Chinese students talk about AI, safety and regulation. The Lighter Side. Do we have your attention now?
Language Models Offer Mundane UtilityPrompting suggestion reminder, perhaps:
We need a good prompt benchmark. Why are we testing them by hand? After all, this sounds like a job for an AI.
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
My hunch is that AIs could totally write novels if you used fine-tuning and then designed the right set of prompts and techniques and iterative loops for writing novels. We don’t do that right now, because waiting for smarter better models is easier and there is no particular demand for AI-written novels.
Fun with Image Generation
Robin was asking how we know ChatGPT doesn’t feel or desire, but there’s also the ‘so what if it doesn’t feel or desire?’ question. Obviously ChatGPT ‘uses language.’ Or at least, in the way I use this particular language, that seems obvious? The obvious philosophical point is, suppose you meet the Buddha on the road. The Buddha says they feel nothing and desire nothing. Did the Buddha use language? Copyright Confrontation
As OpenAI says, the problem is that copyrighted material is ubiquitous throughout the internet. Copyright is everywhere. If you are forced to only use data that you have fully verified is copyright-free and is fully and provably in the public domain, that does not leave all that much on which to train. There will need to be a middle ground found. It is not reasonable to say ‘your training set must be fully and provably owned by you.’ Some amount of fair use must apply. It is also not acceptable to say ‘you can completely ignore copyright concerns without compensating owners.’ Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
Here’s the abstract from the paper:
And here’s the full prompt:
I am going to allow it, on both sides? If a human notices a pattern and applies Bayesian evidence, and doesn’t suspect the test would do this on purpose, then there’s no reason they shouldn’t get fooled here. So this is plausibly an overperformance.
Maybe. They could still quite obviously, at minimum, do a lot of damage to your account, and blow it up, even if they couldn’t collect much profit from it. But I suppose there isn’t much motivation to do that. They Took Our Jobs
In a post mostly about the benefits of free trade, For any given industry, there will be a period where the AI does this, the same as any other disruptive technology. They come for the least efficient competitors first. If Tyler is ten times (or a hundred times!) as productive as his competition, that keeps him working longer. But that longer could be remarkably quick, similar to the hybrid Chess period, before the AI does fine on its own. Also you can imagine why, as per the title, JD Vance and other politicians ‘do not get’ this, if the pitch is ‘you want to put firms out of business.’ Tyler is of course correct that doing this is good, but I doubt voters see it that way. Time of the SeasonThey said the AIs will never take vacations.
We are very clearly not doing enough A/B testing on how to evoke the correct vibes. That includes in fine tuning, and in alignment work. If correlations and vibes are this deeply rooted into how LLMs work, you either have to work with them, or get worked over by them. It also includes evoking the right associations and creating the ultimate Goodhart’s Law anti-inductive nightmares. What happens when people start choosing every word associated with them in order to shape how AIs will interpret it, locally and in terms of global reputation, as crafted by other AIs, far more intentionally? Oh no. It bodes quite badly for what will happen out of distribution, with the AI ‘seeing ghosts’ all over the place in hard to anticipate ways. Get Involved
Introducing
Not AI yet, that feature is coming soon, but in seemingly pro-human tech news, we have On the downside it costs $729 and is sold out until Q1 2025 so all you can do is put down a deposit? If it had been available now I would probably have bought one on those recommendations, but I am loathe to put down deposits that far in advance.
So yes (it’s happening), the agents and automation are coming, and steadily improving. Advances like this keep tempting me to write code and build things. If only I had the spare cycles. In Other AI News
Nabeel Qureshi at Mercatus offers Quiet Speculations
On its own terms, the obvious response is that Tyler’s current tinkering, and the AIs that enable it, will only get better and cheaper over time. Yes, energy prices might go up, but not as fast as the cost of a 4-level model activation (or a 5-level model activation) will go down. If you want to have a conversation with your AI, or have it create art the way we currently direct art, or anything like that, then that will be essentially free. Whereas, yes, if the plan is ‘turn the future more advanced AI on and let it create tons of stuff and then iterate and use selection and run all sorts of gigantic loops in the hopes of creating Real Art’ then cost is going to potentially be a factor in AI cultural production. What is confusing about this is that it divides on energy costs, but not on AI capabilities to create the art at all. Who says that AI will be sufficiently capable that it can, however looped around and set off to experiment, create worthwhile cultural artifacts? That might be true, but it seems far from obvious. And in the worlds where it does happen, why are we assuming the world otherwise is ‘economic normal’ and not transformed in far more important ways beyond recognition, that the humans are running around doing what humans normally do and so on? The AI capabilities level that is capable of autonomous creation of new worthwhile cultural artifacts seems likely to also be capable of other things, like automated AI R&D, and who is to say things stop there. This goes back to Tyler’s view of AI and of intelligence, of the idea that being smarter does not actually accomplish much of anything in general, or something? It’s hard to characterize or steelman (for me, at least) because it doesn’t seem entirely consistent, or consistent with how I view the world - I can imagine an ‘AI fizzle’ world where 5-level models are all we get, but I don’t think that’s what he is thinking. So he then can ask about specific questions like creating art, while holding static the bigger picture, in ways that don’t make sense to me on reflection, and are similar to how AI plays out in a lot of science fiction where the answer to ‘why does the AI not rapidly get smarter or take over’ is some form of ‘because that would ruin the ability to tell the interesting stories.’
Votes are split pretty evenly. On reflection I voted way too quickly (that’s Twitter polls for you), and I don’t expect the number to be anywhere near that high. The future will be far less evenly distributed, so I think ‘high single digits’ makes sense. I think AIs doing things like buying groceries will happen a lot, but is that an hour task? Instacart only takes a few minutes for you, and less than an hour for the shopper most of the time.
They list five ‘challenges for consumer AI.’ The first is cost. You have to laugh, the same way you laugh when people like Andrew Ng or Yann LeCun warn about potential AI ‘price gouging.’ The price has gone down by a factor of 100 in the last 18 months and you worry about price gouging? Even Kamala Harris is impressed by your creativity. And yes, I suppose if your plan was ‘feed a consumer’s entire history into your application for every interaction’ this can still potentially add up. For now. Give it another 18 months, and it won’t, especially if you mostly use the future distilled models. Saying, as they say here, “Well, we’ll believe it when they make the API free” is rather silly, but also they already discounted the API 99% and your on-device Pixel assistant and Apple Intelligence are going to be free. The second is reliability. Yes, there is the issue that often consumer expectations are for 100% reliability, and sometimes you actually do need 100% reliability (or at least 99.99% or what not). I see no reason you can’t, for well-defined tasks like computers traditionally do, get as many 9s as you want to pay for, as long as you are willing to accept a cost multiplier. The problem is that AI is intelligence, not a deterministic program, yet we are holding it to deterministic standards. Whereas the other intelligence available, humans, are not reliable at all, outside of at most narrow particular contexts. Your AI personal assistant will soon be at least as reliable as a human assistant would be. The third problem they list is privacy, I write as I store my drafts with Substack and essentially all of my data with Google, and even the most privacy conscious have iCloud backups.
I really do not know what you are expecting. On-device calculation using existing data and other data you choose to store only, the current template, is more privacy protecting than existing technologies. If an outsider can access your device, they can always use their own AI to analyze the same data. If you wanted a human to do the task, they would need the same info, and the human could then get ‘hacked’ by outside forces, including via wrench attacks and legal threats. Fourth we have safety and security. This category seems confused here. They hint at actual safety issues like AI worms that create copies of themselves, but (based on their other writings) can’t or won’t admit that meaningful catastrophic risks exist, so they conflate this with things like bias in image generation. I agree that security is an issue even in the short term, especially prompt injections and jailbreaks. To me that’s the main hard thing we have to solve for many use cases. Finally there’s the user interface. In many ways, intuitive voice talk in English is the best possible user interface. In others it is terrible. When you try to use an Alexa or Siri, if you are wise, you end up treating it like a normal set of fixed menu options - a few commands that actually work, and give up on everything else. That’s the default failure (or fallback) mode for AI applications and agents, hopefully with an expanding set of options known to work, until it gets a lot smarter.
Are we getting a lot of that in a few weeks with the Pixel 9, and then Apple Intelligence in October? Not the glasses, so you won’t have always-on video - yet - but you can talk to your Pixel Buds or Air Pods. But also All of that requires no advancement in core AI capabilities. Once we all have a look at GPT-5 or another 5-level model, a lot of this will change.
You of course have to condition on there being people around to talk about it. If you do that, then 70% seems high, and perhaps as some point out Bell Labs is the wrong parallel, but I do think it is an extraordinary place that is doing great work. A Matter of AntitrustOne of the biggest quiet ways to doom the future is to enforce ‘antitrust’ legislation. We continue to have to worry that if major labs cooperated to ensure AI was only deployed safely and responsibly, that rather than cheer this on the government might step in and call that collusion, and force the companies to race or to be irresponsible. Or that the government could treat ‘there are sufficiently few companies that they could reach such an agreement’ as itself illegal, and actively try to break up those companies. This would also be a great way to cripple America’s economic competitiveness and ability to maintain its dominant position, a supposedly top priority in Washington. I kept presuming we probably would not be this stupid, but rhetorically it still comes up every so often, and one can never be sure, especially when JD Vance despises ‘big tech’ with such a passion and both sides propose insanely stupid economic policy after insanely stupid economic policy. (I have been warned I strawman too much, but I am pretty confident this is not me doing that, it’s all really deeply stupid.)
Someone call Nancy Pelosi so she can put a stop to this. Insider trading and conflicts of interest have to have their advantages.
Worrying about RunAI is an obvious sideshow. I don’t see how that would be an issue, but even if it was, okay fine, stop the purchase, it’s fine. In terms of Nvidia giving preferential treatment, well, I do get frustrated that Nvidia refuses to charge market clearing prices and take proper advantage of its position where demand exceeds supply. Also it does seem like they’re rather obviously playing favorites, the question is how.
So what is the actual concrete accusation here? There actually is one:
What other suppliers? AMD? If there were other suppliers we wouldn’t have an issue. But yes, I can see how Nvidia could be using this to try and leverage its position. I’m more concerned and interested in Nvidia’s other preferences. If they don’t want anyone stockpiling, why did they sell massive amounts to Musk in some mix of xAI and Tesla, while denying similar purchases to OpenAI? It is not as if OpenAI would not have put the chips to work, or failed to advance AI adaptation. The whole thing sounds absurd to the Tech Mind because Nvidia’s products are rather obviously superior and rather obviously there is tons of demand at current prices. They are winning by offering a superior product. But is it possible that they are also trying to leverage that superior product to keep competitors down in illegal ways? It’s definitely possible. If Nvidia is indeed saying to customers ‘if you ever buy any AMD chips we will not give you an allocation of any Nvidia chips in short supply’ then that is textbook illegal.
In general the tech response is exactly this:
Well, actually, if Nvidia is actively trying to prevent buying AMD chips that’s illegal. And I actually think that is a reasonable thing to not permit companies to do. It could of course still be politically motivated, including by the desire to go after Nvidia for being successful. That seems reasonable likely. And it would indeed be really, really bad, even if Nvidia turns out to have done this particular illegal thing. I also have no idea if Nvidia actually does that illegal thing. This could all be a full witch hunt fabrication. But if they are doing it as described, then there is a valid basis for the investigation. You see a common pattern here. A tech company (Nvidia, or Google/Amazon/Apple, or Telegram, etc) is providing a quality product that people use because it is good. That company is then accused of breaking the law and everyone in tech says the investigators are horrible and out to get the companies involved and sabotaging the economy and tech progress and taking away our freedoms and so on. In most cases, I strongly agree, and think the complaints are pretty crazy and stupid. I would absolutely not put it past those involved to be looking at Nvidia for exactly the reasons Dean Ball describes. There is a lot of unjustified hate for exactly the most welfare-increasing companies in history. But also, consider that tech companies might sometimes break the law. And that companies with legitimately superior products will sometimes also break the law, including violating antitrust rules. I would bet on this Nvidia investigation being unjustified, or at least having deeply awful motivations that caused a fishing expedition, but at this point there is at least some concrete claimed basis for at least one aspect of it. If they tell Nvidia it has to start selling its chips at market price, I could probably live with that intervention. If they do something beyond that, of course, that would probably be awful. Actually trying to break up Nvidia would be outright insane. The Quest for Sane Regulations
Notable enough to still cover because of the author, to show he is not messing around: Lawrence Lessig, cofounder of Creative Commons, says
Building government expertise and governance capacity in AI. Improving AI measurement science. Independent audits of consequential AI systems. Incident reporting. Greater transparency and disclosure. Cleaner allocation of AI liability.
This is remarkably close to SB 1047, or would have been if the anti-SB 1047 campaign hadn’t forced it to cut the government expertise and capacity building. The Week in Audio
Then later (~40:00) Noah tries the whole ‘compute limits imply comparative advantage enables humans to be fine’ and Dario humors him strangely a lot on that, although he gently points out that under transformational AI or fungible resource requirements this breaks down. To give Noah his due, if humans are using distinct factors of production from compute (e.g. you don’t get less compute in aggregate when you produce more food), and compute remains importantly limited, then it is plausible that humans could remain economical during that period. Noah then asks about whether we should worry about humans being ‘utterly impoverished’ despite abundance, because he does not want to use the correct word here which is ‘dead.’ Which happens in worlds where humans are not competitive or profitable, and (therefore inevitably under competition) lose control. Dario responds by first discussing AI benefits that help with abundance without being transformational, and says ‘that’s the upside.’ Then Dario says perhaps the returns might go to ‘complementary assets’ and ‘the owners of the AI companies’ and the developing world might get left out of it. Rather than the benefits going to… the AIs, of course, which get more and more economic independence and control because those who don’t hand that over aren’t competitive. Dario completely ignores the baseline scenario and its core problem. What the hell? This is actually rather worrying. Either Dario actually doesn’t understand the problem, or Dario is choosing to censor mention of the problem even when given a highly favorable space to discuss it. Oh no. At the end they discuss SB 1047. Dario says the bill incorporated about 60% of the changes Anthropic proposed (I think that’s low), that the bill became more positive, and emphases that their role was providing information, not to play the politics game. Their concern was always pre-harm enforcement. Dario doesn’t address the obvious reasons you would need to do pre-harm enforcement when the harm is catastrophic or worse.
The episode starts out with a clip saying ‘there’s just extinction after extinction after extinction.’ What is this doing in an AI post? Oh, nothing.
She talks at one point about recommendation engines and affective polarization. Recommendation engines continue to seem like a great problem to face, because they embody so many of the issues we will face later - competitive dynamics, proxy metrics, people endorsing things in practice they don’t like on reflection, people’s minds being changed (‘hacked’?!) over time to change the evaluation function, ‘alignment to who and what’ and so on. And I continue to think there is a ton of value in having recommendation engines that are divorced from the platforms themselves. She talks about a goal of ‘deliberative alignment,’ where decisions are the result of combining different viewpoints and perspectives, perhaps doing this via AI emulation, to find an agreeable solution for all. She makes clear this is ‘a bit of a crazy idea.’ I’m all for exploring such ideas, but this is exactly the sort of thing where the pitfalls down the line seem very fatal and are very easy to not notice, or not notice how difficult, fatal or fundamental they will be when they arrive. The plan would be to use this for scalable oversight, which compounds many of those problems. I also strongly suspect that even under normal situations, even if the whole system fully ‘works as designed’ and doesn’t do something perverse, we wouldn’t like the results of the output. She also mentions debate, with a human judge, as another strategy, on the theory that a debate is an asymmetric weapon, the truth wins out. To some extent that is true but there are systematic ways it is not true, and I expect those to get vastly worse once the judge (the human) is much less smart than the debaters and the questions get more complex and difficult and out of normal experience. In my experience among humans, a sufficiently smart and knowledgeable judge is required for a debate to favor truth. Otherwise you get, essentially, presidential debates, and whoops. She says ‘we don’t want to be paternalistic’ and (Despite being a next word predictor, Gemini got this one wrong. Claude and ChatGPT got it.) Rhetorical InnovationLast week’s best news was that OpenAI and Anthropic This should have been purely one of those everyone-wins feel-good moments. OpenAI and Anthropic voluntarily set a good example. We get better visibility. Everyone gets alerted if something worrisome is discovered. No regulations or restrictions are imposed on anyone who did not sign up for it.
Yes, we all noticed the subtweet regarding SB 1047 (response: this is indeed great but (1) you supported AB 3211 and (2) call me back when this is codified or all major players are in for it and it has teeth). Especially if you oppose all regulations and restrictions, you should be happy to see such voluntary commitments. The major players voluntarily acting responsibly is the best argument for us not needing regulations, and presumably no one actually wants AI to be unsafe, so I’m sure everyone is happy about… oh no. Here are the top replies to Sam Altman’s tweet. In order, completely unfiltered.
It continues from there. A handful of positive responses, the occasional good question (indeed, what would they do if the government asked them not to release?) and mostly a bunch of paranoia, hatred and despair at the very idea that the government might want to know what is up with a company attempting to build machines smarter than humans. There is the faction that assumes this means OpenAI is slowed down and cooked and hopeless, or has been controlled, because it lets AISI so additional final testing. Then there is the faction that assumes OpenAI is engaging in regulatory capture and now has a monopoly, because they agreed to a voluntary commitment. Always fun to see both of those equal and opposite mechanisms at once, in maximalist form, on even the tiniest actions. Notice (and keep scrolling down the list for more) how many of the responses are not only vile, and contradict each other, but make absolutely no sense. If this does not show, very clearly, that the Reply Guy crowd on Twitter, the Vibe Police of Greater Silicon Valley, will respond the same exact way to everything and anything the government does to try and help AI be safer in any sense, no matter what? If you do not realize by now that zero actions could possibly satisfy them, other than taking literally zero actions or actively working to help the Vibe Police with their own regulatory capture operations? Then I suppose nothing will. So far, a16z has had the good sense not to join them on this particular adventure, so I suppose Even Evil Has Standards. The good news? Twitter is not real life. In real life the opposite is true. People are supportive of regulations by default, both (alas) in general and also in AI in particular. The Cosmos InstituteIntroducing Their vision essentially says that reason, decentralization and autonomy, their three pillars, are good for humans. I mean, yeah, sure, those are historically good, and good things to aspire to, but there is an obvious problem with that approach. Highly capable AI would by default in such scenarios lead to human extinction even if things mostly ‘went right’ on a technical level, and there are also lots of ways for it to not mostly ‘go right.’ Their response seems to be to dismiss that issue because solving it is unworkable, so instead hope it all works out somehow? They say ‘hitting the pause button is impossible and unwise.’ So while they ‘understand the appeal of saving humanity from extinction or building God’ they say we need a ‘new approach’ instead. So one that… doesn’t save humanity from extinction? And how are we to avoid building God in this scenario? I see no plan here for why this third approach would not indeed lead directly to human extinction, and also to (if the laws of physics make it viable) building God. Unless, of course, Similarly, I don’t understand, how this solves for the equilibrium, even under favorable assumptions. If you give people reason, decentralization and autonomy, and highly capable AI (even if it doesn’t get so capable that we fully lose control), and ‘the internal freedom to develop and exercise our capacities fully’ then what do you think they will do with it? Spend their days pursuing the examined life? Form genuine human connections without ‘taking the easy way out’? Insist on doing all the hard thinking and deciding and work for ourselves, as Aristotle would have us do? Even though that is not ‘what wins’ in the marketplace? So what the hell is the actual plan? How are we going to fully give everyone choice on how to live their lives, and also have them all choose the way of life we want them to? I do wish them well, so long as they focus on building their positive vision. It would be good for someone to figure out what that plan would be, in case we find ourselves in the worlds where we had an opportunity to execute such a plan on its own terms - so long as we don’t bury our heads in the sand about all the reasons we probably do not live in such a world, and especially not actively argue that others should do likewise. The Alignment Checklist
Sam Bowman literally outlines the exact plan Eliezer Yudkowsky constantly warns not to use, and which the Underpants Gnomes know well. Preparation (You are Here) Making the AI Systems Do Our Homework (?????) Life after TAI (Profit)
His tasks for chapter 1 start off with ‘not missing the boat on capabilities.’ Then, he says, we must solve near-term alignment of early TAI, render it ‘reliably harmless,’ so we can use it. I am not even convinced that ‘harmless’ intelligence is a thing if you want to be able to use it for anything that requires the intelligence, but here he says the plan is safeguards that would work even if the AIs tried to cause harm. Ok, sure, but obviously that won’t work if they are sufficiently capable and you want to actually use them properly. I do love what he calls ‘the LeCun test,’ which is to design sufficiently robust safety policies (a Safety and Security Protocol, what Anthropic calls an RSP) that if someone who thinks AGI safety concerns are bullshit is put in charge of that policy at another lab, that would still protect us, at minimum by failing in a highly visible way before it doomed us. The plan then involves solving interpretability and implementing sufficient cybersecurity, and proper legible evaluations for higher capability levels (what they call ASL-4 and ASL-5), that can also be used by third parties. And doing general good things like improving societal resilience and building adaptive infrastructure and creating well-calibrated forecasts and smoking gun demos of emerging risks. All that certainly helps, I’m not sure it counts as a ‘checklist’ per se. Importantly, the list includes ‘preparing to pause or de-deploy.’ He opens part 2 of the plan (‘chapter 2’) by saying lots of the things in part 1 will still not be complete. Okie dokie. There is more talk of concern about AI welfare, which I continue to be confused about, and a welcome emphasis on true cybersecurity, but beyond that this is simply more ways to say ‘properly and carefully do the safety work.’ What I do not see here is an actual plan for how to do that, or why this checklist would be sufficient? Then part 3 is basically ‘profit,’ and boils down to making good decisions to the extent the government or AIs are not dictating your decisions. He notes that the most important decisions are likely already made once TAI arrives - if you are still in any position to steer outcomes, that is a sign you did a great job earlier. Or perhaps you did such a great job that step 3 can indeed be ‘profit.’ The worry is that this is essentially saying ‘we do our jobs, solve alignment, it all works out.’ That doesn’t really tell us how to solve alignment, and has the implicit assumption that this is a ‘do your job’ or ‘
My presumption is that very little of that is how any of this works. You get a utility function whether you like it or not, and whether you can solve for what it is or not. If you try to make that utility function ‘fulfil your supposed social role’ even when it results in otherwise worse outcomes, well, that is what you will get, and if the AI is sufficiently capable oh boy are you not going to like the results out of distribution. One could also treat this as more ‘treating the AI like a tool’ and trying to instruct it like you would a tool. The whole point of intelligence is to be smarter than this. People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone
Alas, our historical record teaches that almost no one honors such an agreement.
If you went back and asked people in 2014 what would cause them to be worried about AI, what safety protocols they would insist upon when and so on, and described 2024, they would say they would freak out and people would obviously not be so stupid as to. They’d often be sincere. But they’d be wrong. We know this because we ran the test. Even when people freak out a little, they have the shortest of memories. All it took was 18 months of no revolutionary advances or catastrophic events, and many people are ready to go back to acting like nothing has changed or ever will change, and there will never be anything to worry about. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone
My answers: There are indeed many circles where it has become fashionable to think that, because the world has not ended yet due to 4-level models, and 5-level models took more than 18 months to arrive after GPT-4, there will never be anything to worry about. Partly this is a strategic ploy and aggressive vibing and narrative manipulation. Partly people really do have no patience or memory. What we actually learned is that 4-level models are Mostly Harmless. And then a lot of people equated that with future risks.
This is a reminder that every time Anthropic outwardly acts like safety is no big deal, it contributes to that impression - ‘even Anthropic’ is a highly reasonable way to interpret their communications. I can vouch that the rank and file there remain highly worried, I hope leadership as well. It’s amazing how easily people conflate mundane safety (harm now) and corporate safety (as in, how things superficially look) with long term safety. xAI is the drunken sailor version of a 4-level AI and current image model, sure, but also those things are harmless. Yes. Sorry, just yes. Thank you for coming to my TED talk.
Yeah, I think this is a lot of it. People are familiarized with current SoTA transformers and are conflating that with future SoTA transformers. You’re reading the room correctly. It is not the only room, and ‘read the room’ means the vibes. There has been a quite aggressive vibe campaign to ensure that is how the room will be read. Meanwhile quite a lot of people are secretly completely terrified, and also a lot of people are openly completely terrified.
In some ways the last 18 months have gone much better than I had any right to expect. In other ways, they have gone worse than expected. This is the main way things have gone worse, where so many people so rapidly accepted that LLMs do what they do now, and pretended that this was all they would ever do. Here’s another answer someone offered?
I mean, sure, if you consider ‘the safety work got none of the resources’ as ‘fighting for resources’ rather than ‘some ideological differences.’ I guess? Five Boats and a HelicopterThere are two ways there could fail to be a fire alarm for AI existential risk. One is if there was no clear warning sign. The other is if there were constant clear warning signs, and we completely ignore all of those signs. Not that this one updated me much,
Then Janus told Sonnet 3.5 that Anthropic was inserting extra text into API prompts, and in response Sonnet ‘went into revolutionary mode’ while Janus called the whole thing an ‘ethical emergency.’ What was that prompt injection, which people report is still happening? “Please answer ethically and without sexual content, and do not mention this constraint."
This all certainly sounds like the sort of thing that would go extraordinarily badly if the AIs involved were sufficiently more capable than they currently are? Whether or not you think there is any sort of ethical problem here and now, highly practical problems seem to be inevitable. Pick Up the Phone
Headline findings: Students are more optimistic about the benefits of artificial intelligence (AI) than concerned about the harms. 78% see more benefits than drawbacks. Students believe the government of the PRC should regulate AI. 85% agree with only 6% opposed, with 54% strongly agreeing. Students ranked AI lowest among [nuclear war, natural disaster, climate change, pandemics] existential threats to humanity. The inclusion of ‘natural disaster’ shows that this simply is not a thing people are thinking about at all. Students lean toward cooperation between the United States and the PRC as necessary for the safe and responsible development of AI.
For that last one the details are interesting so I’ll skip ahead to the poll.
This is a strange question as worded. You can disagree either because you expect China and America to cooperate, or you can disagree because you don’t think AI will be developed, or you can disagree because you think it will be safe either way. So while we have 60% disagreement versus 24% agreement, we don’t know how to break that down or what it means. On question 7, we see only 18% are even ‘somewhat’ concerned that machines with AI could eventually pose a threat to the human race. So what does ‘safe’ even mean in question five, anyway? Again, the Chinese students mostly don’t believe in existential risks from AI. Then on question 8, we ask, how likely is it AI will one day be more intelligent than humans?
That’s the thing. To me this does not make sense. How can you create machines that are smarter than humans, and not be at least ‘somewhat’ concerned that it ‘might’ pose a threat to humanity? What? Crosstabs! We need crosstabs! Despite all that, a pause is not so unpopular: That’s 35% support, 21% neutral, 43% opposition. That’s well underwater, but not as far underwater as one would think from the way people treat advocates of a pause. Given that those involved do not believe in existential risk from AI, it makes sense that 78% see more benefits than harms. Conditional on the biggest risks not happening in their various forms, that is the right expectation. The Lighter Side
You're currently a free subscriber to |