---
subject: "Your favourite podcasts: Cred’s Kunal Shah, job-market surprises, de-influencers, and more"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-12-29 02:38:02
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
So, 2023 has been a bit of a rollercoaster for the worldwide podcast industry. We usually keep our podcast antennas pointed West—because, let’s face it, India tends to follow the audio trends a bit fashionably late. And, well, it’s been a touch gloomy out there lately.
Spotify’s podcasts division went through a “strategic realignment” and laid off [200 people](https://www.theverge.com/2023/6/5/23749351/spotify-podcast-layoffs-parcast-gimlet). Youtube is bidding [farewell](https://www.theverge.com/2023/9/26/23890694/google-podcasts-2024-shutdown-youtube-music?ueid=8b7917698988a1e3715b0b57bed8c4f4&utm_source=Sailthru&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=Hot+Pod+free+9%2F26&utm_term=Verge+Podcasts) to Google Podcasts, rolling the dice on Youtube Music instead. At the same time, there are some fascinating trials and errors in the mix. Apple, for instance, is integrating its Podcast app with third-party subscriptions to other lifestyle and news apps. Spotify is once again fiddling with AI.
The game is changing. The old rules don’t apply anymore. And in a year of experiments, The Ken not only kept up but also found its footing in podcasts. We’re not just patting ourselves on the back for our own trial and error. Your feedback, love for our episodes, and your hands-on role in crafting episodes through surveys and interviews are the real MVPs.
As we gear up for 2024, our year-ender wouldn’t be complete without a wrap (yes, I’m sorry) of our most downloaded episodes from 2023. Let’s go.
This one isn’t a surprise. This was our highest-ever downloaded episode across all our podcasts. Our conversation with Shah was full of wonderful analogies and sharp perceptions of the world. In his childhood and teenage years, he was thrust into work to support his family. He ended up being coached through the school of hard knocks and accidental exposure to philosophy.
He breaks down the result of this: a curious mix of abilities, knowledge, ambitions and perspective. Chip on the shoulder mixed with the urge to pay it forward. The ability to put himself in another person’s shoes while being brutally blunt with feedback. Left brain execution and right brain exploration. And a startup that has raised $600 million.
[Gaurav Munjal of Unacademy on being confrontational, paranoid and transparent](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/first-principles/gaurav-munjal-unacademy/)
Gaurav Munjal, the co-founder and CEO of Unacademy, comes across as straightforward, candid, and deliberate. The story starts in his college years when he ran a very successful blog devoted to actress Priyanka Chopra. Then, a Facebook page that earned him thousands of dollars from ads. A content creator before content creators were cool.
He explains that Unacademy was, in many ways, a logical evolution of his life thus far. Nearly eight years and $835 million in venture capital later, Unacademy is a company that reflects much of Gaurav’s personality. It has no time for niceties. It would rather disrupt than defend itself. It is supremely confident in the face of even existential crises. And it attaches zero value to classical or theoretical notions of education.
[Ronnie Screwvala on why Upgrad is neither a startup nor an edtech](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/first-principles/ronnie-screwvala-upgrad/)
“You need to be restless because you don’t have a choice.”
Ronnie is the chairperson and co-founder of Upgrad, an online higher-education company last valued at over $2.2 billion. In this episode, he tells us that “edtech was a parlance invented by people who wanted to go out raise money and VCs who liked the word ‘tech’ as it was the flavour for the last five years to invest in.” He also breaks down ambition, organisation building, online education, and long-term thinking.
|
|
[Why banks are suddenly lining up to finance your study abroad](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/daybreak/why-banks-are-suddenly-lining-up-to-finance-your-study-abroad/)
Public sector banks are known to be hesitant towards study-abroad loans, and this caution has been well-founded. They bore the brunt of losses due to defaulting on education loans.
Non-banks, however, are a whole different story. Study-abroad loans accounted for about $4 billion in the year ended March 2023. These were almost fully funded by non-banks like Credila and Avanse Financial. Their strategy was simple—sanction collateral-free loans as fast as possible. But guess who is using all that data and experience gathered by non-banks to offer overseas education loans now? The banks.
[What is fuelling the growing band of de-influencers in India?](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/daybreak/what-is-fuelling-the-growing-band-of-de-influencers-in-india/)
Beets are a superfood today. Tomorrow, it’ll be lemons. The internet is rife with misinformation, especially about food and health. There are hundreds of influencers on your feed telling you what’s good for you.
But who’s telling you what’s bad and doesn’t work? Maybe a keto diet worked for your friend but not for you. For instance, Cyriac Abby Philips, who goes by The Liver Doc on X or Twitter, claimed there is no point in taking multivitamins. Many, like him, work towards breaking down myths. Often, they’re faced with legal action and threats, yet most of them continue their work. What really fuels these de-influencers?
[Is Digiyatra more about cash than convenience?](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/daybreak/is-digiyatra-more-about-cash-than-convenience/)
This year, stories of passengers being forced to sign up for the Digiyatra app surfaced on social media. Airlines, which are important stakeholders in making the entire endeavour successful, are unable to see any benefits for themselves. Airports, though, see it as a great opportunity. In fact, multiple people close to the Digiyatra implementation say that the whole idea came from airports. What’s in it for them?
|
|
(Cost to Company, discontinued in August, remains one of our most creative podcast formats. Despite its end, it solidified our commitment to a forthcoming, innovative careers podcast. Widely loved and shared by listeners in 2023, it left a lasting impact.)
[How to get hired in an employer’s market](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/cost-to-company/how-to-get-hired-in-an-employers-market/)
In 2023, the tides of the job market shifted, putting the ball in the employers’ court. Job-seekers had to hustle to keep up. And the mistakes kept spilling over.
In this episode, we spoke to Ria Shroff Desai (People and Culture Lead, Blume Ventures), Udayan Walvekar (CEO, GrowthX), and Bhakti Dhanak (Associate Vice President – Human Resources, CIIE.CO) to understand some of the unobvious errors that candidates are making while applying for jobs in the “employer’s market”.
[Bombay is running out of talent](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/cost-to-company/bombay-is-running-out-of-talent/)
Earlier in 2023, Cost to Company received a striking message from a subscriber, Uzma Rushdi. She wrote, “Mumbai is suffering from a lack of new talent inflow. Unless there are dramatic changes, it will be Calcutta in 20 years.” Around the same time, another thing happened. A group of 35 startups in Mumbai created something called TEAM (Technology Entrepreneurs Association of Mumbai) to reinvigorate “Brand Mumbai”.
This episode, which is based on conversations with four lovers of Bombay, founders, CEOs, one product manager, and Uzma, tracks the story of Bombay’s talent in 2023.
[The golden era of ‘work from anywhere’ is over](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/cost-to-company/the-golden-era-of-work-from-anywhere-is-over/)
In 2023, the buzz around the water cooler suggests that the era of working from home might be officially coming to a close. Companies have realised that the “work from anywhere” model isn’t sustainable in the long run. Or even in the short run, in some cases. Meesho, for one, announced an extravagant WFA policy in February 2022. They scrapped it only a few months later. But it’s not just the employers who’re putting the final nail in the coffin. It’s the employees, too.
As we enter 2024, stay tuned for an explosion of The Ken’s podcasts—there’s a lot more brewing! In fact, we’re looking for a driven podcast host for our team—a writing, researching, and hosting role for our news podcast. If this is you, [click here](https://the-ken.com/careers/podcast-host) to apply.
Regards,
Anushka
anushka@the-ken.com
What you just read is the personalised daily introduction to The Ken's story. Written by a different person each day. Often insightful, sometimes witty, and very rarely boring. Someone sent this to you? [Sign up for free](https://the-ken.com/?modal=register&utm_source=footer&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=morning_email_ind_shared). [Dont like these? You can unsubscribe](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/unsubscribe/?user_id=2349339&data=Zl6hSLaY7vHkgJJp5s0Ej7rQGtRiRiim2Bm5Nhgy18BoMDAwdTAwMCdDp9Sy-uaOL47QI4jYyklEzhcZPsSal3emGqb20FRIoThlZ4gLVYR5JTwXOoVcB8fhi_-xKBjfP20yQZ7n4vZrnXCSvECAqgi1v1PIl13h-RhCK0_PD0gLY6N_eA6WGpd2Z__9WMt5cZ05hOuObk1sf-KVZafaA_Gthx7U2IadaqRT35xlARoVVt3H8wIrLg_xFsmv74xLiL1UmxgEFbEaGpSGIu6cEIX2UHdfPn0ZucReY8E2NmX-SidWCRlfGTxb4IZKSe8SExIDC82dZURxRMTMpyCyD-HjdsV3RGqQ1BNYvzHCkD11T8L0ZfQZS7yNB4lMBkcJedimVLmRrEq549-W-Z0zPnmsSlFJ8H7Dabe2pjlRkDMVKKAPPu6_YlbPSfmIhvVho7U380X12pzIHCnWA_eG5znTjuAEll_DD0hL6a0NRTzufDY4qhPpEfVHt17fpKLm3TBjQxlsNqsacs71wOJFTfbEfEwfXyU5rHNIJvG6JcrwtgV8zYemYU1L9x9wRj2-r_27V5LIrjo=) Dont want to hear from us again? [ Unsubscribe from our emails here](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/?user_id=2349339&data=nn-QV3m4cZDrLxTvTsLnWTGL39jI_dHZF3mZk4M8R-ZoMDAwdTAwMErfFw_Kd7LFJE1ezaJ2EbFiwWBtlmsnN759j8sazCygYuRA_0JmaULAyFgnfWIA0-LwzzHWewPxOQu65UDNVn7C2ClMripklVCXISLttRRJN4lDEvy8WqHy9_xDnWQ3AS-wDR2yCYXZDpsJeV6SMuzkterFqKNl-YAEmwll6OBNsiAnJ2XsvsC2msgNa2r-8o5bpPTgqC4krwRG1pbiI3hxyxby_GorY43b64bRsKW-OaxQRpoKisZUKsGDvbqG59eyDuOkEN3qne9uHfVRyttXjXu0WGerj5aWo7kL4OApLqoImtqF1RTlCP51ybRYA9pEkKN88NEc7rlN5_QjaYBOxsRuBX_plkwIcHxeT-3Oz3-ExzAElihkO6jAJnGSZn03c0qE_agOsq6VHKeaWpRikcJ-qbjvwWLGZBykyWaar0vDnrBdAbcr_vcRm7dU1sRPLvwXYapP1fqkTGvCLofJk73QE1B53Ka29fXLpkm7iFWi-cbsbZXtCyMij6P3hQ==).
Something wrong? Tell us at [support@the-ken.com](mailto:support@the-ken.com)