---
subject: "Variously Effective Altruism"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-11-10 19:14:56
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
This post is a roundup of various things related to philanthropy, as you often find in the full monthly roundup. Preventing Value DriftPeter Thiel warned Elon Musk to ditch donating to The Giving Pledge because Bill Gates will give his wealth away ‘to left-wing nonprofits.’
As he points out, ‘let my children handle it’ is not a great answer, and would be especially poor for Musk given the likely disagreements over values, especially if you don’t actually give those children that much free and clear (and thus, are being relatively uncooperative, so why should they honor your preferences?). There are no easy answers. Maximizing Good Makes People Look BadA new paper goes Full Hanson with the question This is one place where the core idea of Effective Altruism is pretty great. You create a community of people where it is socially desirable to be deliberative, and scorn is put on those who are empathic instead. If that was all EA did, without trying to drum up more resources or direct how people deliberated? That alone is a big win. No We Have No Tuition
In general giving to your Alma Mater or another university is highly ineffective altruism. One can plausibly argue that fully paying for everyone’s tuition, with an agreement to that effect, is a lot better than giving to the general university fund, especially if you’re hoping for a cascade effect. It would be a highly positive cultural shift if selective colleges stopped charging tuition. Is that the best use of $100 million? I mean, obviously not even close, but it’s not clear that it is up against the better uses. Will MacAskill and the Dangers of PR Focus
He does not mention until later the obvious objection, which is that the Effective Altruist brand is toxic, to the point that the label is used as a political accusation. No, this isn’t primarily because EA is ‘inherently controversial’ for the things it advocates. It is primarily because, as I understand things: EA tells those who don’t agree with EA, and who don’t allocate substantial resources to EA causes, that they are bad, and that they should feel bad. EA (long before FTX) [adopted in a broad range of ways](https://substack.com/redirect/3f6209eb-2eb2-45d3-a33a-f2926bea3e99?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)the ‘PR mentality’ MacAskill rightfully criticizes, and other hostile actions it has taken, also FTX.FTX, which was severely mishandled. Active intentional scapegoating and fear mongering campaigns. Yes, the things it advocates for, and the extent to which it and components of it have pushed for them, but this is one of many elements.
Thus, I think that the things strictly labeled EA should strive to stay away from the areas in which being politically toxic is a problem, and consider the risks of further negative polarization. It also needs to address the core reasons EA got into the ‘PR mentality.’ Here are the causes he thinks this new EA should have in its portfolio (with unequal weight that is not specified):
There are some strange flexes in there, but given the historical origins, okay, sure, not bad. Mostly these are good enough to be ‘some of you should do one thing, and some of you should do the other’ depending on one’s preferences and talents. I strongly agree with Will’s emphasis that his shift into AI is an affirmation of the core EA principles worth preserving, of finding the important thing and focusing there. I am glad to see Will discuss the problem of ‘PR focus.’
I also appreciate Will’s noticing that the PR focus hasn’t worked even on its own terms, that EA discourse is withering. I would add that EA’s brand and PR position is terrible in large part exactly because EA has often acted, for a long period, in this PR-focused, uncooperative and fundamentally hostile way, that comes across as highly calculated because it was, along with a lack of being straight with people, and eventually people learn the pattern. This laid the groundwork, when combined with FTX and an intentional series of attacks from a16z and related sources, to poison the well. It wouldn’t have worked otherwise to anything like the same extent. This was very wise:
Except I think this was a far broader issue than a post-FTX narrow PR focus. Thus I see ‘PR focus’ as a broader problem than Will does. It is about this kind of communication, but also broader decision making and strategy and prioritization, and was woven into the DNA. It is the asking ‘what maximizes the inputs into EA brands’ question more broadly and centrally involves confusion of costs and benefits. The broader set of things all come from the same underlying mindset. And I think that mindset greatly predates FTX. Indeed, it is hard to not view the entire FTX incident, and why it went so wrong, as largely about the PR mindset. As a clear example, he thinks ‘growing the inputs’ was a good focus of EA in the last year. He thinks the focus should now shift to improving the culture, but his justifications still fall into the ‘maximize inputs’ mindset.
Actively looking to grow the movement has obvious justification, but inputs are costs and not benefits, it is easy to confuse the two, and focus on growing inputs tends to cause severe PR mindset and hostile actions as you strive to capture resources, including people’s time and attention. Another example I would cite was the response to If Anyone Builds It, Everyone Dies by the core EA people, including among others Will MacAskill himself and also the head of CEA. This was a very clear example of PR mindset, where quite frankly a decision was made that this was a bad EA look, the moves it proposes were unstrategic, and thus the book should be thrown overboard. If Will is sincere about this reckoning, he should be able to recognize that this is what happened. What should you do if your brand is widely distrusted and toxic? The good news, I agree with Will, is that you can stop doing PR.
The bad news is that this doesn’t raise the obvious question, which is why are you doubling down on this toxic brand, especially given the nature of many of the cause areas Will suggests EA enter? Tag, You’re It
There’s basically no reason for everyone not to outright copy this format, forever. Indeed, one wonders if you shouldn’t have such badges and wear them at parties. Impact Philanthropy
One key insight is that if you’re asking for $3 million you might as well ask for $30 million, provided you have a good pitch on what to do with it, and assuming you pitch people who have the money. If someone is a billionaire, they’re actively excited to be able to place large amounts of money. Another is that there’s a lot of variance and luck, although he doesn’t call it that. You probably need a deep connection with your funder, but you also need to find your funder at the right time when things line up for them. Finally, it sounds weird, but it matches my experience that funders need good things to fund even more than founders need to find people to fund them, the same way this is also true in venture capital. They don’t see good opportunities and have limited time. So things like cold emails can actually work. Expect another philanthropy-related post later this month. You're currently a free subscriber to |