---
subject: "The Monday Media Diet with Oren Schauble"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-06-26 10:01:53
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Oren Schauble (OS) first came to my attention with his Tell us about yourself. I’m Oren, I’m a designer, content creator and entrepreneur. You may have seen me online discussing Status Cutlery, declaring the end of Blanding, or breaking down the excellent Jacquemus marketing strategy. Describe your media diet. I have an app limit of 30m a day on twitter and use lists on that app to keep up to date with interestInc professionals, mostly in trends and culture. I follow all artists and designers on Tiktok and Instagram and am on there daily as part of my content creation, but I consume there as little as I can to keep relevant. I avidly read newsletters weekly and love our current free and paid newsletter economy that gives so much valuable content regularly. I pay for Business of Fashion and What’s the last great book you read? I recently read What are you reading now? I’m working hard on a massively scaling product right now and rereading Ben Horowitz’s The Hard Thing About Hard Things. This is one of the books I take the time to reread every time I get back in the saddle at an org that’s really scaling- nuanced insights on leadership in crunch time. What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication? It’s been a while since I picked up a print copy but I read front to back no skimming or skipping— I fully realize this makes me sound insane. Who should everyone be reading that they’re not?
What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone? An app called One Sec that limits and provides blocks on social media access in an intuitive fashion. Plane or train? Is train an option anymore? Plane sadly. What is one place everyone should visit? Biarritz on the coast of France - a beautiful and oddly perfect mix of French and surf culture. Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into. I have a very obsessive personality so there are many rabbit holes I’ve gone too far down haha. My son has been very into the Rubik’s cube so recently I reread Neal Stephenson’s |