---
subject: "The Secondhand Watch Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-02-02 14:17:23
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Colin here. The famed watchmaker Audemars Piguet (AP) recently announced a Unfortunately, secondary markets can be murky. They’re rife with counterfeits, and hard for brands to control the image and perception of what they sell—a rarified luxury good with super tight brand codes. Sites like eBay, Chrono24, Stockx, and specialized dealers try to add guarantees and levels of assessment to ensure the customer is getting the real deal, but it creates a “your mileage may vary” type of dynamic for the customer looking to part with serious money. These high-touch luxury brands don’t have sufficient control of the experience. WITI Classifieds: We are experimenting with running some weekly classifieds in WITI. If you’re interested in running an ad, Parlance is a Brand Voice Advisory Studio. We Help Make the Impossible, Relatable. Noah here. I've got a new newsletter about brands and AI called BrXnd Dispatch. If you're in marketing, creative, or just interested in understanding what's up with AI, check it out. My Next Electric is a hella-fun online crash course about how to move from gas to electric cars and stoves. The Intermodal Spirit. Writing about Exploring, Relating, and Being. Available by newsletter or online. Daly is a comms+ agency that reaches beyond the standard PR playbook to deliver results (and some magic) for our exceptional clients. Tempo Rubato is a live classical music venue in an old factory shell in the backstreets of inner city Melbourne. Why is this interesting? These official pre-owned launches are interesting from a business/market perspective, and from a brand strategy and management one. The logistics are simple: the watches will be sent to Rolex for certification before they are released back to authorized retailers to sell as second-hand. According to the
For AP and Rolex, taking control of secondhand sales means that they can ensure quality, brand standards, and even the presentation of a second-hand watch upon purchase to the customer. And, when Rolex is assessing and certifying a used timepiece, there is a customer willing to pay a premium for the trust. Sure, good second-hand dealers that have built a reputation over time (like — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) —
|