---
subject: "The Daoist Image of Control (III)"
from: "Maxim Raginsky from The Art of the Realizable <realizable@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-12-31 04:30:30
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Maxim Raginsky", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3440436245007788095", "UNREAD"]
---
Those who know others are perceptive — Dao De Jing, chapter 33 (translation by Red Pine) “Perception is external knowledge. Wisdom is internal knowledge. Force is external control. Strength is internal control. Perception and force mislead us. Wisdom and strength are true. They are the doors to the Tao.” — Li Hsi-Chai’s commentary on Dao De Jing 33 As I wrote in Parts What are the capabilities and the limitations of language as a control technology? If we are to make the best use of this control technology, what should be the internal structure or architecture of a [good regulator](https://substack.com/redirect/6a20887e-fd3b-4584-ba0e-5317006471eb?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)?
The first question is about what we can and cannot do with language; the second question is about realizability. According to Hansen, the Chinese answer to the realizability question is different from the Indo-European one. The latter is intimately linked with symbolic representations that are manipulated according to the rules of propositional logic. It’s an old idea going back at least to Leibniz and Hobbes. For example, in The Leviathan Hobbes writes that
Experience in the form of sense data impinges on an information processor that applies a series of truth-preserving transformations. As Daniel Dennett put it memorably in The Intentional Stance, a reasoning subject is just a theorem prover wearing an overcoat of transducers and effectors. This is the GOFAI paradigm of Minsky, McCarthy, Simon, Newell, Pylyshyn, Fodor, etc. By contrast, the Chinese answer is more like connectionism or like the Hayekian In this context, we can think of LLMs as models of linguistic control systems that seem to vindicate the Chinese (or connectionist) view of language. Their internal architectures are manifestly nonpropositional. The French philosopher Jean-Pierre Dupuy, in his book Rectification of names as the token grounding problemThe concept of tokens, “the universal interface” of LLMs, maps neatly onto the classical Chinese concept of ming (names). Ideally, names or tokens should not be analyzable into smaller units. That is, they should be grounded in the capacity for making appropriate elementary bian (distinctions) which, in turn, engender more complex distinctions and actions. Stevan Harnad referred to this as the DeLanda’s objective in that book is to develop a philosophy of perception that does not presuppose language, but which nevertheless recognizes the importance of control using some sort of a sign system or a code. Just
Examples of indices include smoke indicating fire, animal tracks indicating the presence of prey or predators, a change in the color of flame indicating the presence of a particular reagent, or the change in the conformation of an allosteric enzyme indicating the presence or absence of a substrate that can bind to it. Examples of a icons are topographic maps encoding things like different elevations in a given terrain or the pattern of grooves on a vinyl record standing for the sound recording. One can even imagine hybrid iconic-indexical representations. DeLanda’s very nice example of one is using an app like Google Maps on your smartphone: the layout of the map on the screen is an icon that bears a relation of similarity to the physical layout of your physical surroundings, while the dot corresponding to your current location on the map is an index since it is causally linked to your physical location. DeLanda argues that the evolution of biological complexity made liberal use of such iconic-indexical semantics, rather than symbolic representations. Components in biological systems are characterized by their capacity to produce icons and indices and to consume icons and indices produced by other components when they are linked together. The most elementary such components are mindless cognitive agents, yet they serve as DeLanda’s emphasis on icons and indices as natural signs provides a viable solution to the grounding problem without foreclosing the possibility of much richer generative semantics using symbols and natural language. Moreover, systems that rely on icons and indices for control and coordination can be implemented using connectionist principles. For example, the structured activation patterns in multilayer neural nets, such as the ones discovered in vivo by The limits and the possibilities: Laozi and ZhuangziThe significance of this perspective for us is twofold. First, by recognizing the arbitrary, conventional nature of language as a symbol system, we can question the constancy of the dao of language and linguistic systems, either human or artificial. As Hansen points out, The famous opening lines of Laozi’s Dao De Jing are usually rendered as follows:
According to Hansen, however, this standard translation introduces a monist, mystical interpretation in terms of a single ineffable Dao, which is not justified. For one, elsewhere in the text of Dao De Jing there are references to multiple daos (the great dao, the dao of heaven, the dao of water, the dao of the dark moon, etc.). Moreover, if we place Dao De Jing in its historical and philosophical context, we cannot simply assert that Laozi’s usage of dao is radically different from how this notion was used by Confucius or by Mozi. All of these texts use the concept of dao in roughly the same way, as either a prescribed or a realized pattern of behavior or action. From this perspective, the opening lines of Dao De Jing are not about the ineffability of some “cosmic Dao,” but about the inherent limitation of any dao that can be expressed in language. Language is a social control technology for humans and by humans. As such, the distinctions induced by any discourse dao and implemented in any performance dao are based on arbitrary convention and can therefore change arbitrarily. As Hansen writes,
Hence, Laozi is concerned with the reliability of language as a control technology and with its inherent dangers. Hansen puts it thus:
Laozi’s vision is, in this regard at least, radically anti-technocratic. Look at Chapter 80 of Dao De Jing, for example:
This is not so much a rejection of technology as a cautionary message that any technology can condition and control us as much as we think we can condition and control it. The worry about such loss of autonomy was expressed eloquently by Ivan Illich in his essay
Daniel Dennett’s fear of However, we can temper the pessimism of Laozi somewhat if we recognize and embrace the plurality and the open-endedness of the varieties of dao embodied either in language or in other types of sign systems. Language is inherently ambiguous, but we have no way of escaping it (aren’t we using language right now?). The generativity inherent in complex system architectures making use of icons, indices, and signs is simultaneously a source of existential unease (in the Heideggerian sense) and of wonder. While Laozi was all about the unease,
Of course, we can only interpret this reality feedback through the system of values inherent in our own perspective, which we can nevertheless compare with those of others. This feedback is a form of shi-fei (this-not this) reinforcement learning. Zhuangzi talks about spontaneous practice and mastery of various skills in this context, and he celebrates this in every domain of life, no matter how exalted or how humble (see, for example, the
The dao of generative architectures: constraints that deconstrainThe overall view that emerges from all of this is of a complex layered architecture, where the operation of higher layers makes use of virtualization and abstraction through the interface of icons, indices, and symbols. This idea, discussed in an insightful Zhuangzi and technologyMy own perspective is Zhuangzi’s optimism tempered by Laozi’s recognition of the limitations of technocratic governance. Hansen puts it nicely as follows:
Happy New Year! The Art of the Realizable is free today. But if you enjoyed this post, you can tell The Art of the Realizable that their writing is valuable by pledging a future subscription. You won't be charged unless they enable payments. |