---
subject: "How Good Are American Roads?"
from: "Construction Physics <constructionphysics@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-11-20 13:02:30
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Construction Physics", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8588207018748827248", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
We’re in an era where US infrastructure is getting a lot of attention. We need a lot of One facet of infrastructure that doesn’t get all that much attention is roads, despite the fact that they’re crucial transportation infrastructure, and probably the infrastructure that Americans interact with most directly and consistently. The US has the largest road network in the world, about 4.3 million miles of road, and Americans How good is American road infrastructure? How does it compare with roads built in other countries? Overall, the quality of US interstates is very high, while the quality of roads in major cities is quite poor. And while there’s some anecdotal evidence that US roads are worse than European roads, I wasn’t able to find much international road quality data to compare. The limited data I found points to the US not being a huge outlier in road quality. But more data is needed to compare accurately. Measuring US road qualityThe most common metric for measuring road quality is the Data on US road quality is provided by the Bureau of Transportation Statistics and the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) at the To start, let’s look at overall road quality, broken down by whether they’re interstate highways or not, and whether they’re urban or rural roads. US Road Quality Fraction of US roads at different quality levels, measured by the International Roughness Index. Note: The FHWA uses slightly different category breakdowns in different places. Some places it uses US interstates are fairly good quality, with more than 80% of mileage good or very good, and only a tiny fraction of mileage (around 3%) poor or very poor. Non-interstate roads are, unsurprisingly, less good, with only around 40% of measured mileage good or better, and 20% poor or worse. Interestingly, in all cases urban roads are worse quality than rural roads, presumably because they see higher traffic than rural roads. More than a third of non-interstate urban roads are poor quality or worse. And remember, this data is just a fraction of total US road mileage (which includes more than a million miles of We can also see how road quality has changed over time. Over the last 30 years, interstate quality has been steadily improving, while non-interstate has been fairly flat. US Road quality over time Average International Roughness Index of interstate and non-interstate roads. We can also look at a state-by-state breakdown. For interstates, there’s not a huge amount of variation: only four states have less than 60% of their roads good quality or better, and almost every state has less than 10% of its interstate mileage poor quality or worse. US Interstate Quality Fraction of interstates at different quality levels, measured by the International Roughness Index (IRI). With non-interstates, we see more variation. Broadly, highly rural states tend to have higher quality roads than more urbanized states, though there’s a decent amount of variation. California, which is reasonably rural, nevertheless comes in third from the bottom. Interestingly, I expected cold places to have lower road quality in general due to things like US Road Quality Fraction of non-interstate roads at different quality levels, measured by the International Roughness Index (IRI). We can also look at the road quality of individual cities. Below is road quality (non-interstate) for the 19 largest metro areas in the US.¹ US City Road Quality Fraction of roads at different quality levels, measured by the International Roughness Index. While urban roads are poor in general, there’s a large amount of variation. Cities like Atlanta and Minneapolis have less than 10% of their roads are poor quality or worse, while more than 60% of the roads in San Francisco and Los Angeles are poor. But in general, most major cities aren’t doing great: in 13 of the 19 largest US cities, more than 1/3rd of the roads are poor quality. And here again we see that cold climate doesn’t seem to have much impact on road quality, with cold places like Minneapolis and New York near the top, while warm cities like Los Angeles, San Diego and Dallas are near the bottom. International comparisons in road qualitySo US interstates seem high-quality, while urban roads are often quite poor. How does this compare to other countries? It’s unfortunately not easy to tell. The US ranks very highly in the international But I was able to scrape together a few. Because these countries use somewhat different roughness categories, I graphed each of these, along with US interstate and non-interstate roads, using a cumulative distribution function, which gradually adds the fraction of roads at different IRI levels. The farther the curve is to the left, the larger the fraction of roads at a lower IRI, and the higher quality the road network. For most of the international sources, the data is for the national or provincial highway network, major roads which (as far as I can tell) are roughly equivalent to the US National Highway System. The exception is the Irish regional road data, which I believe are a lower tier of road.³ We see that US interstates compare very well; as good or better than the national road networks in every other country for which there’s data. US non-interstates do less well: about 90% of Dutch national roads are “good” by US standards, for instance, whereas only around 40% of US non-interstates are. Nevertheless, the US doesn’t seem to be a huge outlier: its roads seem to be roughly as good as British national roads, for instance. I’m also assuming that the US data includes a lot of lower-importance/quality roads beyond the national system that drag its average down. My guess is that if you restricted US data to just the National Highway System roads, average quality would jump significantly.⁴ On the other hand, while Ireland has reasonably good motorways (interstate equivalents) and “engineered pavements” (whatever that means), it appears to have poor regional and legacy roads, to the point where I’d be sure there was an error in the data if I hadn’t already heard that Ireland has unusually poor roads.⁵ Unfortunately, this doesn’t include data from many countries we might be interested in, like the Nordics, Germany, France, or Spain (anecdotally, I’ve heard that Spain has exceptionally good roads). And it's only measuring a very small portion of each country’s road network: the Netherlands data, for instance, is based on about 7,000 kilometers of national highway network, a tiny fraction of the Is there anything else we can look at that might prove illuminating? One thing we can do is compare the quality standards of different countries: how smooth does a road have to be to meet different quality thresholds? International Road Roughness Standards Roughness allowed at different quality levels, as measured by the International Roughness Index. Looking at this, we see that the US generally has fairly strict quality standards compared to other countries. The US for instance, has a higher threshold for what counts as “good” than any other country listed, and only Holland has a higher bar for what counts as “very good.” There’s also slivers of information that can be found elsewhere.
As far as I can tell, the most common way to build a road more durably is to use concrete construction. Most roads in the US are built using one or more layers of asphalt concrete (a mixture of aggregate and
It’s also possible that European roads use the same basic construction methods, but are built more robustly. In 1993, the Michigan DOT ConclusionTo sum up, US interstates seem high quality, and as good as comparable roads in Europe. Non-interstates are lower quality, particularly within major urban areas, but a lack of data makes it hard to do much international comparison. The limited data we have suggests that US roads are perhaps not a huge outlier in quality. It also seems likely that many European roads are maintained better than US roads and resurfaced more frequently, and that European roads are designed more robustly (though perhaps not in a way that results in better service life). Overall, my main takeaway is that roads in major US cities are often shockingly bad, particularly in California, and that much more data is needed on road quality in other countries. If you know of good international road quality datasets (ideally IRI), please let me know! 1 Detroit is larger than some of these cities, but I excluded it from this list because of an error in its quality data (some of the mileage for different quality levels is anomalously high and doesn’t add up correctly.) 2 The Netherlands data measured IRI directly, while England, Wales, and Scotland had to be converted to IRI from another, similar quality metric, longitudinal profile variance (eLPV). 3 National roads in England, Scotland, and Wales were all at very similar levels of quality, so I’ve only included England here. 4 My suspicion that the non-interstate portions of the National Highway System are higher quality than most other roads is because there seems to be a 5 The linked presentation gives “engineered pavement” as its own subcategory of road network, but other sources describe “engineered pavement” as a design methodology, and I wasn’t able to determine when, specifically, it was used. 6 Not all countries use five quality levels: Canada has three and Germany seems to have four. For present purposes, I’ve assumed they (roughly) correspond to “good," “acceptable," and “poor” for Canada, and adding “very poor” for Germany. Construction Physics articles will always remain free, but if you find this work valuable, I encourage you to Construction Physics is produced in partnership with the Institute for Progress, a Washington, DC-based think tank. You can learn more about their work by visiting their You can also contact me on |