---
subject: "Software engineering job openings hit five-year low?"
from: "The Pragmatic Engineer <pragmaticengineer+the-pulse@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-20 20:33:32
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Pragmatic Engineer"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_6413324878686416177"]
---
|
Hi, this is Gergely with a bonus issue of the Pragmatic Engineer Newsletter. In every issue, I cover topics related to Big Tech and startups through the lens of engineering managers and senior engineers. This article is an excerpt [from last week's The Pulse,](https://substack.com/redirect/4e707a75-8f2f-4da9-be59-ae94c3599064?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) issue – full subscribers received the below details seven days ago. Many subscribers expense the newsletter – if you have a learning & development budget, [here's an email you could send to your manager](https://substack.com/redirect/581c5977-4531-49da-851e-977c5406b6fd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).
If you’ve been forwarded this email, you can [subscribe here](https://substack.com/redirect/86860b40-c88c-4b12-9416-8359c24c9c22?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).
Before we start: despite the below stats, the tech market is not all gloom and doom! This week, we covered pockets of the tech industry that are seeing more demand than before in the issue [State of the startup and scaleup hiring markets – as seen by recruiters](https://substack.com/redirect/023b8689-fcb5-44f2-9249-6ddeb8e5c2b6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).
Interesting data from the recruiter Indeed shows the change in the number of active software developer job listings on the site. For context, Indeed is the largest job aggregator portal in the US and in several countries, and it crawls vacancies on other sites, too. The overall picture looks pretty grim, right now:
Since February 2020, Indeed has shared aggregated statistics on the number of active jobs listings, taking January 2020 to be 100%, as a reference.
Facts about software developer jobs on Indeed:
65% of the number of vacancies in January 2020
3.5x fewer vacancies than the mid-2022 peak
8% down on 1 year ago
Indeed tracks international job markets, too. Canada has virtually the same graph as the US. Things are different in the UK, France, Germany, and Australia:
Trends look similar across the world. Australia’s growth in software engineer positions is eye-catching because it’s higher, and it’s the only country where the number of jobs listed is not lower than in 2020.
What about the number of total jobs in other industries? The data:
Across Indeed, 10% more jobs are listed today in February 2025 than were in February 2020. There are 35% fewer listings for software developers. Let’s dig a little deeper into which other industries are also experiencing a drop:
The change in the number of listings in 2025, compared to 2020, for each of these areas:
All jobs: +10%
Baking and finance: -7%
Sales: -8%
Marketing: -19%
Software development: -34%
Hospitality and tourism openings are [also down](https://substack.com/redirect/c4cf38b6-4c29-4c5e-8d5e-27b5788de6c9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) by 18%.
Overall, software developer jobs have seen the biggest boom and bust in vacancies. No other segment saw hiring more than double in 2022; only banking came close. At the same time, hiring has fallen faster in software development in the last 2-3 years than anywhere else
So, which areas have grown since 2020? Several sectors saw job listings go up, significantly:
Growth rates compared to five years ago:
Construction: +25%
Accounting: +24%
Electrical engineering: +20%
All jobs: +10%
The numbers don’t lie, job listings for devs have plummeted. There’s a few potential reasons why:
GenAI impact. We know first-hand that coding is an area in which Large Language Models are really helpful. Indeed, would it be so surprising if coding goes on to become the single best area of all that LLMs thrive in? The discipline looks tailor-made for it:
Programming languages are simpler than human languages
More high-quality training material is available for coding than for any other domain, in the form of well-written source code that’s correct and works as expected. Much of this thanks to open source and GitHub!)
Coding solves hallucinations – mostly. One of the biggest problems with LLMs is frequent hallucination. However, by using these for coding:
Devs spot and fix hallucinations immediately, dismissing incorrect autocomplete suggestions
Compiling code and running it against automated tests weeds out another big chunk of hallucination – and this step can also be automated.
No other industry has workers immediately able to spot hallucinations, and automated tools to catch them. No wonder LLMs are being adopted faster by developers for day-to-day work than within any other industry.
AI tooling penetration is massive across developers: last year, about 75% of engineers said they use some AI coding tooling in our survey,
[AI tooling for software engineers: reality check](https://substack.com/redirect/bb1642ab-c124-4bd2-bc71-7404b1d91cca?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).
Could tech companies be hiring less thanks to anticipating productivity boost that GenAI tools could bring for existing engineers? I don’t really buy this logic: but I can see how several companies could do a “wait and see” approach, slowing down hiring or even pausing it while they gather more data.
Interest rate changes explain some of the drop, but not everything. The end of zero percent interest rates [is a mega-trend](https://substack.com/redirect/4f413683-5f4c-43ba-8a29-de4b39d8d8f6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) that affects many things across the economy since 2022, including hiring, the steep fall in VC funding, and how many tech startups survive, thrive, or die.
But it doesn’t explain why highly profitable Big Tech companies like Microsoft, Meta, Amazon or Google have slowed down their hiring, or the large layoffs in recent years at tech’s biggest workplaces.
The tech sector seems to react to sudden events with more intensity than any other industry. There is no other industry that started to hire in the frenzy than the tech industry did in 2022 – and then no other industry cut back hiring in 2024-2025. Let’s compare it with the industry that had the second-largest hiring boom during COVID: banking and finance.
The job posting slowdown could partially be explained by how much more tech companies hired during the pandemic-era boom, and that companies are well-staffed thanks to that boom. Of course, we cannot deny that developer jobs – as well as banking jobs – are underperforming, compared to job listings across the economy:
A perception that engineering is no longer a bottleneck could be a reason for lower hiring. As [covered in January](https://substack.com/redirect/1d99ab38-b1f1-45e3-8b1e-c1d6d108feac?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), Salesforce will keep software engineering headcount flat because it’s seen a 30% productivity gain from AI tools. Salesforce has an interest in making AI productivity sound compelling because it sells an AI offering called Agentforce, and the company can afford to hire 1,000 additional salespeople to sell its new products it’s built.
This suggests there’s substance in the reported productivity gain; Salesforce might be building software faster than it can sell it. Playing the devil’s advocate, this also raises the possibility that Salesforce isn’t building the right products, if it needs to hire more agents to sell its products, despite already having a strong distribution network and partnerships.
Still too many engineers, after overrecruitment in 2021-2022? The period was the hottest tech jobs market of all time, and companies hired at a record pace. In 2023, widespread layoffs followed. Sluggish hiring today could be an indicator that companies still have enough “excess hires” from 2022. Perhaps some companies feel they hired too quickly before, and are going slower now.
Are smaller teams more efficient? The two companies below hire slowly, and have small engineering teams:
Linear: 25 engineers. More than 10,000 companies use their product, including OpenAI, Retool, and Ram. Linear deliberately hires very slowly and it seems to be working, so far. We cover more on this in a
[podcast episode with Linear’s first engineering manager](https://substack.com/redirect/4db0fd38-b1ec-4816-9e58-2bf795d7a70d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), and a look[Inside its engineering culture](https://substack.com/redirect/d0fc91e3-e409-4f4e-8360-8cd94b51715e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).Bluesky: 13 engineers. The social media startup crossed 30 million users with a surprisingly small team. Like Linear, Bluesky is growing slowly, and is incredibly efficient: their web, iOS and Android app runs from the same codebase, and was originally built by a single developer. More in
[Inside Bluesky’s engineering culture](https://substack.com/redirect/5c2294d4-3e80-483b-88e0-51b18af4e4c4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).
Could we be approaching the point at which building products is simpler to do for one or two engineers? Not because of LLMs, but how languages like Typescript allow working across the backend and frontend (using e.g. Node.js on the backend and React and React Native on the frontend and web). Of course, LLMs make onboarding to different stacks easier than ever.
Consider how Indeed job postings will not be fully accurate data. There is a fair chance that Indeed is becoming less popular as a destination to post jobs – especially software engineering jobs – and that Indeed is either not crawling, or banned from crawling them.
For example, Indeed [lists](https://substack.com/redirect/2551867a-8b60-4f1b-81aa-f6240a8db5e2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) a total of 663 jobs from Microsoft – however, Microsoft [has](https://substack.com/redirect/b4a7648f-294e-4553-9eba-08deae691d8c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) more than 1,000 jobs just with the words “software” in them listed. I also struggled to find several startup jobs advertised on sites like [Workatastartup](https://substack.com/redirect/9b44f1b9-4f84-4142-9d99-0bf11f7048ba?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) (the job board for Y Combinator companies) listed on Indeed.
I suspect that Indeed’s data should be directionally correct, and there are indeed fewer developer job listings than before. But I don’t think this data is representative enough of startup hiring, and it probably doesn’t track Big Tech hiring all that well either.
Data shows that in 2023, the number of software engineers dropped for the first time in 20 years, fuelled by layoffs.
It’s predicted that growth in the tech industry is likely to be low this year, and most certainly well below growth between 2011-2021 growth. I see a few possibilities:
Smaller engineering teams get more productive. This is the optimistic outlook, where LLMs add a big boost to both individual and team productivity, which leads to more engineering teams being spun up, across the industry. More startups could be founded, and traditional companies could bring development in-house.
The industry stagnates / shrinks. In this pessimistic outlook, even as software becomes cheaper to produce with fewer engineers needed, companies produce the same software, but with fewer people. This also assume entrepreneurs will not jump at the opportunity to build their ideas more efficiently – and much cheaper than before! I cannot see the scenario of the shrinking industry playing out – not with good software missing from so many parts of the world, and building better software being a big business opportunity in some many other industries.
LLMs make software development more accessible for non-developers:
A) An explosion of startups offering “English-to-working-app” services. Offering software development services to non-developers on a budget has always been good business: LLMs could now make “democratizing software development” a reality. This is the pivot Replit has made, and it’s an angle for fast-growth AI startups like Lovable.dev and Bolt.new.
B) Software by non-developers creates more opportunities for devs. Imagine a situation where the number of non-developers creating software increases by 10x or 100x, due to AI, thanks to non-technical people creating software with AI tools and agents. Those projects which succeed and make money will have budget to spend on better development, and will have a motivation to do so. This could boost demand for developers in jobs for “taking over” AI-generated code, fixing it up, and improving it. This could be a boon for developers with entrepreneurial mindsets.
I’m sure that LLMs are a leading cause of the fall in software developer job postings: there’s uncertainty at large companies about whether to hire as fast as previously, given the productivity hype around AI tooling, and businesses are opting to “wait and see” by slowing down recruitment, as a result.
Startups are finding that smaller teams are working fine, and that it pays off to hire slower – as Linear and Bluesky are doing – and to avoid the “hyperscaling” approach of hiring first and asking what the new workers will actually do, later.
Big Tech will hire slower than before, and I don’t see startups speeding up hiring. What’s missing is an answer to the question: how much new software will be created by non-developers using AI tools, for which a lot more developers will be needed to grow and maintain those new solutions?
You’re on the free list for [The Pragmatic Engineer](https://substack.com/redirect/2/eyJlIjoiaHR0cHM6Ly9uZXdzbGV0dGVyLnByYWdtYXRpY2VuZ2luZWVyLmNvbT91dG1fY2FtcGFpZ249ZW1haWwtaG9tZSZyPThvNTRuIiwicCI6MTU3NTc0OTkwLCJzIjo0NTg3MDksImYiOnRydWUsInUiOjE0NTYzMzE5LCJpYXQiOjE3NDAwODM2NTksImV4cCI6MTc0MjY3NTY1OSwiaXNzIjoicHViLTAiLCJzdWIiOiJsaW5rLXJlZGlyZWN0In0.bjmbS1ZjBx6dUmFQnqCcZ6QnKspGi0aMhmDr_b4ywZ8?). For the full experience, [become a paying subscriber](https://substack.com/redirect/2/eyJlIjoiaHR0cHM6Ly9uZXdzbGV0dGVyLnByYWdtYXRpY2VuZ2luZWVyLmNvbS9zdWJzY3JpYmU_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.ocxiVaoMnABqztPpY_722eyENkrkuBulB71GSbJ93WQ?). Many readers expense this newsletter within their company’s training/learning/development budget.
This post is public, so feel free to share and forward it.
If you enjoyed this post, you might enjoy my book, [The Software Engineer's Guidebook](https://substack.com/redirect/f04bbd70-92ff-4a24-abeb-ecda950052f4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Here is what Tanya Reilly, senior principal engineer and author of The Staff Engineer's Path said about it:
"From performance reviews to P95 latency, from team dynamics to testing, Gergely demystifies all aspects of a software career. This book is well named: it really does feel like the missing guidebook for the whole industry."