---
subject: "Is the Ego Made of Fear?"
from: "\"River Kenna from In•Star\" <riverkenna@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-11 03:34:02
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "River Kenna", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3010718370428876194", "UNREAD"]
---
I need to set terms first, because when it comes to “ego” and “fear,” these days I’m not sure I use those words the same way as most people do. EgoI point at my use of the word ego in This action, this ego-ing, takes place at many different levels of my being. I’ve got a few distinct patterns of ego-ing in my head, a couple others in my heart, more of them in my body and my tissue; they’re everywhere. (The body example might be a good illustration actually — do you ever notice how you sometimes scrunch or tense your face up, when you’re trying to control something or be more certain about something? Do you notice that scrunching your face doesn’t actually help control anything, but it does increase your feeling of being able to control it or find certainty in it? — That feeling on my face (or in my shoulders or neck or wherever else I do it) is exactly how the other ‘egos’ feel in my heart, in my emotional channels, in my energy, etc.) So that’s what I mean by ego. It’s a clenching-towards-certainty that takes place at many levels of my being — and the patterns created by that clenching. FearAs for fear — and here we’re getting into why I’d think they’re the same thing — I’ve come to feel fear not just as a sense of my heart beating faster, of feeling under threat, of looping thoughts about losing something important or being injured or whatever else. All of those are downstream of the thing I’m calling fear; I tend to experience fear as deep felt-sense resistance. It’s almost like something in me shuts down pathways to stop or slow movement, to lock things in place. Physically, you might recall the edge-of-your-seat feeling in a horror movie, or the tension you feel sitting across from someone you suspect is about to give you very bad news. Your thighs tighten up, your face tightens into a mask, your shoulders go tense; on an emotional level, something inside you also goes tight, closes down. You’re braced for impact. Nothing has happened yet, but you’re expecting it to, so you get all your resistances in place. That way, it won’t hurt as much when it hits. (Or at least that’s the hope; it doesn’t seem to work that way, but still we try.) That basic dynamic, on both very obvious and very subtle levels, is how I experience fear. It’s all these ways my body, heart, mind, soul, energy, emotions… all the ways my being puts itself into resistance-mode, anticipating something that hasn’t happen yet but that might need to be resisted and pushed back at any moment. Same Same?The more I feel into my ego and the more I feel into my fear (and boy oh boy do I have ample opportunity to feel into both of those lovely experiences lately), the harder time I have drawing a line between them. They’re both forms of constriction, both ways of closing down open flow, of trying to control how reality is experienced. They feel nearly the same. Or at least cousins. Or at least close enough that I very often look from one to the other and shrug, unable to neatly sort them into different categories. Ego’s entire job is to seek certainty and control; that’s what it’s function is, that’s what it’s good for. Fear’s entire job is to control uncertainty by closing down any open channels that could be hurt by an uncertain outcome. I’m really not sure how to draw the connection, but I can definitely feel it. Maybe we could say the ego is made of fear. Maybe we could say fear is a product of the ego. Maybe we could say fear and ego are both expressions of a deeper constricting-impulse. Maybe we could say a bunch of other stuff, much of it incomprehensible to me. For now: in every situation I have at least some degree of choice between opening or constricting — and I’m trying, whenever possible, to choose opening. Infra is free and will stay free, but if you get something out of my work, consider giving something back. Share my writing with friends & followers, pick up my |