---
subject: "Will Boom Successfully Build a Supersonic Airliner?"
from: "Construction Physics <constructionphysics@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-03-06 13:03:17
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Construction Physics", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8588207018748827248", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Boom has gotten a lot of attention after successfully breaking the sound barrier, but most of the discussion around the company that I’m seeing isn’t really grappling with the challenges the company is facing. The XB-1 supersonic flight is impressive, but to me there are basically four major points to consider when evaluating Boom’s prospects: How hard is it to develop a commercial aircraft? How hard is it to develop a commercial jet engine? (Boom is designing its engine in-house, rather than one provided by a major engine manufacturer like Rolls-Royce or Pratt & Whitney.) How likely is it that Boom can do both at the same time? If it does, will the economics of its supersonic transport business work?
Almost all the discussion I’ve seen has centered on #4: whether a supersonic airliner business can be viable. There are But in my mind the biggest questions are #1–3. Before Boom deals with the market risk of building a viable business, it needs to work through the technical risk of building the actual airliner.¹ Building commercial aircraft and jet engines are some of the most difficult things that civilization accomplishes, and I expect trying to do both at the same time will be very difficult indeed. How well Boom executes its development program will have a huge impact on whether or not it has a viable business: the cheaper development is, and the more successful Boom is at achieving low manufacturing cost and high fuel efficiency, the easier it becomes to operate profitably. We also don’t yet have much evidence as to Boom’s progress in building its airliner. People are treating the XB-1 flight as a major milestone and a strong indicator that they’ll be successful. To me, flying the XB-1 — while an impressive achievement — does not tell us all that much about how well the company will execute on the airliner and the engine that powers it. Building commercial aircraft is hardI’ve previously written about the Boeing spent an estimated $14 and $15 billion to develop the 777 and the 787, respectively, two to three times as much as initial cost estimates. Airbus spent a similar amount on its A350, and more than twice as much to develop the A380. Bombardier spent nearly $6 billion in a And while it's definitely gotten more expensive over time to develop a new commercial aircraft, it’s always been an expensive and risky endeavor. Boeing spent nearly $200 million (roughly $2 billion in 2025 dollars) to develop its first jetliner in the 1950s, the 707: substantially more than the company was worth at the time. Boeing bet the company again on the 747 in the 1960s, spending an estimated $2 billion (~$17 billion in 2025 dollars) on the program. And Boeing wasn’t alone. By the late 1960s, aircraft manufacturers were regularly spending $1 billion or more on new aircraft programs, and the high costs and risks drove many companies to exit the business. For instance, Lockheed gave up on the commercial aircraft business after losing an The supersonic Concorde, the obvious comparison to Boom, had a similar trajectory. Its ultimate development costs were well over $2 billion (~$19 billion in 2025 dollars), vastly more than initial estimates, and the program never came close to making a return on its investment. These high costs and risks are why firms like Boeing and Airbus will often move heaven and earth to avoid designing a new clean sheet aircraft, and why Boeing has kept on rolling out modified versions of the 737 for almost 60 years. Thus, when developing a new commercial aircraft, even well-established firms with decades of aerospace experience under their belt regularly fail: projects will often never get completed at all (like the Spacejet), or they fail to recoup their development costs (the Concorde, the Tristar, the A380). Building a commercial jet engine is hardThe story of Pratt & Whitney spent an estimated It’s important to note that early on, Boom planned on having an existing major jet engine manufacturer build its engines. Boom spent several years Historically, aircraft manufacturers haven’t also tried to design and build their own engines (though new engine development does often take place concurrently with new aircraft development). Boeing, Airbus, Embraer, and COMAC all use engines built by Rolls-Royce, Pratt & Whitney, or GE/CFM. The Concorde used a redesigned What are Boom’s odds of successfully doing both?Given this historical background, my basic model is that building commercial jet engines and commercial aircraft are two of the most difficult things for an organization to do. Projects often fail or go massively over budget, even at established aerospace companies with decades of experience trying to do just one of these. Most startups fail, and I’d expect a startup trying to do two of the hardest things at the same time to have an even lower probability of success. But this is an extreme First, let’s consider the technical aspects. New aircraft and jet engine programs are so expensive and difficult in part because they’re typically pushing performance boundaries forward: aircraft that are lighter and have better aerodynamics, engines that run hotter and at higher compression, and so on. If you don’t need to push technical boundaries, then your technical risk and your development costs should be lower. This is the path Boom says it's taking, minimizing risk by repackaging already existing technology. Via
I understand why Boom would make this claim (since if true it means much lower technical risk), but I’m not sure how valid it is. For one, while not bleeding edge, Boom seems like it’ll be operating close to the current performance frontier, which I still expect to be difficult for a new company. For instance, turbine inlet temperature (TIT) is one performance metric of jet engines: the hotter the gas going into the turbine, the more efficient the engine runs, and inlet temperatures have gradually climbed over time. Boom is Similarly, Boom is targeting a time-on-wing (that is, time between major overhauls) of Related to the last point, Boom may be using already existing technology, but it’s using it in a fundamentally new domain of supersonic flight. Taking existing aerospace technology like, say, the Boom will also need to use certain technologies that aren’t required on a conventional, subsonic airliner. Compared to subsonic engines, supersonic engines require a more complex intake system to slow down the air before it reaches the engine, as well as a more complex nozzle system for the air exiting the engine. These aren’t things Boom can just emulate from the 787. The intake and nozzle system on Concorde were among the most difficult parts of the project. Via Concorde: New Shape in the Sky:
So overall, I expect the technical risk Boom faces is at least similar, and possibly much greater, than a typical commercial aircraft development project. I also expect that the larger One might expect that the successful supersonic flights of Boom’s XB-1 demonstrator means that this technical risk is reduced — Boom has now shown it can build and fly a supersonic jet, they just need to scale it up. But while flying the XB-1 is extremely impressive, I don’t think it tells us all that much about whether Boom can build a supersonic airliner. For one, while XB-1 is called a “technology demonstrator,” there’s not all that much overlap in the design of the XB-1 and the design of the Overture. The XB-1 uses a different wing shape, a different engine arrangement (three on the XB-1 vs. four on the Overture), and an off-the-shelf J85 jet engine, rather than one Boom is designing. There’s some overlap — the XB-1 gives Boom experience building carbon fiber airframes, and allowed it to test some cockpit systems — but the Overture and the XB-1 are fundamentally different aircraft. While the XB-1 was originally planned to be a scaled-down version of the Overture, the designs diverged, and Boom has now stated that the primary purpose of XB-1 is mostly to show that And The relatively limited number of flights the XB-1 took before being retired also seems unusual to me. I’m not sure why, after spending hundreds of millions of dollars on the aircraft, there’s really nothing more for Boom to do with it: no system that can use it as a test bed, no high-speed phenomena they want to better understand. (By comparison, an early test aircraft for the Concorde, the More generally, we just don’t yet have all that much information about Boom’s progress on the actual airliner. The company aims to complete the Symphony engine core (compressor, combustor, and turbine) When trying to weigh Boom’s chances, we can also consider organizational factors. Boom appears to have hired a lot of aerospace talent. I still think there’s a good possibility of development difficulties, though. The F135 was designed close to 20 years ago and FTT was founded Boom also claims that designing its own engine in-house will ultimately be a benefit, because it will allow for such close coordination and optimization between the engine and airframe design. This doesn’t seem totally implausible to me, but it obviously trades off against the knowledge and experience that an existing commercial engine manufacturer has. We can also consider the overall arc of the company. Boom has gone from basically nothing to flying a supersonic aircraft, which as I’ve noted is an impressive achievement. But it’s not an achievement that has come easily. The company was founded in 2014, so it took Boom over 10 years to go supersonic with the XB-1. And it’s had to repeatedly push back its estimated completion dates. Boom originally planned to fly the XB-1 For another perspective on the operations of the company, we can look at Glassdoor reviews left by Boom employees. The current rating of the company is Many of the bad reviews are sort of standard startup stuff (lots of pressure, long hours, lack of structure), but among them are more pointed critiques of the company’s operations. A sample: “Poor management, control freak CEO with no relevant technical background, infighting/politics, many under-experienced engineers in key roles leading to quality/safety issues, marketing lies.” “Boom has blown through funding that was intended for goals and benchmarks that are long overdue, and are not even close to completion. Two of three founders have left the company and turnover in management roles is multiples above industry standards.” “Company is vaporware and bound to fail.”
(I was only able to find one founder that left the company, Similarly, on LinkedIn, Boom’s former Chief Aerodynamicist, Founder Blake Scholl I’d caution against putting too much weight these sorts of negative employee reports. Many successful startups will have early growing pains and (probably) lots of similar-sounding employee complaints. And we can ascribe some negative sentiment to former employees unhappy about losing their jobs. But I do think they add color to the picture. Overall my impression of Boom is a company that has struggled a lot (and spent a lot) to get where it is. This is understandable (building a supersonic aircraft is hard!), but it’s important to note that these struggles have taken place before Boom has gotten to the hardest part: building the airliner, the engine, and raising the billions of dollars required. The business case for supersonic travelI’m not going to spend too much time on the business case for supersonic travel, but I will note a few points. The obvious point of comparison here is Concorde, which failed due to a combination of high costs and limited demand. There just The counterpoint is that the world is much richer today, many more people fly, and there are thus a lot more viable supersonic routes. By taking advantage of 50 years of progress in aircraft technology, a modern supersonic airliner should be more efficient, and be able to fly much more cheaply than Concorde did. This is all true ( We can also point to the number of orders that Boom has accumulated ( I’m not going to speculate about the number of viable supersonic routes (or Moreover, historically commercial aircraft haven’t been particularly good investments. In his Is Boom the SpaceX of supersonic flight?SpaceX obviously paved the way for Boom. SpaceX showed that existing aerospace companies were often incredibly inefficient, and that it was possible for someone with a startup mentality and no aerospace background to come in and run circles around the existing players. You could have written a very similar essay to this one 20 years ago when SpaceX was trying to get off the ground — “rocket manufacturing is so hard and so risky, it takes huge amounts of money, SpaceX has struggled a lot, there’s no reason to expect these upstarts to succeed” — and you would have wound up being wildly wrong. And it’s not as if current aircraft manufacturers have been paragons of competence: nobody looks at present-day Boeing and sees a company at the top of its game. It’s not hard to imagine a nimble startup coming in and executing an aircraft development program far more competently. I don’t think this analogy is valueless, but it’s easy to take the comparison too far. For one, I suspect there was a lot more “slack” in the rocket business than in the commercial aircraft and jet engine business. Aircraft and engine manufacturers are selling to airlines in an extremely competitive market, and are under constant pressure to drive down their various costs. Note that while launch costs Another reason this comparison is tricky is that if you’re relying on a company being as good as SpaceX, that seems like a situation where your odds are low. Most companies will not be as good as SpaceX! I’m not an aerospace expert, but reaching orbit with a rocket and achieving supersonic flight seem like they might be roughly comparable in difficulty. They were first achieved at broadly similar times (1947 vs. 1957),⁵ and there seem to be comparable numbers of (I would be very interested to hear from aerospace experts whether they think launching a rocket into orbit or achieving turbine-powered manned supersonic flight is more difficult.) And Boom is much further from having a product than SpaceX was at a similar point in its history. SpaceX’s first successful orbital launch with the Falcon 1 was in 2008, which enabled the company to secure Boom, on the other hand, appears to have much further to go. It doesn’t yet have its own engine, it hasn’t ( One final Concorde comparison is appropriate. The “technology demonstrator” for the Concorde, the BAC-211, first flew in 1964. But the Concorde itself didn’t fly until 1969, five years later. And it didn’t enter commercial service 1976, almost 12 years after the testbed first flew. I hope Boom is successful, because it would be great to have supersonic airliners (and to have another US company capable of building commercial aircraft). But to me it seems the odds are steep, and they have a very long way to go. 1 Though obviously an analysis of the market is key for deciding whether it’s worth trying to solve the technical problems. 2 It’s possible Boom is referring to a slightly different point with regards to TIT, which would put it even further behind state of the art. 3 There’s some slight inconsistency in the funding numbers I’ve found. Some say $600 million of investment prior to the $100 million round last fall, and 4 The one “profitable” route, New York to London, was ultimately profitable enough for airlines to recoup operational costs, but not the upfront costs of the actual airliner. 5 If you instead consider turbine-powered supersonic flight by an aircraft that has to take off and land, that wasn’t achieved until 1953 with the 6 By the successful Falcon 1 launch, SpaceX had gotten $100 million from Elon Musk, $20 million from Founders Fund, a portion of the NASA COTS contract money (probably around $40 million), and some payments from DARPA and early customers. 7 The XB-1 isn’t the only thing Boom has spent its funding on. It’s also finishing design of Overture, building a factory for it, and developing its jet engine. But Falcon 1 also wasn’t the only thing SpaceX was working on at the time: it was also developing Falcon 9 and the Dragon Capsule. Construction Physics articles will always remain free, but if you find this work valuable, I encourage you to Construction Physics is produced in partnership with the Institute for Progress, a Washington, DC-based think tank. You can learn more about their work by visiting their You can also contact me on |