---
subject: "Other minds / 102 lessons / No-hole poster hanging"
from: "Recomendo <recomendo@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-11-02 10:01:41
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Recomendo", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8455078693589186571", "UNREAD"]
---
Newsletter for creative professionalsOne of my favorite newsletters for creatives is Jane Friedman’s Other mindsNeanderthals were more closely related to us than we had been taught by modern culture. They had language, fire, buried their dead, made ornaments and simple tools. I really enjoyed the book Buying back your time while travelingJapan or Die, one of my favorite newsletters, is all about traveling in Japan. The advice applies to travel anywhere in the world, not just Japan. The recent issue has an article about “ Political thrillerThe Netflix movie Damage-free poster hangingThis video shows the 102 Lessons from the 102 BooksI love when others synthesize what they’ve learned and share lists like these— On Focus: Even having a phone nearby reduces our mental bandwidth and makes us seem less attentive in conversations. On Reflection: Asking yourself “what went well?” at the end of the day can give you a big boost to your happiness. On Outreach: Friendliness is irrationally undersupplied. In one study, subjects were asked to either stay quiet or talk to a stranger during their commute. People predicted they’d prefer solitude, but they enjoyed the conversation more.
Discovered through THIS ISSUE IS SPONSORED BY ALTHEAIt’s now legal in Oregon & Colorado to experience guided psilocybin journeys with licensed facilitators. Find trusted, verified practitioners & learn what to expect: safely, ethically, and above ground. Recomendo Unclassified Ads work! UNCLASSIFIEDS Power Up Your Work With Powerful Handheld Vacuum. Rechargeable car vacuum. 4-in-1 design includes vacuum, air blower & pump. 40-minute runtime, USB-C charging. Includes HEPA filter, 3 anti-static heads, storage bag. Declutter your inbox! The Meco newsletter reader app lets you organize and read newsletters in a dedicated space. Connect Gmail/Outlook. Features offline reading, topic grouping, highlights, saved links, and custom themes. Available on iOS, Android, web. Power up anywhere with Anker’s 5-in-1 Nano Travel Adapter! Ultra-compact design 43% smaller than competitors, charges 5 devices simultaneously with 20W fast charging—universal compatibility for 200+ countries, smart temp control & built-in safety features. Recomendo is an authentic, hand-crafted, human-written weekly newsletter that is free, but not cheap. Please consider supporting our work with a paid option, now at the low price of $45 per year. Paid subs enable us to keep making it free for others. Recomendo is published by Cool Tools Lab, a small company of three people. We also run the Recomendo is copyrighted by Cool Tools Lab, LLC. Commissions may be earned from the links above. |