---
subject: "Oversized winter scarf/Shogun/I Don't Have Spotify"
from: "Recomendo <recomendo@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-02 10:01:10
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Recomendo", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8455078693589186571", "UNREAD"]
---
Oversized winter scarfI sent this Japan historical seriesThe series Convert music streaming song links
Old time radio storiesOne of the best American storytellers of all time was the radio host Jean Shepherd who appeared on a New York City AM station (WOR) for 3 decades, during the 1950s, 60s and 70s. Every weekday night he did a humorist monologue of stories from his boyhood in a steel-mill town, rants about city life, and tall tales about everyday life – and nothing was pre-scripted! A tireless raconteur, Shep wrote the classic movie Christmas Story, about a kid getting a BB gun for Christmas. Many of his shows were taped over the static airways by listeners, and about 500 are now available online at Follow a water drop’s path
50 ideas for building a better lifeThis If you’re about to take an emotion-induced action, wait 24 hours. Many relationships have been broken by actions taken in the heat of the moment. Don't fall into the trap. Never avoid hard conversations. When you avoid a hard conversation, you're taking on a debt that has to be repaid with interest at a date in the future… Make a rule to never think twice about investments in yourself. Books, quality food, fitness, and personal development all fit into this bucket. These investments pay dividends for a long time. Think about material purchases instead—wait 24 hours to complete an order to see if you still want it. When someone is going through hell, just saying “I’m with you” is the most powerful thing you can do. Advice, perspectives, or offers to help are minimally impactful. The notion that someone is with you is 10x more powerful. Be the “darkest hour friend” to those you love. John D. Rockefeller would take regular breaks from his notoriously demanding schedule to mill about in his garden—it was his personal escape. Find your "garden" and go there often. Practice stillness, flex the solitude muscle. Be bored for at least 15 minutes per day. It’s an unlock for creativity and mindfulness.
— CD Recomendo is an authentic, hand-crafted, human-written weekly newsletter that is free, but not cheap. Consider supporting our work with a paid option, now at the low price of $45 per year. Paid subs enable us to keep making it free for others. Recomendo is published by Cool Tools Lab, a small company of three people. We also run the Recomendo Unclassified Ads work! UNCLASSIFIEDS Stop overpaying for travel! Join our FREE expert-led community & learn how to maximize points, leverage airline alliances, and redeem like a pro for first-class flights & 5-star hotels. Informed Shopping, Effortless Savings. Stop using multiple tabs when researching a product to buy! Get all the reviews on the same page. Discover your new favorite daily read. Chortle delivers original short humor writing—essays, lists, and more—every weekday. Sharp, clever, and irreverent, it’s perfect for fans of McSweeney’s and The New Yorker.
Need a quick prescription refill? No more waiting rooms or unnecessary appointments. RefillGenie connects you with licensed doctors who approve refills on chronic medications—fast, simple, and hassle-free. Recomendo is copyrighted by Cool Tools Lab, LLC. Commissions may be earned from the links above. |