---
subject: "Recomendo Deals / Zip Air / 35 simple health tips"
from: "Recomendo <recomendo@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-01-11 10:01:08
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Recomendo", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8455078693589186571", "UNREAD"]
---
Recomendo DealsWe launched a free daily email newsletter called Bargain flights to JapanBy far the best bargain flights to Japan are through a Japan Airlines subsidiary called 35 simple health tipsThis article gathers Understanding Old EnglishWhat we now call the English language has been rapidly changing for over a thousand years. The best way to experience this evolution is to watch this Dream school newsletterEvery night I have multiple, vivid dream adventures, and for the past five years I’ve been writing them down and treating them as a parallel stream of consciousness for self‑reflection, healing, and guidance. The dream teacher who’s helped me the most is author Robert Moss, whose free Substack is a living archive of shamanic “active dreaming” prompts, personal stories, and techniques that make it easy to develop a co‑creative relationship with your dreams. If you’re at all interested in understanding your dream self on a deeper level, I highly recommend subscribing to his newsletter. Two great starting pieces are “ Satisfying squishA relative with ADHD brought a THIS ISSUE IS SPONSORED BY MARKETINGIDEAS.COM 60,000+ marketers subscribe to Recomendo Unclassified Ads work! UNCLASSIFIEDS Tired of clicking “Accept” on every website? Person Do Thing is the fast, friendly party game you can learn in minutes and play for hours. Use very simple words (like Person, Do and Thing) to describe everything in the universe. Stuck in a creative rut? The Creative Vision Scorecard shows exactly where your vision's strong and what's holding you back. Get personalized insights in minutes to boost motivation, sharpen focus, and build momentum. Snow on your windshield? Need a powerful air duster for winter clean-ups? The Power Up Your Work With Powerful Handheld Vacuum. Rechargeable car vacuum. 4-in-1 design includes vacuum, air blower & pump. 40-minute runtime, USB-C charging. Includes HEPA filter, 3 anti-static heads, storage bag. Declutter your inbox! The Meco newsletter reader app lets you organize and read newsletters in a dedicated space. Connect Gmail/Outlook. Features offline reading, topic grouping, highlights, saved links, and custom themes. Available on iOS, Android, web. Power up anywhere with Anker’s 5-in-1 Nano Travel Adapter! Ultra-compact design 43% smaller than competitors, charges 5 devices simultaneously with 20W fast charging—universal compatibility for 200+ countries, smart temp control & built-in safety features. Recomendo is an authentic, hand-crafted, human-written weekly newsletter that is free, but not cheap. Please consider supporting our work with a paid option, now at the low price of $45 per year. Paid subs enable us to keep making it free for others. Recomendo is published by Cool Tools Lab, a small company of three people. We also run the Recomendo is copyrighted by Cool Tools Lab, LLC. Commissions may be earned from the links above. |