---
subject: "Your Review: The Synaptic Plasticity and Memory Hypothesis"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-09-12 09:05:12
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
[This is one of the finalists in the 2025 review contest, written by an ACX reader who will remain anonymous until after voting is done. I’ll be posting about one of these a week for several months. When you’ve read them all, I’ll ask you to vote for a favorite, so remember which ones you liked] I. THE TASTE OF VICTORYThe Tupinambá people ate their enemies. This fact scared
Staden himself was supposed to be eaten, but through a mix of luck and deception managed to convince the Tupinambá that he should not be. Among other reasons, he claimed that their God didn’t like the idea of him being eaten: (Ch. 2, pg. 61)
His final deception was to talk his way onto a French ship, the Catherine, in late 1554. After four months crossing the Atlantic, Europe was in sight, and he was free. He later wrote a bestselling memoir about his time among the Tupinambá, whose English translation was hilariously titled True History: An Account of Cannibal Captivity in Brazil. At one point in his book, Staden recounts admonishing a Tupinambá warrior named Cunhambebe about eating human flesh. From Duffy and Metcalf: (Ch. 2, pg. 67)
Why did they eat their enemies? Partly for revenge, partly because well-cooked people (apparently) taste good, and partly because the associated festivities were fun. But another reason might have been that they could obtain some of their enemy’s strength—their courage and bravery, for example—by eating them. At least according to
I had a hard time finding support for this claim elsewhere. The closest I could find was some
Whether or not the Wikipedia claim is true, the idea that you can acquire some of a person’s essence by eating them isn’t unique to the Tupinambá; it’s enough of a meme that it has its own From a modern vantage point, it’s clear that if groups like the Tupinambá practiced cannibalism for the purpose of acquiring aspects of their enemies, they were misguided. Maybe they could get some protein by doing this, but they certainly couldn’t acquire any of the things that make us fundamentally human, courage and bravery included. You can’t get anything cognitive—personality! memories! identity!—by eating someone’s arm, or leg, or heart. They’re just a bunch of molecules, no longer meaningfully linked to the core features of the former person. Right? II. PERSONAL IDENTITY AND HEART TRANSPLANTSPeople that have gotten heart transplants sometimes report extremely weird changes afterward. Mitchell Liester, a doctor and Assistant Clinical Professor at the University of Colorado’s School of Medicine, has collected a bunch of examples of this in an article titled “
Another woman, Claire Sylvia, received a heart-lung transplant from an 18-year-old man and seemed to acquire his taste for beer, green peppers, and chicken nuggets. The donor apparently liked chicken nuggets so much that they were found on him when he died. But you might think that this isn’t that weird. Getting a heart transplant is a major operation that involves lots of drugs (e.g., for immune suppression and anesthesia) and surgery, and it’s at least plausible that the associated trauma to your body changes what foods taste good to you. But some of the other accounts are weirder. A lesbian that received a heart from a 19-year-old heterosexual woman reports becoming predominantly sexually attracted to men:
A man who received a heart from a passionate young musician reports suddenly becoming obsessed with classical music, listening to it for hours on end and greatly annoying his wife in the process:
Consider this snippet about a 5-year-old boy who received a heart from a 3-year-old boy:
Leister includes a number of stories like this: a nine-year-old boy avoids water after getting a heart from a little girl who drowned; a college professor began to have recurring dreams about a flash of light burning his face after getting a heart from a police officer who died in a shooting during a drug bust; a woman often feels the pain of the car accident that killed her donor. It’s possible that all these people are lying, but the phenomenon is apparently common enough that this seems unlikely. It also doesn’t seem likely that what they report is just due to a surgery-related brain injury. In many cases, organ receivers report information about their donor, including information about their name, or their cause of death, that they didn’t appear to have access to. Claire Sylvia wrote a whole memoir, playfully called A Change of Heart, about the changes she experienced. Here’s a dream she wrote about, as quoted in a great
She inhaled him. That’s almost a bit too on the nose. She didn’t know it at the time, but her donor’s name was Tim Lamirande. Spooky, right? Is there something special about the heart? In a newer article titled “ I really encourage you to read these stories. They’re crazy. If even a quarter of them are true, they speak to something deep about the biology of personal identity and memory that we don’t yet understand. How could a heart recipient inherit memories of how their donor died? Then again, the world is full of kooky stories about inexplicable phenomena, and many of these stories are probably fake, no matter how many people strongly and sincerely believe them. Everyone’s heard about And part of that skepticism comes from our hard-won knowledge about how the physical world works. For example, we probably shouldn’t believe someone that claims to be able to bend spoons with their mind, because the laws of physics don’t provide any plausible ways this can happen. As far as we know, some type of signal has to physically propagate from the body of the spoonbender to the spoon in order for them to bend it. And given our knowledge of possible physical signals, there are only so many ways this can happen. No one has found that spoonbenders’ brains produce any long-range waves, electromagnetic or otherwise, capable of bending a spoon. Since “ (Side note: the firm belief that psi phenomena must occur in accordance with the laws of physics motivated a number of physicists to study whether quantum mechanics could explain things like spoonbending. Physicist and historian David Kaiser writes entertainingly about these physicists in The relevant knowledge for evaluating these heart transplant stories is our knowledge of biology, and how human memory works. And everyone knows memories are stored in the brain, not the heart, so we ought to be highly skeptical. They are just in the brain, right? …Right? … This leads us to the subject of our review: the synaptic plasticity and memory hypothesis. III. THE SYNAPTIC PLASTICITY AND MEMORY HYPOTHESISAs formalized by Martin, Greenwood, and Morris in a
More simply, it says that learning and memory amount to changes in For most people even vaguely familiar with neuroscience and the brain, this claim rings as trivially true. This idea is so entrenched, in fact, that I'd wager most people don't even know it has a name. (I didn’t, anyway.) The most popular quantitative models of the brain, In AI, too, weights are king. The term “weights” is even used as a synonym for “model parameters”. Weights are the numbers that completely characterize what a state-of-the-art model has learned through expensive training, and these days they can be ferociously protected trade secrets. The SPM hypothesis is one of the most well-supported theories in the life sciences, and might fairly be called the cornerstone hypothesis of neuroscience. It’s one of the key assumptions of a framework called And yet I think it’s wrong, or at least woefully incomplete. In this review, I’ll rant about why. Usefully, Morris et al. lay out a set of criteria for deciding whether the SPM hypothesis is true: But they really just boil down to necessity and sufficiency. Is a synaptic weight change necessary for an animal to learn or memorize something? If a mouse receives a shock (a common stimulus in Is a synaptic weight change sufficient for encoding learning and memory? If we changed some weights, and only some weights, can we change a memory? Can we make a new memory from scratch just by modifying synaptic weights, or would we have to change something else too? Learning and memory happen if and only if synaptic weight changes happen; that’s the SPM hypothesis in a nutshell. When I say that the SPM hypothesis is wrong, I mean it’s wrong in the same way that something like To understand my issue, it’s useful to distinguish between what I’ll call the strong SPM hypothesis and the weak SPM hypothesis. The strong version says that learning/memory is literally physically equivalent to changes in synaptic weights. The weak version says that learning/memory can be stored in changes to synaptic weights, but isn’t only stored in them. I believe the weak version, but not the strong version. In principle, worrying about this distinction could amount to pedantry. Maybe there are other mechanisms for learning or storing memories, but they’re weird edge cases, and mostly don’t matter for the kinds of learning and memory we typically care about. I don’t think this is true, for reasons that will become clear as we go on. The crux of my negative review of the SPM hypothesis is this: cells are extraordinarily complex molecular machines, and there’s a lot going on inside of them that the SPM hypothesis implicitly neglects. We often abstract away most of the biophysical complexity of neurons, which are You might respond: sure, neurons are cells and cells are complicated, but we can abstract away those details, and imagine that whatever is going on inside cells ultimately just serves the modification of synaptic weights. I also don’t think this is true, and will try to argue against it. How should we proceed? First I’ll say a little bit about the history of the SPM hypothesis, so we know how we got here, and what competing ideas fell by the wayside. Then I’ll talk about necessity and sufficiency. Finally, I’ll talk about an alternative hypothesis that I think is more promising, and that can, among other things, potentially explain the weird heart transplant stories discussed above. IV. A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE HYPOTHESISEspecially since the early 2010s, when exponential success in AI started to drive significant progress in neuroscience (and lead to many articles like “ But the SPM hypothesis wasn’t always the only game in town. Fortuitously, I found a chapter in a 1976 neuroscience textbook by Nobel Prize winner In Kandel’s telling, there are two main hypotheses for explaining why and how behavior changes—and hence, learning and memory—are possible. He calls them the “dynamic change hypothesis” and “plastic change hypothesis”. The “dynamic change hypothesis” suggests that learning and memory is due to persistent activity in neural circuits: if you see a picture of a cat, and the associated photons impinge on your retina and travel through your visual system, ripples associated with this activity linger for a while. The fact that they linger causes the system to behave differently, and we can identify the differences in system behavior due to the ripples with learning and memory. Kandel attributes this idea to the physiologist Alexander Forbes (1922) and Lorente de Nó (1938). Nowadays, persistent activity is According to Kandel, (Cellular Basis of Behavior, Ch. 11, pg. 476)
Note that he says “in the properties of neurons”; he’s referring not just to the connections between neurons (i.e., synaptic weights), but also to their intrinsic properties, like their degree of electrical excitability. This makes the “plastic change hypothesis” somewhat more inclusive than the SPM hypothesis, which only concerns connection strengths. He primarily attributes the plastic change hypothesis to
Later, people like Jerzy Konorski (1948) and Donald Hebb (1949) substantially expanded on the idea. Hebb’s ideas were particularly influential. In Hebb’s famous
Hebb’s idea is now usually paraphrased as “ But when did the plastic change hypothesis become the SPM hypothesis? When did we mostly forget about changes to intrinsic excitability, or changes in other properties of single neurons? (I say “mostly” because people know that intrinsic excitability can change, and you sometimes see studies that acknowledge its existence and say something about it, but the idea remains niche. It seems to be in the category of things that one could pay attention to, but that one doesn’t need to pay attention to in practice. Synaptic weights are thought to be way more important.) Kandel doesn’t say, probably because he wrote his textbook (remember: 1976!) before the SPM hypothesis supplanted the more general plastic change hypothesis. But Martin, Greenwood, and Morris do comment on this in the introduction to their paper. They reference Martin, Greenwood, and Morris wrote:
They acknowledge the existence of changes to neuron-intrinsic properties like excitability, but view synaptic weight changes as more important, and as most probably the locus of learning and memory storage. Apart from LTP and
Interestingly, they also reference the idea (“experience-dependent alterations in neurogenesis or cell survival”) that learning and memory could happen through introducing new neurons to circuits, or removing old neurons, but implicitly claim that such changes aren’t important compared to synaptic weight changes. In a follow-up review paper from 2014, where Morris is again the last author, Morris essentially sticks to his guns: (Takeuchi, Duszkiewicz, and Morris, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B, 2014)
The rough history of the SPM hypothesis, then, goes something like this. Around 1900, there was still much we didn’t know about the nervous system (or biology, for that matter; remember that molecular biology really only got started in the 1950s), but even early workers like Ramón y Cajal recognized that connections between neurons could offer a useful substrate for modulating circuit behavior, and hence for learning and memory. This lead to the “plastic change hypothesis”, which took a more modern form around 1950 with the work of Hebb et al. When LTP and LTD were discovered in the 1970s, and appeared to successfully account for a variety of longer-term forms of learning, the stock of synaptic weight changes rose, and the stock of other known forms of plasticity (e.g., plasticity in single-neuron properties, and in rates of neuron creation and death) fell. By 2000, when the SPM hypothesis paper was published, workers had good reason to believe LTP and LTD explained most learning and memory phenomena of interest. Other forms of synaptic plasticity were discovered after LTP and LTD, like It’s worth pointing out that there are other ideas about potential biological substrates of memory that don’t fit neatly within this linear narrative. We’ll discuss one such idea a bit later. V. THE NECESSITY OF SYNAPTIC WEIGHT CHANGES FOR MEMORYThe SPM hypothesis says that synaptic weight changes are necessary for learning and memory. Is that true? I think the answer is a strong no, for a few different types of reasons. (And it goes without saying that this will impact my final rating of the SPM hypothesis.) First, it’s uncontroversial that there are other forms of information storage, even in humans. There’s Apparently there’s some debate over whether immune memory really ‘counts’ as memory, or at least as memory anything like the cognitive forms of memory psychologists study. A paper by philosopher David Colaço (“
The “Error Argument” is about the fact that there are characteristic ways humans misremember things, or can be manipulated to misremember things, for example by prompting. (If you’ve taken an intro psychology course, maybe you’ve heard of the
I can’t convey how much I hate this kind of argument and find it stupid. Either you believe everything is ultimately elementary particles obeying the laws of physics, as There are other known forms of non-synaptic memory, too, with Next, experiments have shown examples of non-synaptic memory storage. A study from the lab of UCLA neurobiologist David Glanzman (“ A dramatic followup experiment by Glanzman’s group suggested that the memory was at least partly stored as RNA. Their experiment involved sensitizing one slug to touch, by shocking it, extracting RNA from that slug, and then injecting that RNA into a different slug. They found that the second slug became sensitive to touch, as if it had been shocked. In other words, it seems like the ‘memory’ of the shock got transferred! See their 2018 paper (“ Finally, forget about synaptic weight changes, and forget about synapses all together. Even single cells can learn and store memories! To me, this is the most persuasive argument against the necessity of synapses. Single-celled organisms, by definition, are just one cell, and hence have no nervous system or synapses to speak of. Yet it appears that they can learn and store (ethologically relevant) memories. The memories in question are certainly much simpler than what you might have in mind when you imagine human memory; a paramecium isn’t waxing nostalgic over its most recent birthday party. But one can argue that they are memories nonetheless. What kinds of memories do single cells possess? The full gamut of possibilities is unclear, but a simple and well-studied kind of memory is The habituation behavior of the ciliate Habituation is admittedly extremely simple, but even a behavior as simple as this remains mysterious in some ways. Consider this: if you wait a while after Stentor stops responding, it will ‘recover’. That is, it will respond if you start poking it again. Keep poking it for long enough a second time, and it will stop responding a second time. Here’s the interesting part: in the second ‘round’, it will stop responding to your pokes faster than it did the first time. This implies that it ‘remembers’ that it got poked a bunch sometime in the recent past. In other words, there is the shorter-term memory of the recent pokes (‘the current pokes are not dangerous, so I should stop responding’) and a longer-term memory of less-recent pokes (‘the current pokes are like the previous pokes, which were not dangerous, so I should learn faster this time’). How does this work? There are ideas out there, but the truth is that no one really knows! Obviously, the mechanism for this type of multiple-time-scale memory can’t rely on synapses. Gershman, Balbi, Gallistel, and Gunawardena discuss some of the history of single-cell learning and related controversies (for example, does this really ‘count’ as learning and memory?) in a recent and readable review paper titled “
As Gershman et al. note, this is probably a bad analogy, since worms have been found to exhibit fairly sophisticated learning and memory! This was clear even in 1957, when Jensen wrote. If you buy that single cells can learn and store memories, you should probably also believe that the associated mechanisms, which must be based on molecules internal to the cell rather than synaptic weights, are probably widely conserved across evolution. After all, evolution is a Relatedly, it seems unlikely that no organism could learn or remember anything before synapses existed. There had to be some other, simpler mechanism that worked before large-scale, synapse-based neural networks were common. But if this is true, why wouldn’t it continue to be used in one form or another after modifications to synaptic weights began to play a role in learning and memory? (On the other hand, it’s certainly true that one mechanism can strongly supplant another. Consider that lesions to the Before I end this section, I want to go back to one of the arguments Colaço discussed. It seems like a lot of our argument hinges on what we mean by learning and memory. If we accept that the simple changes in behavior exhibited by single cells or sea slugs reflect some form of ‘learning’ or ‘memory’, then it really does seem like one has to take a broader view, and (for example) engage with non-synaptic mechanisms. Some people might just not think these behavioral changes are worth associating with the rich phenomenology of human memory. How should we define memory, then? I think it’s worth taking a permissive view, since otherwise—essentially by definition—we’re excluding non-human animals, or non-human complex systems more generally, from being able to learn and store memories. Biology is complicated, and it’s plausible to me that something as basic as memory is a matter of degree rather than kind. Maybe single cells don’t exhibit all of the rich phenomenology associated with human memories, but there are still important enough similarities that we should use some of the same words. A minimal definition of learning and memory is something like “ Did we go too far? If you kick a rock, so that a piece of it breaks off, does this mean that the rock now ‘stores’ information about you kicking it, and hence ‘memorizes’ something about your kick? I’d bite the bullet and say yes. But a rock can’t use the absence of that piece to inform adaptive behavior in the same way that a living organism can, or equivalently its retrieval capabilities are extremely limited. It also has more limited storage capabilities: your friend will remember a whole temporal sequence of you kicking them (and will probably not be too happy), whereas the rock can probably only ‘store’ the final result. In other words, maybe there’s a sense in which non-living physical systems like rocks have memory, but it isn’t very good. VI. THE SUFFICIENCY OF SYNAPTIC WEIGHT CHANGES FOR MEMORYThe SPM hypothesis says that synaptic weight changes are sufficient for learning and memory. Is that true? I think the answer is again a strong no. We’ve already encountered Glanzman et al.’s experiments, which suggest (at least in sea slugs) that synaptic weights are not the only format for information storage. These experiments directly falsify one of Martin, Greenwood, and Morris’ proposed tests: you can destroy a bunch of synaptic weights, but not destroy the associated memory. There’s a more dramatic example of large-scale synaptic weight destruction in nature whose phenomenology parallels that finding. In the process of becoming a butterfly, a caterpillar’s entire body—including its brain—undergoes major structural changes. These changes involve a vast array of synapses being pruned, remodeled, and generally reorganized. And despite all of this, it seems like it’s at least possible that a butterfly can Blackiston, Shomrat, and Levin discuss more examples like this in a 2015 article titled “
Sam Gershman, in a magisterial 2023 review (“
It’s worth pointing out that some of these examples are controversial, or at least not nearly as well-studied as more mainstream memory-related phenomena. But if any of these examples is at least kind of true, the SPM hypothesis doesn’t come out looking great. These examples also speak against the possibility that non-synaptic memory mechanisms are just ‘edge cases’, since the behaviors involved (metamorphosis, regeneration, and hibernation) are pretty varied, and also fairly important for the animals that perform them. And there are other reasons to think synapses are insufficient as a learning and memory storage mechanism. Synaptic weights naturally ‘decay’ and ‘turn over’ on a time scale of hours to weeks. In that sense, they are not completely stable places to store information. In the aforementioned 2023 review, Gershman points this out as a serious problem with a synaptic-weight-based account of learning and memory:
How can we remember things for years with synapses that turn over on a time scale of weeks or less? Maybe we can imagine neural circuits playing an elaborate game of At this point, I think it’s helpful to recall a point we made earlier: persistent activity, reverberations of neural activity due to some previously presented stimulus, is probably a reasonable mechanism for short-term memory, but not long-term memory. Maybe there are tricks one can play to get it to hold onto information for a little longer, but these will only go so far—it faces a fundamental limitation. But this isn’t the end of the world, because it can couple to a longer-term memory mechanism so that one gets the best of both worlds. (Persistent activity can’t hold onto information as long as a synaptic-weight-based mechanism, but its faster dynamics make it more responsive to stimuli, which is good for inputting a quickly-changing signal.) The idea that persistent activity and longer-term storage mechanisms interact is popular, and is sometimes called the “ Maybe it’s turtles all the way down? If synaptic weights turn over on a time scale of weeks, maybe there’s something slower that turns over on a time scale of months. And maybe there’s something else that’s slower than that. Why just one ‘fast’ and one ‘slow’ mechanism? Why not ‘fast’, and ‘slow’, and ‘even slower’, and ‘even slower than that’, and so on? This line of thinking leads us to an alternative to the SPM hypothesis, which I discuss next. VII. THE CELLULAR PROCESSES AND MEMORY HYPOTHESISEarlier, I referenced experiments from the Glanzman lab that appeared to show that injecting an untrained sea slug with RNA from a trained slug ‘ In parallel with ideas due to Hebb and others that learning and memory might be associated with the connections between neurons, a different idea floated around: maybe memory was stored via molecules like proteins or RNA. In the 1950s and 1960s, when molecular biology was just getting started and people began to get excited about the possibilities associated with molecules like DNA, this was a natural idea. If a lot of biology could ultimately be described in molecular terms, why not learning and memory too? Were there memory molecules? If so, what were they like, and how did they work? See a (pessimistic) 1976 article by Gaito (“
An
Maybe unsurprisingly, the subsequent history of this line of work is muddled. (Otherwise, we probably would’ve heard about “memory pills” and “memory injections”.) It didn’t help that McConnell first published these results in a journal he ran called
For this and a variety of other reasons—including the discovery of LTP, which boosted the idea that synaptic weights were causally related to learning and memory—by the late 1970s, researchers became generally pessimistic about the prospects of the “biochemical” memory hypothesis. But people never totally gave it up. Over the years, various researchers have made apparently unrelated suggestions that this or that molecule might provide a potential memory storage mechanism. Over the years, there were a number of reviews and perspectives on these somewhat heterodox approaches to learning and memory. And over the past ten years, they’ve grown increasingly common. Consider these titles:
All right, all right, we get it! Synapses aren’t enough! But despite the pleading of these titles, in 2025 this still very much remains a minority view, or at the very least something most neuroscientists don’t think about regularly. (Maybe if you asked them to really think about it, they’d agree that there’s potentially something interesting going on.) It’s also apparently hard to get mainstream funding to study possible non-synaptic, molecular mechanisms for memory. I heard secondhand that Glanzman has had trouble getting funding since he published those studies. I’m not sure whether this anecdote is true, but if it is true, it’s surprising. You can give someone a memory by having them eat someone else with that memory? Seriously? That is objectively insanely cool, and I don’t know why more people aren’t excited about it. Where does all of this leave us? Maybe at this point you’re on board, and think that synaptic weight changes are neither necessary nor sufficient for learning and memory. So what’s the alternative? Is it just the SPM hypothesis plus plus, where we take synaptic mechanisms and tack on a bunch of additional mechanisms? Kind of, but we can do a little better than that. As an alternative to the SPM, I want to put forward the cellular processes and memory hypothesis (CPM). In the spirit of Martin, Greenwood, and Morris’ 2000 review article, I’ll define the CPM hypothesis as the claim that:
(Just to be clear, this idea definitely isn’t original to me. I’m just the only one calling it this.) What are these molecular and intracellular processes I allude to? Is learning and memory stored in RNA, as McConnell thought and Glanzman et al.’s experiments suggest? Is it stored in post-translational modifications to proteins, like Crick thought? Is it stored via epigenetic mechanisms, or in the stable states of gene regulatory networks, or in the action of transcription factors? The truth is that no one really knows. But I think there’s evidence for all of these, and in general a good rule of thumb is to believe that biology embraces a multiplicity of solutions when more than one solution exists. I’d bet that all of these things contribute, and work together with synaptic-weight-based mechanisms to store long-term memories. Two final comments here, because now we’re getting (even more) into wild speculation and topics of ongoing research. First, most neurobiologists would agree that molecular mechanisms are involved in learning and memory; this claim is definitely not controversial. What’s controversial is whether these processes store information independently of, or in a fashion complementary to, synaptic-weight-based mechanisms. If this were the case, molecular mechanisms are certainly there and play a role, but may not be that interesting from a higher-level computational or systems perspective. They’re details that we can just abstract away. I don’t think this is the case, since otherwise the memory transfer experiments and single-cell learning experiments (among others) would be hard to explain. There isn’t any good reason to believe that RNA molecules track synaptic weight changes, and moreover with a fidelity high enough to encode them well, and moreover that other cells (in other animals!) somehow ‘know’ to decode some aspect of those RNA in order to decode something about synaptic weight changes. And if you do believe this, this is basically just saying that RNA molecules encode memory (albeit, memory possibly originally stored in synaptic weight changes), but using more words. The memory transfer experiments, which suggest that molecules like RNA are sufficient for transferring a memory, are consistent with the CPM hypothesis but inconsistent with the SPM hypothesis. Lastly, you might wonder: if there are perfectly good synaptic-weight-based mechanisms for learning and memory, why would you need these other mechanisms? I think the answer to this puzzle relates to the relatively short time scale on which synapses turn over, an observation I mentioned earlier. You’d really like a mechanism that’s slower, since slower processes tend to hold onto information for longer. Intracellular processes like signaling cascades, gene regulatory dynamics, epigenetic dynamics, and so on all operate on time scales much slower than that of synaptic weight changes. It’s possible that these intracellular mechanisms are better for storing long-term, but probably not short-term, memories. VIII. THE TERRA INCOGNITA OF CELLULAR MEMORYA few years ago, when I first heard about some of these ideas, I was heavily inspired by a review article I mentioned above (“ The end of that review is so beautifully written that I can’t resist quoting it in full here:
It isn’t an exaggeration to say that the SPM hypothesis is a central, foundational element of how most neuroscientists think, whether or not they’ve heard the term “SPM hypothesis”. It’s been extremely productive, and will no doubt continue to be productive for those that cling to it, but a new world awaits those courageous enough to let go. We ought to embrace a broader conception of how learning and memory might be possible. Consider the heart transplant stories we started with. These stories are all extremely weird. Can it really be true that one person can remember someone else’s first-person experience of death, or acquire someone else’s sexuality, or know the name of a person they’ve never met or heard about? According to the CPM hypothesis, these phenomena are at least biologically plausible, and hence worth taking seriously. If memories aren’t just stored in the connections between cells, but in the cells themselves—as molecules, or perhaps as dynamic processes involving molecules—then there’s no reason to think that memories are particular to the brain. Maybe your memory of your fifth birthday party is in your arm, or leg, or heart. And if it’s potentially in these weird other places, and if the format in which information is stored is similar from person to person, then why couldn’t transplanting an organ transplant the memories stored in them? If the CPM hypothesis is even partially true, the implications are stunning. Can you forget something about your fifth birthday party if someone chops your arm off? Does eating the liver of an animal give you some of its memories? (Does it depend on the animal, or the body part?) Is cannibalism actually good, at least in the sense that you can acquire nontrivial capabilities of the person you eat? Could we treat a memory-related disease by intervening on someone’s heart? Could we manipulate memories, or inject new ones, by intervening on a non-brain part of the body? To all of these: maybe. It’s a brand new world! Terra incognita! The SPM hypothesis is useful and well-supported, but I hope I’ve convinced you that it’s wrong. IX. THE VERDICTThree out of five stars, good for its time but doesn't hold up to modern scrutiny. Like a human leg, a bit tough to swallow. You're currently a free subscriber to |