---
subject: "Futarchy And Self-Dealing Governance"
from: "Robin Hanson from Overcoming Bias <overcomingbias@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-17 14:27:36
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Overcoming Bias", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8616244883382228708", "UNREAD"]
---
Compared to divided government, a more central government has stronger incentives to help the polity as a whole. But it also has more of a risk of self-dealing. It may increase the pie shares of its government system and of its allies, and work to entrench itself, making it harder to remove. The simplest form of futarchy is a pretty centralized form of governance. All covered policies are evaluated by the same traders estimating the same conditional metric. So how much risk is there of futarchy self-dealing? In principle, we’d have a separate system to set the key parameters of futarchy, such as its metric, system for making proposals, trading subsidies, price difference evaluation function, trading rules, and constitutional limits on policies. But there may be many channels by which allowed futarchy policies might influence such things, as well as the processes by which futarchy might be replaced with some other system. When a futarchy outcome metric is entirely short term, it should only be interested in changing futarchy parameters to those that are more likely to on average raise its metric. But when its metric care about things that happen in the distant future, futarchy will also care about preserving its existing metric, as any other metric is less likely to improve things according to its current metric. So it will only want to allocate more of the society’s budget to the futarchy system to the extent that would actually help to achieve its overall metric. A futarchy with a long term metric will also want to prevent a switch away from futarchy to the extent that it fears this new form of governance will be less effective at achieving goals, or to the extent it will have different goals. But futarchy would be eager to induce a switch to another form of governance that it estimates to be more effective at achieving its goals, as specified in its metric. You're currently a free subscriber to |