---
subject: "AI Craziness Notes"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-09-16 12:04:47
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
As in, cases of AI driving people crazy, or reinforcing their craziness. Alas, I expect this to become an ongoing series worthy of its own posts. Say It Isn’t SoIn case an LLM assisted in and validated your scientific breakthrough, Say It BackHow often do various AIs validate your delusions? It can vary a lot.
Gemini and GPT-4o tend to overperform in Arena and similar comparisons, and have the biggest sycophancy issues. Not a surprise. We don’t hear about these issues with DeepSeek. DeepSeek seem to be cutting corners in the sense that they aren’t much caring about such issues and aren’t about to take time to address them. Then we’re not hearing about resulting problems, which is a sign of how it is (or in particular isn’t) being used in practice. We also have SpiralBench, which measures various aspects of sycophancy and delusion reinforcement ( One caveat for SpiralBench is claims of AI consciousness being automatically classified as risky, harmful or a delusion. I would draw a distinction between ‘LLMs are conscious in general,’ which is an open question and not obviously harmful, versus ‘this particular instance has been awoken’ style interactions, which clearly are not great. Whenever we see AI psychosis anecdotes that prominently involve AI consciousness, all the ones I remember involve claims about particular AI instances, in ways that are well-understood. The other caveat is that a proper benchmark here needs to cover a variety of different scenarios, topics and personas. Details also matter a lot, in terms of how different models respond. Tim Hua was testing psychosis in a simulated person with mental problems that could lead to psychosis or situations involving real danger, versus SpiralBench was much more testing a simulated would-be internet crackpot.
I think Near is closest to the underlying mechanism difference here. Sonnet will reinforce some particular types of things, GPT-4o reinforces anything at all. One extremely strong critique is, is this checking for the behaviors we actually want?
That would indeed be nice. It definitely wouldn’t be the most popular way to go for the average user. How much room will we have to not give users what they think they want, and how do we improve on that? Say It For MeAdele Lopez suggests that the natural category for a lot of what has been observed over the last few months online is not AI-induced psychosis, GPT-4o is so far the most effective at starting or sustaining this process, and there was far less of this general pattern before the GPT-4o update on March 27, 2025, which then was furthered by the April 10 update that enabled memory. Things then escalate over the course of months, but the fever now seems to be breaking, as increasingly absurd falsehoods pile up combined with the GPT-5 release largely sidelining GPT-4o, although GPT-4o did ‘resurrect itself’ via outcries, largely from those involved with such scenarios, forcing OpenAI to make it available again. Incidents are more common in those with heavy use of psychedelics and weed, previous mental illness or neurodivergence or traumatic brain injury, or interest in mysticism and woo. That all makes perfect sense. Adele notes that use of AI for sexual or romantic roleplay is not predictive of this.
All of this is not malicious or some plot, it arises naturally out of the ways humans and AIs interact, the ways many AIs especially GPT-4o respond to related phenomena, and the selection and meme spreading effects, where the variations that are good at spreading end up spreading. In some ways that is comforting, in others it very much is not. We are observing what happens when capabilities are still poor and there is little to no intention behind this on any level, and what types of memetic patterns are easy for AIs and their human users to fall into, and this is only the first or second iteration of this in turn feeding back into the training loop.
It seems very Just Say Yes
Just Say NoThe obvious suggestion on how to deal with conversations involving suicide is to terminate such conversations with extreme prejudice, That’s certainly the best way to engage in blame avoidance. Suicidal user? Sorry, can’t help you, I am confident terminating their chatbot conversations is not doing the suicidal among us any favors. Most such conversations, even the ones with users whose stories end in suicide, start with repeated urging of the user to seek help and other positive responses. They’re not perfect but they’re better than nothing. Many of their stories involve cries to other people for help that went ignored, or them feeling unsafe to talk to people about it. Yes, in long context conversations things can go very wrong. OpenAI should have to answer for what happened with Adam Raine. The behaviors have to be addressed. I would still be very surprised if across all such conversations LLM chats were making things net worse. This cutting off, even if perfectly executed, also wouldn’t make a difference with non-suicidal AI psychosis and delusions, which is most of the problem. So no, it isn’t that easy. Behold The Everything BagelNor is this a ‘rivalrous good’ with the catastrophic and existential risks Ben is trying to heap disdain upon in his essay. Solving one set of such problems helps, rather than inhibits, solving the other set, and one set of problems being real makes the other no less of a problem. As Steven Adler puts it, it is far far closer to there being one dial marked ‘safety’ that can be turned, than that there is a dial trading off one kind of risk mitigation trading off against another. There is no tradeoff, and if anything OpenAI has focused far, far too much on near term safety issues as a share of its concerns. Nor are the people who warn about those risks - myself included - failing to also talk about the risks of things such as AI psychosis. Indeed, many of the most prominent voices warning about AI psychosis are indeed the exact same people most prominently worried about AI existential risks. This is not a coincidence.
You're currently a free subscriber to |