---
subject: "US War Dept’s Big UFO Lie"
from: "Robin Hanson from Overcoming Bias <overcomingbias@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-11-29 20:45:15
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Overcoming Bias", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8616244883382228708", "UNREAD"]
---
UFOs appear to be intelligently-guided artificial physical craft with tech abilities far exceeding those of any known human society. They usually appear near the edge of visibility, and by now there have been >100K documented UFO reports. Reflecting on recent events (eg, A) UFOs are what they appear to be. B) A powerful conspiracy has worked for 75+ years to con folks into thinking (A).
Hard to say which of these is more likely. The following seems a strong (>80% conditional chance) corollary of (A): A1) US (and ally?) war (military & intelligence) orgs have been working hard for 80+ years to ridicule & hide evidence of (A). Even from most US presidents.
And this seems a strong (>80%) corollary of (B): B1) US (and ally?) war orgs are the main orgs behind the conspiracy, and even most US presidents aren’t in on the con.
So I put >2/3 probability weight on this dramatic claim: C = A1 or B1) US War Depts have been working hard for 75+ years to either hide that UFOs are what they seem, or to mislead many into thinking so. Even most US presidents aren’t in on the con.
The simple version of A is: they are here now, but no where else we can see in the universe, and they choose to stay at the edge of our visibility. Now I’ve Our grabby aliens analysis suggest that life that visibly changes its region appears roughly once per million galaxies, with our current date (14Gyr) a typical date. Our Sun’s stellar nursery was seeded with life from nearby, and one of the other ~10K stars born there reached our level millions of years ago. That civilization successfully enforced an internal rule against visibly colonizing the cosmos. This rule might be for religious, eco, or culture-coherence reasons. They have made an exception to their no-travel rule to come here to convince us to follow their no-colonizing rule. They prefer not to destroy us. This expedition is only empowered to enact a robust strategy set from home: domesticate us by being local, impressive, & peaceful. As domestication might fail if we learn something repulsive about them, they will not show us more, at least for a long time.
A more complex version of A, call it A2, adds that their craft hold biosquishy passengers, and that these craft have crashed many times on Earth. I’m not yet convinced I need to believe A2, but if I did I’d Either version of A seems bad news for humanity’s long term future. We wanted to leave the farm when we grew up, to seek adventure elsewhere. But no, big brother says we must stay and work the farm til we die. Aliens are real, but have not helped us, and never will help. Not killing us is the best we can get from them. Maybe we will get to spread into our Solar System, or maybe not, we don’t yet know. But these A consequences wouldn’t bite for a while. Not for centuries, if my However, there is still a big potential consequence here. According to So I put 2/3 odds on their being a key fact that, if revealed, would cause a big crisis in US democracy. The US public would seek assurances that US War Depts couldn’t do something that bad again, and such assurances might require pretty dramatic changes to the structure of US democracy. Maybe even using prediction and decision markets? You're currently a free subscriber to |