---
subject: "WikiTok/Phone endoscope/Historical Tech Tree"
from: "Recomendo <recomendo@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-08-10 09:02:19
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Recomendo", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8455078693589186571", "UNREAD"]
---
Wikipedia, TikTok styleI'm not here to shame anyone for scrolling through TikTok. I suggest you give Phone endoscopeSometimes a single use tool is the only tool that will work. An endoscope is a long coil of stiff, but not too stiff, wire with a tineeweenie camera and LED light at the end. You snake the wire/camera into crevices, down pipes, behind cabinets, inside engines to find out stuff. There’s usually no other way to see deep inside. Not too long ago endoscopes were extremely expensive, but I bought mine for $21. The business end is about 8mm or a 1/4” thick and the other end of the 5 meter (16ft) wire connects to my phone, which serves as the screen, camera and power source. It comes with a clip-on hook or magnet for retrieving tiny objects. I downloaded its app and this Historical tech treeThis Coffee counter matI make espressos at least three times a day. The machine, grinder, and knock box are on a wood kitchen counter, and it's getting stained from drips and spills. This Cooking oil sprayerWe switched from a pouring spout for our cooking oil to this Trader Joe’s dessertsIf you are lucky enough to live near a Trader Joe’s grocery store, my three favorite desserts from there are their THIS ISSUE IS SPONSORED BY GOTHAM SILICONWhat would you put on a 5”x5” quartz plate with 25,878,012,676 pixels? Full text of your 5,000 favorite novels? Archive of your top 10,000 photos? Ultra-res map of your city with every shrub on every street? We are Gotham Silicon, a new chip fab in NYC. Recomendo is an authentic, hand-crafted, human-written weekly newsletter that is free, but not cheap. Please consider supporting our work with a paid option, now at the low price of $45 per year. Paid subs enable us to keep making it free for others. Recomendo Unclassified Ads work! UNCLASSIFIEDS The Proxy We Wish We Found Sooner. Need US residential proxies that actually work? NinjaProxy is fast, stable, and keeps you off the radar. Great for research, travel, or bypassing site blocks. We're big fans. Imagine if Pocket and Spotify Wrapped had a baby. I made an app for myself that takes my bookmarks + notes and sends me a deeply personal recap every Sunday morning, available for 24hrs. Is this interesting? "Anyone not following Bill Adler is missing a dip into the wonders of short prose." "Great storytelling." Enjoy a short story every other week, emailed to you. Always free, always enthralling, always a treat for the heart and mind. Find out more or subscribe Recomendo is published by Cool Tools Lab, a small company of three people. We also run the Recomendo is copyrighted by Cool Tools Lab, LLC. Commissions may be earned from the links above. |