---
subject: "Towards truth"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2021-07-25 03:31:59
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "The Ken"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031"]
---
|
Good Morning Ishan,
In this day and age of journalism, it isn't uncommon to hear news organisations adopting the proposition of “facts over opinion”. It's understandable, considering the deluge of opinion-driven prime time news debates that have plagued our TVs for well over a decade.
But I feel at The Ken we take it a bit further. Here, the emphasis is not just on placing the facts before the reader but guiding them towards truth. Traditionally, journalism is all about presenting facts objectively, with the reporter expected to remain invisible. But when I submitted the first draft of my first story for The Ken, I remember my editor saying, “Good reporting, but where is your voice in the story?”
The narrative journalism we do here is a natural offshoot of the New Journalism wave of the 60s and 70s. The literary style of conveying non-fiction brought a breath of fresh air to journalism. Magazines like The Atlantic and New Yorker have done wonderful work over the years. Journalists like Hunter S Thomspon and Gay Talese mastered the art. They immersed themselves in the subject, working on it for days to tell some of the most fascinating real life stories.
The writers are central to the stories we do. We are visible and our voices point towards the truth.
Arundhati exemplified this by going through Paytm's 400-plus page IPO prospectus to connect the dots and tell the [true story](https://the-ken.com/story/paytm-ipo-tells-but-doesnt-show/) of the company's listing prospects. The homegrown fintech company is seeking a valuation of $25-30 billion. But a maze of related party transactions, founder shareholding patterns, and lack of segment reporting leaves one with more questions than answers. One investment banker quoted Winston Churchill, saying, “Paytm is a riddle, wrapped in a mystery, inside an enigma.”
Then there was [Seema's story](https://the-ken.com/story/tsmc-intel-samsung-unlikely-to-chip-in-india-could-use-diy-in-semicon/) about how India could possibly achieve self-reliance in semiconductor manufacturing. It is a hot topic with geo-political implications but very little reportage has come from India until now. Despite the government throwing incentives their way, big chip manufacturers are not buying in. Political leadership could pick up the phone and get a deal, but there are simpler ways, Seema writes. It is our free read for the week. Do share widely.
On Wednesday, Seetharaman and Anand [wrote](https://the-ken.com/story/nse-bse-and-the-benchmark-blues/) an interesting story about the importance of stock market indices and the need to scrutinise their practices more closely. Especially with the rise of passive funds and their dependence on these indices. Regulating indices could prevent a catastrophe, they write.
On Thursday, contributor Annie Philip [wrote](https://the-ken.com/sea/story/the-pandemic-perks-of-serving-the-elderly-in-ageing-singapore/) about the booming business of elderly care in Singapore. The country’s people are ageing and there seems to be many inflection points in this sector due to the pandemic.
Friday saw Maitri [write](https://the-ken.com/story/crown-vet-and-its-all-in-one-pet-care-bet/) about the pet-care space in India. She tells the story of this space through a company called Crown Vet. It has five clinics now and is planning to expand to 50 more 24x7 clinics. It has challenges though, like a dearth of quality veterinarians, for instance.
Of course, no week is complete without our newsletters. In our daily newsletter, Beyond the First Order, Rohin wrote about why Udaan and IndiaMART should be worried about [Reliance’s acquisition of Justdial](https://the-ken.com/bfo/udaan-indiamart-ought-to-be-worried-about-reliances-acquisition-of-justdial/); Nithin explored how [IPO documents are getting longer](https://the-ken.com/bfo/drhps-of-today-are-different/) and more verbose, a problem for investors who'll miss the 'risks'; and Olina explained how India's bureaucracy around oxygen is leading to a further [undercounting of Covid-19 related deaths](https://the-ken.com/bfo/death-by-bureaucracy/).
Our weekly newsletter, [The Nutgraf](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/the-10000-engineer-rule/), took a look at why startups are offering trips to sporting events and superbikes in their attempts to hire "quality" engineering talent. It's a great read.
That's all for this week. We have another set of insightful and thought-provoking stories lined up for you next week.
Enjoy what's left of your weekend,
Regards,
Pranav Balakrishnan
[pranav@the-ken.com](mailto:pranav@the-ken.com)
|
What you just read is The Ken's weekly recap of its stories. Written by a different person each week. Often insightful, sometimes witty, and very rarely boring. Someone sent this to you? [Sign up for free](https://the-ken.com/?modal=register&utm_source=footer&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=in_recap_email). Don't like these? You can [unsubscribe](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/unsubscribe/?user_id=2349339&data=dUBcCf2KQDMR-qqduSj-Jft3m8ik2VMk74reLzEMjNdCuK4Fzcs9hVsEfDkVH8OB5uUGJiK0mJ6HeiZBYqi4-Fq5qOoFyyhPhgdJvxGVkfB7SZnqG9Gk_Ds6aPAGRn-YAWkrvO6LHnM2uY1V2kIQwoO3JbQ519vCMM9Q2FnRcDgcj1eirZP24wmvZFunJ5VpJRMRCmovA_uP0TAuxtX5W1HExBkwYdvXoylueV4N4oal9uTsyPrl3bvvvUF471ueJD6u6pddcoIEWYQq0dC4mXFG9P--h0W-hZYu-IBqMripQeq-0fd7tAG5fGyak3avokUJfFj-EFRsCyaUJ-tbUolJRIArAc5LtpLjwZLrYP9cWGlnYMbnc0DQG4T0Fgem1gg2EXU4B4Nq5ZsDGQr5EwqGs5SunTujxX1FsiK-8ZrkhHgGk751Pvsoq85EBPY8UK6jSpSAjXao4xm1JQjs1UXGE6d5D3I9yyXwEynUEt_XAtBz0zyq80SRJe5vJ_B_vzfxkFZIU9rBhIGOJJu5zL6f4D7VUx6QLmmGF5bqPTc=). Want to manage your emails? Click [here](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/?user_id=2349339&data=76RcLVhX8QZmobwDxmSB09UAyrZkQFMx3forqMuBI2nDjd9p3YUnkc3K5sn7FlcrsmGqz7K88yn-AJI6SheyxIHVFV6FSz5eSWXQZoNcIahR-aYlTVkTxOuKm77aL_qln9BBAJt2hkbxyIae0C2dzbK9-Nz7fvkfvXM3-3NlRKsy4zVwdq7cd0hOI6FwfYRLpBAwoFuGQXoI7JZN0O_xTLyy-IqO8JC9zBGTLRmCpZ9sUeffnROngqfyYAfEwTQgDm3f6k1xOrACCZB-Zk7V06CIYI-OiSTkEGH9XbpPKzSv3t_sMNvcmmqtGWz7RCNMcpeYKaSASU9s-SsOQcrdMfYoqgEl0JnlCLs_b2msPsiEN_AEIVssSL1rct3GfQjdowuTYakSa8VmVqE_ekm57e10TdAlYJKWeNv3SXs7yTVJ3kIiYFCtKIs2pnZFJh-gS7wV0yNCXeA1qQqhUrWy7U1PfYqE9yGDLQxrlNIgphWGbUexvvJIPlWoPqycnnmdduU9b5EKuPuWVu0fHcaaxQ==).
|
|
|
|
|