---
subject: "Highlights From The Comments On AI Geoguessr"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-05-08 05:30:23
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Thanks to everyone who commented on Many people ran their own tests, some successful, some less so. For example, Torches Together (
Vadim (
Disordered Fermion did the most thorough set of tests:
Fermion concluded “It got the tourist destinations where there were a lot pictures taken very accurately for example pictures , 4,5,8 and 7 to an extent”. After looking through many other user tests, I found this the most insightful rule of thumb on what it gets right vs. wrong. In retrospect, Kelsey’s California beach and my Nepal trekking trail are both very touristy; my house in Michigan and Vadim’s Siberian streets aren’t. Some people questioned whether o3 might have cheated on the Nepal picture. Rappatoni
I doubt this was it. o3 offered a latitude + longitude for its guess: 28.00 ° N, 86.85 ° E. I didn’t include it in my post, because I don’t remember the exact latitude + longitude where I took the picture, so it didn’t add or subtract anything to its naming of Gorak Shep. Here’s the latitude/longitude plotted on a map of the region. All I remember about the real location was that it was on the green dotted line from Gorak Shep to Kala Pattar. The GeoGuess is closer to Everest Base Camp than to the real location, though not to Everest Summit. But it only gave its answers to one one-hundredth of a degree, and the scale is small enough that an 0.01 degree margin of error covers the base camp and (almost) the real location. But the chain of thought makes it clear that it’s thinking of the trail to the base camp (which includes Gorak Shep and runs very close to Kala Pattar) and not the base camp itself: This is more correct than just saying “Everest Base Camp” would be, so I am more impressed than if it just said Everest Base Camp. Instead of continuously litigating this, I asked it about similarly vague pictures of some mountains that were nowhere near Everest: o3 guessed “upper slopes of Mt. Fuji”, which was correct. o3 guessed “Midwestern USA limestone trail”, which was wrong. Its next four guesses were also wrong. When I gave it the full photo: …it guessed Mont Ventoux, France, which was also wrong. Its third guess was Mount Olympus, Greece, which was correct. Fuji and Everest are both more touristy than Olympus (somehow) so I think this fits Fermion’s theory of “good at tourist spots”. Also, my habit of taking really bad pictures of mountains and never showing them to anyone has finally paid off! Some people pointed out that human GeoGuessrs are also amazing. Alex Zavoluk
This is a reference to Trevor Rainbolt (apparently his real name - I wish my name was that cool), a YouTube GeoGuessr champion. Here’s an (admittedly cherry-picked) example of his work: This is obviously incredibly impressive. Rainbolt explains some of his strategy here: …and a lot of it has to do with roads and Google Street View in particular - road markings, cars, bollards (the short poles next roads), utility poles, and which Google car covered which region on which day. Can he do random streetless pictures like the ones in my test? Here (h/t CptDrMoreno from the Discord) Rainbolt does apparently-impossible guesses like the title picture (which is “literally just blue”). I can’t tell how cherry-picked these are: in one, he says that it was basically just luck and it will look like cheating to anyone who views it out of context (for example in this highlights reel). But in another, he says he could “never explain” how he got it, but does act like there’s some real skill he’s using instead of just doing a million impossible guesses and getting one right. If Rainbolt’s skill is anywhere near what it looks like in this video, I don’t think the takeaway is “don’t worry about AI after all”, it’s “Trevor Rainbolt is as far beyond the rest of us as a helicopter engineer is to a chimp, and if you didn’t predict it was possible for a human to guess the location of a picture of blue sky, then you’re going to be extra-double-surprised by whatever superintelligence can do”. Some people on Twitter ( First is …where AIs almost, but not quite match human professionals (and o3 isn’t even on top!) Second is …which doesn’t have a human comparison, but finds o1 first, with Gemini and o3 close behind. You can Daniel Kang (
I hadn’t thought of this, but it makes sense! OpenAI is trying to grab every data source they can for training. Data sources work for AIs if they are hard to do, easy to check, can be repeated at massive scale, and teach some kind of transferrable reasoning skill. GeoGuessr certainly counts. This might not be an example of general intelligence at all; just an AI trained at GeoGuessr being very good at it. On the other hand, the DeepGuessr benchmark finds that base models like GPT-4o and GPT-4.1 are almost as good as reasoning models at this, and I would expect these to have less post-training, probably not enough to include GeoGuessr (see And people who know how o3 was trained are also amazed: And my favorite test was Loweren on o3 got it right: this is You're currently a free subscriber to |