---
subject: "Zvi's Thoughts on His 2nd Round of SFF"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-11-20 13:35:19
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Previously: There are lots of great charitable giving opportunities out there right now. I recently had the opportunity to be a recommender in the Survival and Flourishing Fund for the second time. As a recommender, you evaluate the charities that apply and decide how worthwhile you think it would be to donate to each of them according to Jaan Tallinn’s charitable goals, and this is used to help distribute millions in donations from Jaan Tallinn and others. The first time that I served as a recommender in the Survival and Flourishing Fund (SFF) was back in 2021. How the world has changed in three years. This time I found an embarrassment of riches. Application quality was consistently higher, there were more than twice as many applications, and essentially everyone is looking to scale their operations and their spending. Thus, this year there will be two posts. This post contrasts between this experience and my first experience in 2021. The other post will be an extensive list of charities that I believe should be considered for future donations, based on everything I know, including the information I gathered at SFF - if and only if your priorities and views line up with what they offer. It will be a purely positive post, in that if I don’t have sufficiently net helpful things to say about a given charity, or I believe they wouldn’t want to be listed, I simply won’t say anything. I’ve tried to already reach out to everyone involved, but: If your charity was in SFF this round, and you either would prefer not to be in the post or you have new information we should consider or share, please contact me this week. This first post will contain a summary of the process and stand on its own, but centrally it is a delta of my experiences versus those in 2021. How the S-Process Works in 2024Note that the speculation grant steps were not present in 2021. Organizations fill out an application. That application is sent to a group of speculation granters. The speculation granters can choose to grant them money. If they do, that money is sent out right away, since it is often time sensitive. All applications that get $10k or more in speculation grants proceed to the round. Recommenders can also consider applications that didn’t get a speculation grant or that came in late, but they don’t have to. The round had 12 recommenders: 6 main track, 3 fairness and 3 freedom. You have 3-4 meetings for 3 hours each to discuss the process and applications with members of your track and a few people running the process. Before and between these meetings you read applications, investigate as you deem appropriate including conducting interviews, evaluate the value of marginal dollars being allocated to different places, and adjust those ratings. Jaan Tallinn and other funders decide which recommenders will allocate how much money from the round. The money is allocated by cycling through recommenders. Each gives their next $1k to the highest value application, based on their evaluations and where money has gone thus far, until each recommender is out of cash to give. Thus everyone’s top priorities always get funded, and what mostly matters is finding a champion or champions that value you highly. If money is given to organizations that already got speculation grants, they only get additional funds to the extent the new amount exceeds the speculation grants. Feedback is given to the organizations and the money is announced and distributed. Speculation granters get further funds based on how those in the main round evaluated their speculation grants - if the main round recommenders thought the grant was high value, you get your money back or even more.
Or: Jaan Tallinn chooses recommenders and has a slate of speculation granters. Organizations apply for funding. Speculation granters evaluate applications and perhaps give money. Recommenders evaluate applications that got money from speculation grants. Recommenders create evaluation functions for how much dollars are worth on different margins to different organizations, discuss, and adjust. Jaan Tallinn and other funders set who gets to give away how much money. System allocates funds by having recommenders take turns allocating $1k to the highest value target left on their board. Money is donated. Hopefully good things. Speculation grant funds are replenished if recommenders liked the choices made.
|