---
subject: "Software is the new Hardware"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <the-diff@ghost.io>"
to: ""
date: 2024-07-22 14:19:33
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX"]
---
|
|
In this issue: - Software is the new Hardware—Run through a list of what makes software such a lucrative field to work in and invest in, and you've also made a list of the biggest economic uncertainties introduced by AI. If the nature of fixed costs changes, and marginal costs go up, software companies start to look a lot more like hardware businesses.
- Vendor Risk—One way to offer cheaper shipping: cheat.
- Hardware and Software—A popular hardware product locks its best features behind a subscription.
- Compounding—The best stock of the last century is... not that great, but stayed above-average for a long time.
- AI as an Interface—Last project's human effort is this project's training set.
- Rotation—The small-cap rally.
Software is the new HardwareIf you spend much time trying to make the case for deep tech investments, you start to get a real appreciation for what a great business software companies have. There are nominally high fixed costs, but most of those costs become fixed well after the company is established. Meanwhile, the marginal cost of delivering the product rounds down to zero, and that means that companies have enormous flexibility in how low they can price—but interacting with any kind of software product means offering a steady flow of data to whoever created it, so they also end up with lots of pricing latitude on the upside. All of that is changing. The marginal cost of writing code is dropping, while the marginal cost of running it—to the extent that much of this new code is frequently using inference, or doing other computationally-intensive tasks—is rising. That's the reverse of the economic tailwind that's done so much for software engineers' incomes and software investors' returns. There have been some essays on this that are a bit more apocalyptic, calling for " More importantly, it misses something essential about software economics: the complementary good to any given software product is a lot more software! This is part of But those economics start to look different. They look a lot less like a high-fixed/low-marginal cost business and a lot more like a lower fixed-cost, but higher marginal-cost business. It's easier than ever to build version 0.1, and takes more time to connect with everything that's going to get it to 1.0 status. That's a case where, paradoxically, a labor-saving tool increases the labor cost associated with any given increase in revenue. But as anyone in AI knows, just as people in video knew a decade ago, there is a difference between costs that are roughly zero and costs that are low in an absolute sense, but high enough that it's possible to have upside-down economics—it's entirely possible to run a video site where the cost of storing and transmitting video exceeds the ad revenue captured (it would be interesting if anyone at YouTube or Netflix periodically went back and looked at how far in the past the video-delivery cost structure would have rendered their current business uneconomic. Netflix and YouTube may in some ways be the same business they were ten years ago, but you're getting a lot more pixel-seconds per dollar than you used to). Meanwhile, a lower cost to creating new programs also means a shorter half-life for a given piece of code. If APIs are being updated more frequently, there will be more times where it makes sense to deprecate them, and API providers will also assume that for their users, the burden of an update is lighter. There are some businesses that are nominally a fixed-asset business that depreciates something over time while its use has a fairly low or at least predictable marginal cost, but when the depreciation curve gets fast enough, as with GPUs today, Bitcoin ASICs in the mid-2010s hashing speed race, or military equipment during an active conflict, the depreciation schedule gets massively compressed, and what was cutting-edge two years ago is basically scrap today. Ironically, in a world where the single cleanest way to bet on the software trend of AI is by buying shares of Nvidia, the economics of software are starting to converge with those of hardware. There will be unpredictable replacement cycles, and higher marginal costs. That evolution was itself a function of the different economics of hardware and software: the more software commoditized hardware, the harder it was to argue that your particular beige box made Excel or Doom different from someone else's. And software companies had a nice tactical/strategic alignment: the more platforms they supported, the more the decision was about which software to use, with hardware as an afterthought. In the early days of PCs, upgrade cycles were extremely fast, too, but consistency in operating systems meant that upgrading to a new Dell, or switching to Compaq, didn't have much of a learning curve. Something like that could happen in AI; to the extent that there's a part of software that will still retain more of the economics of software, it will be integration tools that are end-product-agnostic. If you have a business intelligence bot that you're using to check in on your company's performance, it won't matter whether the relevant numbers are in Excel or Google Sheets or a Pandas dataframe or a Postgres database; if the tool is smart enough, it will know how to convert your request into the appropriate query and get an answer. And that means that those underlying products will compete more on technical specs. There may come a time when founders realize their dream of not having to buy an Office license because the docx contracts they get will be reviewed by an automated lawyer, who will run a few changes by them, ask them natural-language questions about key terms, and edit the file, which they will never personally review. The upshot of all of this is that, even as the volume of software produced increases, and even as interfaces get better by adapting to individual users, the economic rewards probably won't be as high. And that ends up being a nice bull case for everything else that technically/analytically-minded people could do instead of writing code. There will be plenty of money in software still, just as there's plenty of money in hardware. But the financial statements won't be as far apart as they used to be. Disclosure: Long MSFT. In an accounting sense, it's easy to use cost of goods sold as a proxy for marginal cost, and that does get you the right directional view, but is incomplete. For inference-heavy products, COGS will be higher to support the same level of user activity as before. But even for companies that don't offer AI tools, if they're interacting with companies that ship faster as a result of those tools, or operating in an ecosystem that's more diverse because of them, those marginal costs will show up in opex instead. And not just in the R&D line—sales and marketing spend will also go up if the pace of change is fast enough that salespeople are constantly getting up to speed with new technologies while marketers are constantly updating copy, creative, and where to do the next ad buy. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/9b536402?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)This sounds high risk, and in the current state of the markets it's a very bad idea to let ChatGPT amend your contracts and send them over sight-unseen. But it's probably the case that at a sufficiently big company, there literally aren't enough hours in the day for the CEO to review every single contract that the company, and thus that CEO, is party to. They already delegate, so the only change is who they delegate to. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/9a30308a?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)Such a tool would have an uphill battle since those big companies have unparalleled distribution. And most of the time, Fortune 500 customers would prefer one vendor to two. But those same companies can be reluctant to be too dependent on just one company—the fact that they'd trust the big three in this category might be all the evidence they need that it's unsound to give those companies too much of an information advantage. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/6acdad89?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
You're on the free list for The Diff! Last week, paying subscribers read about Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. See a sampling of current open roles below: - A new, growing startup that provides unique data to buy-side investors—and makes extensive use of generative AI in the process—is looking for a scraping engineer. Python-based scraping experience required, exposure to using LLMs in scraping a plus. (US, Remote)
- A well-funded startup is building a platform to identify compliance risks associated with both human- and AI-generated outputs. They are looking for a cloud infrastructure engineer to join their team of world-class researchers. (NYC)
- A company building ML-powered tools to accelerate developer productivity is looking for a (very technical) technical writer—a software engineer comfortable with close-to-the-metal code and new developments in AI, and who can write well about both. (Washington DC area)
- A mission-driven ed-tech startup is deploying AI tutors to revolutionize education. They have a strong customer base in Latin America and they're in need of a driven founding engineer. Key skills: TypeScript, React, Node.js, Postgres. Spanish and Portuguese proficiency help, but not required.(Remote, East Coast time zone)
- A CRM-ingesting startup is on-boarding customers to its LLM-powered sales software, and is looking for someone to found their go-to-market team—the role is similar to that of an SDR, but with leadership opportunities in the near term. (NYC)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. ElsewhereVendor RiskA small logistics company, NullShip, found a clever way to reduce shipping costs: Hardware and SoftwareAn (Incidentally, if you're a new parent, the Snoo is probably an incredibly good investment. Anecdotally, it doesn't work for every kid, and doesn't work every time, but there are few points in your life when you're willing to put such a high dollar value on a few extra minutes of sleep, and the Snoo generally provides that.) CompoundingMeb Faber has a fun table on AI as an InterfaceElectronic Arts has been regularly publishing NFL-themed football games, but their new college football game presented challenges around 3d player portraits: there are more college players than professionals, rosters are determined later, and those rosters change more. So it's infeasible to create three-dimensional scans of every player's head. Fortunately, many problems that only worked at small scale turn out to be training data for larger-scale implementations, so RotationThe WSJ The real risk for investors is a classic one: treating lucky factor exposure as evidence of skill. Small caps, especially cheap ones, have underperformed for a while, and many of them were getting enticingly cheap. But a rally like this is less driven by individual companies' fundamentals and more by broader positioning. So if you're way up this week, remember that you may or may not be good but are definitely currently lucky. |
||||||||||
|
|
|
||||||||||
|