---
subject: "Weekly Dose of Optimism #56"
from: "Not Boring <notboring@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-08-18 12:55:17
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Not Boring", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2982495070691762429", "UNREAD"]
---
Hi friends 👋, Happy Friday and welcome back to our 56th Weekly Dose of Optimism. Another big week of Optimism over here at Not Boring HQ. We filled all of the slots for this week’s edition by mid-evening on Wednesday, which is about 36 hours ahead of our usual schedule. All that optimism makes our jobs a bit easier and the world a bit better. Let’s get to it. The Weekly Dose is brought to you by… We are big fans of Investors: Not Boring Capital has invested in two [Ramp](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/5504a0bd-7990-429d-a931-f546faf0473c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)roundsAnalysts: Packy has written three deep dives on Ramp Customers: Most importantly, we use Ramp at both Not Boring and Create. For Create in particularly, Ramp is a very important partner.
You likely already know We’re not alone, over 15,000 businesses (of all sizes) use Ramp. If you want to join them and save 3.5% + close your books 8x faster, check them out. (1) From the Department of Energy
There goes that man again, Jobs Biden. Seems like all of that investment in clean energy is translating into real jobs growth. The renewable energy sector is benefitting from decades of declining cost curves and pushes towards a clean energy transition, and it seems that the Inflation Reduction Act is accelerating its deployment and job growth in the sector. The IRA has already dumped tens of billions of dollars of investment into spurring the clean energy transition, and that’s translating to real jobs.
(2)
Last week, we covered that Nueralink (Elon’s Brain Computer Interface company) had raised a $280M Series D to accelerate its products which help patients translate thoughts into physical movements. This week, a team of researchers have gotten one step closer to developing devices that translate brain activity into sound. Essentially, the device reads brain activity and translates those signals into spoken word or other sounds. You should check out the side-by-side comparison of the song and the brain output in the But since we’ve been on the Sci-Fi train here recently, let’s take it a step further. Imagine a device that could automatically translate your thoughts into any language, automatically making you a polyglot. Or attaching the device to a baby, translating the brain signals behind nighttime cries into well-articulated statements of need. Or better yet, how about hooking up one of these devices to your pooch…oh if the dogs could talk… That’s a ways away, but in the meantime, as is the case with most of these cutting edge brain-technologies, people truly in need will be the first to benefit. (3)
Thousands of people die each year waiting for kidney transplants. There’s about a 100,000 person waitlist for kidney transplants in the U.S. each year, but only 25,000 transplants are performed due to a shortage of human organ donors. That’s where the pigs come in! New research, produced by two separate teams, demonstrates functional pig kidneys in brain-dead human patients. Previous experiments have show that pig-kidneys can make urine, but this new research shows that pig kidneys are also effective at filtering creatinine from the body. (As an aside, creatinine ≠ creatine. Creatinine is the waste product creatine. If your kidneys are functioning properly, taking creatine will not harmfully increase creatinine levels.) The ability to safely and effectively use animal organs in humans would, of course, limit the shortage organs needed for transplants. We’re still a bit of a ways off: the experiments have only occurred in two brain-dead patients, but the teams are seeking FDA approval for a clinical trial in live patients. Pigs are becoming humans. Or maybe, humans are becoming pigs. I’m not sure how the logic works there. But whether or not I should eat bacon is about to become a much more morally complex question… (4)
If science keeps progressing, the first step is we all become human pig hybrids. The next step is that we’re replaced by robot humanoids all together. The race to commercialize humanoid robots is heating up. There’s dozens of companies competing to develop and sell a useful human-like robot, and now, some of the prototypes are quite good. One of those companies, Unitree, introduced its general purpose humanoid robot, called H1, this week. The robot, which walks like a human that needs to find a toilet really badly, is expected to be available for sale in the next “3-10 years” (bit of breathing room there for the team) for under $90,000. These humanoid robots could perform a range of tasks, from warehouse working to caregiving, to soldiering, and free up time for us pighumans to focus on more worthwhile projects. From Coinbase
The ability to trade leveraged crypto futures isn’t necessarily cause for optimism in and of itself, but we’re highlighting this story because it’s a big W for Coinbase in its ongoing fight to bring regulatory clarity to the industry. Coinbase has long held that if the SEC offered a path to register, they’d take it. The registration as a Futures Commission Merchant with the CFTC shows that they’re serious, and the CFTC’s willingness to work with Coinbase highlights a sane approach to regulation. And as of last night, reports are that Coinbase has stood strong and it’s starting to get results, for itself and the industry. Props to the company and its CEO Brian Armstrong for fighting the good fight. Crypto is here to stay. Even if you’re a crypto skeptic, it makes very little sense to have regulatory bodies driving the industry outside of the U.S. Even if you think there’s just a small chance of crypto becoming a major part of the economy in the future, there’s high expected value of having it centered in U.S. Moves like this make it more likely that that will be the case. A government that isn’t anti-innovation is good for the country. Plus, how can you not love a company that’s waging a serious legal battle against the US Government while also bringing beautiful art like Summer Kevin into the world? Bonus: From The Information
Packy here. Many of the companies we write about both here in the Weekly Dose and in Not Boring fall under the category that a16z’s Katherine Boyle dubbed “American Dynamism.” In the post introducing the firm’s AD practice, she wrote:
When Katherine started investing in and promoting companies tackling serious American problems, it was unpopular at best. Just a few years and one Russian invasion later, the industry has caught up. This profile on Katherine by The Information’s Margaux MacColl is worth a weekend read. It’s a good example of being non-consensus and right, and of working towards something you believe in even when others don’t believe. That’s all for this week. We’ll be back in your inbox on Tuesday. Thanks for reading, Dan + Packy |