---
subject: "AI #28: Watching and Waiting"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-09-07 17:18:05
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
We are, I see this as part of a pattern of continuing good news. While we have a long way to go and very much face impossible problems, the discourse and Overton windows and awareness and understanding of the real problems have continuously improved in the past half year. Alignment interest and funding is growing rapidly, in and out of the major labs. Mundane utility has also steadily improved, with benefits dwarfing costs, and the mundane harms so far proving much lighter than almost anyone expected from the techs available. Capabilities are advancing at a rapid and alarming pace, but less rapidly and less alarmingly than I expected. This week’s highlights include an update on the UK taskforce and an interview with Suleyman of Inflection AI. We’re on a roll. Let’s keep it up. Even if this week’s mundane utility is of, shall we say, questionable utility. Table of ContentsIntroduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. It’s got its eye on you. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. Google search ruined forever. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. I’ll pass, thanks. They Took Our Jobs. Better to not work in a biased way than not work at all? Get Involved. Center for AI Policy and Rethink Priorities. Introducing. Oh great, another competing subscription service. UK Taskforce Update. Impressive team moving fast. In Other AI News. AIs engage in deception, you say? Fooled me. Quiet Speculations. Copyright law may be about to turn ugly. The Quest for Sane Regulation. The full Schumer meeting list. The Week in Audio. Suleyman on 80k, Altman, Schmidt and several others. Rhetorical Innovation. Several more ways not to communicate. No One Would Be So Stupid As To. Maximally autonomous DeepMind agents. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. Easier to prove safety? Twitter Community Notes Notes. Vitalik asks how it is so consistently good. People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Their worry level is slowly rising. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Tyler Cowen again. The Lighter Side. Roon’s got the beat.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
It’s not the tool, it is how you use it. Already some companies such as JPMorgan Chase use highly toxic dystopian monitoring tools, which lets them take to the next level. It seems highly useful to keep track of how long customers have been in the store, or whether they are repeat customers and how long they wait for orders. Tracking productivity in broad terms like orders filled is a case where too much precision and attention has big problems but so does not having enough. Much better an objective answer with no work than a biased error-prone answer with lots of work.
This seems like exactly what such folks were doing before? The problem here isn’t AI.
Ethan Mollick proposes developing what he calls Grimoires, which my brain wants to autocorrect to spellbooks (a term he uses as well), prompts designed to optimize the interaction, including giving the AI a role, goal, step-by-step instructions, probably a request for examples and to have the AI gather necessary context from the user.
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
Here is Beware even looking at AI when Steam (Valve) is involved,
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse SoonSo far, Donald Trump has had the best uses of deepfakes in politics. Do they inevitably favor someone of his talents? Another angle to consider is, who is more vulnerable to such tactics than trump supporters?
I checked r/scams on a whim about 40 posts deep. Almost all were old school, Worth noting that the scam attempt failed. We keep hearing ‘I almost fell for it’ and keep not hearing from anyone who actually lost money.
Also, can I give everyone who hates this, or anything else on the internet, the obvious advice? For example,
The problem with using AI is that AI is not a good actor. An AI voice actor can copy the voice of Mel Brooks, but the voice has little to do with what makes Mel Brooks great. What I presume you would actually do, at least for a while, is to have some great voice actor record the new lines. Then use AI to transform the new lines to infuse it with the vocal stylings of Mel Brooks. If we have Tom Hanks or Susan Sarandon (both quoted in OP) doing work after they die, then we are choosing to recreate their image and voice, without the ability to copy their actual talents or skills. To the extent that we get a ‘good performance’ out of them, we could have gotten that performance using anyone with enough recorded data as a baseline, such as Your Mom, or a gorgeous fashion model who absolutely cannot act. It makes sense to use this for sequels when someone dies, and continuity takes priority, but presumably the actors of the future will be those with The Look? Thus James Dean makes sense, or Marylin Monroe. Or someone whose presence is importantly symbolic. They Took Our JobsAI detection tools do not work. We know this. Now we have data on one way they do not work, which is by
The problem is that the test does not work. This is an illustration that the test does not work. That it happens to hit non-native speakers illustrates how pathetic are our current attempts at detection. The AIs we were training on this were misaligned. They noticed that word complexity was a statistically effective proxy in their training data, so they maximized their score as best they could. Could one generate a bespoke training set without this correlation and then try again? Perhaps one could, but I would expect many cycles of this will be necessary before we get something that one can use. If anything, this discrimination makes the AI detector more useful rather than less useful. By concentrating its errors in a particular place and with a testable explanation, you can exclude many of its errors. It can’t discriminate against non-native speakers if you never use it on their work. It also shows an easy way AI work can be disguised, using complexity of word choice. Get InvolvedThe
Introducing
UK Taskforce Update
In Other AI News
Here is the abstract:
They do a good job of pointing out that whatever your central case of what counts as deception, there is a good chance we already have a good example of AIs doing that. LLMs are often involved. There is no reason to think deception does not come naturally to optimizing AI systems when it would be a useful thing to do. Sometimes it is intentional or predicted, other times it was unintended and happened anyway, including sometimes with the AI’s explicit intent or plan to do so.
I am not as surprised as Owain was, this all makes sense to me. I still find it interesting and I’m glad it was tried. I am not sure what updates to make in response.
Good
Quiet Speculations
This is a highly technical opinion, and relies on courts applying a typical set of heuristics to a highly unusual situation, so it seems far from certain. Also details potentially matter in weird ways.
Presumably we can all agree that this rule does not make a whole lot of sense. Things could also take a while. Or it might not.
Cate Hall’s position
The authors suing in the current copyright lawsuit do seem to be a bit overreaching?
Is generative AI in violation of copyright? Perhaps it is. Is it a ‘grift’ that merely repackages existing work, as the authors claim? No.
Flo Crivello shortens their timelines.
I don’t see this as consistent. If you get AGI in 2-8 years, you get ASI in a lot less than 2-8 more years after that. The Quest for Sane Regulations
The Week in AudioThe main audio event this week was Up front, I want to say that it’s great that he went on 80,000 hours and engaged for real with the questions. A lot of Suleyman’s thinking here is very good, and his openness is refreshing. I am going to be harsh in places on the overview list below, so I want to be clear that he is overall being super helpful and I want more of this. I also got to see notes on Suleyman’s new book, The Coming Wave. The book and podcast are broadly consistent, with the main distinction being that the book is clearly aiming to be normie-friendly and conspicuously does not discuss extinction risks, even downplaying details of the less extreme downsides he emphasizes more. Wiblin opens asking about potential dangerous AI capabilities, since Suleyman has both said he thinks AI may be able to anonymously run a profitable company within 2 years, but also says it is unlikely to be dangerous within 10 years, which I agree seem like two facts that do not live in the same timeline. Suleyman clarifies that the AI would still need human help for various things along the way, but given humans can hired to do those things, I don’t see why that helps? Suleyman also clarifies that he is centrally distinguishing runaway intelligence explosions and recursive self-improvement from potential human use or misuse. Suleyman says he has uncertainty about timelines, in a way that makes it seem like he wants to wait for things to clearly be getting out of hand before we need to act? Suleyman disputes claim that is trivial to remove fine-tuning and alignment, later explaining it can be done but requires technical chops. I don’t see how that helps. Suleyman emphasizes that he is warning about open source, but still seems focused on this idea of human misuse and destructiveness. Similarly, he sees Llama-2’s danger as it revealing information already available on the web, whereas Anthropic says Claude was capable of importantly new synthesis of dangerous capabilities. “We’re going to be training models that are 1,000x larger than they currently are in the next three years. Even at Inflection, with the compute that we have, will be 100x larger than the current frontier models in the next 18 months.” Agreement (and I also mostly agree) that the issue with open sourcing Llama-2 is not that it will do much damage now, but the precedent it sets. My disagreement is that the 10-15 year timeline here for that transition seems far too slow. Anticipation of China being entirely denied the next generation of AI chips, and USA going on full economic war footing with China. As usual, I remind everyone that we don’t let Chinese AI (or other) talent move to America, so we cannot possibly care that much about winning this battle. Google’s attempt to have an oversight board with a diversity of viewpoints was derailed by cancel culture being unwilling to tolerate a diversity of viewpoints, so the whole thing fell apart entirely within weeks. No oversight, then, which Suleyman notes is what power wants anyway. As Wiblin notes, you can either give people in general a voice, or you can have all the voices be agreeing with what are considered correct views, but you cannot have both at once. We can say we want to give people a voice, but when they try to use it, we tell them they’re wrong. I would say here: Pointing out that they are indeed wrong does not help on this. There seems to clearly not be a ZOPA - a zone of possible agreement - on how to choose what AI will do, on either the population level or the national security level, if you need to get buy-in from China and the global south also the United States. I predict that (almost) everyone in the West who says ‘representativeness’ or even proposes coherent extrapolated volition would be horrified by what such a process would actually select. “The first part of the book mentions this idea of “pessimism aversion,” which is something that I’ve experienced my whole career; I’ve always felt like the weirdo in the corner who’s raising the alarm and saying, “Hold on a second, we have to be cautious.” Obviously lots of people listening to this podcast will probably be familiar with that, because we’re all a little bit more fringe. But certainly in Silicon Valley, that kind of thing… I get called a “decel” sometimes, which I actually had to look up.” Whereas from my perspective, he is quite the opposite. He founded DeepMind and Inflection AI, and says explicitly in his book that to be credible you must be building. “It’s funny, isn’t it? So people have this fear, particularly in the US, of pessimistic outlooks. I mean, the number of times people come to me like, “You seem to be quite pessimistic.” No, I just don’t think about things in this simplistic “Are you an optimist or are you a pessimist?” terrible framing. It’s BS. I’m neither. I’m just observing the facts as I see them, and I’m doing my best to share for critical public scrutiny what I see. If I’m wrong, rip it apart and let’s debate it — but let’s not lean into these biases either way.” Well said. “So in terms of things that I found productive in these conversations: frankly, the national security people are much more sober, and the way to get their head around things is to talk about misuse. They see things in terms of bad actors, non-state actors, threats to the nation-state.” Can confirm this. It is crazy the extent to which such people can literally only think in terms of a human adversary. More ‘in order to do safety you have to work to push the frontline of capabilities.’ Once again, I ask why it is somehow always both necessary and sufficient for everyone to work with the best model they can help develop, what a coincidence. Suleyman says the math on a $10 billion training run will not add up for at least five years, even if you started today it would take years to execute on that. Suleyman reiterates: “I’m not in the AGI intelligence explosion camp that thinks that just by developing models with these capabilities, suddenly it gets out of the box, deceives us, persuades us to go and get access to more resources, gets to inadvertently update its own goals. I think this kind of anthropomorphism is the wrong metaphor. I think it is a distraction. So the training run in itself, I don’t think is dangerous at that scale. I really don’t.” His concern is proliferation, so he’s not worried that Inflection AI is going to accelerate capabilities merely by pushing the frontiers of capabilities. Besides, if he didn’t do it, someone else would. Wiblin suggests “They’re going to do the thing that they’re going to do, just because they think it’s profitable for them. And if you held back on doing that training run, it wouldn’t shift their behavior.” Suleyman affirms. So your behavior won’t change anyone else’s behavior, and also everyone else’s behavior justifies yours. Got it. Affirms that yes, a much stronger version of current models would not be inherently dangerous, as per Wiblin “in order for it to be dangerous, we need to add other capabilities, like it acting in the world and having broader goals. And that’s like five, 10, 15, 20 years away.” Except, no. People turn these things into agents easily already, and they already contain goal-driven subagent processes. “I think everybody who is thinking about AI safety and is motivated by these concerns should be trying to operationalize their alignment intentions, their alignment goals. You have to actually make it in practice to prove that it’s possible, I think.” It is not clear the extent to which he is actually confusing aligning current models with what could align future models. Does he understand that these two are very different things? I see evidence in both directions, including some strong indications in the wrong direction. Claim that Pi (found at [pi.ai](https://substack.com/redirect/b4fe087d-6de3-4488-9585-ba629972f836?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)) cannot be jailbroken or prompt hacked. Your move.Reminds us that Pi does not code or do many other things, it is narrowly designed to be an AI assistant. Wait, need my AI assistant to be able to help me write code. Reminds us that GPT-3.5 to GPT-4 was a 5x jump in resources. Strong candidate for scariest thing to hear such a person say they believe about alignment difficulty: “Well, it turns out that the larger they get, the better job we can do at aligning them and constraining them and getting them to produce extremely nuanced and precise behaviours. That’s actually a great story, because that’s exactly what we want: we want them to behave as intended, and I think that’s one of the capabilities that emerge as they get bigger.” On Anthropic: “I don’t think it’s true that they’re not attempting to be the first to train at scale. That’s not true… I don’t want to say anything bad, if that’s what they’ve said. But also, I think Sam [Altman] said recently they’re not training GPT-5. Come on. I don’t know. I think it’s better that we’re all just straight about it. That’s why we disclose the total amount of compute that we’ve got.” Endorses legal requirements for disclosure of model size, a framework for harmful capabilities measures, and not using these models for electioneering. I have no idea what that last one would even mean? He says ‘You shouldn’t be able to ask Pi who Pi would vote for, or what the difference is between these two candidates’ but that is an arbitrary cutout of information space. Are you going to refuse to answer any questions regarding questions relevant to any election? How is that not a very large percentage of all interesting questions? There’s a kind of myth of neutrality. And are you going to refuse to answer all questions about how one might be persuasive? All information about every issue in politics? Suleyman believes it is not tactically wise to discuss misalignment, deceptive alignment, or models having their own goals and getting out of control. He also previously made clear that this is a large part of his threat model. This is extra confirmation of the hypothesis that his book sidesteps these issues for tactical reasons, not because Suleyman disagrees on the dangers of such extinction risks.
It is perhaps worth contrasting this with There is also the video and transcript of the talks from the
Telling is that he says that most people are too worried about catastrophic risk, and not worried enough about chronic risk - they should be concerned they will waste their life without accomplishment, instead they worry about failure. I am very glad someone with this attitude is out there running all but one of Sam Altman’s companies and efforts, and most people in most places could use far more of this energy. The problem is that he happens to also be CEO of OpenAI, working on the one problem where catastrophic (existential) risk is quite central. Also he says (22:25) “If we [build AGI at OpenAI] that will be more important than all the innovation in all of human history.” He is right. Let that sink in.
Risks are not mentioned at all, although it is hard to imagine Rhetorical Innovation
The point I was trying to make last week,
Exactly. We want to avoid ubiquitous surveillance, or minimize its impact. If there exists a sufficiently dangerous technology, that leaves you two choices. You can do what surveillance and enforcement is necessary to limit access. You can do what surveillance and enforcement is necessary to contain usage.
Which of these will violate freedom less? My strong prediction for AGI is the first one. As a reminder, this assumes we fully solved the alignment problem in the first place. This is how we deal with the threat of human misuse or misalignment of AGI in spite of alignment being robustly solved in practice. If we haven’t yet solved alignment, then failing to limit access (either to zero people, or at least to a very highly boxed system treated like the potential threat that it would be) would mean we are all very dead no matter what. No One Would Be So Stupid As To
Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is DifficultWe have a class for that now, at Princeton,
Jan Leike, head of alignment at OpenAI, relies heavily on the principle that verification is in general easier than generation. I strongly think this is importantly false in general for AI contexts. You need to approach having a flawless verifier, whereas the generator need not achieve that standard. Proofs are the exception. The whole point of a proof is that it is easy to definitively verify. Relying only on that which you can prove is a heavy alignment tax, especially where the proof is in the math sense, not merely in the courtroom sense. If you can prove your system satisfies your requirements, and you can prove that your requirements satisfy your actual needs, you are all set. The question is, can it be done? Can we build the future entirely out of things where we have proofs that they will do what we want, and not do the things we do not want? That does seems super hard. The proposal here is to use AIs to discover proof-carrying code.
Where I get confused is, what would it mean to prove that a given set of code will do even the straightforward tasks like proving cybersecurity. How does one prove that you cannot gain access without proper credentials? Doesn’t this fact rely upon physical properties, lest there be a bug or physical manipulation one can make? Couldn’t sufficiently advanced physical analysis allow access, if only via identification of the credentials? How do we know the AI won’t be able to figure out the credentials, perhaps in a way we don’t anticipate, perhaps in a classic way as simple as engineering a wrench attack? They then consider securing the blockchain, such as by formally verifying Ethereum, which would still leave various vulnerabilities in those using the protocol, it would not I’d expect mean you were safe from a hack. The idea of proving that you have ‘secured critical infrastructure’ seems even more confused. These don’t seem like the types of things one can prove even under normal circumstances. They certainly don’t seem like things you can prove if you have to worry about a potential superintelligent adversary, and their plan says you need to not assume AI non-hostility, let alone AI active alignment. They do mean to do the thing, and warn that means doing it for real:
How are we going to pull this off? They suggest that once you have an LLM learn all the things, you can then abstract its functionality to traditional code.
I worry that Emerson Pugh comes to mind: If the human brain were so simple that we could understand it, we would be so simple that we couldn’t. Will introspection ever be easier than operation? Will it be possible for a mind to be powerful enough to fully abstract out the meaningful operations of a similarly powerful mind? If not, will there be a way to safely ‘move down the chain’ where we are able to use a dangerous unaligned model we do not control to safely abstract out the functionality of a less powerful other model, which presumably involves formally verify the resulting code before we run it? Will we be able to generate that proof, again with the tools we dare create and use, in any sane amount of time, even if we do translate into normal computer code, presumably quite messy code and quite a lot of it? The paper expresses great optimism about progress in mechanistic interpretability, and that we might be able to progress it to this level. I am skeptical. Perhaps I am overestimating what we actually need here, if we can coordinate on the proof requirements? Perhaps we can give up quite a lot and still have enough with what is left. I don’t know. I do know that of the things I expect to be able to prove, I don’t know how to use them to do what needs to be done. They suggest that Godel’s Completeness Theorem implies that, given AI systems are finite, any system you can’t prove is safe will be unsafe. In practice I don’t see how this binds. I agree with the ‘sufficiently powerful AGIs will find a way if a way exists’ part. I don’t agree with ‘you being unable to prove it in reasonable time’ implying that no proof exists, or that you can be confident the proof you think you have proves the practical property you think it proves. I would also note that we are unlikely any time soon to prove that humans are safe in any sense, given that they clearly aren’t. Where does that leave us? They warn humans might have to operate without any guarantees of safety, but no system in human history has ever had real guarantees of safety, because it was part of human history. We have needed to find other ways to trust. They make a different case. Similarly, if we actually do build the human-flourishing-enabling AI that will give us everything we want, it will be impossible to prove that it is safe, because it won’t be.
I get why this argument is being trotted out here. I don’t expect it to work. It never does, Arrested Development meme style. Their argument laid out in the remainder of section 8, of why alternative approaches are unlikely to work, alas rings quite true. We have to solve an impossible problem somewhere. Pointing out an approach has impossible problems it requires you to solve is not as knock-down an argument as one would like it to be. As calls to action, they suggest work on: Automating formal verification Developing verification benchmarks. Developing probabilistic program verification. Developing quantum formal verification. Automating mechanistic interpretability. Develop mechanistic interpretability benchmarks. Automating mechanistic interpretability. Building a framework for provably compliant hardware. Building a framework for provably compliant governance. Creating provable formal models of tamper detection. Creating provably valid sensors. Designing for transparency. Creating network robustness in the face of attacks. Developing useful applications of provably compliant systems. Mortal AI that dies at a fixed time. Geofenced AI that only operates in some locations. Throttled AI that requires payment to continue operating. AI Kill Switch that would work. Asimov style laws?!? Least privilege guarantees ensuring no one gets permissions they do not need.
I despair at the proposed applications, which are very much seem to me to be in the ‘you are still dead’ and ‘have we not been over that this will never work’ categories. This all does seem like work better done than not done, who knows, usefulness could ensue in various ways and downsides seem relatively small. We would still have to address that worry mentioned earlier about “formally specifying complex requirements such as “don’t drive humanity extinct.”” I have not a clue. Anyone have ideas? They finish with an FAQ, Davidad correctly labeled it fire.
I worry that this is a general counterargument for any objection that something is too technically difficult, either relatively or absolutely, and thus proves far too much.
Eliezer Yudkowsky responds more concisely to the whole proposal.
Yep. The idea, as I understand it, is to use proofs to gain capabilities while avoiding having to build a friendly superintelligence. Then use those capabilities to figure out how to do it (or prevent anyone from building an unfriendly one). Twitter Community Notes Notes
This results in notes pretty much everyone likes, with a focus on hard and highly relevant facts, especially on materially false statements, and rejecting partisan statements. He also notes that all the little complexity tweaks on top matter.
This is a great framing for the AI alignment debate. In this framing, the central alignment-is-hard position is that you can’t use the engineering approach to align a system, because you are facing intelligence and optimization pressure that can adapt to the flaws in your noisy approach, and that then will exploit whatever weaknesses there are and kill you before you can furiously patch all the holes in the system. And that furiously patching less capable systems won’t much help you, the patches will stop working. And also that because you have an engineering system that you are trying to align, even if it sort of does what you want now, it will stop doing that once it is confronted with the unexpected, or its capabilities improve enough to create an effectively unexpected set of affordances. What is funny is that it is economists who are most skeptical of the things that might then go very wrong, and who then insist on an economist-style model of what will happen with these engineering-style systems. I’m not yet sure what to make of that. In the context of Twitter, Vitalik notes that the complexity of the algorithm can backfire in terms of its credibility, as illustrated by a note critical of China that was posted then removed due to complex factors, with no direct intervention. It’s not simple to explain, so it could look like manipulation. He also notes that the main criticism of community notes is that they do not go far enough, demanding too much consensus. I agree with Vitalik that it is better to demand a high standard of consensus, to maintain the reliability and credibility of the system, and to keep people motivated to word carefully and neutrally and focus on the facts. The algorithm is open source, so it would perhaps be possible to allow some users to tinker with the algorithm for themselves. The risk is that they would then favor their tribe’s interpretations, which is the opposite of what the system is trying to accomplish, but you could safely allow for lower thresholds and looser conditions generally if you wanted to see more notes on the margin. People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone
I notice that the grave dangers number was essentially unchanged, whereas the capabilities number was up and the ‘no risk of human extinction’ was down. This could be small sample size, instead I suspect it is that people are not responding in consistent fashion and never have. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone
I think ‘notice that less intelligence (or energy, or other useful things) is not what you want’ is a very good point to raise. Notice how many people who warn about the dangers of technology are actually opposed to civilization and even to humanity. Notice when the opposition to AGI - artificial general intelligence - is opposition to the A, when it is opposition to the G, and when it is opposition to the I. Consider those who fear it will take their jobs. This is a real social and near-term issue, and we need to mitigate potential disruptions. Yet ‘this job’s work is no longer necessary to produce and do all the things, we now get that for free’ is a good thing, not a bad thing. Jobs are a cost, not a benefit, and we can now replace them with other jobs or other uses of time, while realizing that leaving people idle or without income is harmful and dangerous and if it happens at scale requires fixing. The question that cuts reality at the joints here, I believe is: Do you support human intelligence augmentation? Would you rather people generally be smarter and more capable, or dumber and less capable? I would strongly prefer humans generally be smarter across the board, in every sense. This is one of the most important things to do, and success would dramatically improve our future prospects, including for survival in the face of potential AGI. Would large human intelligence gains break or strain various things? Absolutely, and we would deal with it. Thus, what are the relevant knobs we want to turn? I want humans to be more intelligent and capable and wealthy, not less. I want humans to have a greater share of the intelligence and control, not less. I want humans to have more things they value, not less. I want there to be more humans, not less humans. I also would want more capital, land and (clean) energy under human control. I want there to be less optimization power not under human control.
Why do I believe artificial intelligence is importantly different than human intelligence? Why do I value augmented humans, where I would not expect to (other than instrumentally) value a future smarter version of GPT? Why do I expect that augmented more intelligent humans would preserve the things and people that I care about, where I expect AGI to lead to their destruction? This is in part a moral philosophy question. Do you care about you, your family and what other humans you care about in a way that you don’t care about a potential AGI? Robin Hanson would say that such AGI are our metaphorical children, as deserving of being considered moral patients and being assigned value as we are, and we should accept that such more fit minds will replace ours and seek to imbue them with some of our values, and accept that what is valued will dramatically change and what you think you value will likely mostly be gone. The word ‘speciesism’ has been thrown about for those who disagree with this. I disagree with it. I believe that it is good and right to care about such distinctions, and value that which I choose to value. Whereas I expect to care about more intelligent humans the way I care about current humans. It is then a practical question. What happens when the most powerful source of intelligence, the most capable and more powerful optimizing force available whatever you label it, is no longer humans, and is instead AIs? Would we remain in control? Would what we value be preserved and grow? Or would we face extinction? In our timeline, I see three problems, only one of which I am optimistic about. The first problem is the problem of social, political and economic disruption from the presence of more capable tools and new affordances - mundane utility, they took our jobs, deepfaketown and misinformation and all that. I am optimistic here. The second problem is alignment. I am pessimistic here. Until we solve alignment, and can ensure such systems do what we want them to do, we need to not build them. The third problem is the competitive and evolutionary, the dynamics and equilibrium of a world with many ASIs (artificial superintelligences) in it. This is a world almost no one is making any serious attempt to think about or model, and those who have (such as fiction writers) almost always end up using hand waves or absurdities and presenting worlds highly out of equilibrium. We will be creating something smarter and more capable and better at optimization than ourselves, that many people will have strong incentives both economic and ideological to make into various agents with various goals including reproduction and resource acquisition. Why should we expect to long be in charge, or even to survive? If there is widespread access to ASI, then ASIs given the affordance to do so will outcompete humans at every turn. Anyone, or any company or government, that does not increasingly turn its decisions and actions over to such ASIs, and increasingly take humans out of the loop, will quickly be left in the dust. Those who do not ‘turn the moral weights down’ in some form will also prove uncompetitive. Those who do not turn their ASIs into agents (if they are not agents by default) will lose. The negative externalities will multiply, as will the ASIs themselves and their share of resources. ASIs will be set free to seek to acquire resources, make copies of themselves and modify to be more successful at these tasks, because this will be the competitively smart thing to do in many cases, and also because some people will ideologically wish to do this for its own sake. That is all the default even if: Alignment is solved, systems do what their owners tell the system to do. Offense is not so superior to defense that bad actors are catastrophic, as many myself included strongly suspect in many areas such as synthetic biology. Recursive self-improvement is insufficiently rapid to give any one system an edge over others that choose to respond in kind.
Remember also that if you open source an AI model, you are open sourcing the fully unaligned version of that model two days later, after it is fine tuned in this way by someone who wants that to exist. We have no current plan of how to prevent this. Thus, we will need a way out of this mess, as well. We need that solution, at minimum, before we create the second ASI, ideally before we create the first one. If I had a solution to both of these problems, that resulted in a world with humans still firmly in charge creating things that humans value, that I value, then I would be all for that, and would even tolerate a real risk that we fail and all perish. Alas, right now I see no such solutions. Note that I expect these future coordination problems to be vastly harder than the current coordination problems of ‘labs face commercial pressure to build AGI’ or ‘we have to compete with China.’ If you think these current issues cannot be solved and we must instead race ahead, why do you think this future will be different? If your plan is secretly ‘the right person or corporation or government takes this unique opportunity to take over, sidestepping all these problems’ then you need to own that, and all of its implications. We could be reminded of the parable of the augments from Star Trek. Star Trek was the dominant good future choice when I asked in a series of polls a while back. Augments were smarter, stronger and more capable than ordinary humans. Alas, because it was a morality tale, that timeline failed to solve the augment alignment problem. Augments systematically lacked our moral qualms and desired power via instrumental convergence, and started the Eugenics Wars. Fortunately for humanity, this was a fictional tale and augments could not trivially copy themselves or speed themselves up, nor could they do recursive self-improvement, and their numbers and capability advantages thus remained limited. Realistically the augments would have won - human writers can simultaneously make augments on paper smarter than us, then have Kirk outsmart Khan anyway, although reality would disagree - so in the story humanity somehow triumphed. As a result, humanity banned human augmentation and genetic engineering, and this ban holds throughout the Star Trek universe. This is despite that universe having periodic existential wars, in which any species that uses such skills would have a decisive advantage, and it being clear that it is possible to see dramatic capability gains without automatic alignment failure (see for example Julian Bashir on Deep Space Nine). Without its handful of illegal augmented humanoids, the Federation would have perished multiple times. Note that Star Trek also has a huge ASI problem. The Enterprise ship’s computer is an ASI, and can create other ASIs on request, and Data vastly enhances overall ship capabilities. Everyone in that universe has somehow agreed simply to ignore that possibility, an illustration of how such stories are dramatically out of equilibrium. For now, any ASI we could build would be a strictly much worse situation for us than the augments. It would be far more alien to us, not have inherent value, and quickly have a far greater capabilities gap and be impossible in practice to contain, and we alas do not live in a fictional universe protected by narrative causality (and, if you think about it, probably Qs or travelers or time paradoxes or something) or have the ability of that world’s humans to coordinate. Also, minus points from Tyler in expectation for misuse of the word Bayes in the post title, is nothing sacred these days? The New York Times reports that the real danger of AI is not that it might kill us, it is that it might not kill us,
Thing is, there is actually a point here, although the authors do not realize it. ‘Neoliberalism’ or ‘capitalism’ are not always ideologies or intentional constructs. They are also simply descriptions of the dynamics of systems when they are not under human control. If AIs are, as they will become by default, smarter, better optimizers and more efficient competitors than we are, and to win competitions and for other reasons we put them in charge of things or they take charge of things, the dynamics the author fears would be the result. Except instead of ‘increasing inequality’ or helping the bad humans, it would not help any of the humans, instead we would all be outcompeted and then die. The Lighter Side
Yes? How about yes? I like this scrap and run away plan. I am here for this plan. Roon also lays down the beats.
You're currently a free subscriber to |