---
subject: "Auto-Paternalism"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <the-diff@ghost.io>"
to: ""
date: 2024-09-30 14:21:06
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
In this issue: - Auto-Paternalism—One limit on organizations is that "the buck stops here" is exhausting after a while—but effective delegation eventually means that the decisions that have to be made at the top of the org chart get harder. So effective founder-led organizations end up being built around their founders' mental limitations. This echoes the process of coming up with an investing strategy that's compatible with the personality of the person executing the strategy, but in the more quantifiable world of finance, the process has gotten more advanced.
- Growth—OpenAI has big losses and spectacular revenue growth—but that revenue growth actually understates how fast usage is increasing.
- AI Deployment—Watch the paywalls.
- S-Curves and TV—User-generated content is risky, but it's also a way to farm for talent.
- Increasing the Asymptote—The bigger the bundle, the more of a struggle it is to remind people of all the things they're paying for.
- China—A rally in equities spurred by trying to stop a rally in bonds.
Today's issue of The Diff is brought to you by Tegus— Auto-PaternalismMarkets are worth studying because they often illustrate broadly applicable truths in a way that, because markets are so narrow and quantifiable, wouldn't be visible in the messiness of reality. For example, it's intuitively true that there's some tradeoff between maximizing the average outcome and aiming for consistency—no one argues that Netflix is the peak of cinematic expression, that McDonald's is the endpoint of the culinary arts, or that Hilton has reached the theoretical limit of good hospitality, but they're all big and valuable businesses because their customers know what to expect and are likely to get it. In markets, we can go deeper, and talk about factor weightings—quantifying luck!—and we can see exactly how much investors value repeatability by looking at the fees hedge funds charge when they can plausibly offer it. This even extends to fuzzy topics, like psychology. Coming up with an active investing strategy is actually a weird exercise in self-discovery. There are people who are motivated by a 50% drawdown, and people who lose their minds when they're losing money, and these people tend to run different strategies. There are investors with a naturally sunny disposition, who want to see the best in everyone, and they tend to do well in early-stage private investing and in growth stocks, though in both cases they'll have the occasionally embarrassing mistake. If you're surly, pessimistic, and convinced everyone is out to get you, that's bad news for your friends and romantic partners but great news for LPs in your short-focused fund. At the limit, managing a portfolio absorbs most of the portfolio manager's useful brain cycles, and that means that good portfolio management is a matter of crafting an information environment where the right news shows up at the right time, with minimal distractions. This is one reason stop-losses are such a common tool, even though it seems irrational to buy a stock at $10 and sell it because it dropped to $9. That is irrational, but the alternative is the much more irrational process of spending a disproportionate amount of your time re-researching and re-underwriting a position when the market is telling you that you do not understand what makes the stock go up and down. Companies go through the same kind of information optimization process. Managing any kind of organization means delegating decisions as much as possible, but still having the hardest ones flow upward. The classic line about this, from someone who ran a very complex organization indeed, comes from Barack Obama: "One of the first things I discovered as President of the United States was that no decision that landed on my desk had an easy, tidy answer. The black-and-white questions never made it to me—somebody else on my staff would have already answered them." His predecessor had a pithier summary: "I hear the voices and I read the front page and I hear the speculation... But I'm the decider, and I decide what's best." This leads to one of those bizarre cognitive environments, where life is a series of unpleasant surprises of varying magnitudes. And since an organization is a mechanism for processing information and getting it to the appropriate party to make a decision, it's also, fundamentally, a system for simultaneously having an effective CEO and not subjecting this CEO to a nervous breakdown. Some of this involves processes with the two-sided goal of 1) minimizing the odds of a sudden crisis, and 2) setting a baseline of performance that is as high as possible while being generally below what the founder would be motivated to provide. Effectively delegating decisions does not mean making fewer hard decisions in a day. It actually means making more, because an organization where managers can effectively delegate is an organization that will grow faster, and come up with new and alarming problems. In your first week as a CEO, your big problem might be fixing some annoying AWS config issue. But with hard work and a healthy dose of luck, within ten years you might be testifying before congress about how your company isn't the biggest threat the country has faced since the Cold War! And what that means is that founder-led companies have an org chart that is designed around the mental quirks of the founding team and their top executives. This is one reason the transition from founder-led companies to their first professional CEO is so challenging: that executive is stepping into a role that's designed around pushing somebody else to their limits, and will have a hard time keeping up. (The toughest transitions are often with notorious micromanagers; Jack Welch, for all his faults, was pretty obsessed with the details of GE's businesses, and Hank Greenberg at AIG apparently kept a lot of the details of the business in his head.) An organization that's perfectly optimized for one team will be utterly broken for anyone else, unless there turns out to be some Managing a company or a portfolio is partly a matter of managing emotional states. Which is one of those things that's easy to talk about until you try to make it concrete, because concretely it means having present-you take a paternalistic approach to managing future-you's emotional instability. But that's an essential part of the process: setting up an org chart or structuring a portfolio is, among other things, a special application of psychotherapy. Short selling, of the catalyst-driven variety, is basically a convenient way to monetize conspiracy theories. The good news here is that some management teams really are out to get you, or are sufficiently incompetent that if they were trying to ruin their investors they wouldn't do anything differently. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/aded1b78?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)A corollary to this is that the nature of the stop loss is different depending on the kind of trade you're doing. If you're doing some kind of intraday strategy where you catch small moves, you'll tend to have tighter stop-losses, which loosen a bit if you have some thesis about how the market will reevaluate a given stock over the next few months. And longer-term investors seem to set a sort of fundamental stop-loss; if you own a stock because you think margins are expanding, then you might sell regardless of price if margins stop going up. Meanwhile, short sellers tend to structure their portfolios to deal with the fact that a company trading at 5x its real worth can easily trade up to 10x. They're either adjusting positions continuously or diversified enough that any one mistake won't kill them. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/dbee7d2e?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
You're on the free list for The Diff. Last week, paying subscribers read about A Word From Our SponsorsAI tools like Microsoft Copilot are transforming software development, but how effective are they really? In this exclusive panel moderated we’ll dive into the reality of AI-enhanced coding. Experts from Microsoft, Adobe, and Cisco will share their experiences and offer actionable insights on the true impact of AI on developer productivity. ElsewhereGrowthOpenAI text-davinci-003 launched in late 2022 at a price of $0.02/1k tokens. GPT-4o is much more capable and was made available in May with a price per output token 25% lower (input tokens are a quarter of DaVinci's pricing). So that revenue growth actually understates how fast usage is increasing. One of the paradoxes of digital goods is that consumption increases are often invisible; almost everyone who logs hours a day in Instagram or TikTok was once someone with more intermittent usage.- Their margins are obviously not good, but if funding is abundant, growth happens fast, and scaling laws continue to hold, it's optimal for them to figure out how to effectively spend money as quickly as possible. If the funding market isn't asking a company to economize, it's not going to find the motivation to do so somewhere else.
- OpenAI's valuation has gotten much less demanding over time. 13X next year's revenue is just not that crazy for a company that plans to triple in size over the next year, even if the absolute amounts are intimidating.
Meanwhile, that round is Disclosure: Long MSFT. AI DeploymentGoogle is S-Curves and TVWhen a media outlet has professionally produced content, it tends to be clustered around some quality level. There are some things that won't get signed off on, and others that are so good that the talent will prefer to go elsewhere. User-generated content has a broader continuum; plenty of garbage, but room for something excellent. As YouTube consumption has shifted towards traditional TVs, and as its monetization has also moved closer to what TV does, Increasing the AsymptoteMore mature streaming businesses have a different set of constraints and opportunities. Amazon (disclosure: long) has mostly focused on on-demand streaming, but is moving into more live shows. Right now ChinaChinese stocks Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. See a sampling of current open roles below: - A company building ML-powered tools to eliminate software bugs is looking for a senior software engineer with a passion for Nix. (Washington D.C)
- An AI startup building tools to help automate compliance for companies in highly regulated industries is looking for a director of information security and compliance with 5+ years of infosec related experience. Experience with HIPAA, FedRAMP a plus. (NYC)
- A tech-bio startup creating the world’s largest database of protein-molecule interactions (and leveraging it to design novel drugs) is looking for a machine learning engineer with some experience training LLMs on distributed systems. (Remote)
- A team of former SpaceX, Air Force, and MIT engineers are looking for a senior mechanical design engineer to help mass-produce rapidly deployable nuclear microreactors to enable energy superabundance. (LA)
- A number of companies in The Diff network are looking for data scientists that love wrangling and analyzing alt. data to help inform investment decisions. (Remote)
- The policy development arm of an established stablecoin is looking for an analyst to help define US crypto policy from first principles. Some background in crypto or policy preferred, but not required. (NYC, Remote)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. |
||||||||||
|
|
|
||||||||||
|