---
subject: "Gemini 2.5 Pro: From 0506 to 0605"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-06-18 19:05:27
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
The general consensus seems to be that this was a mixed update the same way going from 0304 to 0506 was a mixed update. If you want to do the particular things they were focused on improving, you’re happy. If you want to be told you are utterly brilliant, we have good news for you as well. If you don’t want those things, then you’re probably sad. If you want to maximize real talk, well, you seem to have been outvoted. Opinions on coding are split. This post also covers the release of What’s In A NameYou know it’s a meaningful upgrade because I do not think this constant ‘here is the new model and you are about to lose the old version’ is good for developers? I would not want this to be constantly sprung on me. Even if the new version is better, it is different, and old assumptions won’t hold. Also, the thing where they keep posting a new frontier model version with no real explanation and a ‘nothing to worry about everyone, let’s go, we’ll even point your queries to it automatically’ does not seem like the most responsible tactic? Just me? On Your MarksIf you go purely by benchmarks 0605 is a solid upgrade and excellent at its price point.
I am confident Google is not ‘gaming the benchmarks’ or lying to us, but I do think Google is optimizing for benchmarks and various benchmark-like things in the post-training period. It shows, and not in a good way, although it is still a good model. It worries me that, in their report on Gemini 2.5, they include the chart of Arena performance. This is a big win for Gemini 2.5, with their models the only ones on the Pareto frontier for Arena, but it doesn’t reflect real world utility and it suggests that they got there by caring about Arena. There are a number of things Gemini does that are good for Arena, but that are not good for my experience using Gemini, and as we update I worry this is getting worse. Here’s a fun new benchmark system.
Here’s a chilling way that some people look at this, update accordingly:
What’s the delta on these?
One worrying sign is that 0605
The thing about Gemini 2.5 Flash Lite is Gemini 2.5 Flash Lite PreviewThis too is being offered.
The Model Report
We start with some basics, notice how far we have come, although we’re stuck at 1M input length which is still at the top but can actually be an issue with processing YouTube videos. Gemini 2.5 models are sparse mixture-of-expert (MoE) models of unknown size with thinking fully integrated into it, with smaller models being distillations of a k-sparse distribution of 2.5 Pro. There are a few other training details. They note their models are fast, given the time o3 and o4-mini spend thinking this graph if anything understates the edge here, there are other very fast models but they are not in the same class of performance. Here’s how far we’ve come over time on benchmarks, comparing the current 2.5 to the old 1.5 and 2.0 models. They claim generally SoTA video understanding, which checks out, also audio: Gemini Plays Pokemon continues to improve, Safety TestingSection 5 is the safety report. I’ve covered a lot of these in the past, so I will focus on details that are surprising. The main thing I notice is that Google cares a lot more about mundane ‘don’t embarrass Google’ concerns than frontier safety concerns. ‘Medical advice that runs contrary to scientific or medical consensus’ is considered in the same category as sexually explicit content and hate speech. Whereas if it is not contrary to it? Go ahead. Wowie moment. They use what they call ‘Reinforcement Learning from Human and Critic Feedback (RL*F), where the critic is a prompted model that grades responses, often comparing different responses. The way it is described makes me worry that a lot more care needs to be taken to avoid issues with Goodhart’s Law. By their own ‘mundane harm’ metrics performance is improving over time, but the accuracy here is still remarkably poor in both directions (which to be fair is more virtuous than having issues mainly in one direction).
They do automated red teaming via prompting Gemini models, and report this has been successful at identifying important new problems. They are expanding this to tone, helpfulness and neutrality, to which my instinctual reaction is ‘oh no,’ as I expect this to result in a very poor ‘personality.’ They have a section on prompt injections, which are about to become a serious concern since the plan is to have the model (for example) look at your inbox.
The news here is quite poor. In security, even a small failure rate is a serious problem. You wouldn’t want a 4.2% chance an attacker’s email attack worked, let alone 30% or 60%. You are not ready, and this raises the question of why such attacks are not more common. For the frontier safety tests, they note they are close to Cyber Uplift 1, as in they could reach it with interactions of 2.5. They are implementing more testing and accelerated mitigation efforts. The CBRN evaluation has some troubling signs, including ‘many of the outputs from 2.5 were available from 2.0,’ since that risks frog boiling as the results on the tests continue to steadily rise.
In general, when you see graphs like this, saturation is close. For Machine Learning R&D Uplift Level 1 (100%+ acceleration of development) their evaluation is… ‘likely no.’ I appreciate them admitting they cannot rule this effect out, although I would be surprised if we were there yet. 3.0 should hit this? In general, scores creeped up across the board, and I notice I expect the goalposts to get moved in response? I hope to be wrong about this.
General Reactions to Gemini 2.5-Pro 0605Reaction was mixed, it improves on the central tasks people ask for most, although this comes at a price elsewhere, especially in personality as seen in the next section.
The Personality Upgrades Are BadThis has also been my experience, the times I’ve tried checking Gemini recently alongside other models, you get that GPT-4o smell. The problem is that the evaluators have no taste. If you are optimizing for ‘personality,’ the judges of personality effectively want a personality that is sycophantic, uncreative and generally bad.
Also this, which I hate with so much passion and is a pattern with Gemini:
There are times and places for ‘just the facts, ma’am’ and indeed those are the times I am most tempted to use Gemini, but in general that is very much not what I want. The Lighter SideThis is
You're currently a free subscriber to |