---
subject: "The Hogs of New York"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-04-02 13:25:58
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
On July 27, 1859, the New York Times
Those of you who know New York City may understand that the location these men stormed is in the heart of Manhattan. Carnegie Hall sits on 7th Avenue between 56th and 57th Streets, right where the assault occurred. Broadway is less than a block to the west, the Museum of Modern Art is a couple of blocks to the south, and Central Park is a few blocks north. This is an area that’s usually full of tourists or people out for a fancy meal. But in 1859, this part of midtown Manhattan was different. Central Park had just opened the year before. Carnegie Hall would not be built for another three decades. This area had more pigs than people. Residents often called it “Stinktown.” These conditions were not unusual for cities in the nineteenth century, which were full of animals. The transportation systems, of course, relied on horses. By the late 1800s, To lots of New York residents, the presence of these animals was necessary and normal. The horses and other beasts of burden kept the city moving. Its economy would have simply shut down without the presence of animals to pull carts and carry loads. Many families relied on pigs as a source of income and food — a working-class family might raise a pig or two, feeding it food scraps, and then sell or eat it. Pigs and dogs also carried out a useful waste-disposal service. In the days before New York had any garbage collection or street-cleaning services, roving animals gulped down the organic waste that many households just threw out into the street. But the animals posed problems, as well. The horses of New York City may have created something like On top of that, “Stinktown” smelled horrible, and it wasn’t just a cosmetic issue. Because nineteenth-century people believed in the The war over pigs in New York was, in many ways, a class struggle. Less-wealthy residents needed pigs to supplement their incomes and feed their families. Poor neighborhoods kept themselves going with the smelly, messy industries that turned parts of those pigs into food and consumer goods. People had long lived in close proximity to animals and their waste. But wealthier residents found the sights and smells of the They didn’t want their city to smell, literally, like shit. If you’re enjoying this newsletter, why not subscribe? Or you could be a true hero and support my work with a paid subscription. Click below, or see other ways to support this work at the bottom of the post: Must we feed the poor at the expense of human flesh?When the police stormed James McCormick’s sty, the struggle over urban pigs was decades old. An He searched for — and found — an egregious example of poor urban hog-keeping: a butcher named Christian Harriet. According to legal scholar
The case rested on an intriguing legal question: even if there was no longer a law against letting pigs roam the streets, could the government find Harriet guilty of creating a porcine nuisance? Both sets of lawyers engaged in delightfully flowery arguments. Harriet’s lawyers argued that this was really about class:
The mayor’s lawyers argued that the pigs were a nuisance. They said that the threats to human health outweighed the rights of the poor to keep pigs: “It is said, that if we restrain swine from running in the street, we shall injure the poor. Why, gentlemen! must we feed the poor at the expense of human flesh?” They also argued that cities should be free of the indignities of the natural world. Ladies should be able to “walk abroad through the streets of the city without encountering the most disgusting spectacles of those animals indulging the propensities of nature.” In the end, City Hall won. Christian Harriet was ordered to pay a token fine of $1. But, though Mayor Colden had proved that he could prosecute people for letting their pigs roam the streets, the city didn’t take serious action on the issue because of the possibility of pushback from the city’s poor. Decades later, the pigs were still there. Charles Dickens remarked on New York’s pigs in his 1848 book New York periodically tried to deal with its pig problem over the first three-fifths of the century. There were attempted purges in 1830 and 1847 that had no real effect. Each time, pig owners fought the police or hid their swine indoors. Another effort, after a cholera outbreak in 1849, was more serious. The police Many of them ended up in what became “Stinktown.” Very shabby for gentlemenTen years later, New York City appointed a new Commissioner of Health, But this time, the complaints of the city’s sensitive-nosed elites had led to real action. Colonel Richard Downing, Superintendent of Sanitary Inspection, went house-to-house with a force of 87 men. Though some of the pig owners had talked tough, threatening to shoot the lawmen, most backed down against the overwhelming force. The Times
The wife of Thomas Glennan, another victim of the raid, said: “Very poor revenge to tear down people’s buildings afther the pigs is all sent away intirely. [sic] Very shabby for gentlemen; gentlemen wouldn’t do it.” In the end, Stinktown was cleared of its hogs and their owners. Some moved far away, to rural areas in Pennsylvania or New Jersey. Some of the pigs relocated further uptown, north of 86th Street, which constituted the new urban frontier. Pigs were still tolerated that far north. An area in Harlem near 125th Street was known as “ In the twentieth century, animals finally left the streets of New York City. The city hired its first corps of cleaners in 1895 to clear the piles of horse manure and other trash from the streets. The pigs disappeared, then a lot of the stray dogs, then, finally, the horses. Eventually, even people surrendered the streets to machines: cars, buses, and trucks dominated the spaces in New York and every other American city. The residents of New York had solved one set of environmental problems — the smells, disease, and danger that accompanied urban animals — only to replace them with another. This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: Or you can share the newsletter with others: You can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week! You're currently a free subscriber to |