---
subject: "How New Zealand invented inflation targeting"
from: "Works in Progress <worksinprogress@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-06-23 14:36:34
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Works in Progress"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_1644361085112560554"]
---
This is an article from the new issue of Works in Progress, Oscar Sykes explains how one Kiwi tamed inflation. Most central banks today target inflation: the government announces a numeric target for inflation that the central bank is tasked with achieving by changing interest rates, setting reserve requirements, and buying and selling financial securities. They haven’t always. Before the 1990s, many targeted the money supply or an exchange rate. This change did not come from research by economists or the emergence of an expert consensus that central banks should reform. Instead, New Zealand's Finance Minister in the 1980s, Roger Douglas, started it when he publicly announced explicit inflation goals to demonstrate his commitment to price stability. This political decision would lead to New Zealand's central bank formalizing a system of inflation targeting. When it was announced, inflation targeting drew skepticism from policymakers and economists. It nonetheless proved very successful. What started as a small nation's attempt to tame inflation would go on to become standard practice among central banks globally. Only since then – after its implementation worldwide – has an extensive academic literature built up explaining how and why the system works. Credit card financingHistorically, New Zealand ranked among the world's wealthiest nations. An enormous ratio of farmland to people, along with privileged trade relations with Britain, powered However, during the mid-20th century its economic position was deteriorating. In the 1970s New Zealand progressively lost its preferential market access to the UK after Britain joined the European Economic Community. The country was also hit hard by the global oil crises of 1973 and 1979. In the two decades between 1960 and 1980 New Zealand's income per head fell The government controlled large portions of many industries, including banking, insurance, and utilities, and the agricultural sector was supported by generous subsidies, price guarantees, and low-interest loans. Imports of goods were also tightly controlled – Kiwis needed government approval to subscribe to an overseas magazine. High inflation was a problem throughout this period, peaking at Unlike today's central banks, which mainly control inflation through adjusting interest rates, New Zealand used New Zealand’s central bank, the Reserve Bank, operated under direct government control with political interests heavily influencing monetary policy. Anti-inflation measures, such as those implemented in 1976 and 1977, were abandoned once their economic costs were felt. Leading up to the 1981 election, Prime Minister and Finance Minister Robert Muldoon ignored his advisers' repeated In June 1984, a visibly drunk Muldoon shocked the nation by After the opposition Labour Party won the election decisively, the departing Prime Minister left an ominous message for his successor, David Lange, warning him that bad news was waiting: for the past month, New Zealand had been experiencing a run on its dollar, which was widely considered overvalued. The snap election triggered a major selloff. In the first hour of trading following the announcement, the Reserve Bank sold more foreign currency than it Despite Bank officials advising Muldoon three times to devalue the currency to curb the selling, he refused. To defend the exchange rate, the Reserve Bank and Treasury RogernomicsUpon taking office, the Labour government launched an ambitious series of free market reforms, which became known as The government devalued and then floated the currency. It lifted the wage freeze. Many state-run organizations laid off staff. The railways reduced its workforce from The speed and expansiveness of the reforms were extraordinary. David Henderson, OECD's then-Chief Economist, However, these changes temporarily worsened inflation, rising from The new government was committed to getting inflation down. Recent experiences overseas showed countries could successfully rein in high inflation using tight monetary policy. Paul Volcker’s Federal Reserve dropped inflation from This shift was also influenced by the growing consensus among economists that in the long-run monetary policy can only meaningfully affect prices, and not real activity like output and employment. Previously, many economists believed that inflation had a reliable inverse relationship with both unemployment and economic output, as described by the Throughout the 1970s, nations like the US and UK had experienced significant inflation alongside rising unemployment, a phenomenon termed The relationship between higher inflation and employment seems to break down US inflation vs unemployment during the stagflation era: 1966–1988 Roger Douglas and his advisers They moved from direct controls, which required ministerial sign off, to conducting monetary policy indirectly through Inflation seemed high during this period, reaching A lack of alternativesFollowing these encouraging signs, Douglas invited the Reserve Bank board to consider further changes to better control inflation. The objective was to find a framework for making monetary policy decisions that would make them more consistent and credible, which would increase their effectiveness. One such approach was monetary targeting, where central banks aim to grow the money supply at a pre-announced rate. Over the previous two decades, many major economies, including the US, UK, and West Germany, The decision to focus on intermediate targets like the money supply, rather than direct goals like inflation, was practical. These targets were more directly under central bank control and appeared to While monetary targeting seemed compelling in theory, central banks often missed their targets or found that meeting them didn't control inflation as intended. These challenges led many countries to abandon or de-emphasize monetary targets. But despite the dissatisfaction, there was a lack of compelling alternatives. Having seen this experience overseas alongside huge fluctuations in the money supply following New Zealand’s financial liberalization, there was little appetite among officials for monetary targeting. While these discussions were happening, Douglas was becoming worried that inflation might be starting to plateau. Although inflation had fallen substantially from its peak by 1988, inflation expectations among businesses over the next two years were still at In March 1988, he spoke to his advisers about the need to convey the government's commitment to further disinflation. They left the meeting unsure how seriously to take This left them surprised when, the very next day, Douglas Douglas would soften his stance on specific timelines but ask the Reserve Bank and Treasury to develop public inflation goals for the next few years that would support his earlier statements. The Bank added 1 percentage point to Douglas's upper range to account for the measurement bias in inflation data at that time, arriving at a target range of 0–2 percent. Michael Reddell, head of the Reserve Bank’s monetary policy unit, This development This raised several tricky design questions. The original inflation reduction target announced by Douglas was intended as a communication tactic to shift expectations. As this was a time-defined target set by the government, there was room to assess results based on market conditions. A statutory framework governing the central bank would offer far less flexibility. Large shocks to the economy could put the Bank in a position where meeting its target would be infeasible or undesirable. It wasn't clear how to design targets that would signal intentions effectively while maintaining necessary flexibility. For the initial targets, the Bank reluctantly agreed shocks would be dealt with by renegotiating the target with the Finance Minister. The Bank was also concerned that inflation targets provided less basis for evaluating performance compared to intermediate measures, This led to the introduction of Monetary Policy Statements, which are reports Governors must publish biannually, reviewing past policy decisions and outlining future intentions. These statements are then scrutinized by Parliament. In parallel with this, there was a separate stream of work focused on how to enshrine greater central bank autonomy through legislation. Douglas wanted to reduce the risk that future governments would revert back to using monetary policy for political purposes. The Reserve Bank's view was shaped by Following this logic, the Reserve Bank advocated for a model in which price stability would be mandated by law and implemented by the Bank's Board. But the Treasury What emerged was a novel compromise. Unlike the Federal Reserve or the Bundesbank, which enjoyed broad independence, the Reserve Bank was granted operational independence only, the freedom to use monetary policy instruments to achieve agreed goals, but not to set those goals themselves. The Bank was also given a singular focus: price stability, removing previous objectives around employment, output, and trade. This was combined with a single decision-maker model to establish accountability. The Bank's governor was granted sole authority and held accountable for their actions. Upon appointment, each new governor negotiated targets with the Finance Minister and could be dismissed for failing to meet them. While the government retained the right to override the Reserve Bank's objectives for up to a year, this had to be done publicly through a parliamentary order. The aim was to allow government intervention during crises while discouraging politically motivated interference due to its public visibility. SuccessA Brash did this by maintaining tight monetary policy, which led unemployment to rise sharply. From Brash’s appointment in 1988 to the achievement of the target three years later, unemployment increased from Over the next twenty years the framework delivered on its promise. New Zealand experienced the kind of price stability that would have been unthinkable during the chaotic 1970s and 80s. The Act has been successful in preventing the use of monetary policy for political benefit – the override provision has never been used (though its use has been considered). Reforms did introduce greater flexibility: the system of renegotiating targets when shocks occurred was quickly determined to be impractical, and frequent renegotiations risked undermining the credibility of the targets. The policy was quickly refined. A revised set of targets was signed in December 1990, outlining situations where the Governor would be allowed to deviate from their target. In these situations they would be assessed on their judgement in responding to the economic disruption. Later changes A new consensusAfter New Zealand, it started to spread globally. Canada was the next country to adopt inflation targeting. From 1975 to 1982, The country’s Finance Minister, Michael Wilson, directed Governor John Crow to develop inflation reduction targets. These were unveiled in February 1991 through a However, due to raising rates combined with a timely economic downturn that was already cooling the economy, inflation fell to Between 1992 and 1993, the United Kingdom, Sweden, Australia, and Finland It isn't clear how exclusively New Zealand was responsible for this sudden adoption. Crow said the proximate cause of Canada’s targets was the directive he received from the Finance Minister, but the Bank of Canada would consult Reserve Bank staff on New Zealand's experience. Lord Mervyn King, then the Chief Economist of the Bank of England (and later its Governor), said, ‘The idea of an inflation target was certainly influenced by conversations with the Reserve Bank of New Zealand staff. The details of implementation were home grown’. In the 1990s, eleven EU member states formed the European Monetary Union as a prelude to the common adoption of the euro currency, with the European Central Bank adopting a The IMF and several academic economists initially argued that, despite encouraging signs in advanced economies, inflation targeting However, the IMF later revised its position after successful implementations in countries like Chile (1999) and Mexico (2001). A Today, almost all developed countries and many developing nations target inflation. Countries that adopted inflation targeting from 1990 to 2015* *This doesn't include countries that later abandoned it. Why did inflation targeting become so widely adopted? One obvious reason is that it solved the practical problem of the money supply and other intermediate targets being imperfect proxies for what governments actually care about. Fears about central banks losing credibility by failing to meet their targets mostly didn't materialize. The introduction of inflation targeting coincided with a period known as the Inflation targeting appears to have stabilized public inflation expectations significantly. A Dallas Federal Reserve It has also meant concerns that inflation targeting would lead to harmful outcomes during shocks haven't been a big issue. The credibility gained through stabilised expectations has allowed banks to act more freely while maintaining market confidence in their commitment to control inflation. This can be seen in the shift towards focusing on achieving targets over the medium-term and getting more flexibility to deviate from their targets under certain conditions. Inflation targeting also These features help reduce the political interference and short-termism of earlier systems, as demonstrated in pre-reform New Zealand where anti-inflation measures were abandoned for political convenience. By aligning incentives and providing transparency, they create accountability without allowing political pressures to distort economic decision-making. New Zealand’s monetary reforms were marked by disagreement, improvisation, and unexpected turns. As Don Brash later
Inflation targeting didn't emerge from academic research. Roger Douglas wanted to show his commitment to price stability, and inflation targeting offered a way to do it. While economists were crucial in translating this political initiative into a workable institutional framework, it was Douglas who put the idea on the table. After New Zealand and Canada demonstrated inflation targeting's effectiveness, other countries quickly followed suit. Delivering the results is what caused consensus to shift. Oscar Sykes is a software engineer. You can follow him on Twitter Thanks for subscribing to |