---
subject: "Crime and the Welfare State"
from: "Marginal REVOLUTION <donotreply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-12-09 12:22:42
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tyler Cowen", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2466199532210586699", "UNREAD"]
---
Several recent papers claim that expanding programs like Medicaid reduces crime (e.g. [here](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=9de6d288a5d344ec77d9e6c6e8da099ab359bc8055e06f5e9adb55adbcb124df&blog_id=42693868&post_id=92018&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=2e77793310e2c9829082cf2307afb808&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cubmJlci5vcmcvcGFwZXJzL3czMjIyNw=&email_id=76f8cb062f6de524408e21f314c95524)). I've been skeptical, not because of weaknesses in any particular paper, but just because the results feel a bit too aligned with social-desirability bias and we know that the underlying research designs can be fragile. As a result, my priors haven't moved much. The first paper using a genuine randomized controlled trial now reports no effect of Medicaid expansion on crime.
Those involved with the criminal justice system have disproportionately high rates of mental illness and substance-use disorders, prompting speculation that health insurance, by improving treatment of these conditions, could reduce crime. Using the 2008 Oregon Health Insurance Experiment, which randomly made some low-income adults eligible to apply for Medicaid, we find no statistically significant impact of Medicaid coverage on criminal charges or convictions. These null effects persist for high-risk subgroups, such as those with prior criminal cases and convictions or mental health conditions. In the full sample, our confidence intervals can rule out most quasi-experimental estimates of Medicaid’s crime-reducing impact.
[Finkelstein, Miller, and Baicker](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=77475fb44f8d7c4fc64c6c4c497dc09151704413fd95f7f2206fb85eaf82bd26&blog_id=42693868&post_id=92018&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=7c0b74ce074d2ad978e11edfbb6fd042&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly9kaXJlY3QubWl0LmVkdS9yZXN0L2FydGljbGUtYWJzdHJhY3QvZG9pLzEwLjExNjIvUkVTVC5hLjE2MjUvMTMzNzM5L1RoZS1FZmZlY3Qtb2YtTWVkaWNhaWQtb24tQ3JpbWUtRXZpZGVuY2UtZnJvbS10aGU/cmVkaXJlY3RlZEZyb209ZnVsbHRleHQ&email_id=76f8cb062f6de524408e21f314c95524) ([WP](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=58ae91025745cf267add99a3d33b726d2676aa7308a6e46fadfd58bb1f1bc05d&blog_id=42693868&post_id=92018&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=7b4be822832ade45f8f2b3adef6a0788&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly9iZmkudWNoaWNhZ28uZWR1L3dvcmtpbmctcGFwZXJzL3RoZS1lZmZlY3Qtb2YtbWVkaWNhaWQtb24tY3JpbWUtZXZpZGVuY2UtZnJvbS10aGUtb3JlZ29uLWhlYWx0aC1pbnN1cmFuY2UtZXhwZXJpbWVudC8&email_id=76f8cb062f6de524408e21f314c95524)).
It could still be the case that very targeted interventions--say making sure that released criminals get access to mental health care--could do some good but there's unlikely to be any general positive effect.
A similar story is found in Finland where a large RCT on a universal basic income found zero effect on crime
This paper provides the first experimental evidence on the impact of providing a guaranteed basic income on criminal perpetration and victimization. We analyze a nationwide randomized controlled trial that provided 2,000 unemployed individuals in Finland with an unconditional monthly payment of 560 Euros for two years (2017-2018), while 173,222 comparable individuals remained under the existing social safety net. Using comprehensive administrative data on police reports and district court trials, we estimate precise zero effects on criminal perpetration and victimization. Point estimates are small and statistically insignificant across all crime categories. Our confidence intervals rule out reductions in perpetration of 5 percent or more for crime reports and 10 percent or more for criminal charges.