---
subject: "The Monday Media Diet with Louis Cheslaw"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-10-31 10:01:15
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Louis Cheslaw (LC) is a friend of WITI and currently works for New York Magazine. He has great taste and we’re very happy to have him on the page today. Tell us about yourself. I was born in North London, and went to university for creative writing in a perfect English city full of pubs and churches called Norwich. Afterwards, I moved to New York to start working, first as Pilar Guzmán’s assistant at Condé Nast, then as a writer and researcher for Tina Brown, and now as an associate editor at New York Magazine. Next year will mark six years in New York, three at New York, and two living in South Slope, Brooklyn. Describe your media diet. It’s most influenced by my stepfather, who—despite hating the internet and barely having a phone–has always been the best-informed person I know. My theory is that because he’s loyal to print media rather than social feeds, he’s always picking up where he left off, which naturally makes it easier for a person’s mind to make sense of things over time. In an attempt to be more like him, my media diet is dominated by print subscriptions too. Currently: the weekend Financial Times and New York Times, Jacobin, the London and New York Review of Books, The New Statesman, and L’Étiquette. There’s always a worry that I’m missing out by no longer having Twitter on my phone, but I rely on a bunch of email newsletters for the best of the rest: What’s the last great book you read?
What are you reading now? To be honest, we’re currently in the thick of assembling the magazine’s Holiday Gift Issue, so I’m reading a lot of product descriptions - you wouldn’t believe how much is made in Portugal these days. But it’s going to be worth it. Once that’s done, I want to finally start the late Mike Davis’ What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication? With newspapers, I look at every page. I would never have found the recent Times piece on Methuselah, a California pine tree that’s lived for Who should everyone be reading that they’re not? Plenty of people already love George Saunders, but he’s always going to be my response to this question. Whenever I read him, I quickly come back to a calmer, kinder version of myself. Most people start with Tenth of December—which they should, it’s a masterpiece—but ‘Offloading for Mrs. Schwartz’, in his first collection, What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone? Watcht. It’s the best app I’ve found so far to keep track of the TV shows that friends recommend to me. Though I’m not sure that I love it: Imagine Letterboxd or Goodreads for TV, but sadly with terrible design. Plane or train? Growing up in Europe spoils you when it comes to train travel. The Eurostar is surreal. And when I was a teenager, my best friend and I were able to purchase affordable What is one place everyone should visit? If you can, Stromboli, near Sicily. It’s an active volcano that’s been erupting for 2,000 years. Spend the day on black sand beaches, then take the night boat back to the mainland, and watch flares of lava light up the night sky. Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into. I’m currently catching up on four years of the WITI Classifieds: We are experimenting with running some weekly classifieds in WITI. If you’re interested in running an ad, Nudge, get customer insights with ease. https://giveitanudge.com/ Do you want to improve your life by tapping into behavioral science insights? Listen to the award-winning Behavioral Grooves podcast today! https://www.behavioralgrooves.com Another interesting newsletter: Making the case for good content, clear writing and the creative process. A publication exploring the most interesting and innovative consumer businesses, products, and trends https://newconsumer.com/ — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Louis (LC). —
You’re a free subscriber to |