---
subject: "Monthly Roundup #25: December 2024"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-12-23 14:18:21
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
I took a trip to San Francisco early in December. Ever since then, things in the world of AI have been utterly insane. Google and OpenAI released endless new products, including Google Flash 2.0 and o1. Redwood Research and Anthropic put out the most important alignment paper of the year, on the heels of Apollo’s report on o1. Then OpenAI announced o3. Like the rest of the media, this blog currently is horrendously lacking in o3 content. Unlike the rest of the media, it is not because I don’t realize that This Changes Everything. It is because I had so much in the queue, and am taking the time to figure out what to think about it. That queue includes all the other, non-AI things that happened this past month. So here we are, to kick off Christmas week. Bad News
What a Lot of Accusations Look Like These DaysAs a clean (with respect to the things this blog cares about) example of the kind of accusations being thrown around by a certain type of person, that very much rhyme with certain accusations in other areas including AI, in case I want to point one later: I saw The government gave Reuters $300 million in total government contracts, mostly for various data analytics services to Thomson Reuters Government Contracts, a distinct subsidiary of Reuters. Reuters did investigations of Musk that were unkind, for which they won the Pulitzer Prize for National Reporting. No claim as to how #1 and #2 are related. Therefore conspiracy and government funded attacks on Elon Musk!
No, seriously, here is the full argument, with the entire comments section cheering on how awful and illegal all this was:
It’s all one big government operation and conspiracy, man. Except not only don’t these posts have any evidence or causal story whatsoever here, not even a fig leaf of one, these contracts are not even larger under Biden than you would have expected from what they got under Trump. If you do a search on As in, 7 of the 9 biggest contracts to Reuters in the past 8 years began under the Trump administration and the long tail looks similar. On so many levels there is absolutely nothing here. When I ask who seems more likely to put their finger on the scale of unrelated government contracts on the basis of news coverage, I think we all know the answer. Good News, Everyone
Seriously, as I said on Twitter, I love economists, never stop economisting:
I am tempted to reply with something wonky about marginal incentive effects not obviously pointing in that direction, or how the opportunity cost is mostly about substitution effects on leisure time instead, but mostly I just want to bask in it.
I think faster walking, when you are alone, is mostly great. It doesn’t only get you where you are going faster, it’s better exercise. A slow walk alone can be nice but on average it’s mostly a skill issue. If you’re with someone else, then yeah, walk slow, have a chat. As for outright lingering, yeah, I think this one is opportunity costs from better leisure options, the same as most everything else. Why would I linger at Boston’s Downtown Crossing, or another public square, and let serendipity happen, given the other options I have? Did you know average cow milk yields are continuing to steadily rise Antisocial Media
As in, he’s putting a large tax on linking, since putting it in the reply will dramatically decrease rate of clicks through. Which is the point. The whole thing continues to be a giant middle finger to every Twitter user. In rival news,
BlueSky at that time was still less than 10% the size of Twitter. There are obvious parallels to what happened with Mastodon, which quickly fizzled out. Yet this time feels different. With Mastodon, it felt like performative anger. People were announcing their moves like they were morally superior. Not this time. This time, the people moving are talking about it practically. They are serious. The pattern is that the most progressive members of Twitter, and those who move in related circles, are mostly the ones splitting off into BlueSky.
Also some sad stats: From all reports, BlueSky is ‘like old Twitter’ in some ways, especially in the sense that Old Twitter was D+42, and in that it was largely a left wing echo chamber. Which in turn meant that other spaces did not have those people, and leaned further right, while the left wing echo chamber
Having this as a clientele puts BlueSky in a strange position, for example with My current view of BlueSky is that those who leave Twitter for BlueSky are usually improving both social networks. Everyone wins from them being distinct. Bubbles are not always a bad thing. If you’re seeking ElonBucks, Community Notes is a miracle of the modern age. Is it over?
I strongly say no, and believe this is an important principle. I often see people dismiss norms when they see even one clear instance of ‘getting away with it’ or non-enforcement, or the start of a potential slippery slope, as if these things must be absolute and stand up to rigid definitions, or they’re worthless, doomed or both. And that simply is not so. Lots of rules, including most laws and norms, constantly face this sort of pushing and pushback, and are muddling through, often for a very long time. Should Community Notes call this a ‘mask off moment’? No, but Community Notes is just people, and occasionally they’re going to do that sort of thing in this kind of spot. To illustrate, after Hanania drew attention to this, the note was voted off this post. Government Working
DOGE is looking for regulations to target. How do you tell them about this? It seems that you literally DM them on Twitter. That is literally what I have my ops person at Balsa doing for the next few weeks, gathering together properly formatted pitches to DOGE, starting with repealing the
More than that, what this is saying is, the law has tied all this up in knots. So what we need, ultimately, is not DOGE. DOGE is potentially helpful but not good enough. What we need is new law, to get rid of old law. I realize this would be very difficult, but the first step is having it shovel ready. Is anyone actually writing the ‘make it so the government can do reasonable things without avalanches of lawsuits’ bill? The one that would actually work? At some point we might get an opening. How many jobs will they cut? Also hopefully they’ll look at government hiring, For those who don’t know, from the above link: If you want to get hired for a government job, you need to literally cut and paste the exact language in the job description into your resume, then in your self-assessment fill out ‘master’ for everything, or you’re ngmi. So, I suppose you’ll want to do that.
Also, if you can do this at all, why not expedite all the permits? Rather than make the billionaires and mega corporations the only ones who can build anything, forcing everyone to partner with one of them?
Is it worse if he knows this is not how any of this works, or if he thinks this actually is how any of this works? I predict that Trump’s statement opposing port automation was a substantial misstep. There is a certain crowd that really wants to be optimistic about making things work again, and this is a very clear negative signal to them. Bending the knee to the dockworkers shows weakness, and has extremely bad vibes.
Welcome to being a CEO in the EU with over 40m in revenue, Technology Advances
I Was Promised |