---
subject: "AI #39: The Week of OpenAI"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-11-23 15:04:12
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Table of ContentsDevelopments at OpenAI were far more important than everything else this read. So you can read Introduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. Narrate your life, as you do all life. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. Prompt injection unsolved. The Q Continuum. Disputed claims about new training techniques. OpenAI: The Saga Continues. The story is far from over. Altman Could Step Up. He understands existential risk. Now he can act. You Thought This Week Was Tough. It is not getting any easier. Fun With Image Generation. A few seconds of an Emu. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. Beware phone requests for money. They Took Our Jobs. Freelancers in some areas are in trouble. Get Involved. Dave Orr hiring for DeepMind alignment team. Introducing. Claude 2.1 looks like a substantial incremental improvement. In Other AI News. Meta breaks up ‘responsible AI’ team. Microsoft invests $50b. Quiet Speculations. Will deep learning hit a wall? The Quest for Sane Regulation. EU AI Act struggles, FTC AI definition is nuts. That Is Not What Totalitarianism Means. People need to cut that claim out. The Week in Audio. Sam Altman, Yoshua Bengio, Davidad, Ilya Sutskever. Rhetorical Innovation. David Sacks says it best this week. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. Technical debates. People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Roon fully now in this section. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Listen to them. The Lighter Side. Yes, of course I am, but do you even hear yourself?
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
Own too much cryptocurrency?
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
Yeah, this is, what’s the term, completely insane? Not in a ‘you are going to wake up Skynet’ way, although it certainly is not helping on such matters but in a ‘you are going to get prompt injected and otherwise attacked by your enemies’ way. This does not even get into the ways in which such a system might, for example, be used to generate leaks of classified documents and other intel. You can hook the LLM up to the weapons and your classified data. You can hook the LLM up to outside data sources. You cannot responsibly or safely do both. Pick one.
I agree with Debreuil for most projects. What is less obvious is if this yet applies to the most expensive and valuable ones, where the results need to be rather bulletproof. My presumption is that it still does. I know my productivity coding is up dramatically. The Q Continuum
The reported results are not themselves scary, but could point to scary potential later. If Altman had not shared the results with the board, that could be part of ‘not consistently candid.’ However, this story has been explicitly denied in Verge, For now I will wait for more info. Expect follow-up later. OpenAI: The Saga ContinuesSam Altman was fired from OpenAI. Now he’s back. For details, see my two posts on the subject, The super short version is that Altman gave the board various reasons to fire him that we know about and was seeking to consolidate power, the board fired Altman essentially without explanation, Altman rallied investors especially Microsoft and 97% of the employees, he threatened to have everyone leave and join Microsoft, and What happens next depends on the full board chosen and who functionally controls it. The new temporary board is Brad Taylor, Larry Summers and Adam D’Angelo. The final board will have nine members, one from Microsoft at least as an observer, and presumably Altman will eventually return. That still leaves room for any number of outcomes. If they create a new board that cares about safety enough to make a stand and can serve as a check on Altman, that is a very different result than if the board ends up essentially under Altman’s control, or as a traditional board of CEOs who unlike D’Angelo prioritize investors and profits over humanity not dying. We shall see. The loud Twitter statements continue to be that this was a total victory for Altman and for the conducting of ordinary profit-maximizing VC-SV-style business. Things could turn out that way, but do not confuse such power plays with reality. We do not yet know what the ultimate outcome will be. Nor was Altman’s reinstatement inevitable. Imagine a world in which the board, instead of remaining silent, made its case, and also brought in credible additional board members while firing Altman (let’s say Taylor, Summers, Shear and Mira Murati), and also did this after the stock sale to employees had finished. I bet that goes considerably differently. Recommended: Recommended: At the ‘we’re so back’ party at OpenAI,
Stuart Buck interprets this as siding with Altman’s criticism of Toner. The other implication in context would be that Altman is this form of insider. Which would mean that he will not listen to anyone who criticizes an insider. Which would mean he will not listen to most meaningful criticism. I like to think that instead what we saw was that Altman is willing to use such principles as weapons. My actual understanding of the insider rule is not that insiders will never listen to outside criticism. It is that they do not feel obligated or bound by it, and can choose to ignore it. They can also choose to listen. A key question is whether this is Summers endorsing this rule, or whether it is, as I would hope, Summers observing that the rule exists, and providing clarity. The second insider rule is that you do not talk about the insider rules. Also on Summers,
After the deal was in place, Fun Whatever else happens, we can all set aside our differences to point out the utter failure of The New York Times to understand what happened.
That is very much not how any of this works. Altman Could Step UpIt is very much an underdog, but one sincere hope I have is Nixon Goes to China. Altman now has the loyalty of his team, a clear ability to shut down what he helped build if crossed, and unwavering faith of investors who trust him to find a way. No one can say they do not ship. OpenAI retains a rather large lead in the AI race. The e/acc crowd has rallied its flags, and was always more into being against those against things rather than anything else. If Altman and his team really do care deeply about the safe part of building safe AGI, he now has the opportunity to do the funniest, and also the best, possible thing. Rather than navigating a conflict between ‘EA’ and ‘e/acc,’ or between worried and unworried, ‘doomer’ and (boomer?), he now has the credibility to say that it is time to make serious costly commitments and investments in the name of ensuring that safe AGI is actually safe. Not because he was forced into it - surely we all know that any such secret promises the old board might have extracted are worth exactly nothing. Not to placate factions or board members. He can do it because he knows it is the right thing to do, and he now is in a position to do it without endangering his power. That is the thing about attempting to align something more capable than you that will pursue power due to instrumental convergence. The early steps look the same whether or not you succeeded. You only find out at the end whether or not the result was compatible with humans. You Thought This Week Was ToughIlya Sutskever tried to put the breaks on AI development and remove what he saw at the time as a reckless CEO, from an organization explicitly dedicated to safety. Or at least, that’s the story everyone believed on the outside. What happened? An avalanche of pressure from all sides. This despite no attempt to turn off any existing systems. Ask yourself: What would happen if AI was integrated into the economy, or even was a useful tool everyone liked, and it suddenly became necessary to turn it off? Never mind whether we could. Suppose we could, and also that we should. Would we? Would anyone even dare try?
Fun with Image Generation
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
As a general rule, scammers are profoundly uncreative. The reason the Nigerian scam is still the Nigerian scam is that if you recognize the term ‘Nigerian prince’ as a scam then you were not about to fall for an ‘Angolan principle’ either. So for now, while a code word is still a fine idea, you can get most of the way there with ‘any request for bail money or a suspiciously low-random-amount kidnapping is highly suspicious, probably a scam.’ An even easier, more robust rule suggests itself. If a phone call leads to a request for money or financial information, assume until proven otherwise that this is a scam! Good rule even without AI. They Took Our Jobs
I would not presume this holds long term. The skill gap has narrowed, but also there is always demand for the best, although they do not find such an effect here. Mostly I would caution against generalizing too much from early impacts in quirky domains.
Get Involved
Red teaming competition, Introducing
All seems highly incrementally useful.
In Other AI News
New paper: Quiet SpeculationsWill deep learning soon hit a wall?
Such strong disagreement.
Not remotely close now, but I am not confident about how long until a lot closer. Dwarkesh Patel asks why LLMs with so much knowledge don’t notice new correlations and discoveries, pretty much at all. The Quest for Sane Regulations
I get that a perfect legal definition of AI is hard, but this is broad enough to include essentially every worthwhile piece of software.
That Is Not What Totalitarianism MeansOne approach to dismissing any attempts to not die, or any form of regulation on AI, has always been to refer to any, and in many although not all cases I do mean any, restriction or regulation on AI as totalitarianism. They want people to think of a surveillance state with secret police looking for rogue laptops and monitoring your every keystroke. Plus airstrikes. What they are actually talking about is taking frontier models, the creation and deployment of new entities potentially smarter and more capable than humans, and applying a normal regulatory regime. It is time to treat such talk the same way we treat people who get arrested because they deny the constitutional right of the United States Government to collect income taxes. As in: I am not saying that taxation is not theft, but seriously, get a grip, stop it. As an excellent concrete example with 500k+ views up top, I am highly disappointed in
What is this ‘totalitarianism’ as it applies here, as Chau explains it?
In other words, the ‘totalitarianism’ is: Standards for frontier models. Registration and reporting of training runs. Mechanisms allowing enforcement of the safety rules.
This is not totalitarianism. This is a completely ordinary regulatory regime. (I checked with Claude, which was about as kind to Chau’s claims as I was.) If you want to argue that standard regulatory interventions tend to favor insiders and large players over time? I will agree. We could then work together against that on 90% (98%?) of issues, while looking for the best solution available in the AI space. Or you can make your true position flat out text? Here’s how the paper describes three ways their regulatory regime might fail.
Here’s how Brian Chau describes this:
If you want to take the full anarchist position, go ahead. But own it. In addition to the above mischaracterization, he then ‘rebuts’ the four claims of harm. Here is his reason biological threats don’t matter.
This seems to be a claim that no amount of expertise or intelligence enables the importantly easier creation of dangerous biological pandemic agents? Not only the claim, but the assertion that this is so obviously false that it is crazy to suggest? He says repeatedly ‘show me the real examples,’ dismissing the danger of anything not yet dangerous. That is not how any of this works. The Week in Audio
The existential risk protest interruption is at about 17:00 and is quite brief. At 19:30 he describes OpenAI as tool builders. Notice every time someone assumes that sufficiently capable AIs would long remain our tools. Right after that he says that young programmers are now outperforming older ones due to greater familiarity with AI tools. 22:00 Sam says he learned two things in school: How to learn new things, and how to think of new things he hadn’t heard elsewhere. Learning how to learn was all the value, the content was worthless. 25:30 Sam responds to the protest, saying that things decay without progress, the benefits can’t be ignored, there needs to be a way forward. Except of course no, there is no reason why there needs to be a way forward. Maybe there is. Maybe there isn’t. 34:00 Sam’s primary concern remains misuse. 47:00 Sam discusses open source, warns of potential to make an irreversible mistake. Calls immediately open sourcing any model trained ‘insanely reckless’ but says open source has a place. From two weeks ago, I happened to listen to this right before Friday’s events: What is very clear here is Ilya’s sincerity and genuine concern. I wish him all the best.
Rhetorical InnovationSome basic truth well said.
Your periodic reminder and reference point: AI has huge upside even today. Future more capable AI has transformational insanely great upside, if we can keep control of the future, not get killed and otherwise choose wisely. Never building it would be a great tragedy. However, it would not be as big a tragedy as everyone dying, so if those are the choices then don’t f***ing build it.
Your periodic reminder that ‘doomer’ is mostly a label used either as shorthand, or as a kudgel of those who want to ridicule the idea that AI could be existentially dangerous. Eliezer Yudkowsky: Disturbing tendency to conflate anyone who believes in any kind of AGI risk as a "doomer". If that's the definition, Sam Altman is a doomer. Ilya Sutskever is a doomer. Helen Toner is a doomer. Shane Legg is a doomer. I am a doomer. Guess what? We are importantly different doomers. None of their opinions are my own, nor their plans, nor their choices. Right or wrong they are not mine and do not proceed from my own reasons.
Such claims are constant. Everything that happens nuance is presumed dead. Also every time most people with the ‘e/acc’ label speak nuance is announced dead. Them I do not worry about, they are a lost cause. The question is whether a lot of otherwise reasonable people will follow. Too soon to tell. Not the argument you want to be making, but…
Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is DifficultFollowing up on the deceptive alignment paper from last week:
I notice a key difference here. Wiblin is saying 30% to deceptive alignment. Last week’s estimate was similar (25%) but it was conditional on the AI already having goals and being situationally aware. Conditional on all that, I am confused how such behavior could fail to arise. Unconditionally is far less clear. I still expect to almost always see something that is effectively ‘deceptive alignment.’ The AI system will figure out to do that which, within the training environment, best convinces us it is aligned. That’s the whole idea with such techniques. I do not assume that the AI will then go ‘aha, fooled you, now that I am not being trained or tested I can stop pretending.’ I don’t rule that out, but my default scenario is that the thing we got it to do fails to generalize out of distribution the way we expected. That it is sensitive to details and context in difficult to anticipate ways that do not match what we want in both directions. That it does not generalize the ways we hope for. We discover that we did not, after all, know how to specify what we wanted, in a way that resulted in things turning out well. Is that ‘deceptive alignment’? You tell me. Here’s Eliezer’s response:
I am so completely confused by Wiblin’s position here, especially that last sentence. Why would ‘scheming’ not be the best way to turn compute into rewards? Why would a completely honest, consistent, straightforward approach be the most rewarded one, given how humans decide how to reward things? I don’t get it.
How optimistic should we be about this in the AI case where you are trying to do this to use outputs of models you cannot otherwise trust? I continue to assume this will break exactly when you need it to not break. It could have mundane utility in the period before that, but I always worry about things I assume are destined to break.
People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone
We need better words for stuff that matters. But yes.
I say this is at best midwit meme territory. Sometimes, yes, ethics or love or the common good wins. We are not living in a full-on cyberpunk dystopia of unbridled capitalism. I am not saying it will be easy. It won’t be easy. It also is not impossible. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing EveryoneIt is important to notice this non-sequitur will be with us, until very late in the game. There is always some metaphorical hard thing that looks easy.
What term would he prefer to use for the possibility?
The Lighter Side
You're currently a free subscriber to |