---
subject: "Zvi's 2024 In Movies"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-01-13 13:33:03
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Now that I am tracking all the movies I watch via Letterboxd, it seems worthwhile to go over the results at the end of the year, and look for lessons, patterns and highlights. Table of Contents[Very Briefly on the Top Picks and Whether You Should See Them.](https://substack.com/redirect/14ddc1e2-f8b2-4957-9f65-1788eaa25438?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[Scott Sumner Picks Great American Movies Then Dislikes Them.](https://substack.com/redirect/60a8d7d9-7464-4a17-9be9-cd3202c2f74b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)
The Rating ScaleLetterboxd ratings go from 0.5-5. Here is how I interpret the rating scale.
5: All-Time Great. I plan to happily rewatch this multiple times. If you are an adult and haven’t seen this, we need to fix that, potentially together, right away, no excuses. 4.5: Excellent. Would happily rewatch. Most people who watch movies frequently should see this movie without asking questions. 4: Great. Very glad I saw it. Would not mind a rewatch. If the concept here appeals to you, then you should definitely see it. 3.5: Very Good. Glad I saw it once. This added value to my life. 3: Good. It was fine, happy I saw it I guess, but missing it would also have been fine. 2.5: Okay. It was watchable, but actually watching it was a small mistake. 2: Bad. Disappointing. I immediately regret this decision. Kind of a waste. 1.5: Very Bad. If you caused this to exist, you should feel bad. But something’s here. 1: Atrocious. Total failure. Morbid curiosity is the only reason to finish this. 0.5: Crime Against Cinema. You didn’t even try to do the not-even-trying thing. The key thresholds are: Happy I saw it equals 3+, and Rewatchable equals 4+. Here is the overall slope of my ratings, across all films so far, which slants to the right because of rewatches, and is overall a standard bell curve after selection: The NumbersSo here’s everything I watched in 2024 (plus the first week of 2025) that Letterboxd classified as released in 2024. The rankings are in order, including within a tier. The correlation of my ratings with Metacritic is 0.54, with Letterboxd it is 0.53, and the two correlate with each other at 0.9. Very Briefly on the Top Picks and Whether You Should See ThemSee The Fall Guy if you haven’t. It’s not in my top 10, and you could argue doesn’t have the kind of depth and ambition that people with excellent taste in cinema like I say so what. Because it’s awesome. Thumbs up. You should almost certainly also see Anora, Megalopolis and Challengers. Deadpool & Wolverine A Complete Unknown is worthwhile if you like Bob Dylan. If you don’t, why not? Dune: Part 2 is about as good as Dune: Part 1, so your decision here should be easy. Conclave is great drama, as long as you wouldn’t let a little left-wing sermon ruin it. The Substance is bizarre and unique enough that I’d recommend that too. After that, you can go from there, and I don’t think anything is a slam dunk. Movies Have Decreasing Marginal Returns in PracticeThis is because we have very powerful selection tools to find great movies, and great movies are much better than merely good movies. That includes both great in absolute terms, and great for your particular preferences. If you used reasonable algorithms to see only 1 movie a year, you would be able to reliably watch really awesome movies. If you want to watch a movie or two per week, you’re not going to do as well. The marginal product you’re watching is now very different. And if you’re watching ‘everything’ for some broad definition of new releases, there’s a lot of drek. There’s also decreasing returns from movies repeating similar formulas. As you gain taste in and experience with movies, some things that are cool the first time become predictable and generic. You want to mitigate this rather than lean into it, if you can. There are increasing returns from improved context and watching skills, but they don’t make up for the adverse selection and repetition problems. Theaters are AwesomeSeeing movies in theaters is much better than seeing them at home. As I’ve gotten bigger and better televisions I have expected this effect to mostly go away. It hasn’t. It has shrunk somewhat, but the focusing effects and overall experience matter a lot, and the picture and sound really are still much better. It seems I should be more selective about watching marginal movies at home versus other activities, but I should be less selective on going to the theater, and I’ve joined AMC A-List to help encourage that, as I have an AMC very close to my apartment. The correlation with my seeing it in a theater was 0.52, almost as strong as the correlation with others movie ratings. Obviously a lot of this was selection. Perhaps all of it? My impression was that this was the result of me failing to debias the results, as my experiences in a movie theater seem much better than those outside of one. But when I ran the correlation between [Zvi Review - Letterboxd] versus Theater, I got -0.015, essentially no correlation at all. So it seems like I did adjust properly for this, or others did similar things to what I did, perhaps. It could also be the two AI horror movies accidentally balancing the scales. I also noticed that old versus new on average did not make a difference, once you included rewatches. I have a total of 106 reviews, 34 of which are movies from 2024. The average of all reviews for movies not released in 2024, which involved a much lower ratio of seeing them in theaters, is 3.11, versus 3.10 for 2024. The caveat is that this included rewatches where I already knew my opinion, so newly watched older movies at home did substantially worse than this. I Hate Spoilers With the Fire of a Thousand SunsI hate spoilers so much that I consider the Metacritic or Letterboxd rating a spoiler. That’s a problem. I would like to filter with it, and otherwise filter on my preferences, but I don’t actually want to know the relevant information. I want exactly one bit of output, either a Yes or a No. It occurs to me that I should either find a way to make an LLM do that, or a way to make a program (perhaps plus an LLM) do that. I’ve had brief attempts at similar things in the past with sports and they didn’t work, but that’s a place where trying and failing to get info is super dangerous. So this might be a better place to start. I also don’t know what to do about the problem that when you have ‘too much taste’ or knowledge of media, this often constitutes a spoiler - there’s logically many ways a story could go in reality, but in fiction you realize the choice has been made. Or you’re watching a reality TV show, where the editors know the outcome, so based on their decisions you do too. Whoops. Damn it. One of the low-key things I loved about UnReal was that they broadcast their show-within-a-show Everlasting as it happens, so the editors of each episode do not know what comes next. We need more of that. Scott Sumner Picks Great American Movies Then Dislikes ThemI saw five movies Scott Sumner also watched. They were five of the eight movies I rated 4 or higher. All platinum hits. Super impressive selection process. He does a much better job here than Metacritic or Letterboxd. But on his scale, 3 means a movie is barely worth watching, and his average is ~3. My interpretation is that Scott really dislikes the traditional Hollywood movie. His reviews, especially of Challengers and Anora, make this clear. Scott is always right, in an important sense, but a lot of what he values is different, and the movie being different from what he expects. My conclusion is that if Scott Sumner sees a Hollywood movie, I should make an effort to see it, even if he then decides he doesn’t like it, and I should also apply that to the past. I did previously make a decision to try and follow Sumner’s reviews for other movies. Unfortunately, I started with Chimes at Midnight, and I ended up giving up on it, I couldn’t bring myself to care despite Scott giving it 4.0 and saying ‘Masterpiece on every level, especially personally for Wells.’ I suspect it’s better if one already knows the Shakespeare? I do want to keep trying, but I’ll need to use better judgment. I Knew Before the Cards Were Even Turned OverI considered recording my predictions for films before I went to see them. I did not do this, because I didn’t want to anchor myself. But when I look back and ask what I was expecting, I notice my predictions were not only good, but scary good. I’ve learned what I like, and what signals to look for. In particular, I’ve learned how to adjust the Metacritic and Letterboxd rankings based on the expected delta. When I walked into The Fall Guy, I was super excited - the moment I saw the poster I instantly thought to myself ‘I’m in.’ I knew Megalopolis was a risk, but I expected to like that too. The movies that I hated? If I expected to not like them, why did I watch them anyway? In many cases, I wanted to watch a generic movie and relax, and then missed low a bit, even if I was sort of fine with it. In other cases, it was morbid curiosity and perhaps hoping for So Bad It’s Good, which combined with ‘it’s playing four blocks away’ got me to go to Madame Web. The worry is that the reason this happens is I am indeed anchoring, and liking what I already decided to like. There certainly isn’t zero of this - if you go into a movie super pumped thinking it’s going to be great that helps, and vice versa. I think this is only a small net effect, but I could be wrong. Other Notes to Self to Remember[If the movie stinks, just don’t go](https://substack.com/redirect/f09eba7d-9c0f-4e14-afeb-c6cb33aef86f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). You know if the movie stinks.Trust your instincts and your gut feelings more than you think you should. Maybe gut feelings are self-fulfilling prophecies? Doesn’t matter. They still count. You love fun, meta, self-aware movies of all kinds, trust this instinct. You do not actually like action movies that play it straight, stop watching them. If the movie sounds like work or pain, it probably is, act accordingly. If the movie sounds very indy, the critics will overrate it. A movie being considered for awards is not a positive signal once you control for the Metacritic and Letterboxd ratings. If anything it is a negative. Letterboxd ratings adjusted for context are more accurate than Metacritic. Opinions of individuals very much have Alpha if you have enough context.
Strong Opinions, Strongly Held: I Didn’t Like ItWhat are the places I most strongly disagreed with the critical consensus? I disliked three movies in green on Metacritic: Gladiator 2, Monkey Man and Juror #2. I think I might be wrong about Monkey Man, in that I buy that it’s actually doing a good job at the job it set out to do, but simply wasn’t for me, see the note that I need to stop watching (non-exceptional) action movies that play it straight. I strongly endorse disliking Gladiator 2 on reflection. Denzel Washington was great but the rest of the movie failed to deliver on pretty much every level. I’m torn on Juror #2. I do appreciate the moral dilemmas it set up. I agree they’re clever and well-executed. I worry this was a case where I have seen so many courtroom dramas, especially Law & Order episodes, that there was too much of a Get On With It impatience - that this was a place where I had too much taste of the wrong kind to enjoy the movie, especially when not at a theater.
One could also include Civil War. I decided that this was the second clear case (the first was Don’t Look Up) of ‘I don’t want to see this and you can’t make me,’ so I didn’t see it, and I’m happy with at least waiting until after the election to do that. Strong Opinions, Strongly Held: I Did Like ItI actively liked four movies that the critics thought were awful: Subservience, Joker: Folie a Duex, Unfrosted and of course Megalopolis. For Subservience, and also for Afraid, I get that on a standard cinema level, these are not good films. They pattern match to C-movie horror. But if you actually are paying attention, they do a remarkably good job in the actual AI-related details, and being logically consistent. I value that highly. So I don’t think either of us are wrong. There’s a reason Subservience
Unfrosted is a dumb Jerry Seinfeld comedy. I get that. I’m not saying the critics are wrong, not exactly? But the jokes are good. I laughed quite a lot, and a lot more than at most comedies or than I laughed when I saw Seinfeld in person and gave him 3.5 GPTs - Unfrosted gets at least 5.0 GPTs. Live a little, everyone.
Joker: Folie a Duex was definitely not what anyone expected, and it’s not for everyone, but I stand by my review here, and yes I have it slightly above Wicked:
I liked MegalopolisFor Megalopolis, yes it’s a mess, sure, but it is an amazingly great mess with a lot of the right ideas and messages, even if it’s all jumbled and confused. If you don’t find a way to appreciate it, that is on you. Perhaps you are letting your sense of taste get in the way. Or perhaps you have terrible taste in ideas and values? Everyone I know of who said they actively liked this is one of my favorite people.
The BrutalistThen there’s The Brutalist, which the critics think is Amazingly Great (
Since I wrote that, I’ve read multiple things and had time to consider WTF, and I understand the decision, but that new understanding of the movie makes me otherwise like the movie less and makes it seem even more like an assignment. Contra Tyler I definitely did feel like this was 3.5 hours long. I do agree with many of Tyler’s other points (including ‘recommended, for some’!) although the Casablanca angle seems like quite a stretch. One detail I keep coming back to, that I very much appreciate and haven’t seen anyone else mention, is the scene where he is made to dance, why it happens and how that leads directly to other events. I can also see the 'less interesting’ point they might have been going for instead, and wonder if they knew what they were doing there. My new ultimately here is that I have a fundamentally different view than the movie of most of the key themes in the movie does, and that made it very difficult for me to enjoy it. When he puts that terrible chair and table in the front of the furniture store, I don’t think ‘oh he’s a genius’ I think ‘oh what a pretentious arse, that’s technically an achievement but in practice it’s ugly and non-functional, no one will want it, it can’t be good for business.’ It’s tough to enjoy watching a (highly brutal in many senses, as Tyler notes!) movie largely about someone being jealous of and wanting the main character’s talent when you agree he’s technically skilled but centrally think his talents suck, and when you so strongly disagree with its vision, judgment and measure of America. Consider that the antagonist is very clearly German. The upside-down Statue of Liberty tells you a lot. The Death of Award ShowsWe’ve moved beyond award shows, I think, now that we have Metacritic and Letterboxd, if your goal is to find the best movies. In terms of the Oscars and award shows, I’ll be rooting for Anora, but wow the awards process is dumb when you actually look at it. Knowing what is nominated, or what won, no longer provides much alpha on movie quality. Giving the Golden Globe for Best Musical or Comedy to Emelia Perez (2.8 on Letterboxd, 71 on Metacritic) over Anora (4.1 on Letterboxd, 91 on Metacritic) or Challengers tells you that they cared about something very different from movie quality. There were and have been many similar other such cases, as well, but that’s the one that drove it home this year - it’s my own view, plus the view of the public, plus the view of the critics when they actually review the movies, and they all got thrown out the window. Your goal is not, however, purely to find the best movies.
I like that tradition, and have tried at times a similar version of it. I think this made great sense back in the 1990s, or even 2000s, purely for the selection effects. Today, you could still say do it to be part of the general conversation, or as tradition. And I’m definitely doing some amount of ‘see what everyone is likely to talk about’ since that is a substantial bonus. But I think we’d do a lot better if the selection process was simply some aggregate of Metacritic, Letterboxd and (projected followed by actual) box office. You need box office, because you want to avoid niche movies that get high ratings from those that choose to watch them, but would do much less well with a general audience. On to 2025I definitely plan on continuing to Tracking and reviewing everything been a very useful exercise. You learn a lot by looking back. And I expect that feeding the data to LLMs will allow me to make better movie selections not too long from now. I highly recommend it to others.
You're currently a free subscriber to |