---
subject: "Climate Caused the US Civil War"
from: "Tomas Pueyo from Uncharted Territories <unchartedterritories@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-08-26 21:01:34
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tomas Pueyo", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_28238133486362596", "UNREAD"]
---
The story people know about the US Civil War is that the South had slavery and the North was free. As each side expanded westward, they feared that the other side would prevail and force their solution on the other, and eventually they went to war over it. That, right there, should give you pause: North and South? Westward expansion? Did geography have something to do with the Civil War? More than that: I think geography caused the Civil War. How? Because of climate, the North farmed crops like wheat and barley that required very little work, and that work was easy to automate. This tended to make farmers independent, incentivize industrialization for the machinery, and push settlers west very fast, as they weren’t as limited by labor needs. Conversely, the crops grown in the south—mainly cotton, tobacco, sugarcane, and rice—all require substantially more work, so getting lots of workers at the lowest possible cost made or broke fortunes. This is why slavery emerged here, why it was fundamental to the South’s economy, and why Southerners went to war to continue it. Why does all this matter? It’s not just a crucial fact of US history. This has dramatic consequences today, from the roots of racial inequality, to where the Democratic party wins elections, and the relative poverty of the US South. So let’s dive in: How exactly did climate cause the Civil War, and what are the consequences of that today? The Slavery Race to the WestFor decades, the rush westward had been fueled by one clause of the US Constitution:
If one side has 50% or more of senators,¹ it can block any legislation it dislikes,² including the most controversial one at the time: slavery. This is the evolution of free vs slave states between 1789 and the eve of the Civil War in 1861: When the US became a country, it had more slave states than free states. But over the following decades, the northern population and its expansion accelerated. By 1820, there were the same number of slave vs free states. A bigger population in the North meant it controlled the House, but as long as the number of free and slave states was the same, the public mandate would not clearly support abolition, and Northerners wouldn’t have a majority to impose it, as Southerners could block any anti-slavery legislation in the Senate. In 1820, Missouri wanted to become a (slave) state, but that would have upended the balance, so the This bought some time, but cemented the idea that each side had to rush westwards as fast as possible to create new states for their camp, lest it lose the senate balance.³ And the South saw the writing on the wall: The Northern population grew faster than the Southern one. The result was this population density map on the eve of the Civil War: The Southerners dreaded the arrival of each new census: They feared this population imbalance meant the North was going to make new states faster, threatening slavery. They were right. By 1860, the North had three more states than the South. Lincoln campaigned for the 1860 election on an anti-slavery platform:
As soon as Lincoln won, and before he was even inaugurated, All of this shows that the single most important cause of the Civil War was slavery, and it came to a head when the North’s population outgrew the South’s. But hold on, why was the Northern population growing faster than the South’s? Feeding the Northern GrowthMost immigrants went to the North. Nearly Then they had children, and those had children, and the population of the north grew faster. I spot-checked the share of population that was either foreign or had a foreign parent, and this is what it looked like: Northern states tended to have a much higher share of foreigners than Southern states because they received much more immigration. It wasn’t just foreigners coming to the US; there was also massive internal migration of Americans moving westward: Around 1850, nearly So now we know the Civil War was caused by the disagreement over slavery, that it erupted when the North outgrew the South, and that this happened because foreigners and Americans moved to the North en masse. But why did immigrants go to the North? The Magnetic NorthAbout The South had slaves, which depressed labor costs, and wages in the South were lower. The North made it easier for immigrants to own land and reap what they sowed. The industry in the North was more diversified, so workers had options beyond farming. Mortality was higher in the South.
And why is all this the case? This is a map of crops in 1860, just before the US Civil War (1861-65): The drier and cooler North grew mostly wheat, barley, and oats.⁸ This is actually not that different today. These are the traditional northern crops: And for the South: This sounds like a small difference, but it’s so momentous that we can consider it the single biggest driver of the Civil War. Why? Because wheat, barley, and corn grow in northern climates and happen to require much less work than cotton, tobacco, sugar, and rice, which grow in southern climates. This led to families taking care of small independent farms in the North and big landowners setting up plantations worked by slaves in the South. The Crop DivergenceThe Ease of Northern CropsRaising crops generally entails three phases: Preparing the soil and seeding Harvesting Post-processing.
For northern crops, these processes were easy,⁹ and tools (and later, machines) made it even easier. For example, preparing the soil for wheat or oats required plowing and harrowing fields, and sowing, which took about Then came reaping season, which could be done in one pass of cutting the wheat, aligning it, bundling it, and putting the bundles upright to dry. This took about 14 h/a. Finally, you had to thresh: Extract the grain from the stalks, and then from the husk. This took about 8 h/a,¹⁰ for a total of about 33 h/a. Luckily, each one of these steps was easy to mechanize: Mechanization was happening through the 19th century, and shrunk the work to produce wheat from 33 h/a in 1839 to 11 h/a in 1910.¹¹ As an example, Harrowing Southern CropsThat was not the case in the South. Consider cotton, which accounted for over Cotton took about An acre of cotton required 4x the work as an acre of wheat. What?! Cotton requires about 70 h/a of field preparation, and about 60 h/a of harvesting,¹⁴ so each step took much more work than the entire wheat cycle! To prepare the land, the woody cotton stalks must first be cut, or they jam the plow. Then, since cotton likes humidity but doesn’t like the ground to be waterlogged, it must be plowed once, and then ridges need to be made to plant the cotton above the rest of the ground. Then, the ridges must be somewhat leveled so that the cotton seeds don’t fall too deep. Then, planting must be done accurately, so that the distance between plants is ideal for pickers to optimally run between them. The seed is small so it must be planted carefully near the surface. Later, as there are plenty of seeds, you get overseeding, so too many plants grow. Some need to be cut early. And finally, since it’s warm and humid, a lot of weeds grow, so fields need to be constantly weeded. That’s just the soil and sowing work! The picking also took much longer than wheat because: Wheat (and oats, barley, and corn) is a strong grain, but cotton is a delicate boll that must be hand-picked. Cotton bolls don’t open at the same time, and they need to be harvested as they open, so cotton requires multiple harvest passes! While wheat, corn, oats, and barley can all be harvested together.
Also, a lot of this work could not be easily automated, because the bolls were delicate, the plants all differed in opening times, the soil was wet and uneven… Mechanization of cotton has taken much longer than wheat.¹⁵ This is the case for cotton, but as we saw, rice requires Tobacco Tobacco must then be grown with precise spacing for airflow, disease control, leaf development, and picking ease. The leaves must remain intact, so they have to be picked by hand. Then, they have to be carried to barns to cure. Sugar cane was another highly complex crop. For example, the soil had to be plowed deep, and needed straight furrows; what you plant is last year’s cane stalks, which are bulky and heavy and must be placed one by one. Sugarcane has to be cut and then immediately crushed and boiled in sugar mills on-site, which meant you couldn’t harvest everything at once, and needed lots of coordination. This is the result: The Economic DivergenceIn the North, a single family in a homestead was enough to handle a big farm. At most, families could live in villages to help each other, but they remained fiercely independent. They preferred owning their farm so they could improve it and invest in machinery to cultivate more land and improve yields with less work. This led to freedom, entrepreneurship, and the ability to grow rich through wit and grind. Of course people flooded to the north! This economic path didn’t require slaves: Slavery is actually expensive because you need a management layer to coerce the slaves, and even then, slaves work against their will. Entrepreneurship and freedom remove this inefficiency, so by 1830, Northern states had Meanwhile, in the south, crops needed massive amounts of work. This meant that the biggest share of costs was human labor. There was a huge incentive to lower that cost, and slavery was the answer: With paid labor, these cash crops would have been In the 19th century, slaves were 2-5x cheaper than wage workers, and were probably more productive,¹⁹ so the Southern White farmers who could afford it bought land, slaves, and created plantations, as they had existed in the region and the wider Caribbean for centuries. By the time of the Civil War, the productivity of these crops had improved enough, and the cost of slaves increased enough, that cultivating these crops with paid workers was possible. But by then, the system was locked in: The Southern farmers didn’t want to lose their massive investments in slaves and juicy profits! Their entire economy depended on these slaves, and they were willing to go to war to keep them. Something Bad’s in the AirThere was another reason why immigrants shunned the south: the bad air, or malaria.
Malaria was pervasive in the South, because it’s hot and humid, and mosquitoes thrive there.
The impact can be seen by the fact that malaria eradication raised income in the “malaria-free” generation born in the next decade by
Malaria was Meanwhile, Black Africans had more natural immunity to malaria specifically, and also some of these other diseases, or they had suffered some of these diseases in the past and had stronger immunity against them. So Black slaves were a better choice than Whites for working these crops in the South: They died less and had fewer down days. ConclusionImagine you are a European descendant living in 1850, a hard and cruel world, but also a world full of discoveries and economic opportunities. Where would you rather go: To the North, where you can get your own land and become rich by yourself through grinding and mechanizing your farm, or work in industries for higher wages than in your homeland? Or to the South, where you could die of disease, and your main job option was to compete with slaves to grow crops that are hard to mechanize?
Early immigrants to the US knew this and went North. This tipped the balance of population towards the North, where slavery was not economically necessary, so it was abolished. Then, as the Northern population grew and their abolitionary stance strengthened, they pushed for imposing abolition of this abhorrent economic system on the South, who depended on it. If you track the entire chain of causality, this is what it looks like: And this is how climate caused the US North and South to enter into Civil War. Why does all this matter? Why does GeoHistory matter, more broadly? Because for centuries, humans have been fighting each other, blaming each other for their past behaviors and their grievances and what they are owed. Yes, slavery is absolutely abhorrent. What was done is terrible. But if instead, we see history as a mechanism, as the result of massive, hidden forces like climate and crops and economics, we can stop blaming each other for people’s terrible past deeds, and try instead to understand these mechanisms to steer humanity in the right direction, together. That’s what Uncharted Territories is about. In fact, you can go farther: This is also why, before the Civil War, its outcome was already determined. And not only that, but the future development of the US North vs South for the following decades was also determined. For the 160 years since the US Civil War, the South has been catching up with the North due to the hindrance of its economic model, determined by climate. This is what we’re going to explore in the upcoming articles. 1 Since the US is 2 Bills need to be approved by the House and the Senate. The House represents population, and the Senate represents land (states). If one side has a majority in the House, but not in the Senate, its legislation can’t pass. In the Senate, a 50-50 split could be broken with the vice-president’s vote, and for some legislation, it’s a majority of 60+ that’s needed to pass the Senate. 3 Another push westwards in the South was the huge global cotton boom triggered by the cotton industrial revolution around Manchester, in England. But this pushed for settlement westward, not for incorporation into states. 4 The conflict between states on slavery had been heightening for decades: the 5 And 75% of working age males disappeared from their communities to move elsewhere! 6 This is why between the Missouri Compromise and 1860, only Florida, Arkansas, and Texas became slave states, whereas in the Midwest, Michigan, Wisconsin, Minnesota, and Iowa became states, on top of Oregon and California of course. While Texas became a state because of the war the US won against Mexico. 7 More Whites than Blacks, and more males than women. 8 Corn is more mixed. It tended (and tends) to be farmed more in the north, but could also grow south of the standard North-South line. 9 For wheat and oats, the first phase included plowing the field, harrowing (breaking up soil clods, leveling the field, and uprooting weeds), and sowing. The second phase included reaping, raking (aligning), binding, and shocking (putting the wheat bundles (shocks) upright to dry). The third phase included threshing (separating wheat grains from their husks and stalks) and shelling (removing the protective husks). 10
11 From 12 From 13 This is actually quite hard to find. The data comes from 14 After the invention of the cotton gin, working the cotton to extract the useful fiber became much easier, (so cheaper, as fewer hours were needed), so the processing went from extremely laborious to very fast and easy. This is, in fact, what allowed the cotton boom, as suddenly the cost of processing became low enough that a mass market could afford cotton clothes. This then triggered a big part of the English Industrial Revolution. 15 A lot of the automation in cotton farming actually happened in the 20th century. 16 I count 32 person-days per acre, or 256 h/a, from 17 Another data point: apparently as late as the 1940s it took 18 To say nothing of the fact that automation and optimization only kick in once you’re already producing at scale. 19
20 Some could also be found in the North, but the prevalence was much lower. The Mason-Dixon Line, an early Free-Slave demarcation line, was also a malaria demarcation line: North of it, malaria didn’t prevail. Invite your friends and earn rewardsIf you enjoy Uncharted Territories, share it with your friends and earn rewards when they subscribe. |