---
subject: "My excellent Conversation with Chris Dixon"
from: "Marginal REVOLUTION <donotreply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-04-24 04:56:24
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tyler Cowen", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2466199532210586699", "UNREAD"]
---
Here is [the audio, video, and transcript](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=f8b91616ef32005c88f930e529ed19d2305caf1c582f96604e27aff4f0b92566&blog_id=42693868&post_id=90507&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=307751639f1bea8d504e592509f1bf82&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly9jb252ZXJzYXRpb25zd2l0aHR5bGVyLmNvbS9lcGlzb2Rlcy9jaHJpcy1kaXhvbi8&email_id=24388b0539c8f91c6c683493fbee67ab). Here is the episode summary:
Chris Dixon believes we’re at a pivotal inflection point in the internet’s evolution. As a general partner at Andreessen Horowitz and author of Read Write Own, Chris believes the current internet, dominated by large platforms like YouTube and Spotify, has strayed far from its decentralized roots. He argues that the next era—powered by blockchain technology—can restore autonomy to creators, lower barriers for innovation, and shift economic power back to the network’s edges.
Tyler and Chris discuss the economics of platform dominance, how blockchains merge protocol-based social benefits with corporate-style competitive advantages, the rise of stablecoins as a viable blockchain-based application, whether Bitcoin or AI-created currencies will dominate machine-to-machine payments, why Stack Overflow could be the first of many casualties in an AI-driven web, venture capital’s vulnerability to AI disruption, whether open-source AI could preserve national sovereignty, NFTs as digital property rights system for AIs, how Kant’s synthetic a priori, Kripke’s modal logic, and Heidegger’s Dasein sneak into Dixon’s term‑sheet thinking, and much more.
Most of the talk was about tech of course, but let's cut right to the philosophy section:
COWEN: What’s your favorite book in philosophy?
DIXON: I’ve actually been getting back into philosophy lately. I did philosophy years ago in grad school. Favorite book, man. Are you into philosophy?
COWEN: Of course, yes. Plato’s Dialogues; Quine,
[Word and Object]; Parfit,[Reasons and Persons]; Nozick. Those are what come to my mind right away.DIXON: Yes. I did
[analytic philosophy]. I actually was in a graduate school program and dropped out. I did analytic philosophy. Actually, Quine was one of my favorites — Word and Object and[Two Dogmas of Empiricism], all those kinds of things. I like[Donald Davidson]. Nozick — I loved[Anarchy, State, and Utopia]. Reading that with[Rawls]is a great pairing. I used to love[Wittgenstein], both early and later. I was into logic, so[Frege]and[Russell]. This was a grad school.Now I’m trying to finally understand
[continental philosophy]. I never understood it. I’ve actually spent the last three months in a philosophy phase. I’ve been watching a lot of videos. Highly recommend this. Do you know Bryan Magee?COWEN: Sure, yes.
DIXON: Amazing. I watched all of his
[videos]. This guy, Michael Sugrue, was a Princeton professor — great[videos]on continental philosophy. I’ve been reading — it sounds pretentious; I’m not saying I understand this or I’m an expert on it, but I’m struggling in reading it. I’m trying to read[Being and Time]right now — Heidegger. I really like Kripke. I follow Kripke. I liked his books a lot. Nelson Goodman was one of my favorites. Funny enough, I just bought it again —[Fact, Fiction, and Forecast]. Kripke —[Naming and Necessity]is his legendary book on reference and language.COWEN: I’ve never been persuaded by that one. It always felt like sleight of hand to me. He’s very, very smart. He might be the sharpest philosopher, but I like the
[book on Wittgenstein]better.DIXON: He basically invented
[modal logic]. I don’t know if you know that story. He was in high school, something.COWEN: He was 15 years old, I heard. Yes.
DIXON: [laughs] He’s like a true prodigy. Like a lot of philosophy, you have to take it in the context, like Naming and Necessity I think of as a response — gosh, I’m forgetting the whole history of it, but as I recall, it was a response to the descriptive theory of reference, like Russell. Anyways, I think you have to take these things in a pairing.
Actually, last night I was with a group of people. I got a lecture on philosophy, and it was great because he went through Hume, Kant, Hegel, Nietzsche. I don’t want to go too much into that, but I’ve always struggled with Kant. Then he went into Hegel and explained that Hegel struggled with Kant in the same way that I did, and then improved on it. I’m not trying to go into details of this; it’s too much. The point is, for me, a lot of it has to be taken in as a dialogue between thinkers over multiple periods.
COWEN: Are you getting anything out of Heidegger? Because I sometimes say I’ve looked at every page of that book, but I’m not sure I’ve read it.
DIXON: It’s a good question. I have a friend who’s really into it, and we’ve been spending time together, and he’s trying to teach me. If you want, I’ll send you some videos that I think are really good.
COWEN: That’d be great.
DIXON: They’ve helped me a lot. I’ve always got it from an intellectual history point of view. If you want to follow the history of
[postmodernism], there’s Heidegger and then[Derrida], and just what’s going on in the academy today with relativism and discourse and hermeneutics. I think it’s modern political implications that were really probably kicked off by Nietzsche and then Heidegger. I’ve always understood in that sense.What I struggle with, and I understand him as a theory of psychology, I think of describing the experience of the Dasein and
[being-in-the-world]. To me, it’s an interesting theory of psychology. You’re thrown into the world. This whole idea is very appealing to me. Just that whole story he tells — you’re thrown into the world, ready at hand versus present at hand. I think this idea of knowing how versus knowing that, different kinds of knowledge is a very interesting idea. Do you watch[John Vervaeke]?COWEN: No.
You will find the (very interesting) tech segments all over the rest of the dialogue. And I am happy to refer you all to the new paperback edition of Chris's new book [Read Write Own: Building the Next Era of the Internet](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=2b18d1a0aef50d9993e0d574fed1e10f5ec5ebff177974c0b20f56075279810c&blog_id=42693868&post_id=90507&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=9ec48c6d4d5b69c0529a32a2cecce8a4&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=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&email_id=24388b0539c8f91c6c683493fbee67ab).