---
subject: "The Monday Media Diet with Jai Dattani"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-01-23 11:01:11
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
I first met Tell us about yourself. Raised in a pretty homogenous North London suburb, media quickly became my portal to a world beyond my own. Whilst friends spent their cash on collectable football stickers, I bought every type of magazine. And I mean every type… from the trashy women’s weeklies to the glossy GQs and Vogues. This was paired with hours spent watching TV, much to the dismay of my parents who believed time away from the textbooks would rot my mind. Little did they know I’d go on to forge a career playing with words, pictures and videos. Following University, I hopped into the world of TV production before the glittering lights of Entertainment PR lured me over. I flitted between Brand and Personal PR for a while before making a spur-of-the-moment decision to relocate to Sydney, following in the footsteps of two close friends who moved out a year prior - a path that would lead me to Ogilvy PR to work on the launch of Netflix in Australia in New Zealand. My time in Sydney drew to a close with the opportunity to move in-house with Netflix to lead Consumer PR for Northern Europe, the Middle East & Africa based in Amsterdam. My first year with them saw me take 121 flights - a magical blur propagating the gospel of Netflix to press and influencers across the region. Paid to talk about TV - a dream! After two and a half years in Amsterdam, I relocated again with Netlfix to Mumbai to lead the social team for India. It was a phenomenal experience bringing together Hollywood and Bollywood and my love for digital storytelling. After two years and a brief stint sheltering from COVID in the idyllic wine region of Margaret River, Western Australia, I found myself in Los Angeles (still with Netflix) in a broader editorial content role, which I left in the Summer of 2022. Today I’m a few months into a new role, leading Global Social for Describe your media diet. I wish it was more diverse. I keep abreast of UK, US and Australian news through the usual BBC, CNN, NYT, SMH apps. Social plays a huge role in keeping me across pop culture. WITI Classifieds: We are experimenting with running some weekly classifieds in WITI. If you’re interested in running an ad, Daly is a comms+ agency that reaches beyond the standard PR playbook to deliver results (and some magic) for our exceptional clients. For the inner journey. For the outer journey. The Intermodal Spirit. For 10 years, this has been the go-to newsletter for people who like to keep up with what’s exciting in design, books, beauty, food, & more. What’s the last great book you read?
What are you reading now? Starting a new job, I’m reading hundreds of documents and decks to get up to speed, so my leisure reading has taken a hit. Evenings are spent watching TV with my partner. Kaleidoscope (Netflix) and Fleishman is in Trouble (Hulu) have had me hooked of late. The latter is a masterclass in script writing and storytelling. What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication? *cracks fingers* Okay, my strategy has remained unchanged for two decades. Pass 1: The Cream Skim - A once-through, reading the stuff that grabs my attention immediately or the cover story that compelled me to buy the publication. Also, an opportunity to earmark the stuff to go back to later. Pass 2: The Leisure Read - Taking some time to devour some of the longer reads and stuff I earmarked before and also discovering some new stuff along the way. Pass 3: The If-I-Must - usually when there’s nothing else around to read, I’ll do a final flick and force myself to skim anything left to pick off the bones. Who should everyone be reading that they’re not? Sorry if this breaks the format, but I’m going to share my current favourite podcasts. Who Weekly - the podcast that tells you everything you need to know about the celebrities you don’t. Ask Iliza Anything - comedian Iliza Schlesinger gives her take on listener questions. I feel that my vocabulary gets significantly better by listening to her. How to Fail - author and journalist Elizabeth Day asks influential people to share their three biggest failures and what they learned through them. Oh, and I love the [Dirt](https://substack.com/redirect/73692b87-f721-4f18-9be9-72ee3a468e2f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)newsletter for all things Entertainment - I think I actually discovered it on a MMD a few months back (Thanks!).
What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone?
Plane or train? The romantic in me wants to say trains. As I type this I picture myself in a window seat veering through the Austrian hills in Spring. The reality is planes. Even though a large portion of my travel is work-related, a plane ride always leads to discovering a new place or meeting new people. I’m even willing to endure LAX for that… What is one place everyone should visit?
Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into. Most recently, I’m embroiled in a personal debate about whether Paris Hilton becoming NBC’s ambassador for their 2024 Paris Olympics coverage is genius or ludicrous? The only connection is the word “Paris”... I’d love to hear what your readers think, hit me up on — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Jai (JD) —
|