---
subject: "The Bid/Ask Spread for Top Talent"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <the-diff@ghost.io>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-03 15:39:32
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
In this issue: - The Bid/Ask Spread for Top Talent
- De Minimis
- ARR
- Jurisdictions
- Forward-Deployed Engineers
- Software and Hardware
This issue of The Diff is brought to you by our sponsor,
The Bid/Ask Spread for Top TalentA fun but necessary practical joke the white collar career path plays on people is that there's a set of technical skills that you hone early in your career, which inform the rate at which you advance in your job, until suddenly, with very little notice, they aren't the main things the job requires, and the focus moves to something with a more interpersonal flavor. There's a correlation between being good at designing distributed systems and being good at implementing a design that's been handed to you, and a lawyer who knows contracts in and out has a distinct edge when pitching legal services to a new client. This doesn't happen everywhere, and there are non-manager tracks that still have a lot of responsibility, but even those involve a fair amount of self-managing; it's hard to manage when your direct report, you, has all the same biases and shortcuts and knows exactly which excuses work. There's some logic to this: the most profitable partner for a given firm might be someone who's 85th-percentile good at what the firm does and 99th-percentile good at strategy, schmoozing, taking risks, not losing one's mind when some of those risks inevitably turn out badly, etc. One thing I've heard from people in both finance and tech is that at some of the best-performing organizations, there are a lot of people who, while objectively good, aren't adding a lot of value to the firm. They aren't subtracting, but the standard is high—the high cost of both errors of omission and employee time means that there's a premium on moving fast, and teams tend to operate at the pace of their slowest member. But put all of these clues together and a story emerges: if they really do have a high bar for mere mediocrity, but they also have the operating leverage to make a successful employee have a bigger impact on the world (and a bigger impact on their own net worth) than anywhere else, then their optimal strategy is to be a bit bloated specifically so they have a farm system for identifying those stars. This shows up in multi-manager hedge funds, which are a unique case because the career's endpoints all involve being directly compensated for generating profits. Early career hiring tends to focus a lot on skills—can you build a model? Can you do it really fast? If your model produces nonsense values, are you going to pointlessly argue about it for an hour or just find and fix the case where you moved a decimal? (And are you going to have an annoying-to-anyone-watching-you habit of injecting all sorts of little audits and checks? For funds, if the excess returns come from a small percentage of the managers, and it's hard to predict which managers and which strategies will work, a strategy presents itself: - Hire a large number of managers, each of whom has some analysts.
- Carefully track where the best ideas come from.
- Design a compensation scheme that's slightly redistributive in order to keep everyone around, and that gets away with this by deferring a growing share of pay for whoever's making the most money.
- Fire people when they underperform, but don't just fire for adequate performance; that's demoralizing.
The goal is to have a large cohort of people who 1) have cleared a very high skill hurdle just to get there, 2) can be more easily and accurately measured by their current employer than by someone else, and who 3) face economic friction in the form of deferred compensation and noncompetes in the event that they want to leave. In this model, the entire end goal is to widen the bid/ask spread for the best talent, in order to retain it. It's worth noting that this model predicts the same behavior as another one: that different strategies go through unpredictable seasons where there are not just more opportunities for alpha generation but also opportunities to get a lot more exposure. SPAC arbitrage, for example, was a very different business in 2018 ($11bn in SPAC IPOs) compared to 2021 ($166bn, and a lot more volatility both pre-deal and after deals were completed). The optimal amount of capital to allocate to merger arbitrage went down in recent years, not just because fewer deals were completed, but because discretionary antitrust intervention creates a correlated risk that makes the whole portfolio a bet on the FTC and DOJ instead of a diversified set of trades that moved on separate catalysts. (This kind of mix-of-skills hedging also applies in tech, where it’s often unclear exactly what the technical limiting factor of the next big thing will be. In that case, it’s a good idea to be slightly overstaffed for any skill that might someday be a bottleneck, and to always bring in young people who can quickly acquire new skills to contribute to the task.) It's likely that the second mandate for diversification was chronologically first, and there are stories of some of the big pod shops timing the market in particular kinds of talent, by interviewing everyone who worked on a particular recently-blown-up strategy to see who just got unlucky and who had a lucky streak that finally mean-reverted. This model means that the biggest funds have the same advantage in talent-spotting that they have in portfolio construction: at their scale, they get enough benefits from diversification that they can afford to take risks that smaller competitors can't. But that's also a market inefficiency: not every great investor ought to be in the business of putting together intra-quarter reads in order to predict earnings, or parsing the nuances of how management rounds various numbers up or down. (As good a business as that is, it's not the only way to skin a cat.) This market inefficiency begs for a solution, so The Diff is happy to be launching our inaugural stock pitch contest; we're soliciting ideas across a few categories, from obscure microcaps to pair trades in liquid large-cap stocks (like I said—the pod shop model is great if you can run with enough leverage and diversification). We're open to macro, too, since it's one of the purest kinds of alpha—if you're betting on something that's literally never happened before, it's not exactly easy to backtest. We're happy to get submissions from college students who are looking for jobs or internships, but we'd also be excited to talk to people who aren't on the standard track. And there's an important reason for that last point: institutional investors who wouldn't be caught dead with a factor bias in their portfolios that they didn't have a very good reason for tend to be systematically long plenty of factors in their talent portfolio. There's the Ivy factor, the STEM degree factor, right-internships factor, etc. And, like regular investing factors, these got identified because they're a source of profits! But they're also pretty crowded bets. Any strategy that's sufficiently optimized for every quantifiable metric is taking lots of tradeoffs against the qualitative ones, and the simplest solution to that is to inject a little variance into the process and see what comes next. Sometimes, that means routing around someone, but at that point they aren't on the team! So this presents a way to think about the org chart: the goal is to create groups of people who have complementary skills for a specific set of tasks, and to start shrinking teams or separating them by function as soon as headcount gets unwieldly. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/6473a501?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)Think things like having a hidden row in the model that ensures that the cash flow statement portion produces the same change in cash that the balance sheet records, or hard-coding a reported operating expense number and then making sure the line items sum to it. Fixing these data entry mistakes is pretty trivial, and what you could do is go back and write a bunch of error-checking rows when you're done. But there are two problems with this: first, one thing you absolutely want to avoid is checking work when you're exhausted, so deferring this to the end is a good way to do a bad job. But second, the Zen of financial modeling is that the data-entry pieces of it are a sort of mantra you recite in order to meditate on the economics of the business. Filling in the model and seeing trends emerge is retelling the story of a company's growth or decline. And if your model happens to have mistakes, and these happen to change the outcome, then you've been telling yourself the wrong story. Getting this tactile feel of a business via manual data entry and parsing of fillings is also why AI will take a surprisingly long time to completely automate fundamental analysis—crucially, what the analyst learns while doing this gets written down later, so there isn’t training data on this exact part of their process.. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/7660a284?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)This often involves something non-quanty. If linear regression got you into a problem, something else will get you out. Some trades work well in certain regimes and poorly in others, and sometimes the assets in question didn't even exist in the previous regimes. Everyone in crypto was taking interest rate risk, for example, because they were generally trading a zero-interest token against a fiat currency that could have positive income. Sometimes a signal works as a result of some institutional constraint somewhere else, which means that there's a big premium on having a good explanation for why it makes money rather than just noticing that it does. And sometimes it's a risk premium; mean reversion trades are just selling insurance against the end of the mean reversion in question. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/6ae54962?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)There’s a fun Citadel story that demonstrates this approach, which Ken Griffin shared during [his talk](https://www.thediff.co/r/d18756fb?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)last year at the Yale SOM: “When Enron filed for bankruptcy, I chartered a Gulfstream jet, put 16 people on it to Houston, and all we did was interview people at Enron for several days to understand what worked, what didn't work, how they made money, how they ran the business, what the competitive advantages were. I hired the entire leadership of the quantitative research effort at Enron. UBS bought the business except for the research team. We've made $30 billion in commodities since then. UBS shut the business down.” In this case, Ken saw that the quantitative research strategies and talent at Enron had staying power, and the others likely did not. UBS probably didn’t do this work and it cost them.[↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/88a3ac99?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
You're on the free list for The Diff. Last week, paying subscribers read about A Word From Our SponsorsDo you know what would make your customer service platform dramatically better? Dumping it and switching to Intercom. But maybe you’re not ready to make that big of a change. We get it! That’s why we made Fin, our leading AI customer service agent available on every helpdesk. Fin instantly resolves up to 80% of customer questions around the clock in 45+ languages. That means you can get off the customer service rep hiring treadmill because your tough-to-fill shifts are covered. With Fin handling frontline support, your human agents are freed up to do higher impact work—like managing complex questions and building deeper relationships with customers. And the best part is that you can experience all of Fin’s benefits from the comfort of your current platform—no switch required. See why more than 3,700 companies trust Fin with their customers and business. ElsewhereDe MinimisRegulatory arbitrage doesn't get enough respect. There are some companies that come into existence entirely to take advantage of poorly-drafted rules, but those companies are a symptom: if the regulations are good, there isn't an arbitrage. Costco is the most impressive example: what started as a workaround for rules allowing manufacturers to fix the prices at which retailers sold their products turned into a company that produces plenty of upside for customers and employees and has not exactly left shareholders out. So it's not strictly wrong that some companies take advantage of rules exempting shipments worth less than $800 from tariffs; the law told them which activities are tax-advantaged, and they listened. But, as Costco illustrates, a business that starts out exploiting legal quirks needs more substance than that; ARROpenAI's ChatGPT subscriber count JurisdictionsMeta is Disclosure: Long META. Forward-Deployed EngineersThe Diff Software and HardwareOne of the classic arguments for software businesses is that the cost of mistakes is low: you can easily test changes, and the only thing you need to ship for most product recalls is a stream of bits. Hardware is harder. But Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. See a sampling of current open roles below: - A company building better analytics for pricing insurance is looking for a senior software engineer who likes turning messy data into clear answers. (NYC or Boston)
- An OpenAI backed startup that’s applying advanced reasoning techniques to reinvent investment analysis from first principles and build the IDE for financial research is looking for product-oriented software engineers. Experience at a high growth unicorn a plus. (NYC)
- YC-backed AI company that’s turning body cam footage into complete police reports is looking for a tech lead/CTO who can build scalable backend systems and maintain best practices for the engineering org. (SF)
- A hyper-growth startup that’s turning customers’ sales and marketing data into revenue is looking for a forward deployed engineer who is excited to work closely with customers to make the product work for them. (SF, NYC)
- A growing pod at a multi-manager platform is looking for new quantitative researchers, no prior finance experience necessary, 250k+ (NYC)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. |
||||||||||
|
|
|
||||||||||
|