---
subject: "An apology"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-05-28 03:33:45
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
Last Sunday, the morning recap email from The Ken titled ‘The art of intentional gatherings’ contained three paragraphs that were similar in language and detail to a [Substack post](https://heartwired.substack.com/p/the-art-of-intentional-gathering), with the same title, written by Uthara Ganesh.
The email, which summarised The Ken’s stories for that week, described how we need to be more mindful in our catchups with friends, but it was written without proper attribution to the original post. This came to our attention after some readers pointed out the resemblance. We’ve taken disciplinary action against the writer.
It is The Ken’s policy to always attribute to the original source and to acknowledge mistakes. We apologise to Uthara and our readers for this lapse.
Our daily morning emails are written by different writers each day based on their personal opinion and experiences, and in their own style. Now we will train them to ensure no one repeats the mistake in question.
As for our stories, newsletters, and podcasts, we have strong fact-checking processes in place. Additionally, we are evaluating multiple anti-plagiarism tools to integrate into our workflow.
With that renewed rigour, let’s get to this week’s stories at The Ken:
On Monday, Soumyajit [wrote](https://the-ken.com/story/sony-liv-is-set-to-upend-the-ott-pecking-order-with-the-zee-merger/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) about how Sony Liv, which has seen a sharp rise in its subscriber base lately, is set to upend the OTT pecking order with its imminent merger with Zee Entertainment. The streaming platform could even threaten market leaders such as Amazon Prime Video and Disney+ Hotstar.
Tuesday was a coffee day. From Southeast Asia’s largest coffee-drinking country, the Philippines, Isa [wrote](https://the-ken.com/story/as-filipinos-crave-more-for-local-java-philippine-coffee-farms-brew-a-plan/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) about a brewing renaissance. “In the 2000s, people would buy anything as long as it was imported. They’d pay higher prices or purchase lower-grade beans just to avoid local coffee. Now, people are paying extra for homegrown beans.” How did that happen?
On Wednesday, Anand and Seetha teamed up for an [analysis](https://the-ken.com/story/how-the-nse-turned-a-bad-year-for-indias-stock-market-into-a-great-one-for-itself/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) on how the National Stock Exchange turned a bad year for India’s stock market into a great one for itself. The answer lies in a business that has become the NSE’s largest since the pandemic.
Bureaucrats rarely give expansive interviews these days. But Pratap managed to convince the telecom secretary K Rajaraman to [discuss](https://the-ken.com/story/india-eyes-us6-12b-pan-country-non-mobile-connectivity-network/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) some key issues in the always-happening telecom industry. The Ken could also manage to connect the dots on why the secretary is optimistic about yet another phase of the optical-fibre network in India even when the previous ones have been disappointing.
We ended the week with an analysis of the visible turnaround in the fintech giant Paytm*. Gaurav and Arundhati [argued](https://the-ken.com/story/paytms-results-hint-at-a-turnaround-but-loan-collection-hacks-drive-it/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) how its 250% loan growth reveals a well-oiled distribution machine the company has built by packaging its onboarding and collection services. But it’s also a strategy that the market is divided on.
That’s all for this week. Have a good weekend.
Warmly,
Seema Singh
Editor
[editorial-feedback@the-ken.com](mailto:editorial-feedback@the-ken.com)
PS: *Paytm founder Vijay Shekhar Sharma is an investor in The Ken
What you just read is the personalised daily introduction to The Kens story. Written by a different person each day. Often insightful, sometimes witty, and very rarely boring. Someone sent this to you? [Sign up for free](https://the-ken.com/?modal=register&utm_source=footer&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=morning_email_ind_recap). [Dont like these? You can unsubscribe](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/unsubscribe/?user_id=2349339&data=xLbPTNEa5-oy5WVF_sGo0qxORKzCJaMyrQBoTbgbzppoMDAwdTAwMHkdh-bSIL0U9JSwEA6HJVK2vvO9ObmcnquGTl25E16sIDn8p1Bbbj4HIjIYVzOZJzdjNdP7QQ_TpMtBg1aAdzTco4yh9BDzajuCLUv83sHURCfh3esln0mGU7xBfXj5E40Ma3zrOQCztUJH9a6TyqCVuBp7TZFs8ID6pr--yP1ybnLMm7tOlM68Acms373ZJrBILg1rWKMNK3t_R3sFKHMkcX134fsAcCkwpq7o4z1eNf1w_U9F6zL3tF6l8pP4-SvZRL0mEfnf6UqIAe86okP7fEdmWEppbMRMGWaN5JJi5XbcXKAjKy10DlMKsrwtufryUESfuPGixcgwh88Q-st3tpS5piI6BmMF9-i5GHEpdP4fd3Aakv7fFNqs8LhOS3YEBZROSBl9rjEVpvCfOmuSWD3g9ExrBwwLLurdPmgs8ghQ-EIcBi_UU4O2NgaXM46bB3wFVNgJ5eMnqMIfOm5mNVGOYjXRGFbIgbyyoBjPjtT6nFaJR871tvd10Ft6cGHP3vHV5lhk0DsOAOPtY4Q=) Dont want to hear from us again? [ Unsubscribe from our emails here](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/?user_id=2349339&data=gl9WQsULVXE5TtSHDSDJ04RA-6-lEsc6O4uXbKhfkV9oMDAwdTAwMD9uvveHcFayvxTYSShxEcDTWbx0pazJriWhvSQoWzush7h4rfoLf0STCp2vDZqXyJvK1nbGalXHAd2OxGtfbULDIFFa3Bgd-Gns09Ad_ZZ0v076YtcvBmlfYl0pJH3Xin-W-z-2zApGdWNeuJCLV1NHJbnvFFd9fX-RWhuOZk37uMJd_4coiMm7zdf0OoXxVZmMeYngrrr4Dz5VLUOSkdsoAWd9mWT3wmz9iqw-37ClUUw6SEIpmVuGQKJCQRvbBRpuXPlK67cyHDpKvA1IIc8QAxpRqDEQP-e7iLLnOQWoSp_TMZ6IGJqy7hqEfCEfxdf0K-QhOHz3V56OGxrbWQmwSdFh5k8UIXhMJClCI0C6Rq3v4YSZGi0mQAddE5GTbHsOZLnnwM5dfmYdC5poZXzSJv-QdNNGUobQN6PI0AzUIiY6HIjeEP5-ec5t8-wV153l25d9Loam1u6hPyIEP3u2HOhavcdUveAqaIFygdyqk3HCBdcCw_xkEglAk--QMw==).
Something wrong? Tell us at [support@the-ken.com](mailto:support@the-ken.com)