---
subject: "Change is the only constant"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-07-09 03:33:51
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
It’s that time of the week again. Lazy Sundays allow you to slow down, unwind, and escape the hustle and bustle. If you have the luxury of idling on this day, you probably indulge in some TLC, hobbies, or even introspection and reflection.
I have no authority on the subject of philosophy. But my mind keeps wandering (and wondering) from topic to topic—and the foremost among these is change. Everything is transient except change, whether it is good, bad, or ugly. And change doesn’t stop—ever. It’s like a constant hum. The sea may appear still but is never calm on the inside.
Most of you might be familiar with the butterfly effect, the behaviour described by Edward Lorenz—a mathematician, meteorologist, and the father of Chaos Theory. For those who aren’t, the simplest explanation, as seen across web searches, is this: a butterfly flapping its wings in Brazil can cause a tornado in Texas. In other words, a small action, which may appear trivial, can affect complex systems and result in a large impact.
The butterfly-effect theory is intriguing as it demonstrates how something inconsequential can cause major events. Actions as simple as the time you woke up today, the cup of tea you had, or that extra second you expended on a task could have a significant domino effect. Now, imagine how much change the choices that we make consciously can bring.
Change also appears to be an underlying theme in our stories for the last week. Let’s rewind.
The transition to electric mobility is crucial to check global warming. But the infrastructure isn’t reliable. That has hampered the adoption of electric vehicles (EVs). The down rate for EV chargers in India, at 20%, is similar to other countries. What’s concerning is that for oil retailer Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd, which has the second-largest network of EV chargers in the country, the downtime is 60%. Monday’s [story](https://the-ken.com/oil-giants-dead-ev-chargers-haunt-indias-highways/) by our contributor Priyans delves to the bottom of the issue.
Tuesday’s story by Isa on the acute shortage of plastic cards for drivers’ licences in the Philippines exemplifies what goes wrong when resistance towards change exists. Due to the lack of biometric cards, paper-based licences are issued, leading to repercussions such as a spike in fake licences. Behind this is a system plagued with red tape and complex bidding processes. Read the full story to find out [more](https://the-ken.com/story/why-the-philippines-keeps-running-out-of-plastic-cards-for-drivers-licenses/?utm_source=daily_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=daily_newsletter).
Capital markets worldwide are evolving at breakneck speeds. While smartphones have made trading more accessible, it is the era of finfluencers and complex products. As markets lure first-time investors in droves, the role of the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Sebi) is becoming more pronounced. [Investor protection](https://the-ken.com/story/sebis-madhabi-puri-buch-and-the-art-of-keeping-market-players-on-tenterhooks/?utm_source=story_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=story_newsletter) is critical. Anand’s story on Wednesday discussed how Sebi chairperson Madhabi Puri Buch seems to have instilled the fear of the regulator back into the markets. However, some say it may hamper growth.
The subject of our story on Thursday is another veteran driving significant changes at private lender RBL Bank. R Subramaniakumar, who took over as chief executive of the troubled bank, is a “turnaround” specialist. Under his leadership, RBL posted its highest-ever quarterly and annual profits. Interestingly, the PSU banker’s move to make RBL branch managers function like their public-sector bank peers has yielded some positive results. Read this in-depth story by Rounak [here](https://the-ken.com/story/the-ceo-who-fixed-a-troubled-bank-by-doing-nothing-new/?utm_source=story_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=story_newsletter) in case you missed it.
Vaibhav’s article made for a fitting weekend read. The success of the Indian Premier League for cricket spawned many other such experiments. These helped raise the popularity of sports other than cricket in the country and boosted the careers of many sportspersons. But most of these leagues are struggling with broadcasts, sponsors, and administration. However, there’s an outlier—the Pro Kabaddi League. To find out why, here’s a [replay](https://the-ken.com/story/in-ipls-shadow-why-kabaddi-league-shines-and-other-sports-fade/?utm_source=story_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=story_newsletter) if you couldn’t catch the story on Friday.
That was our lineup for the week gone by. I hope you enjoyed reading these stories. We will be back with more tomorrow. Until then, think about what changes you would like to bring, provided you could. Also, if you have observed any developments that you wish to share or talk about, do write to us. We would love to hear your thoughts.
Best regards,
Meenal
[meenal@the-ken.com](mailto:meenal@the-ken.com)
What you just read is the personalised daily introduction to The Ken's story. Written by a different person each day. Often insightful, sometimes witty, and very rarely boring. Someone sent this to you? [Sign up for free](https://the-ken.com/?modal=register&utm_source=footer&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=morning_email_ind_recap). [Dont like these? You can unsubscribe](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/unsubscribe/?user_id=2349339&data=jF-twRCspYFXNTayFC-iQalQRFruONz9-DCvKfoRrE9oMDAwdTAwMFxsyzKRnwC7BNRrP2w5NKt0ntKJLrOehpRWXtB3TYa1M9qis1vXQeULPlokgxmkCzdg-wKSa4p35C_WEtHgBNx1X1t7SWrpUVYfi_qHzUQDdrzGBXdcRoehmsPf7JHqq9Vy2PXx3keJv_Ee_X-LzMASj3I-WB7vf-O0zv2s05PamAROeGi5PCbbJTEebvNFm93rWXiaCEwFyf_5Qn5hXs4-FpwJZMu0hcH5pC5JkpQzIO3RzDTC_Uu_k6dhuv2004O7mzptnuDbnD_Amti4-VxnpwRUUngXxmFekXjkglw5CxikM7Q8qMlIRo_tjmgy2u_AQ2mUA1rtvQzgFKAe0tWAow1KQoNU0K3CstDV21oH5PnKNwotv0PgjYzWGwl89sZDpUWGb96fZqbzMx9VTrr7L0Ns6YpXk8x3Nlyi98jcZy51VZh_PROChizcKKYjYn_7BTReYEhJpkIHdYAy_pZpJEiDPts7L9JvSCfvyScLct7lkG06dgAEIWgj5_vCQQy1SE_JxT_AJCEHBxFkXZQ=) Dont want to hear from us again? [ Unsubscribe from our emails here](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/?user_id=2349339&data=0GCDDsTB5o2pOWt81wdeFspILfcLG24UaLPEa-O3NlZoMDAwdTAwMOv50QPHuCcVvvHerrcFd0Ml2lytDCU_dDy-JMRU5NdwY4TGkx318NjGKDiiwmfr7r1aL8zTDSCKOybVJPzqClzvkozMReWK3KK9DDOYi6rgZUkqGoWVNg6c5GuXkNG6eNxQAxdbe-TFfAqtW_y3RtoWHJJje6GFUNqFdt5UXt9QynYNlQpTqnJBn28Irc5KSINYjvs0Z_VqKnY02WY2TNF7UhkyS_rNHUjULkFF1shYR7-WNpkjdw-5XW6uafYYKHBX-wGN6JN2F0Dj-SlspiDPjrQ3EUgzmYDWh8QJbnaUX5L3kSseLWxAwgV3EWGpShQska0Ad8ueEeMfEsKDVjpe509CgTUy2mpq1vXscZoo-JnnVdj3fOlHJ3SEYNDobJ-hpPaMc-uygU_EEWXDE63S0WespqyNeWJomV_6UdJevOe3vo2alMx5wivcchYu5Ns-4-j-ll4ZFGqfhF4bMSjZ6fSbp6Cezhk_YjVCCUZXlS4SzXkwYRnC8jhkh0yWPQ==).
Something wrong? Tell us at [support@the-ken.com](mailto:support@the-ken.com)