---
subject: "Spin it like Tata Capital"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-10-01 01:32:25
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
Long and Short
Wed, 01 Oct 25
The story behind the numbers and motivations driving India's stock market.
Good Morning Ishan,
On Tuesday, 29 September, soon after Tata Capital announced the price band for its upcoming IPO on 6 October, I received a rather unusual note from an industry player associated with the public issue.
“37,000 or 37 lakh investors? Analysts & Brokers hail the investor-friendly pricing of Tata Capital’s IPO
Tata Capital’s IPO pricing is investor-friendly and will expand the retail investor base of Indian investors in initial public offerings—this is the verdict of several brokers and analysts who attended the IPO conference of the company. Many voiced out that the Board of Tata Sons and Tata Capital has rightly kept in mind the interests of 36 lakh potential fresh retail investors who can apply in the IPO for full one-time subscription. They felt that this investor-friendly move can lead to a whole new set of retail investors applying for the Tata Capital IPO due to the impeccable credentials of the company. And unlike the unlisted shares where mostly well-off or rich investors need to invest more than Rs 3 lakh whereas genuine retail investors can now become shareholders by investing as less as Rs. 15,000 in the Tata Capital IPO.
Many brokers and analysts also opined that it is good that the Board sided with the majority of mass investors rather than a handful of 37,000 investors of unlisted shares who brought the shares in the unlisted market many months back at a different time and different valuation, which are no longer relevant.
The management team of Tata Capital said that they had received an encouraging response from QIBs and institutional investors. However, they want to encourage new sets of retail investors to become part of the Tata Group family. According to sources, institutional investors were willing to part with a much higher price than the one which was officially declared on Monday 29th September 2025.
Several other brokers and analysts were also of the view that the handful of investors who had invested in unlisted shares now have an opportunity to buy the shares at Rs. 326 per equity share (upper end) and reduce the value of their initial investors. Many others also said that the price will settle somewhere between the official price announced today and the price of the unlisted shares in the unofficial markets.”
The rest of the note sang paeans to Tata Capital’s size, growth, diversification, and asset quality.
The media caught on. “Tata Capital trims valuation to around $15.7 billion ahead of IPO launch,” said a [headline](https://www.moneycontrol.com/news/business/ipo/tata-capital-trims-valuation-to-15-7-billion-ahead-of-ipo-launch-13586824.html), with sources attributing the move to a “goodwill” gesture to leave more on the table for investors. Tata Capital’s managing director and CEO, Rajiv Sabharwal, [said](https://www.livemint.com/industry/banking/tata-capital-discount-in-ipo-price-band-retail-investors-nbfc-tata-sons-oem-bajaj-finance-shriram-finance-11759157009937.html) that the discount in the price band is to encourage retail investors. The pricing is lower than expected, the report added.
But is it really? Or has Tata Capital spun a nice little yarn?
The $15.7 billion valuation number seemed unfamiliar from what I had read earlier, so I went back to The Ken’s [story](https://the-ken.com/story/tata-capitals-ipo-has-a-tata-motors-problem/) from March this year titled “Tata Capital’s IPO has a Tata Motors problem”. Here’s what we had said then:
“It could be among India’s largest IPOs yet—one where one of the country’s marquee business houses will list one of the largest non-banks. Reportedly, a Rs 17,000 crore ($2 billion) offering, the issue—a mix of a fresh issue and offer-for-sale—will value Tata Capital at a cool $11 billion. The big offer and mighty valuation emanate from a huge business that’s been mostly under the radar so far.”
The $11 billion estimated valuation, reported not long ago, was attributed to [sources](https://www.moneycontrol.com/news/business/ipo/tata-capital-seeks-as-much-as-11-billion-value-in-ipo-12955168.html) by many media outlets over the past few months, including as recently as [August](https://www.business-standard.com/companies/news/tata-capital-to-float-2-bn-ipo-in-sept-last-week-eyes-11-bn-valuation-125083100158_1.html).
From about Rs 95,000 crore ($11 billion) to nearly Rs 1.38 lakh crore ($15.7 billion), Tata Capital’s valuation seems to have made a tidy leap in a matter of months—even as the issue size has come down from an estimated Rs 17,000 crore to about Rs 15,500 crore.
Sure, the IPO’s upper band price of Rs 326 per share is 5% lower than the Rs 343 the company had priced its July rights issue at—a [point](https://www.livemint.com/industry/banking/tata-capital-discount-in-ipo-price-band-retail-investors-nbfc-tata-sons-oem-bajaj-finance-shriram-finance-11759157009937.html) Tata Capital’s management didn’t miss making.
But here’s the thing. The rights issue was mostly subscribed to by the promoter group—Tata Group companies including the ultimate holding company Tata Sons—which together hold close to 96% of Tata Capital currently. The overall acquisition cost of the promoter group is quite low, including the rights issue. For instance, the weighted average cost of acquisition of Tata Sons in Tata Capital is Rs 34 a share. Oh, and it had also subscribed to a rights issue in March at Rs 281 per share, making a cool 22% in less than seven months. Tata Sons, with about 89% shareholding in Tata Capital, is the main selling shareholder in the offer-for-sale.
Long story short, the narrative of the IPO price being lower than the rights issue price, and hence at a “discount” to retail shareholders, skates on thin ice.
But surely, with so much virtue-signalling, the Tata Capital IPO would at least be priced lower than its peers, right? Well, not quite.
At Rs 326 per share, Tata Capital’s issue demands 35X its FY25 earnings—higher than the 12X–33X range its peers from Shriram Finance to Bajaj Finance trade at, shows the [IPO document](https://www.sebi.gov.in/filings/public-issues/aug-2025/tata-capital-limited-udrhp-i_95828.html). On a price-to-book basis, Tata Capital’s 4X is lower only than market leader Bajaj Finance’s 5.6X and higher than all its other finance peers mentioned in the IPO document—Shriram, Cholamandalam, L&T, Sundaram, and HDB.
It’s not all optics, though. Giving credit where it’s due, Tata Capital has indeed priced its IPO far lower than the Rs 750 or so the stock traded at in the unlisted market. But as The Ken [wrote](https://the-ken.com/story/sebi-watches-as-investors-in-unlisted-shares-gasp-for-breath/) in August, many investors in the unlisted market have been smoking some really different, really strong herbs. A comparison with such highs is ingenious, but hardly genuine.
That’s a wrap for this week. Please write to [longandshort@the-ken.com](mailto:longandshort@the-ken.com) with your thoughts or leave a comment on our web edition.
Best,
Anand
Got a tip? If you have a lead for a great story that The Ken can pursue, please send it to tips@the-ken.com or share it through [this form](https://theken.typeform.com/got-a-tip). To find out more about how to do this securely, read our [blog post](https://the-ken.com/blog/help-the-ken-tell-the-next-big-story/) about sharing tips with The Ken.