---
subject: "Valuation Metrics: A Cross-Examination"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <diff@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-06-06 12:10:10
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Coming in the next few weeks, we'll be looking at the business of YouTube (lots of fun stuff there), how search makes us spoiled, why intra-company miscommunications are a kind of bug (with a known solution), and two profiles of companies that are moving far afield from their core business—but maybe less so than meets the eye.
|
|
This newsletter goes out to 32,482 readers, up 375 since last week. In this issue:
Valuation Metrics: A Cross-Examination
What's Still Fundable (Con't.)
ESG and Measurement
Sentiment Tracking
Volatility
Diff Jobs
[written before](https://email.mg2.substack.com/c/eJwlkcuOrSAQRb9GZhqgBHHA4CY3_RuGR3kkrWAAu-PfN56TkGKwa9djlTMVXynf-kylkics9T5RR_wtO9aKmVwF8xK8ZqOQAGwmXo-eKaFIKMuaEQ8Tdl3zheS87B6cqSHFt2MegZJNu9HPZlqZmCi3TllljQewTnqE0Tr_6WsuHzA61PiD-U4RiUvHgbE-pciut1rP0sG_jn-1Z-8ccUvW5Doc6MN1DC29CT4Ul65Y0ffOlK1f9_Tbu9QKn7X0bZeApUcJEzhK55maDr7Kdwf_rfTSSOUkCKtArICWOyMFcJQo-EqC5pRzKqlknFFGBxgkVUpAM8AqZzthN9LjxYdy2VKN-35GIlmHspk4PJia_nr-t9BoLc-KVwz1XjAau6P_gKyfe7zRLi-MmNud_GKqZlKMgk0jk2qcPuAaHqE40JFT0jr71FxR-7Cuf9tyn3w)
The first claim to get out of the way is that DCF analysis is, fundamentally, what all investors are either doing or are betting that other investors are doing. Since investment means putting aside money today in exchange for a hopefully larger sum in the future, the question of which investment to choose is answered by determining which one's future returns are worth more. This is incredibly easy to apply to, say, a bond; it's trickier with a blue-chip stock; and it feels irrelevant when looking at more esoteric assets. But consider:
Did Facebook perform a DCF on Instagram before acquiring it? Explicitly, probably not. (There might be a spreadsheet saved somewhere that pretended to estimate Instagram's future revenue, but if it exists I wouldn't be surprised if the key decisionmakers hadn't actually opened it.) Implicitly, though, Instagram's value was the present value of future cash flows to Facebookthat wouldn't exist if it had a full-scale competitor taking share and, at least initially, operating with a lower ad load. What about collectibles? They're still worth what you expect to sell them for at some point in the future, and if that point can be predicted with some degree of accuracy then it needs to have a discount rate. For example, if you're betting that art by a particular artist will go up in price when the artist dies, you'd discount back an estimate of future sale value based on the artist's current life expectancy.
What about assets that don't provide a great return on their own, but that offer some hedging value? Gold mines have not been kind to investors, but owning gold mining stocks at times of low real rates driven by high inflation has sometimes been, well, a gold mine. If you're looking at one investment in isolation, a hedge may not be worth it. But when you consider a portfolio, what you're also looking at is the set of future opportunities you'll have to make better absolute-return investments when an external risk comes along and crushes the value of almost everything else. In that case, the hedge pays for itself not because of what you buy upfront but because of the opportunity to make future high-return investments at times when other investors can't.
What about higher-frequency transactions, like daytrading or making a market in an asset rather than owning it for the long haul? On very short timescales, DCF seems not to apply. A high-frequency trader buying 100 shares of AAPL at $145.37 and selling them at $145.38 is not, in fact, benefiting from the gradual upward drift in Apple's value as future cash flows accrue to the present, nor is this trade an attempt to benefit from a variant view that iPhone unit shipments next year will be 90.03m instead of 90m or something. This doesn't mean that DCF doesn't apply here; it does, in two ways. First, market-makers aim to have flat net exposure over time: they'll be long and short each company in roughly equal amounts over a lifetime of trading. But the traders they interact with are net biased towards being long, and are most likely paying for liquidity in order to make a trade based on a more fundamental outlook. On a microstructure scale, valuation exists but it's a rounding error. In the same way that dust in the air is affected by gravity but can bob up and down due to air currents, it's there but not the main force.
But discounted cash flows still come back to haunt us in that case. Because the trader needs to allocate resources, both human and financial, to running a trading strategy that targets a particular opportunity. A prop trading firm that puts a researcher and developer onto the task of improving their liquid single-name HFT signals is implicitly allocating the cost of a certain number of worker-months, plus the capital required to do the trades to buying a future stream of cash flows from the profits of those trades. ¹If you want to get even fancier, you can apply discounted cash flow analysis to dumb financial decisions, whether they're on a grand scale (buying an expensive new corporate headquarters at a high point in the economic cycle when running a cyclical business) or on a smaller one (trading meme stocks when you're sure they're fundamentally overpriced). The people who do this kind of thing are generally getting somebenefit from it, and it's possible to model their behavior by treating the difference between the cost of what they buy and the net present value of owning it as a form of luxury consumption. This gap can be a very large number, but that's true of plenty of other luxury goods; the bragging rights are in what you pay for, not what you get.
Doing this analysis sensibly means defining two tricky terms. What is free cash flow, and what is the discount rate?
[Here](https://email.mg2.substack.com/c/eJwlkduOhCAMhp9muNNwEGQuuNibfQ3DoSpZBw0Uzbz94kxC2oa29O-HtwjLnt_m2AuS20z4PsAkuMoGiJBJLZCnGAwbpBKCPUkwQ2BaahLLNGeAl42bwVyBHNVt0VuMe_p0PAdByWpmIb3UQLUNTmvlnVb2KZWcOYyzYOE719YQIXkwcEJ-7wmI318vSHg_RTazIh7lIX4e_Led67p6d2Yoe80eSt9q263NGP0GpYXuvGKGFpRkD79a7E671Y-2bq3OVdddtnQhFr_XhF1uJLpjq8sCoWOj7DiJhlPOqaKKcUYZ7UWvqNZSCOnErJ5uhMdAXwvvS3UFrf-7ZZBsYllt6m8uLb_c_pNoeKZ7p5oividI1m0QvuTw-wEfltMCCW45YbJomJKDZOPAlB7GL6nGQ2ou6MApaZPD3rqSCXGe_wGaSZ2s)
The two basic ways to use discount rates are, essentially, semantic differences covering the same approach:
Try to use a market discount rate based on the current risk-free rate and the historical risk premium for the asset in question, and use that to get a valuation for the company. If there's a big gap between the implied valuation and the current price, that's a trading opportunity.
Hold the price constant and back into an implied discount rate based on the valuation. This is useful in both directions; a long thesis is basically saying "investors can expect a 15% annualized return from buying and holding this asset, under the following conditions," while a short thesis ends up being phrased as " Even ifthis company reaches all of its wildly optimistic targets, your expected return from owning it amounts to what you'd get from owning risk-free treasurys."
All this is a long-winded way to say that, in the end, DCF is all there is to valuation. But "the end" is a short chunk of time! In most of the financial models I've seen, the DCF portion is a) the most important part of the model, and b) the simplest, mostly drawing on other metrics.
It's not the only way to value things. For example, many investors are fans of using comparable multiples—pick a metric, find a basket of similar businesses, and just buy the cheapest. Easy!
But it's a bit like a classic joke format. An analyst has a problem: valuing a company that doesn't produce free cash flow, and won't for several years. "I know! I'll use a comparables analysis." Now, the analyst has two problems.
Specifically, the first problem is choosing a set of comps that's actually comparable. And the second is ensuring that these comps are not all mispriced for the same reason. A comps analysis of SaaS companies would produce a 40% lower valuation today than it did at the beginning of the year, for example. But the even trickier problem is figuring out which companies are similar, and how similar they are. There are somewhat trivial examples of this; sometimes, one company in an industry will use slightly different accounting standards than the others, so comps need to reflect this. But also, the weirdest companies—which tend to be the companies whose current financials are the least useful guide to their long-term prospects—are the hardest to compare to anything else. If you're looking at a business category with high margins and strong network effects, for example, your comps table might have the market leader trading at 15x revenue, the #2 player at 2x, and the #3 player at 0.5x (with that multiple reflecting the potential value of acquiring patents and employees, not the underlying business).
Ironically, the best use case for comps is when the businesses are wildly incomparable in their current fundamentals because they're completely different approaches to solving the same problem. It was useful a decade ago to think of a media conglomerate like Viacom as a comparable for both Netflix and Facebook, since Viacom could answer the question "How much money per attention-hour does a company make when it's a mature business providing fairly passive entertainment that millions of people default to without thinking hard about it." This didn't offer a useful valuation multiple for either company (though—fun fact!—you could buy Viacom and Netflix at the same P/E in mid-2007 and the first half of 2010). What it does instead is offer a sort of valuation framework, telling you roughly how big the business can get. For DCFs, modeling growth companies is partly a question of measuring growth and partly one of measuring how durable growth is; if a business can consistently grow at higher than the discount rate being applied to it, then investments can work out very well for two reasons:
Keeping up with the growth story means consistently looking at how current operations reflect on a very long-term outlook. If part of the thesis is network effects, that means ensuring that the company is still adding users faster than competitors; if the thesis is management's execution skills, then it means keeping an eye out for avoidable mistakes, even minor ones; if the thesis is that the business is persistently willing to allocate capital to high-risk/high-reward opportunities, it means keeping an eye out for the absenceof mistakes—the best way to achieve a 100% success rate on new product launches is to never launch anything daring. If the expected period of high growth rounds up to "a really long time, basically forever," then it's possible for the company to trade at a consistent multiple of rapidly-growing earnings. Multiples compress as growth expectations decline, but they increase as investor confidence in growth goes up. Google traded at a higher P/E ratio in 2018 than it did in 2010, even though it was 3x bigger and growing a bit slower, in part because everyone who had ever bet that Google's growth would materially slow down had turned out to be wrong—the stability premium offset the slower-growth discount.
And there are some special cases where the right route to a DCF calculation is somewhat circuitous. Financials get their own special criteria. They’re hard to analyze on a cash flow basis, because cash is constantly moving around; a lender that’s able to add loans instead of growing its cash balance is, hopefully, getting more capital-efficient over time and increasing the rate at which it compounds. Net income can be wobbly, too. The high-level criterion I look at for financials is changes in their tangible book value per share. Financial companies are deploying balance sheets, and over time their ability to grow the equity portion of that balance sheet is the criterion by which they should be judged. But they’re also returning capital; per-share metrics are a good way to give them credit for that. (You’ll also want to add in dividend returns.) At maturity, the right model for a financial company is that it's scaled up to the point that it roughly earns its cost of capital; the compounding of tangible book value per share is basically the growth rate of what will look, at maturity, like a portfolio of bonds.
Last week, Bloomberg covered the story of the first CFTC regulated prediction market, Kalshi. For the first time, traders now have the ability to buy the asset class: regulated Event Contracts.
We couldn’t believe it when we saw that these markets have been live for almost a year. With inflation at 8.3% and interest rates climbing 50 bips each month traders are looking to get their feet wet in new markets.
While the S&P 500 is down 14% on the year, the top 10% of traders on Kalshi’s exchange are enjoying an average 59% ROI.
Instead of trading noise in the stock market, predict outcomes of events. Or if you want to stick with what you know, trade options on stock indices with as little as $1.
[exclusive access](https://email.mg2.substack.com/c/eJxFkd2KwyAQhZ8m3jX4n_TCi4WlrxGMThLZaII_W_L2q21hYVCG43E8n0ZnWI94qfNIGbVlytcJKsAz7ZAzRFQSxMlZRbiQjJE7sopbMooRuTQtEcBrt6scC6CzzLszOrsjvBx3zjDalKHVx63VYoB5AUwo5gQbO8yYcrsM77m6WAfBgIJfiNcRAJnDewi5XYV2teV8po59dfRR60fvaXN9PdJ69ijZT-ko0UDHvq1blhuWtToqm-LBuuKr8p_roxjtT-3WULU1Hs-83WprkVMUU4olloQSTHDPeonHUTAmZrbI-zxAx7FfaZ_KnLI2P-0pKCqXNh36hqTqa9tfQiUztTgluHxNEPS8g31Dy2_2L4zTCgFi_RM76ayIFFyQgRM58g-kikKMlGFOMaqT7VFdQbW8f0EjmeQ)
[career education provider Guild Education just raised at a $4.4bn valuation](https://email.mg2.substack.com/c/eJwlUUuOrSAQXY3MMMhPHTB4yUtvwyCUSrfCDZ82d_cN14RUURT1OecYnWEP8a1eIWXUzJLfL1Ae7nRCzhBRSRAXZ9XAhWRsmJFV3A6TmJBLyxYBLu1OlWMB9Crr6YzOLvhPxcwZQYea-UbnmfN5FWKkk2DGgJw3YBOMdDT6mauLdeANKPiF-A4ekAnXBT63VuhUR86v1LF_Hf2q577vfgtxhdTXb_UhuQyp-m_w-jJ7bLBqSAml1RHZTLvtxZ0Wgy3PnjiCNgckzDle3Xm2p199liepEz71GiK-dPyBjG0F623CJvjsfAFcI6yxDbfPJXqcj9ou4-jSZ5eOfaWjY_-pXSchJWGSz8ipthORRA50IAPpWS_JVFlhYmWbnNcROk6unfaprClr89MQoqhcOrTvG9s1vzf_SVTSl8ZU8S6_l4p-PcE-euRH1o9Cyw4eYpXbLjqrQQouhpEPcuLjw39lWUyUEU4JqpNtqFVeWbdtf5Czt-A)
[highlights the trend towards more self-driving EVs for the construction and mining industries](https://email.mg2.substack.com/c/eJwlUEuO7CAMPE2z64h_6AWL2bxrRAScNOoEIj4vk9sPdCTLBtnlcpU1BdaYLn3EXFBPU7kO0AHOvEEpkFDNkCbvNOFCMkZeyGnuiBIK-TwtCWA3ftMlVUBHnTdvTfExfBEvzjB6a2IM4SOVo7V8ZhwUc9IyJV-jWPDC55vXVOchWNDwH9IVAyAb9x1C6avQpt-lHPnBfh70X4vzPAfz62Me2lT7U0xpK1j21F-mlhjiHmt-wga2JG-fZ0yfZ7vUfjLyukOwxJJQggke2CCxUoIxMbNFvuYRHhzvKx1ynXMx9tOZUNI-v00YuujWX3v9Npr2qR9cgy_XBMHMG7jblnK7-zVqWiFAaq67yRRNpOCCjJxIxcfbhiZWKMowpxg1ZhcbKmjnl-UPTWKOYA)
[the recent re-release of ](https://email.mg2.substack.com/c/eJwlkUuShCAMhk_T7LB4qwsWs5lrWCDRZkbBAhzL2w-0VUB4JH-Sj9kUWGO69RFzQW2Zyn2ADnDlDUqBhM4MafJOUyEV53RETgtHBzkgn6clAezGb7qkE9Bx2s3PpvgYPhGj4AS9taVkHMCoUQjJOOsVW4xT3DEn-16AefKa03kIM2j4g3THAGiO-w6hNCm06XcpR37xrxf7ruO6rq68m-sKXXWsV4wwVo2qU7Qjp1IoTut2j8n6M-MddsDLFg-8-JQLdubG1sy_uCpVECnjH5PA4dp5xDmGG3ndVIkiijJKKOl4p8gwSM6l5YsabQ8vQfaVdfm0uVStVgxK2ue3CV1DU9_XZj8PldDU2jqDL_cEwdgN3AOvPH_wwTmtECDVktxkiqZKCkl7QdUg-gdWRSIHxolgBNXMLtaooJ1fln_QMJp5)[Morbius](https://email.mg2.substack.com/c/eJwlkUuShCAMhk_T7LB4qwsWs5lrWCDRZkbBAhzL2w-0VUB4JH-Sj9kUWGO69RFzQW2Zyn2ADnDlDUqBhM4MafJOUyEV53RETgtHBzkgn6clAezGb7qkE9Bx2s3PpvgYPhGj4AS9taVkHMCoUQjJOOsVW4xT3DEn-16AefKa03kIM2j4g3THAGiO-w6hNCm06XcpR37xrxf7ruO6rq68m-sKXXWsV4wwVo2qU7Qjp1IoTut2j8n6M-MddsDLFg-8-JQLdubG1sy_uCpVECnjH5PA4dp5xDmGG3ndVIkiijJKKOl4p8gwSM6l5YsabQ8vQfaVdfm0uVStVgxK2ue3CV1DU9_XZj8PldDU2jqDL_cEwdgN3AOvPH_wwTmtECDVktxkiqZKCkl7QdUg-gdWRSIHxolgBNXMLtaooJ1fln_QMJp5)[, a weak box office performer that was the topic of some popular memes in the last few weeks](https://email.mg2.substack.com/c/eJwlkUuShCAMhk_T7LB4qwsWs5lrWCDRZkbBAhzL2w-0VUB4JH-Sj9kUWGO69RFzQW2Zyn2ADnDlDUqBhM4MafJOUyEV53RETgtHBzkgn6clAezGb7qkE9Bx2s3PpvgYPhGj4AS9taVkHMCoUQjJOOsVW4xT3DEn-16AefKa03kIM2j4g3THAGiO-w6hNCm06XcpR37xrxf7ruO6rq68m-sKXXWsV4wwVo2qU7Qjp1IoTut2j8n6M-MddsDLFg-8-JQLdubG1sy_uCpVECnjH5PA4dp5xDmGG3ndVIkiijJKKOl4p8gwSM6l5YsabQ8vQfaVdfm0uVStVgxK2ue3CV1DU9_XZj8PldDU2jqDL_cEwdgN3AOvPH_wwTmtECDVktxkiqZKCkl7QdUg-gdWRSIHxolgBNXMLtaooJ1fln_QMJp5)
[says that price volatility is likely to stay high in commodities](https://email.mg2.substack.com/c/eJwlkcuO4yAQRb8m7Gzxjr1g0d1S73ozmr2FoZyUTMACnB7__eBEQlBQj1uccrbCLeXDbKlUcm5TPTYwEX5LgFohk71AntAbJpUWgo3EG-nZoAaCZVoywMNiMDXvQLZ9DuhsxRRfGaMUlNyNkE5rtYxMacr14K905KOaFaXjPCvn37p29wjRgYEn5CNFIC49HhDrWYoEc691KxfxceHfbdmCto-4roB9i2svn3vBCKU088fmFeppfbUSyWNFOG9_MHV_MdbUwT9wXbFH6baMDrpnCq3tgPXosHR7DLhCOLoWWRqFAJ1Pv5ETNJxyTjXVjDPKaC96TYdBCaFmsehxvsJF0seN92WfS7VuPZsj2WC529ifpJr_dp4vRwM2nb_cY1OeINo5gH-zrO-RvOhON4iQ26j8ZKthWknFrpLpQV7f7BohNXBBJaekKfvUsqLxuCz_AbwSo1U)
If you're interested in pursuing a role, please reach out—if there's a potential match, we start with an introductory call to see if we have a good fit, and then a more in-depth discussion of what you've worked on. (Depending on the role, this can focus on work or side projects.) Diff Jobs is free for job applicants.
A company which helps local restaurants expand to new markets through micro-foodhalls (written up in the Diff here) is looking for its first market launcher. (various locations)
A company building a marketplace for private equity secondaries is looking for a co-founder to lead deal sourcing and research efforts. (US, remote)
A company in the education space which offers advice to people from high school age through to early career professionals is looking for GM/mini-CEO candidates to own a variety of company functions. It's likely the right candidates will have a product background, but not necessary. (US, remote)
A company adding a software layer to the VC fund closing process is looking for their first Product Manager and Product Designer. (NY, Philadelphia, Remote)
A company offering working capital loans to small, traditionally-underbanked businesses is looking for engineers across the stack; infra, backend, and web. (SF)
1
Stay tuned for a future post on this business model. The proprietary trading business is fascinating, not just because of what the companies do—provide constant liquidity while determining the efficient frontier between automation and human judgment—but because of how their model lets them think about opportunities. They may be the world's most systematic and effective allocators of research time, so in a meta sense it's very good news that some of them are getting quite rich and donating their money to research on things other than systematic trading signals.
2
3
Note that the discount rate in that second scenario is not necessarily the expected return. If the analysis is right, it's an understatement; if you buy at an implied discount rate of 12% and immediately sell at an implied discount rate of 8%, you've made 50%. Whether you do sell at this point depends on whether or not you see other opportunities whose return, after accounting for capital gains taxes and other transaction costs, is higher than the implied 8% you're getting at the new price.
4
Technically some funds are only looking at the accuracy of those short-term drivers, but in effect what those funds are doing is mentally modeling a long-term investor who will adjust long-term views based on short-term results. You can go to the extra effort of estimating what a 2% revenue miss this quarter does to 2028's probably free cash flow, but in practice if you're good at estimating those near-term deviations, the binary beat/miss outcome is more tractable than getting the magnitude perfect.
5
6
[this thread](https://email.mg2.substack.com/c/eJwlkMGOhSAMRb9GlgYoIC5YTDJ5v2FQqpLxoYE6E_9-8JkQaFPa23smT7js-XLHXojd10DXgS7hX9mQCDM7C-YhBieUNgCiZ8GpIKy2LJZhzohvHzdH-UR2nOMWJ09xT5-OXgFnq_PBaJil7TvAift-EjbI0U9SgrFGykfXnyFimtDhL-ZrT8im_f3GRPcotrmV6CgNfDXyVQ_9xXu7tv6p2YphwRAzXTUp5OksNRBSq850oExnFQgApRp4bT4tDXxjYtFJLiU33AgpuOAttIZbqwH0CLPpxw4bxd-LbMs51qnTzy3Hsotl9am9fdf6cr-fQrU_3DufKdI1YPLjhuEhQw_gD6thwYS5gg-DJyeMVlp0ShiruodE9autBK4kZ1U57LUruRDn-R-8XI1d)
You’re a free subscriber to [The Diff](https://email.mg2.substack.com/c/eJwlkM2urSAMhZ9mMzT8iwMGZ3JegyBUJUfRQL3Gt7-4TZo2abPa9TV4hHkvtz32iuRJDu8DbIarroAIhZwVikvRMqm0EGwg0crIjDIkVTcVgM2n1WI5gRznuKbgMe35qxikoGSxWk3BDMFwUJ7Gvtdx6L2CSTIDTFL63vVnTJADWPgH5d4zkLBvG2R8VpHVLohH_YifD_9tcV1XhwvENE1d2FuDJMsp51RTzTijjHai09QYJYQaxaSHsYePpNvMu3qOFX34a8KNFJvq4nP3ULT5_NTvoMG4x8GZE94Osh9XiC8nvu_6krsZMpT2xug8WqaVVKyXTBvZv1zNvTJcUMkpaZfj3lTZPsb_A4LgfsQ). For the full experience, [become a paid subscriber.](https://email.mg2.substack.com/c/eJxdUk1vozAQ_TVwW-QPPpwDh7YkWroLUbVJm_SCwAyJE7CzxjQhv74myV5WsmzNs-bNzHvDSwM7pcf4pHrjTldhxhPEEs59C8aAdocedCHqGPtBSCmeuXXs15gFzBV90WiArhRtbPQA7mmoWsFLI5S8Zcx8itx9TBjBpc-gDqkPkR-xJoiiGgMhwBhHwb1uOdQCJIcYvkCPSoLLVdeBNBOV28Z7Y069Q58csrDnfD57Zg-1aBqPKwv0Q9VzLSpw6MKoI0iHJjC-Yk7exw1pj-lBXfJkTbJrdln-OYvyY4Fu2GGN8tWc5smc_H55beHnk1ge5iRf8UuWHFG22vZp1175mIapfMZbgS7L1ds1e0n7VOY2tniXq8-PXFf0HaUSedWGyw3uTr-ynHyx8PlHPo5yZFtCtPpcv812Rqu_DUvWB-aQcDBd0atBc9t6MknxPzaNZkp-fOCdnXropvEm5R8gV9JYrR4M3JSuiAkiBIUoxAQjjDzqhYixgNKgok04qyJwfNTtiPeP3wrZuToW_b6U3o3bR7vpvX1Yc4vJkUEKMxYgy6qF-u67ua_PrZ9iBxK0Xau6KE2Mw8APcOTjkPnR3WfrZsAIRT5Brq1cK5sl48nIb7d23BY)