---
subject: "Money and Legitimacy"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <the-diff@ghost.io>"
to: ""
date: 2024-10-07 14:30:53
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
In this issue: - Money and Legitimacy—One of the historical ways to show that someone new is in charge is to put their face on a coin. There are more effective methods today, but there's still a deep connection between political legitimacy and the ability to issue currency.
- Moats—Google did the hard part first.
- Big Tech Sees Like a State—Recurring revenue streams give companies new incentives.
- Shifting Costs—Amazon's AI agenda is not the same as the rest of big tech's.
- Managing Macro—Discounting and deflation.
- Experimentation—A bigger economic bloc is better, but harder to manage.
Today's issue of The Diff is brought to you by our sponsor, Money and LegitimacyIn This raises the question of what seizing power looked like before mass media. And there's an interesting answer: the first stop for a successful coup was wherever the reigning monarch lived, but the second stop was often the nearest mint, to start creating coins in the new ruler's image. This makes plenty of sense. Internally, in an environment with low literacy and few kinds of physical media, it's a good way to get the news of a new ruler to as many people as possible. Externally, it tells other countries a) who's in charge, and b) that there is someone sufficiently in-charge to mint currency that can be used to buy goods elsewhere. This is a big deal; in the fiat currency era, a good working definition of an economically-independent government is that it can create a currency that's accepted as payment outside that country, whether that's in the form of paying for imports with it or borrowing from external investors in local currency. Fiat currency still provides that same extension-of-legitimacy effect. Every time bilateral trade is denominated in dollars, or global companies headquartered outside the US report their financials in USD, or worried savers convert legal deposits in their rapidly-inflating home currency into gray-market deposits in dollars, it burnishes the US's status as a superpower. One irony of this is that one contributor to the dollar's power is that the US has, historically, exercised less control over money flows than other countries. (The mark was an important currency, but it didn't get much traction as a reserve asset or tool for global trade, because Germany was slow to liberalize currency flows as fast as other big economies. The mark was more stable, which made it an attractive reserve asset, but German policymakers recognized that if the value of the currency were to rise enough to reflect this, it would hurt German exports.) The dollar sometimes gets used as a policy tool because of its centrality to the global financial system. Sometimes, the logic works like this: - A given transaction happened in jurisdictions where it's legal. But it would be illegal in the US, and the US doesn't like it.
- One of the parties to that transaction was a global bank. That bank naturally does lots of business in dollars.
- The US threatens this banks's access to the dollar system if it doesn't adhere to US rules.
This would be called "imperialism" if the prototypical victims weren't This money/legitimacy collection will get more important over time if network states start to take off. It's likely that most network states will find that, even if they have their own currency, and even if they like it, they won't be able to import many products with it, except in cases where the seller is humoring them by pricing things in their currency with the plan to immediately export it back. Small, open economies tend to find that the best currency to use is one that's already in use by their trading partners: Ireland, Dubai, and Hong Kong all either adopted an external currency or pegged their currency to one. Singapore is an exception, but this is partly a historical artifact: in the beginning, they were doing plenty of business in British pounds, and keeping reserves in pounds was part of how they maintained relations with their former mother country. Now, they Issuing a currency makes sense for a country that has enough domestic economic activity that there's fairly predictable demand for that currency. And many countries don't qualify—for a lot of them, the financial trap that they run into is that they lack the state capacity to implement a currency peg, and lack the even higher level of state capacity required to issue and manage a useful currency. Which loops right back to the argument about currency and legitimacy: given money's network effects, the world arguably has too many nation-state-issued currencies, but perhaps too few company-issued pseudo-currencies. The latter works when it can be managed well and exploited ruthlessly, but for most purposes, just opting into an existing currency system saves them a lot of trouble. As transaction costs decline, that could easily change—the network effects of currencies are weaker if translating between them is cheap and happens invisibly to the end user. On the other hand, translating between currencies is a classic area where payments companies know they have more pricing power, because it's not as if their customers are all incredibly excited to individually figure out the most cost-effective way to turn zloty into kyat or vice-versa. Everyone needs currency, but if you're going to have one that you call your own, you need a very good excuse. This is a frequent motif in the history of the Ottoman empire, because their succession mechanism was that one of the sultan's sons would be ruler, but there wasn't a norm about which son it was. And the existing sultan tended to have a harem and lots of kids. From [1453](https://www.thediff.co/r/1a940abd?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99): "[this approach] would reach its apogee with the sultanate of Mehmet III in 1595, when nineteen coffins containing the bodies of his brothers were carried out of the palace.[↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/aca9a920?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)In a precious metals-backed system, that's a looser criterion; not everyone has gold or silver deposits in their own territory, and the gap between the purchasing power of a currency and its precious metal content is supposed to be small—seigniorage is basically a way to fund spending through lower future growth, though that's not necessarily how it was understood at the time. But this means that such coins expressed a different kind of "fiat," where instead of declaring that something otherwise worthless had value, it was declaring that something that had universally-recognized value was the product of a particular ruler. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/fa5c3f9c?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)The introduction of the cannon, for example, made larger states more sensible; they made castles a worse investment, and we even use the term [gunpowder empires](https://www.thediff.co/r/c7afa64b?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)to describe the three empires that consolidated just about everything between the Balkans and Bengal. The rise of manufacturing- and service-dominated economies lowered the rewards from conquest, since taking over a bunch of square miles while destroying most of the tangible and intangible capital was a value-destructive move. From the perspective of agrarian economies, a modern economy holds most of its wealth hostage, and will destroy it rather than getting conquered. This helps to explain why, when modern wars do happen, they're either justified by some abstract ideology, revolutionary politics or theocracy, or by nationalist claims.[↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/35e1208c?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
You're on the free list for The Diff. Last week, paying subscribers read about A Word From Our SponsorsCan this really be true?ElsewhereMoatsOne of the most irritating sources of competitive advantage is doing work that nobody thought was worth doing, and that turns out to be worth doing exactly once. This shows up in a surprising range of fields, from commercializing moonshot research to Big Tech Sees Like a StateA fun question to ask MBA students is: consider a feature for a product that doesn't make the product any better, doesn't affect consumers' decisions to buy it—but does make it a more attractive target for thieves. Something like the set of features that make the That's obviously an extreme example, and most people are not cynical enough to deliberately engineer a subpar product just so customers will have to buy more replacements. But businesses vary in how much it pays to keep products safe from customers. All else being equal, higher theft rates mean more purchases, offset by an eventually tarnished brand. But for products that monetize through usage, the seller's incentives in this respect are closely aligned with the buyers': the thieves are stealing their customer lifetime value, too! So, Shifting CostsAn interesting Disclosure: Long AMZN. Managing MacroA ExperimentationWith a given set of rules, the bigger a free trade zone is, the better: there will be more value-creating transactions available to more parties. But crafting rules gets harder when there are more interest groups, so these arrangements tend to experience a slow decline in utility after they've been around for a while. The EU is Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. See a sampling of current open roles below: - A hyper-growth startup that’s turning customers’ sales and marketing data into revenue is looking for a product engineer with a track record of building, shipping, and owning customer delivery at high velocity. (NYC)
- A fast growing startup creating autonomous precision weapons systems to safeguard the US military and our allies is looking for a machine learning engineer with expertise designing and developing computer vision systems. (Austin, Remote)
- An AI startup building tools to help automate compliance for companies in highly regulated industries is looking for a director of information security and compliance with 5+ years of info sec related experience. Experience with HIPAA, FedRAMP a plus. (NYC)
- A well funded startup founded by two SpaceX engineers that’s building the software stack for hardware companies is looking for a new grad / early career software engineers. (LA, Hybrid)
- The policy development arm of an established stablecoin is looking for an analyst to help define US crypto policy from first principles. Some background in crypto or policy preferred, but not required. (Remote)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. |
||||||||||
|
|
|
||||||||||
|