---
subject: "AI Killed The College Paper. So, What's Next?"
from: "Trung Phan <trungphan@workweek.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-05-17 05:55:28
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Trung Phan", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_7971156048460647958", "UNREAD"]
---
Last week, New York Magazine dropped a [nuclear viral article](https://link.workweek.com/click/39910237.60542/aHR0cHM6Ly9ueW1hZy5jb20vaW50ZWxsaWdlbmNlci9hcnRpY2xlL29wZW5haS1jaGF0Z3B0LWFpLWNoZWF0aW5nLWVkdWNhdGlvbi1jb2xsZWdlLXN0dWRlbnRzLXNjaG9vbC5odG1sP2hhc2hlZF91c2VyPTBlYmVmMTJjNDI5MTE4NDU2MmRhYzA5OTY1YmNlODA4/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Bcdcca0c6) written by James D. Walsh. It was titled “Everyone Is Cheating Their Way Through College” with a guaranteed-to-make-you-click subtitle “ChatGPT has unraveled the entire academic project”.
The piece just nailed the Venn Diagram of topics that will trigger people in 2025: 1) the state of higher education; 2) an ethically-questionable AI use case; 3) anxiety with the younger generations; 4) cheating; and 5) oh god, “ChatGPT”.
Here are some doozy excerpts from Walsh:
As a computer-science major, [the student] depended on AI for his introductory programming classes: “I’d just dump the prompt into ChatGPT and hand in whatever it spat out.” By his rough math, AI wrote 80 percent of every essay he turned in. “At the end, I’d put on the finishing touches. I’d just insert 20 percent of my humanity, my voice, into it.”
Got damn! Ok, next:
I asked Wendy if I could read the paper she turned in, and when I opened the document, I was surprised to see the topic: critical pedagogy, the philosophy of education pioneered by Paulo Freire. The philosophy examines the influence of social and political forces on learning and classroom dynamics. Her opening line: “To what extent is schooling hindering students’ cognitive ability to think critically?” Later, I asked Wendy if she recognized the irony in using AI to write not just a paper on critical pedagogy but one that argues learning is what “makes us truly human.” She wasn’t sure what to make of the question. “I use AI a lot. Like, every day,” she said. “And I do believe it could take away that critical-thinking part. But it’s just — now that we rely on it, we can’t really imagine living without it.”
This next one goes hard:
After getting acquainted with the chatbot, Sarah used it for all her classes: Indigenous studies, law, English, and a “hippie farming class” called Green Industries. “My grades were amazing,” she said. “It changed my life.” Sarah continued to use AI when she started college this past fall. Why wouldn’t she? Rarely did she sit in class and not see other students’ laptops open to ChatGPT. Toward the end of the semester, she began to think she might be dependent on the website. She already considered herself addicted to TikTok, Instagram, Snapchat, and Reddit, where she writes under the username maybeimnotsmart. “I spend so much time on TikTok,” she said. “Hours and hours, until my eyes start hurting, which makes it hard to plan and do my schoolwork. With ChatGPT, I can write an essay in two hours that normally takes 12.”
The teachers are trying to battle back…
Teachers have tried AI-proofing assignments, returning to Blue Books or switching to oral exams. Brian Patrick Green, a tech-ethics scholar at Santa Clara University, immediately stopped assigning essays after he tried ChatGPT for the first time. Less than three months later, teaching a course called Ethics and Artificial Intelligence, he figured a low-stakes reading reflection would be safe — surely no one would dare use ChatGPT to write something personal.
But one of his students turned in a reflection with robotic language and awkward phrasing that Green knew was AI-generated. A philosophy professor across the country at the University of Arkansas at Little Rock caught students in her Ethics and Technology class using AI to respond to the prompt “Briefly introduce yourself and say what you’re hoping to get out of this class.”
…but it’s a Sisyphean task:
Still, while professors may think they are good at detecting AI-generated writing, studies have found they’re actually not. One, published in June 2024, used fake student profiles to slip 100 percent AI-generated work into professors’ grading piles at a U.K. university. The professors failed to flag 97 percent. It doesn’t help that since ChatGPT’s launch, AI’s capacity to write human-sounding essays has only gotten better.
Which is why universities have enlisted AI detectors like Turnitin, which uses AI to recognize patterns in AI-generated text. After evaluating a block of text, detectors provide a percentage score that indicates the alleged likelihood it was AI-generated. Students talk about professors who are rumored to have certain thresholds (25 percent, say) above which an essay might be flagged as an honor-code violation. But I couldn’t find a single professor — at large state schools or small private schools, elite or otherwise — who admitted to enforcing such a policy.
Most seemed resigned to the belief that AI detectors don’t work. It’s true that different AI detectors have vastly different success rates, and there is a lot of conflicting data. While some claim to have less than a one percent false-positive rate, studies have shown they trigger more false positives for essays written by neurodivergent students and students who speak English as a second language.
Turnitin’s chief product officer, Annie Chechitelli, told me that the product is tuned to err on the side of caution, more inclined to trigger a false negative than a false positive so that teachers don’t wrongly accuse students of plagiarism. I fed Wendy’s essay through a free AI detector, ZeroGPT, and it came back as 11.74 AI-generated, which seemed low given that AI, at the very least, had generated her central arguments. I then fed a chunk of text from the Book of Genesis into ZeroGPT and it came back as 93.33 percent AI-generated.
Grim. Very grim.
Of course, every generation goes through some similar education-related concern. Socrates famously worried that the act of writing was detrimental to memory and therefore thinking. In more recent decades, various inventions —from calculators to spell check to Google to Wikipedia to Microsoft’s Clippy — have caused consternation over how students will learn critical thinking skills.
Generative AI is a totally different ball game than these previous scares, though.
Writing and submitting papers has underpinned the entire college project for over a thousand years. Now, a B-quality paper is a single-prompt and 5 seconds away.
What’s the solution? I’m the 6,556,987,999th most qualified person in the world to answer this question, so let start by sharing one statement and one memory:
Because of #2, I’m not super judgmental of college students using ChatGPT to power through their assignments. However, because of #1, I am pretty pessimistic on the academic project if the schools don’t figure out a way to integrate generative AI into the curriculum.
Everyone knows that college/university is a bundle of goods including:
- critical thinking development
- knowledge attainment
- job market signalling
- finding new friends and dating people
- networking
-
light or heavy indoctrination (depending on the school)
- a taste of independent living…
- …and also young adult babysitting
- playing Super Smash Bros. on N64 with the homies
- making my Asian parents happy
- dick around with no real responsibilities
- social and communication skills
- eating poutine at 4am after getting absolutely gassed for Peel Pub’s $5 pitcher special on Tuesdays
As schools are presently constituted, Generative AI really threatens the first three goals (critical thinking development, knowledge attainment, job market signalling).
Take my sub-par University career as an example. The reality is that my real learning took place by reading random books on my own or as Mark Twain said “Never let school interfere with your education.”
Still, going through the Wikipedia motions had elements of knowledge attainment and some skill being exercised. I at least had to go through the work of writing 5 pages-ish of words — depending on the font — and finding random quotes from physical books that weren’t just a straight up copy-and-paste from the internet. Also, the fact that I could complete those tasks were the type of skills that signalled to potential employers that I could put in the effort to do a job even if it was fake laptop work….which was basically the first decade of my professional career.
All of that is short-circuited by ChatGPT because teachers will (understandably) have the default assumption that a take-home essay was done by AI. Whereas, employers won’t trust the “grading” system…which itself already suffers from widespread grade inflation.
So, what do colleges and universities have to do to force critical thinking and rebuild a signal? They need to incentivize different outcomes.
Definitely go back to oral and Blue Book exams. But let’s also accept the reality that generative AI isn’t going anywhere. Let’s accept the reality that the entire next generation is interacting with these tools on a daily basis.
If we accept that reality, then this suggestion by neuroscientist Erik Hoel — to grade the workflow instead of the output — makes a lot of sense and [can be deployed in a reasonable timeframe:](https://link.workweek.com/click/39910237.60542/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cudGhlaW50cmluc2ljcGVyc3BlY3RpdmUuY29tL3AvdGhlLWpveS1vZi1ibGFja291dHMtYWktcnVpbnMtY29sbGVnZT9oYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B1f3606c9)
Why, in 2025, are we grading outputs, instead of workflows?
We have the technology. Google Docs is free, and many other text editors track version histories as well. Specific programs could even be provided by the university itself. Tell students you track their workflows and have them do the assignments with that in mind. In fact, for projects where ethical AI is encouraged as a research assistant, editor, and smart-wall to bounce ideas off of, have that be directly integrated too. Get the entire conversation between the AI and the student that results in the paper or homework. Give less weight to the final product—because forevermore, those will be at minimum A- material—and more to the amount of effort and originality the student put into arriving at it.
In other words, grading needs to transition to “showing your work,” and that includes essay writing. Real serious pedagogy must become entirely about the process. Tracking the impact of education by grading outputs is no longer a thing, ever again. It was a good 3,000 year run. We had fun. It’s over. Stop grading essays, and start grading the creation of the essay. Same goes for everything else.
Admittedly, I wasn’t sold on Hoel’s proposal at first glance.
I totally understand there are many ways to learn (hands on, talking, visual etc) but am firmly in the camp that writing is the best way to force critical thinking. As a newsletter purveyor, I know I’m talking my own book but would say the same thing even if you waterboarded me.
YC co-founder Paul Graham has a great article titled “Write or Write Not”, where he posits exactly a future in which[ more and more people over-rely on AI](https://link.workweek.com/click/39910237.60542/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cucGF1bGdyYWhhbS5jb20vd3JpdGVzLmh0bWw_aGFzaGVkX3VzZXI9MGViZWYxMmM0MjkxMTg0NTYyZGFjMDk5NjViY2U4MDgjOn46dGV4dD1JZiUyMHlvdSdyZSUyMHRoaW5raW5nJTIwd2l0aG91dCxJJTIwYmV0JTIweW91JTIwZG8lMjB0b28u/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B87880b68):
I'm usually reluctant to make predictions about technology, but I feel fairly confident about this one: in a couple decades there won't be many people who can write. […]
The reason so many people have trouble writing is that it's fundamentally difficult. To write well you have to think clearly, and thinking clearly is hard.
And yet writing pervades many jobs, and the more prestigious the job, the more writing it tends to require. […]
[Due to AI], all pressure to write has dissipated. You can have AI do it for you, both in school and at work.
The result will be a world divided into writes and write-nots. There will still be some people who can write. Some of us like it. But the middle ground between those who are good at writing and those who can't write at all will disappear. Instead of good writers, ok writers, and people who can't write, there will just be good writers and people who can't write.
Graham says this is a different situations than previous lost skills (eg. blacksmiths) because “writing is thinking”. It’s a much more generalized problem.
With respect to colleges and universities, I do think it’s very very bad that they can no longer force students to sit down and write stuff (or [even read stuff](https://link.workweek.com/click/39910237.60542/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cudGhlYXRsYW50aWMuY29tL21hZ2F6aW5lL2FyY2hpdmUvMjAyNC8xMS90aGUtZWxpdGUtY29sbGVnZS1zdHVkZW50cy13aG8tY2FudC1yZWFkLWJvb2tzLzY3OTk0NS8_aGFzaGVkX3VzZXI9MGViZWYxMmM0MjkxMTg0NTYyZGFjMDk5NjViY2U4MDg/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Ba3dcabbd)).
But after digesting Hoel’s point, I realized that grading the workflows is a decent alternative because the AI chat interface is writing. ChatGPT and its competitors are incredibly powerful conversational partners intermediated through text. It may not be “5-page essay with 12 font” type of writing but it is writing that is natural to a younger generation. Hell, Socrates would recognize the ChatGPT conversation as closer to the oral tradition of learning and his Socratic method than the “5-page essay with 12.5 font”.
I also think there are many advantages for the AI chat route as a pedagogical tool. Think about how often we text via SMS and group chats ever day. It’s very natural, especially compared to a blank page with blinking cursor. Compared to asking a human, there’s no concerns about asking "stupid" questions. A major part of learning is staying motivated and engaged. If that means a chat interface, then so be it.
To be extra extra extra clear, I’m talking specifically about writing workflows over outputs in the context of higher education. I’m long past having to write for school and will only ever publish my own words with my idiotic own jokes. People should absolutely be writing on their own on topics they are interested in all the time. Writing forces you to wrestle with an idea like nothing else. Write for yourself. In a journal or a blog or online or in group chats or in email chains or in random Amazon reviews for Banana slicers. Always be reading, writing and thinking.
In a recent interview, OpenAI CEO Sam Altman [explained how he saw different age demographics using ChatGPT](https://link.workweek.com/click/39910237.60542/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cueW91dHViZS5jb20vd2F0Y2g_dj1jdGNNQTZjaGZEWSZoYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B0d2cdcbf):
It reminds me of when the smartphone came out and every kid was able to use it super well. Older people took like three years to figure out how to do basic stuff. […]
The generational divide on AI tools right now is crazy. […]
I think [this is a] gross oversimplification but older people use ChatGPT as a Google replacement. Maybe people in their 20s and 30s use it as like a life advisor. Then, people in college use it as an operating system.
Even if you want to discount Altman’s take for inherent bias, it feels directionally correct. With AI chatbots, I think it makes sense to meet the students where they are at.
Ultimately, the higher education bundle we talked about earlier is supposed to prepare students for the real world. Guess what? Knowing how to use AI and how to manipulate the correct models and how to ask the right questions and how make the right prompts is what will be valuable in coming decades. I find a lot of credence in the popular line that “AI won’t take your job, but someone who knows how to use AI will.”
So, grade the workflow (and not the output). Let’s just keep some form of writing to force critical thinking and make sure there’s a signal for future employers.
Is grading the workflow actually worse than grading Trung Phan on Wikipedia? It might not be the most ideal situation but we have to be realistic about the technology. It’s definitely better than grading a “5-page essay with 13 font” that was 98.5% done by AI. The teacher can also train his or her requirements into an AI and have it mark the workflows, thus freeing up time for more hands-on teaching. Again, is that any worse than a teacher reading 100 papers on The Great Gatsby that are all +/-2% derivations of Coles Notes?
Honestly, smartphone and all the apps as a distraction machine have probably done more damage to kid’s ability to focus and learn than AI ever will.
Especially if a workflow standard is implemented.
“Ok, Trung, will you let your kid use AI?”
Let me first say that I’m not giving my son a smartphone until he’s at least 15. However, we already allow him to use a laptop for design work and to research for topics he’s curious on.
On the few occasions he’s dabbled with AI chat, I’ve applied the same rules I do for general screen time. I just limit the usage and only allow him to interact with supervision. Make sure he’s not getting the sycophantic model update and teach him how to cross-check the facts. It’s an intellectual sparring partner not a “you don’t have to ever do any cognitive work” partner.
If you’ve ever played the “why game” with your kid — as in they ask “why?” 10x in a row on some random topic and you tap out after the first three questions — then you’ll know that ChatGPT is a high-quality learning tool in the right context.
Part of that context is availability and I’ve borrowed a concept called “Best Available Human” from [Wharton Professor Ethan Mollick as a decent principle](https://link.workweek.com/click/39910237.60542/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cub25ldXNlZnVsdGhpbmcub3JnL3AvdGhlLWJlc3QtYXZhaWxhYmxlLWh1bWFuLXN0YW5kYXJkP2hhc2hlZF91c2VyPTBlYmVmMTJjNDI5MTE4NDU2MmRhYzA5OTY1YmNlODA4/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Be71b324b) :
I would like to propose a pragmatic way to consider when AI might be helpful, called Best Available Human (BAH) standard. The standard asks the following question: would the best available AI in a particular moment, in a particular place, do a better job solving a problem than the best available human that is actually able to help in a particular situation?
I also want my kid to know how to use AI because there is obvious upside since the tool is flexible enough to meld with any student’s specific needs. Per [Nature](https://link.workweek.com/click/39910237.60542/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cubmF0dXJlLmNvbS9hcnRpY2xlcy9zNDE1OTktMDI1LTA0Nzg3LXk_aGFzaGVkX3VzZXI9MGViZWYxMmM0MjkxMTg0NTYyZGFjMDk5NjViY2U4MDg/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B54b34701), a recent “meta-analysis of 51 research studies published between November 2022 and February 2025…indicate that ChatGPT has a large positive impact on improving learning performance”. To be sure, the classroom results required proper integration of the tool as an intelligent tutor and learning partner.
This classroom integration is still a work-in-progress but it will come.
There’s a long history of the first use case of new technologies missing the mark. This trend plays on the idea of skeuomorphism, when an older design cue is used to make something new feel familiar:
-
Electricity was first adopted in factories in the early 20th century…by replacing centralized steam engines that ran the entire length of a building. Eventually, factory owners realized there didn’t have to be a centralized electric-powered motor. They could actually build entire new factories and workflows because electricity could operate in more flexible and modular floor plans.
- Automobiles were initially conceived as “horseless carriages”…and featured whip holders instead of steering wheels (and it took time for the dashboard and pedals to be integrated).
- Early television was filmed like stage plays…directors used single cameras on a small set and the scripts were still very dialogue heavy (close-ups, camera movements, editing and more visual language came after).
-
Steve Jobs thought the killer app for the first iPhone…was a better phone call experience. He specifically pointed at a swipe-able contact list as the breakthrough. The iPhone didn’t even launch with 3rd party apps. Eventually, the iPhone’s “computer in your pocket”, GPS, contact list and always-on internet led to actual killer apps including social media (Facebook), transportation (Uber), convenient payments (Apple Pay), navigation (Maps) and on-demand single bags of Doritos when you’re too lazy to go to 7-Eleven (Instacart).
- The first smartwatches tried shrinking smartphone UI onto the wrist…before integrating more native features such as quick glances, haptics, and passive health tracking.
Once we figure out how to properly use AI in education, my friend Jack Butcher makes a fair point that the flexibility and ease-of-use will “raise the floor of education”.
This doesn’t mean 10 hours in front of a screen, but it also doesn’t mean 0 hours.
I ultimately want my son curious, engaged and motivated on his own. That’s the best defense against a sclerotic education system (“Never let school interfere with your education.”)
Let’s get back to the colleges and universities. Confidence in the value of higher education was declining sharply [even before the launch of ChatGPT.](https://link.workweek.com/click/39910237.60542/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuaW5zaWRlaGlnaGVyZWQuY29tL25ld3MvYnVzaW5lc3MvZmluYW5jaWFsLWhlYWx0aC8yMDIzLzA3LzExL2FtZXJpY2FuLWNvbmZpZGVuY2UtaGlnaGVyLWVkLWhpdHMtaGlzdG9yaWMtbG93P2hhc2hlZF91c2VyPTBlYmVmMTJjNDI5MTE4NDU2MmRhYzA5OTY1YmNlODA4/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Bcbb898a3) Nearly 3 years later, how have these institutions responded? It doesn’t [look like they’ve done much](https://link.workweek.com/click/39910237.60542/aHR0cHM6Ly94LmNvbS90eWxlcl9hX2hhcnBlci9zdGF0dXMvMTkyMjI2Mzg4NjA0NjEzMDY4MD9zPTEwJmhhc2hlZF91c2VyPTBlYmVmMTJjNDI5MTE4NDU2MmRhYzA5OTY1YmNlODA4/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Bf83d8db0).
There has to be way more imagination…especially with some of these insane tuition prices. I don’t care how much Super Bros someone gets to play with the homies, that alone is not worth $50k+ a year.
The college essay is no longer the right teaching vehicle in a world of ChatGPT. It simply won’t survive AI chatbots but that doesn’t mean the entire academic project is doomed. But schools have to immediately adjust to the potential of generative AI. If they don’t, you know New York Magazine will be licking their chops for future articles.