---
subject: "Blockchain Meets Bio"
from: "Not Boring <notboring@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-06-06 12:54:09
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Not Boring", "STARRED", "YELLOW_STAR"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2982495070691762429", "STARRED", "YELLOW_STAR"]
---
Today’s Not Boring is brought to you by…
With For free trial access to Tegus, click Hi friends 👋, Happy Tuesday! The weather here in NYC continues to be immaculate and the world’s technologists continue to give us stuff to be optimistic about. Life is good. Quick programming note: welcome to our Summer Schedule. We’ll be publishing Monday pieces on Tuesday through Labor Day (and potentially beyond) so that I’m not spending every Saturday and Sunday this summer debating whether I should go outside with Puja and the kids or stay inside to write. Rules are made to be broken though: we’re publishing next week’s piece on Sunday. You’ll see why. Today’s post is a guest post from Not Boring’s very own Biotech Partner, We’re firm believers that some of the coming years’ most magical technology will be built at the intersections of different disciplines. Elliot’s piece is an exploration of one of those intersections. Let’s get to it. Blockchain Meets BioA Dispatch from the Future by As our plane descended toward the Black Mountain, we saw the glowing Adriatic Sea in the distance. Night fell. We weaved our way along narrow mountain roads and entered a deep tunnel, emerging on the other side of an otherwise impassible rock face. Our ride ended at a small beach village nestled directly at the foot of the mountains. It was not an ordinary beach village. This was a city within a city, an experiment with statehood embedded within another state. Members of a global digital tribe concerned with running one of the largest World Computers had decided to make this their temporary home for several months. It was an experiment in digital citizenship. We joined this city as representatives of another tribe—the biotic tribe. In their ongoing experiment with statehood, the World Computer tribe had come to a realization. Sovereignty is intimately connected to physical abundance. Societies need to run on atoms. Materials, food, water, medicines. They began to wonder: what tools exist to develop local, independent, sustainable supply chains? Our answer was: biology. Using the tools of synthetic biology, perhaps this new Network State could one day meet all of its material needs by growing everything. Could they grow their own cement to make new buildings, their clothing, and their medicines by using biology as a technology? This was a Summit—a meeting between tribes. It was a chance to establish a shared language. To consider how distributed biomanufacturing could advance the cause of Network States, and how the vast and decentralized World Computer could be harnessed to accelerate science. No, unlike Packy’s As the resident bio-optimist at Not Boring, I was excited to brainstorm about ways to power future societies using distributed biomanufacturing. Beyond that, a major goal in attending this summit was to more deeply understand the other direction of this relationship—what problems are members of the Decentralized Science (DeSci) community solving for scientists? While sentiment around crypto is at a major low, the DeSci community seems to remain as energized as ever. Zuzalu has been Still, my time at Zuzalu updated my priors on just how crazy the future is going to be. You’ll need to strap in because this is a complex story with many Here’s a general map of where we’re going to go: A primer on Network States — distributed digital citizenship Distributed biomanufacturing — make anything, anywhere Decentralized Science — expanding the aperture of research, accelerating progress
So, let’s jump in! What is a Network State? A Primer on Network States — distributed digital citizenshipAccording to the Oxford English Dictionary, a State is a “community of people living in a defined territory and organized under its own government; a commonwealth, a nation.” As a species, we’ve spent an exorbitant amount of energy and spilled a lot of blood drawing these territorial definitions. They have ebbed and flowed throughout human history, as empires have consolidated borders before splintering into a patchwork of smaller nations. For all of the unbundling, some states have also rebundled to control large swathes of entire continents. If you’re a citizen who is dissatisfied with the state you inhabit, what are your options for recourse? In some parts of the world, a viable path is to pursue political action. You can vote for the change you want, and convince other citizens to do the same. What if that doesn’t work, or if the dissatisfaction is so fundamental that it is unlikely to be resolved through any political change that is possible in your lifetime? Hopefully, you have the right to exit. One example of exiting a state is immigrating to another one. A more extreme version of exit is leaving an existing state to build a new one. One example of this type of exit is the profound social experiment that we call the United States of America. Discontent with remote rule from Great Britain, the Founding Fathers set out to build a new system of governance from the ground up. Unfortunately, this wasn’t a peaceful exit despite the geographic separation from Britain—the American Revolutionary War ensued. Now, a quarter of the way into the 21st century, we find ourselves in an interesting predicament. Nearly every corner of the Earth has been claimed by an existing state. We even have layers of global governance like NATO and the UN that play a role in enforcing and legitimizing claims of statehood. Is it still possible to start a new country from a blank slate? What if you are a young political revolutionary convinced that the U.S. has become the Having been described as “Einstein if he had Internet access,” Balaji Srinivasan is one of the most novel and prolific thinkers of our era. Balaji has spent time as a General Partner at Andreessen Horowitz (a16z), the CTO of Coinbase, and co-founded several successful companies in disparate domains including Earn (online payments for completing tasks), Counsyl (genetic screening), and Teleport (a search engine for digital nomads). His track record is evidence of his intense curiosity, capability, and intellectual range. Balaji has also gained a reputation as a forecaster worth paying attention to. He was a very early proponent of Bitcoin and was one of the first people to raise the alarm about the COVID pandemic. Balaji paints a picture of the future that is very different from the present. We’re talking about Recently, Balaji released a deeply hyperlinked 262-page nation-building handbook called For me, the main idea of what was being proposed started to click in the Cloud first, land last. In the most compressed version of Balaji’s historical narrative, Western society had a frontier until we hit the Pacific Ocean. Over time, we’ve developed dense regulatory and legal scar tissue that has impeded our range of motion, making it harder to innovate in the world of atoms. In response, we built the World Wide Web, opening up a new digital frontier. Where do we go from here? One option is to continue to explore the physical frontier—venturing outward into space. Another option is to re-architect our societies here on Earth by harnessing the action potential of digital communities to manifest real physical change. What does Balaji propose this would actually look like in practice? The idea is for digital communities to begin expanding their physical footprint by acquiring a large number of Okay, but what is the likelihood that a network state will ever actually form? I think the likelihood is surprisingly high. First, it’s important to keep in mind that The second factor that makes all of this more likely is that people are already experimenting with putting these ideas into practice. I know this firsthand because that’s what One of the major critiques of the world of web3 and network states is that it is a castle of digital abstractions without any way to tether it to physical reality. The FTX collapse was One of the best distillations of this viewpoint so far is the essay
I think that this framing captures important viewpoints from two increasingly divergent tech communities. To me, the major open question moving forward will be what happens as the Atoms/Bits dichotomy blurs. Will Washington be able to navigate an Internet-driven future successfully? Will the Bits actually be able to mobilize and transform some of their digital wealth into physical cities and societies worth living in? Zuzalu is like the Ethereum community’s version of the Mayflower—it is an initial vessel shepherding devoted believers from the space of Bits into the space of Atoms. The core wish is to freely establish a society consistent with a specific set of ideals. It’s a chance for leaders of a globally distributed community to actually break bread together and physically connect, often for the first time. The focus areas of this first pop-up city are almost like a direct response to Nadia’s criticism. The community is centered around a “shared desire to learn, create, live longer and healthier lives, and build self-sustaining communities.” Zuzalu is an experiment in building a new type of city from the ground up. Starting from a blank slate, what are the building blocks of a city people truly love living in? One of the answers is centered around digital and frictionless state services. This is the basis for the experiment with Another layer of exploration at Zuzalu is around regulation for physical experimentation. In the United States, the FDA dictates what diseases—referred to as indications—drugs can be developed to treat. This is a bottleneck for the longevity biotech community because there is no indication for treating aging. As Nadia points out, members of the Atoms tribe would advocate for a change to this policy in Washington. At Zuzalu, the alternative approach is to develop a parallel regulatory system in a What about the problem of building the physical infrastructure necessary to supply the needs of a truly self-sustaining city? Here, the hope is that synthetic biology and distributed biomanufacturing could breathe life into Network States in a novel way—ushering in a green and vibrant solarpunk future. This was the rationale for the Distributed biomanufacturing — make anything, anywhereWhat is the most advanced manufacturing system on Earth? One answer could be Elon Musk’s “ Cells are programmable molecular factories capable of producing every aspect of the biosphere that carpets our entire planet. That probably isn’t how biology was described to you in primary school, but it’s true. Despite our best efforts, we are still eons away from rivaling the atomically precise machinery that Evolution has developed. Biological systems are adaptive, resilient, efficient, and beautiful. The fundamental insight of synthetic biology is that our fastest path to viable nanotechnology is to learn how to program biology. According to Drew Endy, one of the pioneers of synthetic biology, the field is a sort of meta-discipline. The goal isn’t to make any specific product using biology, it is to develop the tools and frameworks necessary to develop any bioproduct. In his talk at Zuzalu, Endy shared the vision that Here’s a tangible example: in the 1970s we developed basic tools that let us copy and paste DNA. We discovered tools for cutting DNA at specific sites called In his talk at Zuzalu, Lab automation and AI — we are transitioning from an era of bespoke and manual experiments to a world with foundries full of robots and machinery making millions of precise measurements. At the bits level, AI is a powerful tool for modeling biology. While math helped us describe principles of fundamental physics, AI may be a better tool for predicting the complex and nonlinear dynamics of cells. I’ve previously argued that biotech is the [physical domain that has benefitted the most from AI to date](https://substack.com/redirect/ba75ca86-e688-4418-ae2c-7a5cb8c9fa7b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).DNA Synthesis and CRISPR — restriction enzymes and ligases gave us the ability to shuffle around stretches of DNA. Now, DNA synthesis technology makes it possible to write new DNA. CRISPR is a [Nobel-winning advance](https://substack.com/redirect/e9b995da-2b82-4e5a-9f2c-7e3634e9723a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)that gives us “Genetic scissors: a tool for rewriting the code of life.” If we had only copy and paste before, CRISPR gives us the edit function—the ability to change specific bases of DNA programmatically. Imagine curing a genetic disease by editing the dysfunctional gene back to a functional state.Genomics — Between 1990 and 2003, scientists around the world coordinated to produce the first reference map of the [human genome](https://substack.com/redirect/a222b148-e644-4ce9-87b0-26cd7c4cc87c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)—the set of genetic sequences defining our species. This ambitious project cost nearly $3B. Since then, DNA sequencing has[decreased in cost faster than any technology in human history](https://substack.com/redirect/2a1bfb58-a075-428b-8dd8-3d5e117ab7ca?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), including computing. Companies are racing towards a[$100 genome](https://substack.com/redirect/1124925b-b7c2-4dda-a788-c2f7549f3621?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), which is absolutely insane.
Copy, paste. Read, write. Edit, program. These aren’t analogies to information technology—biology is an information technology. As Kelly would put it, “biology is programmability for the physical world.” As a scientist, I’ve been obsessed with building on top of this emerging tool stack. If you want to go deeper on this tech, I’ve written the If insulin was the killer app for v1 of genetic engineering, what kinds of things can we build with v2? The loftiest claim for synthetic biology is that the answer is basically everything. McKinsey Several incredible examples were on display at the summit in Zuzalu: Materials: Biomason CEO Ginger Dosier shared her vision to build a distributed network of bioreactors that grow cement using biology. Cement is the world’s most used human-made material, so the transition away from kilns would have a huge impact on reducing carbon emissions. Clearly, distributed cement production would be interesting for network states. Chemicals: Jennifer Holmgren, the CEO of Lanzatech, told us about the synbio-powered chemical plants they are building around the world to convert carbon emissions into products like fuels, proteins, and materials. They [feed emission streams to microbes](https://substack.com/redirect/49fde633-1fe0-466d-8191-9e49ff654262?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)that spit out chemical products using their metabolic machinery. Could network states one day crowd-source ownership of their own chemical plants?Medicines: synthetic biology isn’t just applicable to planetary health—it also has the potential to transform human health. Mark Kotter, who is an academic neurosurgeon and the CEO of [bit.bio](https://substack.com/redirect/2f51b845-2ce0-43b6-b67a-57cb22293b88?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), told us about his vision to develop a new generation of medical therapies by reprogramming human cells. Specifically, bit.bio is building a platform on top of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), another[Nobel-winning discovery](https://substack.com/redirect/6d6db275-f6aa-41ce-9396-6c50cbe7d644?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)that makes it possible to transform differentiated cells back into stem cells—the type of cell that can then be transformed into any other cell type in the body. This vision directly overlaps with the longevity focus at Zuzalu.Food: Agriculture is a critical module in the operating system of any modern civilization. Jason Kelly highlighted several key [strategic acquisitions](https://substack.com/redirect/33f9e284-a38f-49eb-9192-f3b4bb095983?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)that dramatically expand Ginkgo’s capabilities in this market. Mark Kotter also highlighted the potential for the bit.bio platform to accelerate the growing[cellular agriculture](https://substack.com/redirect/245ccb91-c056-4f3f-b5e3-e6bf664f916a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)market. So far, removing animals from food supply chains has been an afterthought for industrial economies with entrenched processes. For new societies without[almost 100 million cows](https://substack.com/redirect/fbfded91-1a64-4b22-9100-7213f3782f8b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), this value proposition could be a lot more compelling.
It’s fairly obvious why a network state would want this type of technology. If you could grow your own physical resources using distributed biomanufacturing, this would accelerate progress towards total independence and sovereignty. Again, sovereignty is intimately connected to physical abundance. Self-sufficiency could dramatically reduce the current asymmetry in negotiation with larger nation states. This has the potential to be an equally beneficial opportunity for the synthetic biology community. Historically, synthetic biology has gone through several funding winters, It’s hard to compete with existing industrial systems (at least initially) but it’s easier to produce small amounts of chemicals everywhere. As Drew Endy framed it, “I’ve been trying to convince industrial states to build networked biotech. Could the story be different trying to convince network states to build networked biotech?” Here’s an intuition pump for one possible outcome: you will find essentially zero credit cards in China. The reason for this is that China was The threads of blockchain and biology also intertwine in the inverse direction. As Jocelynn Pearl and I have One of the primary biomedical funding mechanisms increasingly supports (literally) senior researchers pursuing incremental ideas. The growing Decentralized Science (DeSci) community seeks to use crypto to disrupt this trend. Can we use crypto capital markets to fund moonshot science projects? Can NFTs be used in creative ways to simplify and accelerate scientific commercialization? Will DAOs help organize productive online research communities? Decentralized Science — expanding the aperture of research, accelerating progressScience is one of the most important public goods that society produces. The One early piece of infrastructure for DeSci that is emerging is the The core IP-NFT protocol is a complicated piece of legal and technical innovation, so it’s easier to get an intuition for the use case by focusing on how early projects have been structured. The And who is funding VitaDAO? Somewhat surprisingly, venture capitalists and even Big Pharma have been willing to interact with this community very early on. VitaDAO announced a Intellectual property still exists in the realm of bits, but crypto is beginning to infiltrate the world of atoms, too An organization called Here’s the
They are trying to use the World Computer to increase fluidity between bits and atoms. With infrastructure like the IP-NFT protocol and LabDAO in place, more science DAOs are starting to emerge. The range of interests is substantial, which is sort of the point. Looking through the DAOs on It doesn’t matter what the project is, the goal is to create a web3 toolbox for communities to mobilize around whatever they want to research and to actually make things happen. One common question from web3 skeptics is: “Why does this require web3? Why isn’t HairDAO just HairLLC? We don’t need to reinvent corporate structures and governance.” After spending some time with various DAO communities at Zuzalu, I care less about this type of skepticism. Clearly, people from all around the world are deriving value from these new tools for coordination, ownership, and transaction. Increasingly my mental model of web3 is that it is a new set of Web protocols that has the potential to transform all of the energy stored up in hyperactive subReddits into actual decentralized communities working to solve the problems they care about. The proof of the value of these new tools is the extent to which they catalyze real action. At Zuzalu, Paul Kohlhaas asked the question: “Statistically, what is the single largest determining factor in a person’s overall success?” The answer is: the zip code where you were born. This is especially true for access to science. As a scientist with the privilege of working at Stanford, I benefit from great funding resources, high-performance computing (HPC) resources, one of the best tech-transfer offices, and a circling swarm of VCs in the area. The boldest version of the DeSci vision is to build the Web-native versions of these resources: better funding mechanisms (IP-NFTs, etc.), better HPC resources and lab marketplaces using the World Computer (LabDAO, etc.), better translational resources (the growing army of BioDAOs). I was consistently amazed by the diversity of this growing community in terms of both countries of origin and training backgrounds. If synthetic biology could offer network states a new level of physical vitality and abundance, the reciprocal offer from the crypto community is to build the protocols, tools, and communities to spread access to science to every corner of the globe. As somebody embedded in the world of research and startups, I’m comfortable with the idea that our future will be very different from the present. Frankly, I’m an accelerationist. I believe we should accelerate progress in the physical world and Outside of the nation-states that most of us inhabit, technologists are attempting to build totally new sovereignties. These network states and startup cities will be the home to new types of political and physical experimentation—and they may be some of the earliest adopters of our most advanced distributed biomanufacturing solutions. Just as scientists have solutions to offer to network states, DeSci is working to give anybody with an Internet connection the ability to participate in cutting-edge research. Perhaps crypto is “seeding a parallel universe with online communities” but these communities hold the ideals of permissionless entrance and community ownership. I, for one, will be following their progress—waiting to see the first moment where a medicine funded by a DAO delivers value in the clinic. What a time to be alive! Departing from the Thanks to That’s all for today. We’ll be back in your inbox on Friday and Sunday. Have a great week out there! Thanks for reading, Packy |