---
subject: "Introducing The Nutgraf podcast—Ep #1: Shein on you crazy diamond"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-08 04:42:04
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
Before I get to today’s edition, here’s the big news.
Introducing The Nutgraf Podcast
If you’re new here, for over five years now, nearly every Saturday, I’ve turned up in the inboxes of half a million registered users of The Ken with an edition of The Nutgraf, The Ken’s weekend newsletter, written by me. I’ve tried to describe The Nutgraf in many ways over the years, but of late, I just say it’s a newsletter where I find interesting ways to write about things that interest me.
Several subscribers have written back over the years asking if I could just create audio versions of my newsletter.
“Can you just read me your newsletter in your soothing voice while we are lying in bed on Saturday morning, hungover from last night’s party?”
So today, years later, I’ve decided to start this podcast by doing just that.
Every weekend, I’ll read out the newsletter, in my own voice… without any AI. It’s all me.
We’ll start there. And just like The Nutgraf changed and evolved over the years, so will this podcast. Maybe someday I’ll do an interview, or conversations, or maybe something else, who knows.
As always, I’ll find interesting ways to talk about things that interest me.
That’s the promise.
You can listen to the first episode, which is a read-aloud version of today’s edition, here:
Subscribe. It’s free for now. And tell me what you liked and what you didn’t.
So the rumours were true.
Chinese fast-fashion platform Shein has relaunched in India through a partnership with local conglomerate Reliance’s retail chain, nearly five years after Shein was banned amid diplomatic tensions between New Delhi and Beijing.
The new Shein India Fast Fashion app, developed and launched by billionaire Mukesh Ambani’s Reliance Retail, marks the firm’s significant return to one of Asia’s largest retail markets ahead of the Chinese firm’s much-anticipated public listing later this year.
The app’s revival comes under stringent conditions that give Reliance complete control over operations and data. Under the partnership structure — disclosed recently by India’s commerce ministry — Shein will operate purely as a technology partner, with Reliance maintaining full ownership of the platform through its subsidiary. The arrangement requires all customer data to be stored in India, with Shein having no access rights.
Shein app relaunches in India with Reliance partnership, [Techcrunch](https://techcrunch.com/2025/02/01/shein-app-returns-to-india-via-reliance-deal/)
For all practical purposes, this translates to Reliance “owning” Shein in India now. Reliance owns Shein’s mobile app. Reliance keeps all of the data of India’s users. Reliance manages the entire supply chain—from inventory and operations to products, all of which are apparently sourced, designed, and manufactured locally in India. And in return, Shein gets a licensing fee, paid by Reliance, for using the Shein brand name.
On the face of it, the conventional wisdom is that this is a win for Reliance and that Shein got the worse end of the bargain. I think there’s some merit in this argument, but the more I think about it, the less I’m sure. If anything, this deal makes the most amount of sense for Shein, and I am left wondering what Reliance is getting out of this deal.
In the past, I’ve written about how Chinese companies are finding their way back to India on the backs of Indian companies. Last year, I gave this a name. I called it the [Gobi-Manchurification effect](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/the-gobi-manchurification-effect/). Take something Chinese. Indianise it. Serve it. Voila. It’s Indian… or is it Chinese? Who knows anymore.
Back in 2022, just before India banned Shein, along with several other Chinese apps such as Tiktok, the ostensible reason provided by the Indian government was that these apps were “prejudicial to sovereignty and integrity of India, defence of India, security of state and public order”. That sounds like serious stuff. It’s not like Shein could have come to the Indian government in 2025 and said, “We note your concerns and we spent the last three years fixing them. So now can you please let us back in?” It wasn’t like Shein had missed conforming to some license requirement, or some FDI requirement, or some marketplace-inventory press note that they could fix with some lawyers and corporate restructuring. Shein wasn’t suspended. It was expelled.
And now, three years into your exile, you get a call from the mightiest Indian company which says, “Let us use your name and brand in India for the next few years. We’ll do all the work. We’ll even build your app. You don’t need to do anything. Oh, and we’ll send you a big fat cheque every month.”
If you are Shein and have been banished for life, you might be tempted to say, “Sure, why not?” Earlier, Shein was operating in India and making some money. Then it was stopped from operating in India and couldn’t make any money. Now it’s still not operating in India, but it’s getting paid money. At least one Shein executive deserves a promotion here.
But maybe you could flip the whole thing around and then say, “No, Reliance actually got a much better deal, because Reliance is going to really take Shein to the next level in India and that cheque it’s writing to Shein isn’t really that big or as fat as we think. In this deal, Reliance has all the leverage, not Shein.”
Well, there’s some evidence for this. Shein isn’t in a great place right now. It’s doing phenomenally well in China, but everywhere else across the world, it’s on the backfoot. In the same week that Shein reentered India via Reliance, it faced increased pressure and scrutiny from two massive markets—the EU and the US.
It’s quite rare, especially these days, for Europe and the US to agree on anything, but in this case, they found a common enemy in Shein in the same week. First, the United States Postal Service announced that it would stop accepting packages from China (which it later backtracked on). This order, signed by President Donald Trump, levied additional tariffs on all Chinese imports into the country and specifically targeted lower-value packages that e-commerce companies in China ship to the USA. And who loses the most from this deal? Shein, of course.
On Tuesday, America sneezed.
By the next day, Europe had caught the cold.
Chinese online marketplace Temu and fast-fashion retailer Shein will be liable for the sale of unsafe and dangerous products on their platforms, the European Commission said on Wednesday, as part of a crackdown against a flood of cheap e-commerce imports into the European Union.
The EU executive also said it would coordinate a joint investigation by the Consumer Protection Cooperation Network of national consumer authorities into Shein based on suspicions that the company infringes EU consumer protection rules.
Temu, Shein targeted as EU cracks down on unsafe e-commerce imports, [CNBC](https://www.cnbc.com/2025/02/05/temu-shein-targeted-as-eu-cracks-down-on-unsafe-e-commerce-imports.html)
Of course, the EU put their own spin on their reasons for the crackdown. One of the concerns raised by the EU was that the number of packages shipped by Shein to Europe had a “negative impact on the environment and climate”. However, the counter-measures they recommended were practically identical—add a “handling fee” to meet the cost of “supervising” these imports from China.
So Shein now has to pay extra for the privilege of shipping products to consumers in Europe and the US, while it gets paid for Reliance doing the exact same thing on its behalf in India. If you are Shein, you’ve had quite a bizarre week.
Things actually got so bad for Shein that it had to downgrade the valuation of its planned IPO in the UK to a paltry US$50 billion. Terrible.
Of course, this is when it’s worth asking why companies in the EU and the US don’t simply follow the Indian model. What’s stopping, say, Walmart or Inditex to do exactly what Reliance did—pay Shein for the licence and sell products under its brand in the US and Europe? It’s not like they don’t have the muscle. Walmart is the biggest retailer in the world. Inditex (which owns Zara) is the world’s biggest apparel retailer. If it makes sense for Reliance, then surely it would make sense for them too? Shein clearly has great consumer demand and a brand name in all of these markets, just like it has in India, so why not just pay for the brand and run operations locally?
Well, as it turns out, they can’t do it for a good reason.
And that’s because Shein is not Shein because of its brand.
Shein’s dominance comes down to three things.
First, it can create, test, and scale styles at a pace faster than anyone else in the world. People call this fast fashion, but Shein has taken it to a whole new level. Boohoo, Fashion Nova, Zara, and H&M take a few weeks to do this, while Shein can do it in about five to six days. It adds 6,000 new items online everyday, most of which are driven by sophisticated algorithms that track multiple websites and social media to figure out what’s trending.
Speed is everything in fast fashion.
If you can catch trends faster than others, you win.
Second, it can do this cheaper than everyone else. This is where China’s manufacturing machine comes in. It also has tax benefits, lower costs of labour, and massive, centralised, subsidised warehouses in China from where it ships products all across the world in small packages, taking advantage of duty-free exceptions. One report suggests that the average cost of a Shein-branded clothing item was less than eight pounds in the UK, which is lower than comparable fast fashion brands.
And the third reason why Shein is winning is because of an app you may have heard of, called Tiktok.
A lot of fast fashion companies have tried to figure out social media, but nobody has managed to do what Shein has done with Tiktok. It’s not a coincidence that Shein’s growth and dominance in the world closely followed the growth and dominance of Tiktok. Influencers on Tiktok are well-known for “Shein hauls”, where they make video after video reviewing, sharing, and talking about all the stuff they’ve ordered and bought on Shein. This was instrumental in their growth.
Speaking of Tiktok, here’s a fascinating parallel to drive the point home.
Tiktok in the US is going through a parallel universe version of what Shein is going through in India. After a brief ban, Tiktok is now under significant pressure to “sell” its app to another company if it wants to continue to operate in the US. The reasons why the US wants to stop Tiktok from running in the US are exactly the same reasons why India stopped Shein from operating in India—concerns over national security and data sharing with China. And America’s solutions are similar. Tiktok must sell or “license” itself to an American company. What makes Tiktok special is its recommendation algorithm, which is currently controlled by its Chinese parent company Bytedance. And Bytedance has refused to part with that. This raises a question for American companies like Microsoft, Oracle, and even Elon Musk. Maybe one of those deals will happen, but all of them have one thing that’s making them hesitate: if you strip away that recommendation algorithm, is Tiktok even Tiktok? Or is it just another short-form video app?
All of this brings me back to Reliance.
Reliance does not have access to the supply chain Shein has built over decades in China, which enables it to make products at prices lower than most others. It does not have access to Shein’s manufacturers. It does not even have Tiktok. Put another way, what is Reliance doing with Shein that it couldn’t have done with, say, Ajio? Maybe Shein is providing some intelligence about what to make, but Reliance still has to figure out a way to make it like Shein does. And it needs to do that in India, where no such capabilities exist.
If you take Shein and if you remove the supply chain, and the manufacturing, and its social media partner, what is left?
Is it even Shein?
Regards,
Praveen Gopal Krishnan