---
subject: "AI #52: Oops"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-02-22 21:39:09
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
We were treated to technical marvels this week. At Google, At OpenAI, Also, in both places, mistakes were made. At OpenAI, ChatGPT briefly lost its damn mind. For a day, faced with record traffic, the model would degenerate into nonsense. It was annoying, and a warning about putting our trust in such systems and the things that can go wrong, but in this particular context it was weird and beautiful and also hilarious. This has now been fixed. At Google, people noticed that I hope both serve as important warnings, and allow us to fix problems. Much better to face such issues now, when the stakes are low. Table of ContentsCovered separately: Introduction. We’ve got some good news, and some bad news. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. Probable probabilities? Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. Air Canada finds out. Call me Gemma Now. Google offers new state of the art tiny open weight models. GPT-4 Goes Crazy. But it’s feeling much better now. GPT-4 Real This Time. Offer feedback on GPTs, see their profiles. Fun With Image Generation. Image generation for journal articles. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. Several approaches to impersonation risks. Selling Your Chatbot Data. I don’t really know what you were expecting. Selling Your Training Data. I still don’t really know what you were expecting. They Took Our Jobs. There is a third option. Get Involved. Apart Research is hiring. Introducing. Groq, Lindy, Podcaster Copilot, potentially Magic and Altera. In Other AI News. Altman looks to move his chip plans forward. Quiet Speculations. Arguing over slow versus fast takeoff during takeoff. The Quest for Sane Regulation. There will be many bills along the way. The Week in Audio. I’m back on the Cognitive Revolution. The Original Butlerian Jihad. What was Dune a cautionary tale against again? Rhetorical Innovation. Another open letter, another trillion dollars. Ho hum. Public Service Announcement. Fentanyl, both literally and as metaphor. People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone. There is a pattern to who. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Sure, why not. The Lighter Side. There is not enough information to solve the problem.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
I have added this to my custom instructions.
I continue to be curious to build a Manifold bot, but I would use other principles. If anyone wants to help code one for me to the point I can start tweaking it in exchange for
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
Timothy Lee asks Gemini Advanced as his first prompt a simple question designed to trick it, where it really shouldn’t get tricked, You know what? I am proud of Google for not fixing this. It would be very easy for Google to say, this is embarrassing, someone get a new fine tuning set and make sure it never makes this style of mistake again. It’s not like it would be that hard. It also never matters in practice. This is a different kind of M&M test, where they tell you to take out all the green M&Ms, and then you tell them, ‘no, that’s stupid, we’re not doing that.’ Whether or not they should consider this good news is another question.
While I fully support this ruling, I do not think that matter was settled. If you offer a chatbot to customers, they use it in good faith and it messes up via a plausible but incorrect answer, that should indeed be on you. Only fair.
The question is, what if the bot had given an unreasonable answer? What if the customer had used various tricks to get the bot to, as happened in another example, sell a car for $1 ‘in a legally binding contract’? Is there an inherent ‘who are you kidding?’ clause here, or not, and if there is how far does it go? One can also ask whether a good disclaimer could get around this. The argument was that there was no reason to doubt the chatbot, but it would be easy to give a very explicit reason to doubt the chatbot.
Look, I know that if I did it a few times I would be over it and everything would be second nature but I keep finding excuses not to suck it up and do those few times. And if this is discouraging me, how many others is it discouraging? Call Me Gemma Now
I have no problems with this. Miniature models, at their current capabilities levels, are exactly a place where being open has relatively more benefits and minimal costs. I also think them for not calling it Gemini, because even if no one else cares, there should be exactly two models called Gemini. Not one, not three, not four. Two. Call them Pro and Ultra if you insist, that’s fine, as long as there are two. Alas.
As usual, benchmarks tell you a little something but are often highly misleading. This does not tell us whether Google is now state of the art for these model sizes, but I expect that this is indeed the case. Google Offerings Keep Coming and Changing Names
This seems like exactly what individuals can get, except you buy in bulk for your business? To be clear, that is a pretty good product. Google will be getting my $20 per month Now, in addition to Gemini Ultra, you also get Gemini other places like GMail and Google Docs and Google Meet, and various other fringe benefits like 2 TB of storage and longer Google Meet sessions. GPT-4 Goes Crazy
But don’t worry. Everything’s fine now.
What the hell happened?
Davidad hazarded a guess before that announcement, which he thinks now looks good.
Roon looks on the bright side of life.
Should we be concerned more generally? Some say yes.
Was this a stupid typo or bug in the code, or some parameter being set wrong somewhere by accident, or something else dumb? Seems highly plausible that it was. Should that bring us comfort? I would say it should not. Dumb mistakes happen. Bugs and typos that look dumb in hindsight happen. There are many examples of dumb mistakes changing key outcomes in history, determining the fates of nations. If all it takes is one dumb mistake to make GPT-4 go crazy, and it takes us a day to fix it when this error does not in any way make the system try to stop you from fixing it, then that is not a good sign. GPT-4 Real This Time
Y
The short term implication is easy, it is to be highly stingy and careful with your RLHF feedback. Use it in your initial fine-tuning if you don’t have anything better, but the moment you have what you need, stop. The long term implication is to reinforce that the strategy absolutely does not scale.
What we actually do to children isn’t as bad as RLHF, but it is bad enough, as I often discuss in my education roundups. What we see happening to children as they go through the school system is remarkably similar, in many ways, to what happens to an AI as it goes through fine tuning. Fun with Image Generation
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
It is odd that this requires a rules change? I would think that impersonating an individual, with intent to fool someone, would already be not allowed and also fraud. Indeed, Gemini says that there are no new prohibitions here. All this does is make it a lot easier for the FTC to get monetary relief. Before, they could get injunctive relief, but at this scale that doesn’t work well, and getting money was a two step process. Similarly, how are we only largely getting around to punishing these things now:
I mean those all seem pretty bad. It does seem logical to allow direct fines. The question is, how far to take this? They propose quite far:
How do you prevent your service from being used in part for impersonation? I have absolutely no idea. Seems like a de facto ban on AI voice services that do not lock down the list of available voices. Which also means a de facto ban on all open model weights voice creation software. Image generation software would have to be locked down rather tightly as well once it passes a quality threshold, with MidJourney at least on the edge. Video is safe for now, but only because it is not yet good enough. There is no easy answer here. Either we allow tools that enable the creation of things that seem real, or we do not. If we do, then people will use them for fraud and impersonation. If we do not, then that means banning them, which means severe restrictions on video, voice and image models.
We are already seeing this effect,
I do expect us to be able to adapt. We can develop various ways to show or prove that something is genuine, and establish sources of trust. One question is, will this end up being good for our epistemics and trustworthiness exactly because they will now be necessary? Right now, you can be imprecise and sloppy, and occasionally make stuff up, and we can find that useful, because we can use our common sense and ability to differentiate reality, and the crowd can examine details to determine if something is fake. The best part about community notes, for me, is that if there is a post with tons of views, and it does not have a note, then that is itself strong evidence. In the future, it will become extremely valuable to be a trustworthy source. If you are someone who maintains the chain of epistemic certainty and uncertainty, who makes it clear what we know and how we know it and how much we should trust different statements, then you will be useful. If not, then not. And people may be effectively white-listing sources that they can trust, and doing various second and third order calculations on top of that in various ways. The flip side is that this could make it extremely difficult to ‘break into’ the information space. You will have to build your credibility the same way you have to build your credit score. Selling Your Chatbot DataIn case you did not realize, the AI companion (AI girlfriend and AI boyfriend and AI nonbinary friends even though I oddly have not heard mention of one yet, and so on, but that’s a mouthful ) aps The best version of this, of course, would be to gather your data to set you up on dates. Cause, you know, Whereas if all those chumps are talking to the AIs on purpose? Then we know they’re lonely, probably desperate, and sharing all sorts of details to help figure out who might be a good match. There are so many good options for who to charge the money. The alternative is that if you charge enough money, you do not need another revenue stream, and some uses of such bots more obviously demand privacy. If you are paying $20 a month An underappreciated AI safety cause subarea is convincing responsible companies to allow adult content in a responsible way, including in these bots. The alternative is to drive that large market into the hands of irresponsible actors, who will do it in an irresponsible way. Selling Your Training DataAI companion data is only a special case, although one in which the privacy violation is unusually glaring, and the risks more obvious. Various companies also stand ready to sell your words and other outputs as training data.
Artist finds out that
I checked that last one. There is a box that is unchecked that says ‘block AI training.’ I am choosing to leave the box unchecked. Train on my writing all you want. But that is a choice that I am making, with my eyes open. They Took Our Jobs
Get Involved
Introducing
Intrinsically self-improving? Ut oh.
In Other AI News
Quiet Speculations
Slow is relative. It also could be temporary. If world GDP doubles in the next four years without doubling in one, that is a distinct thing from historical use of the term ‘fast takeoff,’ because the term ‘fast takeoff’ historically means something much faster than that. It would still be ‘pretty damn fast,’ or one can think of it simply as ‘takeoff.’ Or we could say ‘gradual takeoff’ as the third slower thing. I do not only continue to think that we not mock those who expected everything in AI to happen all at once with little warning, with ASI emerging in weeks, days or even hours, without that much mundane utility before that. I think that they could still be proven more right than those who are mocking them. We have a bunch of visible ability and mundane utility now, so things definitely look like a ‘slow’ takeoff, but it could still functionally transform into a fast one with little warning. It seems totally reasonable to say that AI is rapidly getting many very large advantages with respect to humans, so if it gets to ‘roughly human’ in the core intelligence module, whatever you want to call that, then suddenly things get out of hand fast, potentially the ‘fast takeoff’ level of fast even if you see more signs and portents first.
How will AIs impact people’s expectations,
The Quest for Sane RegulationsDid you know that we already already have
That is quite a lot of bills. One should therefore obviously not get too excited in any direction when bills are introduced, no matter how good or (more often) terrible the bill might be, unless one has special reason to expect them to pass.
As for this particular law? I mean, sure, all right, fine? I neither see anything especially useful or valuable here, nor do I see much in the way of downside. Also, this is what happens when there is no one in charge and Congress is incapable of passing basic federal rules, not even around basic things like deepfakes and impersonation. The states will feel compelled to act. The whole ‘oppose any regulatory action of any kind no matter what’ stance was never going to fly.
The Week in Audio
The Original Butlerian Jihad
I asked Gemini Pro, Gemini Advanced, GPT-4 and Claude. Everyone except Gemini Pro replied in the now standard bullet point style. Every point one was ‘yes, this is a cautionary tale against the dangers of AI.’ Gemini Pro explained that in detail, whereas the others instead glossed over the details and then went on to talk about plot convenience, power dynamics and the general ability to tell interesting stories focused on humans, which made it the clearly best answer. Whereas most science fiction stories solve the problem of ‘why doesn’t AI invalidate the entire story’ with a ‘well that would invalidate the entire story so let us pretend that would not happen, probably without explaining why.’ There are of course obvious exceptions, such as the excellent Zones of Thought novels, that take the question seriously. Rhetorical InnovationIt’s been a while since we In other news (
Public Service AnnouncementThis does tie back to AI, but also the actual core information seems underappreciated right now:
They have never been a good idea, Now, drug dealers can cut with fentanyl to lower costs, and face competition on price. Due to these price pressures, asymmetric information, lack of attribution and liability for any overdoses and fatalities, and also a large deficit in morals in the drug dealing market, a lot of drugs are therefore cut with fentanyl, even uppers. The feedback signal is too weak. So taking such drugs even once can kill you, although any given dose is highly unlikely to do so. And the fentanyl can physically clump, so knowing someone else took from the same batch and is fine is not that strong as evidence of safety either. The safety strips help but are imperfect. As far as I can tell, no one knows the real base rates on this for many obvious reasons, beyond the over 100,000 overdose deaths each year, a number that keeps rising. It does seem like it is super common. Also the base potency of many drugs is way up versus our historical reference points or childhood experiences, and many people have insufficiently adjusted for this with their dosing and expectations.
The producer of the AGI gets rewarded for taking on catastrophic or existential risk, and also ordinary mundane risks. They are not responsible for the externalities, right now even for mundane risks they do not face liability, and there is information asymmetry. Capitalism is great, but if we let capitalism do its thing here without fixing these classic market failures, they and their consequences will get worse over time. People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone
The basics are important. I agree that you can’t know for sure, but if we do indeed do this accidentally then I do not like our odds.
If you do create God, do it on purpose. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing EveryoneRoon continues to move between the camps, both worried and not as worried,
Sometimes one asks the right questions, then chooses not to care. It’s an option.
Let’s try this again. If we have AI that can automate most jobs within 3 years, then at minimum we hypercharge the economy, hypercharge investment and competition in the AI space, and dramatically expand the supply while lowering the cost of all associated labor and work. The idea that AI capabilities would get to ‘can automate most jobs,’ the exact point at which it dramatically accelerates progress because most jobs includes most of the things that improve AI, and then stall for a long period, is not strictly impossible, I can get there if I first write the conclusion at the bottom of the page and then squint and work backwards, but it is a very bizarre kind of wishful thinking. It supposes a many orders of magnitude difficulty spike exactly at the point where the unthinkable would otherwise happen. Also, a reminder for those who need to hear it, that who is loud on Twitter, or especially who is loud on Twitter within someone’s bubble, is not reality. And also a reminder that there are those hard at work trying to create the vibe that there is a shift in the vibes, in order to incept the new vibes. Do not fall for this.
Yeah, no, absolutely nothing has changed. Did Brown observe this at all? Maybe he did. Maybe he didn’t. If he did, it was because he self-selected into that corner of the world, where everyone tries super hard to make fetch happen. The Lighter Side
You're currently a free subscriber to |