---
subject: "why, what, & how we read; compensating creators; more"
from: "web3 letter from a16zcrypto <a16zcrypto@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-07-22 22:24:37
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "a16zcrypto"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2535365729249697677"]
---
👑 NFT royalties: Designs, challenges, and new ideasby Michael Blau, Scott Kominers, and Daren Matsuoka Royalties have always been a key value proposition It’s difficult to tell the difference between NFT transfers that are sales — and that should pay out a royalty — and other types of transfers that should not (like when transferring an NFT between your own wallets, or gifting an NFT to a friend). And while creators have a few different solutions to choose from — such as blocklists and allowlists — each comes with tradeoffs that can be difficult to navigate. In particular, imposing restrictions on transferring NFTs also restricts their applications and innovation, making them less Since 🔀 🔖 Lists to bookmark: What to read this summerLooking for a summer read? Here are some books the a16z crypto team is reading and recommending. Our list covers everything from dark academia fantasy to free market economics texts, and chronicles of engineering history to classic literature adaptations. Repeat recommendations reveal our longstanding interests. This season's repeats include Unreasonable Hospitality by Eleven Madison Park's Will Guidara on lessons learned in the restaurant business (that are applicable well beyond); Haruki Murakami's What I Talk About When I Talk About Running, a memoir and meditation on an ancient art; and various books by the late James C. Scott, the Yale political scientist whose treatises on statehood and social planning are perennial favorites. ➡️ check out our ➡️ also see our 🎧🎙 Listen: What, how, and why we read/ listen/ and more…Sonal Chokshi, Robert Hackett, Tim Sullivan, and Stephanie Zinn In this fun hallway-style conversation we discuss picks from our summer reading list — as well as evergreen and Lindy picks that show up on our what-we're-reading lists again and again. We also share our top picks of ALL time. Throughout, we also discuss HOW we read — whether audiobooks count as reading or listening, graphic novels, read-alouds; multiple modes of reading when you’re a busy parent or always on the go; and technologies for reading, and how they have changed us over time… from printing press to AirPods. Which books are better as movies and TV shows, and games too? Also, are collaboratively-filtered recommendations via family or friends really that great, or should we avoid them? What other heuristics — and “anti-heuristics” — do we use to read? Finally, WHY do we read?? Is mythology and fantasy filling a hole left by religion? Wherefore nonfiction vs. fiction — or newer genres such as "infotainment,” "romantasy,” and others? From Shakespeare to Prince Harry to erstwhile seafarers to modern mermaids, this episode is a rollicking ride — and love letter — to all things books, and reading, from team a16z crypto. Curiosity is magic, after all… 🔀 -- Stephanie Zinn, Robert Hackett, Sonal Chokshi & a16z crypto teams You’re receiving this newsletter because you signed up for it on our websites, at an event, or elsewhere (you can opt out any time using the ‘unsubscribe’ link below). This newsletter is provided for informational purposes only, and should NOT be relied upon as legal, business, investment, or tax advice. Furthermore, the content is not directed at nor intended for use by any investors or prospective investors in any a16z funds. Please see a16z.com/disclosures for additional important details, including link to list of investments. subscribe to our podcast ' |