---
subject: "new research, global report, 3 takeaways on market design for builders"
from: "web3 letter from a16zcrypto <a16zcrypto@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-10-05 15:01:59
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "a16zcrypto"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_2535365729249697677"]
---
🔎 Trends in academic/ industry research with applications to web3with Tim Roughgarden, Valeria Nikolaenko, Joseph Bonneau, Justin Thaler With the goal of advancing the science and technology of the next generation of the internet, the a16z crypto research multidisciplinary lab also helps bridge the worlds of academic theory with industry practice. Every year, as part of its immersive summer programs at the a16z crypto office, the team brings together both established and emerging researchers to present work, sharpen each other’s ideas, and collaborate together (along with our portfolio) on some of the hardest problems in the ecosystem. [The journey from academic research to industry deployment of cryptography](https://substack.com/redirect/3f97ecbd-eaef-42d4-94b3-2f1db2c4154b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)— Yehuda Lindell, Head of Cryptography, Coinbase[The past, present, and future of threshold Schnorr signatures](https://substack.com/redirect/f0bf9954-f872-4522-9909-00604d3efff9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)— Chelsea Komlo, University of Waterloo[Threshold ECDSA in 3 rounds](https://substack.com/redirect/df260c59-4ffc-41aa-87dd-ea7d7d5fda7b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)— Abhi Shelat, Northeastern University[Exponent-VRFs and their applications](https://substack.com/redirect/f2faa31f-032b-49b8-91d0-4ead0f63e4ce?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)— Yehuda Lindell, Head of Cryptography, Coinbase[Distributed randomness using weighted VRFs](https://substack.com/redirect/79ea212b-33c6-41e2-9026-ef945928c92e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)— Benny Pinkas, Aptos Labs, Bar-Ilan University[Toward succinct proofs of solvency](https://substack.com/redirect/15058102-0e0e-413c-9523-3fa05677a770?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)— Jeremy Clark, Concordia Institute for Information Systems Engineering[Perpetual encryption](https://substack.com/redirect/4a5b28dd-007b-4f29-8f80-02e38a0b84ef?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)— Yevgeniy Dodis, NYU and The International Association for Cryptologic Research[Toward practical zero-knowledge virtual machines: HyperNova](https://substack.com/redirect/3bd000e7-50bf-490c-a539-f4d54219db5d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)— Abhiram Kothapalli, Carnegie Mellon University[Advanced security for SNARKs: A survey](https://substack.com/redirect/dd454b9f-10e1-4822-b30c-f0b78b487e05?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)— Quang Dao, Carnegie Mellon University[A novel approach to proof-of-replication via polynomial evaluation](https://substack.com/redirect/61bcb40c-cf04-46e1-83c7-e6bef42d497f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)— Foteini Baldimtsi, George Mason University, Mysten Labs
🛠️ 3 takeaways on market design for web3 builderswith Scott Kominers Some quick takeaways from a16z crypto research’s Scott Kominers, shared with the most recent cohort of our 1. Web 2 platforms and web3 protocols leverage network effects in different ways. Platforms have historically benefited from creating “walled gardens” to lock in their advantage over competitors. Protocols, by contrast, establish 2. With marketplaces and protocols alike, the optimal strategy is often to start broad, then narrow, and then broaden again. Starting broad gives you the space to find 3. With token design, monetary policy evolving over time should be the default. Owing in part to the Bitcoin precedent, many projects try to fix their entire
🎧 From bridges to interoperability: Out of the mess, into the meshnetwith Bryan Pellegrino, Ali Yahya, and Robert Hackett Blockchain bridges are essential tools for moving cross-chain, but they have a history of succumbing to big hacks. Why? This episode of web3 with a16z (with Bryan Pellegrino of LayerZero) dives deep into the history and evolution of bridges; discusses the tradeoffs of various approaches; and explores more on scaling blockchains and the importance of interoperability. 🌐 Around the web: weekend readsThe World Economic Forum just published their new On DeFi, the report makes clear that “entity-centric” frameworks don’t work for decentralized systems and calls for calibrated, risk-based regulation to realize the benefits of decentralization. Specifically, the report acknowledges the value of implementing tailored licensing models that account for decentralization where there is no centralized entity. [see also: “ [Regulate apps, not protocols](https://substack.com/redirect/f26e6c54-f671-472b-9b31-d6364384f95f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)”]The report calls out the pitfalls of regulation-by-enforcement. [see also: " [What regulators can learn from the aftermath of the Titanic](https://substack.com/redirect/3adcbb64-8a2d-46aa-b441-a5df15b7d8fd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)”]The report identifies the breadth of decentralized innovation far beyond finance, from social media to identity management. Like many jurisdictions around the world, the World Economic Forum reinforces the importance of crafting clear, effective rules of the road that account for the unique nature of decentralized protocols and applications. Since sensible policy can protect consumers and foster innovation, it’s encouraging to see an institution with 1,000+ firms globally advocating for pro-decentralization policies. [read the full report](https://substack.com/redirect/2122d14d-e114-4d4c-a7b7-a8777e062a94?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)
Instead of attempting to create a parallel world from scratch, more blockchain applications should extend the offchain environment — offering the composability, neutrality, and lower take rates that are only possible via crypto. This is the tool stage (cf “come for the tool, stay for the network”), where blockchain-powered applications can acquire users by simply working better than their offchain counterparts. Once these applications reach critical mass, they can then meaningfully evolve user behaviors in ways that are unique to fully onchain networks. Blockchains must first extend, and then evolve, observes Zhao.
You’re receiving this newsletter because you signed up for it on our websites, at an event, or elsewhere (you can opt out any time using the ‘unsubscribe’ link below). This newsletter is provided for informational purposes only, and should NOT be relied upon as legal, business, investment, or tax advice. Furthermore, the content is not directed at nor intended for use by any investors or prospective investors in any a16z funds. Please see a16z.com/disclosures for additional important details, including link to list of investments. subscribe to our podcast ' |