---
subject: "The Monday Media Diet with Crista Luedtke"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-03-02 10:15:22
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Crista Luedtke is an amazing chef as I can attest, and proprietor of Boon Hotel + Spa and Highlands resort in Northern California. -Colin (CJN) Tell us about yourself. There’s a lot to unpack here…I’m a self taught chef who came to this business by way of Wisconsin parents that owned restaurants in their 20’s. I grew up in it, like really in it. Standing on a milk crate behind the bar at 6yrs old slinging grasshoppers and working a crowd from a young age. It was a real midwestern supper club. You can picture it right, salad bars with the sneeze guard glass, prime rib, bands on the weekends. For better or worse I was destined to make my way back to this, what’s not to love. I left a very successful career in Biotech in the bay area post college, made the natural move to the mortgage industry, and then left it all behind to get back in the biz. This wild path polished my business edge to re-enter the hospitality world with a new set of skills. It set me up for success and a lifestyle that felt more in line with who I truly am. I made the move to Guerneville in 2008 and never looked back. From there it snowballed from a single boutique hotel, to restaurants, cafes, a bar and another hotel, all that and a solid sprinkling of Food Network TV and much more. It’s been a great ride and I’m still holding on to that wave. Describe your media diet. Lately I have been consuming a lot of music, IG stories, Apple TV Original series, a really great book, and lots of cookbooks for inspiration. What’s the last great book you read? Truth be told, I don’t read a ton. I think it’s my undiagnosed ADD that makes reading, or sitting still for that matter, a real challenge for me. That said, books that jump all over the place from chapter to chapter tend to hold my attention- just long enough to suck me back in every now and again. The last really great book I read was ‘The Husband’s Secret’ by Liane Moriarty. Wow, that was good- highly recommend. What are you reading now? In preparation for a overseas trip I thought, ok maybe time to grab an easy reader in case I have down time to sit and just chill. Ha! Wishful thinking given I was leading the trip. But I had a plan so…I just picked what appeared to be a light read called ‘Sandwich’ by Catherine Newman. So far so great, and what grabbed me was that it is about a woman in her 50’s in perimenopause, so clearly, I figured I could relate and maybe even learn something. Her voice in writing is so clever, so relatable. I found myself laughing out loud at a café so I’m feeling good about my pick so far. Stay tuned or grab a copy if you’re feeling it. I think every woman in their 50’s can relate, even better if you have kids. I also got inspired, doubled down, and just grabbed a copy of ‘Why I cook’ by Tom Colicchio – a friend and colleague and I’m excited to dive in. Look at me with two books!! Watch out. What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication? Oohh this is a good one…typically I start in the middle. I have no idea why actually. And now that I am writing this here knowing people will read this, I feel like maybe I’m a bit of a weirdo? Anyway, I start by paging through the entire thing middle to front then back to the end via the middle again-looking first at all the photos. I’m very visual- I like pretty things. Pretty food, great design, fashion, all of it. So, after the first pass, then I start to dive into the articles- I guess in no real particular order. Who should everyone be reading that they’re not? I’m not sure I’m the one to tell you what to read given I’m not a big reader. But if I get to share my 2 cents, I guess I would encourage people to read more cookbooks. I think they are both recipes for food, and love letters from great chefs about their history, their families, and they open us up to understanding culture through food. It’s also a nice escape and takes you on a bit of a journey of sorts. What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone? Honestly, I don’t have many apps on my phone that aren’t travel related but I really love the calculator – maybe my former life as a mortgage broker, dunno. But I secretly use it all the time. I guess not a secret anymore. Plane or train? For me it is always a plane. I do love a train, but I am super anxious and if I am going somewhere I want to fastest way there possible. Patience isn’t a skill I possess much of. If a train is the only way there, I’m all in! Now that we’re on the topic of trains I just remembered the last one I was on… it was the most epic train ride I ever took- the open top glass ceiling train from Ollantantambo to Machu Picchu. It’s a must!! I can’t even begin to describe it. Unreal. Planes are just easy, fast, practical- what I don’t love is the time in the airport prior unless there’s an AMEX lounge nearby, if there is, I’m all about getting there early. What is one place everyone should visit? That’s a hard one because we are so blessed to have so many magical places on this planet. I’m gonna struggle here as I have several places that I think everyone should experience for different reasons-for food, for religious reasons, for beauty, for relaxation. But since I just returned from the Basque region of Spain I’m gonna lean into this one. It’s truly a special place with so much history, its terrain is so incredible, from mountains to ocean to vineyards- it’s got it all. It’s unlike any other part of Spain in my opinion. Its cuisine is some of the best in the world, its people so genuine and kind, its landscape stunning. Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into. Generally, my rabbit holes are based on travel ideas and things to do, where to eat, how to maximize my meals and time while visiting. It’s a bit of an obsession really. My wife on the other hand doesn’t want to know anything til we arrive. We’re very different in that regard. Sometimes I wonder what it would be like to just show up, sigh. It’s just not in my DNA, I’m a planner, maybe to excess but it sure is fun learning and exploring. I do also balance it with going with the flow once I get there and often my rabbit holes get to be just that, a hole I fell into but what got me to the magical destination I’m at. Invite your friends and earn rewardsIf you enjoy Why is this interesting?, share it with your friends and earn rewards when they subscribe. |