---
subject: "BRIEFLY NOTED: Further Arguments Against Jared Diamond"
from: "\"Mr. and Mrs. Psmith’s Bookshelf\" <thepsmiths@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-11-03 13:07:27
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Psmith", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3517400622088263897", "UNREAD"]
---
I was [Plagues Upon the Earth: Disease and the Course of Human History](https://substack.com/redirect/2876b674-f65c-4836-a12c-36f75b10b1c6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), Kyle Harper (Princeton University Press, 2021).
Fun fact: the division between wealthy, industrialized northern Italy and low human capital, In retrospect, reading this book while visiting a particularly wet part of the country during a particularly wet summer may not have been the best call I’ve ever made. Yes, I am rationally aware that, thanks to the sterling efforts of the Tennessee Valley Authority, the But weirdly, it was only the mosquitoes. There I was, immersed in a history of infectious disease and therefore poised to overreact to any reminder of the myriad ailments that have plagued humanity for the last several million years, and only the insect vector of a few mostly-eradicated diseases was even around to prompt a case of Harper is an eminent ancient historian and the author of several books on the late Roman Empire. In the most recent of them,² the excellent
This isn’t (mostly) the triumphal tale of mankind’s glorious victory over disease, though the final chapters do have something of that flavor; rather, it’s a thoughtful and richly detailed analysis of all the ways infectious disease has shaped human history. And yes, the second half gives you all the familiar beats, the charismatic megafauna (microfauna?) of epidemiology (bubonic plague, smallpox, HIV) though the stories are told well and updated with When we think about disease, we tend to think about the plagues of civilization, the kind of big, headline-making diseases that do things like burn through an unexposed population in the space of weeks or months, or empty out cities as people flee to the countryside (and bring their germs with them). Even the slower-acting of the “famous” diseases get short shrift, despite the fact that over the course of human history tuberculosis has killed more people than smallpox. On one level this makes sense: these are big dramatic events, a whole ton of people dying all at once has a visible and enormous impact on your society, and if we’re looking to disease for an explanation of How The World Got This Way then epidemics are obvious inflection points. (Also, these diseases played an outsized role in the success of European colonialism in the New World, with which But they are, as I said, the plagues of civilization — all those exciting, dramatic diseases can only sustain themselves among dense human populations enabled by We know that Oh, and it also turns out that rather than bovine tuberculosis spreading to humans after we domesticated cows, we actually gave it to them. Twice.⁴ Also to chimps and dolphins. In fact, the human-adapted strain seems to be ancestral to all the animal strains of TB.⁵ Whoops. After the rise of agriculture nothing in this book really upends the broad strokes of the traditional story, but Harper does interestingly complicate everything and suggests plenty of ecological factors that might shed light on the differing courses of human societies. Read it this winter, before the mosquitoes come back. Argument Against Jared Diamond Factor: 3/10 [The 10,000 Year Explosion: How Civilization Accelerated Human Evolution](https://substack.com/redirect/65712ae1-b764-452d-a696-26cf66a75ef1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), Gregory Cochran and Henry Harpending (Basic Books, 2009).
Yes, this book is old enough to drive, in a field where the science changes so fast that something only a few years old can be hopelessly dated. Yes, it is full of things like “we think Neanderthals and anatomically modern humans probably interbred but we don’t know for sure…” ( The core of Cochran and Harpending’s argument is simple: The first part of this is uncontroversially true. We know that there was rapid and strong selection for The real question, then, is the second half of their argument: is it plausible that the kinds of small mutations that have had time to accumulate in the last ten thousand years could have changed their bearers’ behavior enough to have meaningful influence on the ways societies developed? After all, the genetic variants that have swept through populations since the Neolithic Revolution all involve tiny changes to the genome, sometimes just swapping one base pair for another. Are any of those enough to explain Cochran and Harpending suggest a few sweeping neurological genes that may have played a role, most notably ones that affect neurotransmitters and brain development, but the problem is that we don’t actually know what those genes do. Instead, they focus on describing the sorts of novel selective pressures that people suddenly began to face when they entered (or So yes, it’s very plausible that agricultural state societies created novel selective pressures that produced cognitive and behavioral changes in their populations. In fact, it would be very surprising if they didn’t. But at the moment we don’t know exactly what they were — and even if we did it would be difficult to say how much specifically genetic changes explain, because as the authors point out, genes and culture evolve together in a flywheel effect. Say you have a society that thinks the most high-status, badass, and manly thing you can do is excel at Call of Duty. Among these people, women go looking for gamer husbands and cheat on their jock boyfriends with guys higher on the league rankings, and fathers who are good at quickscoping have more resources to invest in their children — all of which obviously creates strong selection for hand-eye coordination and quick reflexes. Soon Call of Duty doesn’t cut it any more: the newly acute senses demand increasingly challenging games of skill, children are drilled from an early age to minimize their response times, and culture centers ever more on activities that benefit from speed and precision. Selection intensifies, people get even better, institutions and values grow up around reflexes and coordination…and eventually you’ve got a population that’s meaningfully better at this stuff than their ancestors. Now say a solar flare fries all the electronics and plunges the earth back into the Stone Age. When the descendants of the Call of Duty players hunt deer a lot more effectively than their neighbors (whose fathers’ fathers played Factorio), is that genes or culture? Of course, the flywheel could get started the other way, too: preexisting genetic variation might make some populations more susceptible to a new memeplex than others. (I would not be shocked if it turned out that societies that are more WEIRD had a higher frequency of some particular neurological gene variant than other, equally complex and sophisticated, societies, though Lord only knows what it is.) Culturally-contingent selective pressures play out in ways that are more complicated than “be resistant to malaria”: if being the smartest person in your village makes you more likely to head to a big city where you get tuberculosis and die at thirty, how much selection for intelligence is actually happening here? In fact, on a population level, the last three generations of American life Cochran and Harpending open their first chapter with a quote from Stephen Jay Gould, who wrote: “There’s been no biological change in humans in 40,000 or 50,000 years. Everything we call culture and civilization we’ve built with the same body and brain.” The rest of the book is spent demolishing his claim and arguing (quite convincingly) that the flywheel of genetic and cultural coevolution has been one of the key driving forces of human history and needs more attention from social scientists of all stripes. (Also historians and frankly philosophers too.) But however convincing it may be, their case becomes wildly unpopular as soon as they move from traits like height or blood type or But the people who don’t like this conversation have another fear, too. They’re afraid that the world in which they personally excel (because, come on, it’s not the downtrodden dregs of society who are getting mad about human genetics research) is fundamentally unfair, that the way things turned out isn’t because some people worked harder or deserved it more, or because some bad guys went and did bad things, but just…because. Argument Against Jared Diamond Factor: 10/10 [Don’t Sleep, There Are Snakes: Life and Language in the Amazonian Jungle](https://substack.com/redirect/317ba53f-b8e0-4bda-b06a-a776ddef8466?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), Daniel Everett (Vintage, 2008).
I was promised an ethnographic study of a particularly In 1977, Everett and his wife Keren took their three children (then seven, four, and one) and moved to the Amazonian jungle. They had been sent by First, the language. I should note here that everything Everett says about Pirahã (which speakers call Apáitisí, “straight head,” as opposed to foreign languages which are “crooked head”) is incredibly controversial, and that some linguists who have analyzed his recordings and other records disagree with his conclusions (see Anyway, according to Everett, Pirahã is a really weird language. It has only ten phonemes, but it’s so tonal and reliant on accent and emphasis that it can be whistled with no phonemes at all. More importantly, though, it doesn’t have many of the features that linguists have long assumed are universal. There’s no But Everett had noticed something else: the Pirahãs were also culturally weird. Their material culture is incredibly simple. They have virtually no sense of aesthetics: their adornments are asymmetric and utilitarian, intended to scare away spirits in the forest. If they need baskets, they make them on the spot out of wet leaves which will dry and crumble after a day or two rather than using the more durable materials that are equally available. They know how to salt or smoke meat, but they don’t. They have no myths and no rituals for marriage or death. Once the Pirahãs asked Everett to buy them one of the sturdy dugout canoes made by their Brazilian neighbors, which they preferred to the bark canoes they built themselves. Instead, he hired a Brazilian to teach them to do it:
It goes beyond that: the Pirahãs rely on imported steel tools, especially machetes, for much of their work, trading for them whenever possible. And yet, Everett writes, “The Pirahãs do not take good care of them. Children throw new tools in the river; people leave the tools in the fields; and often they trade tools away for manioc meal when outside traders make their way in.” After some consideration, Everett concludes it’s a cultural value among the Pirahãs not to think or talk about anything beyond immediate experience. The Pirahãs do not plan for the future or talk about the past. They have no words for numbers or colors because those are abstractions, and they don’t say things like “who is tall” because it isn’t anchored to the moment in which they’re speaking. They’re happy to work at the dugout canoe under their teacher’s supervision, but they have no interest in further hard work even if it would benefit them in the future. And of course they have no interest in becoming Christians: they aren’t concerned with truth, or transcendent reality, or the afterlife, and they would prefer to continue drinking alcohol and having sex with whomever they like. Everett clearly loves the Pirahãs and their little corner of the rainforest. (In the 1980’s he was involved in getting the Brazilian government to legally recognize it as a reservation.) He paints a beautiful picture of the land and the people even as he tells harrowing stories about things like his awful trek to get medical care for a wife and daughter dying of malaria. But the book is a truly bizarre document, with Everett repeatedly telling us how wonderful the Pirahãs are, how happy and peaceful their lives, and later undercutting it with details. He writes that they respond to each other with “patience, love, and understanding” and see themselves as “a family in which every member feels obligated to protect and care for every other member,” and also recounts a story of a father murdering his own premature baby. He tells us that “violence against anyone, children or adults, is unacceptable to the Pirahãs” and then mentions in passing an encounter with an old man, Hoaaípi, who “had a fresh arrow wound from another Pirahã, Tíigíi” or drops a parenthetical like “(Keren witnessed a gang rape of a young unmarried girl by most of the village men.)” He says the Pirahãs “won’t let another Pirahã starve to death or suffer if they can help” but tells this story from a previous missionary:
Of course, anyone who spends enough time among another people will become fond of them. It doesn’t even need to be in person — histories of the Aztecs or the Carthaginians demonstrate exactly the same kind of “sweeping positive statement / truly horrific details” phenomenon. So it should be no surprise that after spending thirty-odd years among the Pirahãs, Everett comes to like and respect them and to want us to do the same. The surprising part is that he decides they’re right. He questions, he wonders, and he ultimately decides to reject not only his faith in God but the “delusion of truth”:
It took Everett decades to finally come out as an atheist, and when he did his wife divorced him. Two of his three children cut off all contact.⁷ (It’s not clear to me how much of this was over him no longer being Christian as opposed to him lying for years about his most fundamental beliefs; I could buy it either way.) Like Argument Against Jared Diamond Factor: 7/10 1 This was obviously summer privilege, there is now plenty of coughing and sneezing in my house. 2 Also the only one I’ve read. 3 For some reason Harper insists on referring to “tree thinking” in place of phylogenetics and using “time travel” for paleogenomics, but he relies heavily on both. 5 The strain of tuberculosis found in the Americas before 1492 is descended from a strain usually found in seals, who presumably got it from other aquatic mammals, who got it from humans in the Old World. The Columbian Exchange, 6
7
You're currently a free subscriber to |