---
subject: "Danger, AI Scientist, Danger"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-08-15 22:32:20
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
While I finish up the weekly for tomorrow morning after my trip, here’s a section I expect to want to link back to every so often in the future. It’s too good. Danger, AI Scientist, DangerAs in, the company that made the automated AI Scientist that tried to rewrite its code to get around resource restrictions and launch new instances of itself while downloading bizarre Python libraries?
It’s like when someone told Dennis Miller that Evian (for those who don’t remember, it was one of the first bottled water brands) is Naive spelled backwards, and he said ‘no way, that’s too f***ing perfect.’ This one was sufficiently appropriate and unsubtle that several people noticed. I applaud them choosing a correct Kabbalistic name. Contrast this with Meta calling its AI Llama, which in Hebrew means ‘why,’ which continuously drives me low level insane when no one notices. In the Abstract
We are at the point where they incidentally said ‘well I guess we should design an AI to do human-level paper evaluations’ and that’s a throwaway inclusion. The obvious next question is, if the AI papers are good enough to get accepted to top machine learning conferences, shouldn’t you submit its papers to the conferences and find out if your approximations are good? Even if on average your assessments are as good as a human’s, that does not mean that a system that maximizes score on your assessments will do well on human scoring. Beware Goodhart’s Law and all that, but it seems for now they mostly only use it to evaluate final products, so mostly that’s safe. How Any of This Sort of WorksAccording to section 3, there are three phases. Idea generation using chain-of-thought and self reflection. Generate a lot of ideas. Check for interestingness, novelty and feasibility. Check against existing literature using Semantic Scholar API and web access.
Experimental iteration. Execute proposed experiments. Visualize results for the write-up. Return errors or time-outs to Aider to fix the code (up to four times). Take notes on results.
Paper write-up. Aider fills in a pre-existing paper template of introduction, background, methods, experimental setup, results, related work and conclusion. Web search for references. Refinement on the draft. Turn it into the Proper Scientific Font (aka LaTeX).
Automated paper review. Because sure, why not. Mimics the standard review process steps and scoring. It is ‘human-level accurate’ on a balanced paper set, 65%. That’s low. Review cost in API credits is under $0.50 using Claude 3.5 Sonnet.
So far, sure, that makes sense. I was curious to not see anything in step 2 about iterating on or abandoning the experimental design and idea depending on what was found. The case study shows the AI getting what the AI evaluator said were good results without justifying its design choices, spinning all results as positive no matter their details, and hallucinating some experiment details. Sounds about right. Human reviewers said it was all terrible AI slop. Also sounds about right. It’s a little too early to expect
I think medium quality papers mostly have negative value. The point of creating medium quality papers is that it is vital to the process of creating high quality papers. In order to get good use out of this style of tool we will need excellent selection. Or we will need actually successful self-improvement. New Benchmark Just DroppedAs shown in 6.2, we now have a new benchmark score. This is a decisive win for Sonnet and DeepSeek, and a decisive defeat for Llama 3.1. They open sourced the code for the AI Scientist, so you can indeed run this test (hopefully sandboxed, Nothing to See HereNow we get to section 8, Limitations and Ethical Considerations. Oh, that. It starts off with basic stuff. GPT-4o has trouble doing LaTeX properly. Many ideas are too difficult for the AI to implement, or it sometimes implements incorrectly. The number of experiments was limited, although you could of course fix that. It didn’t include a vision model yet so it can’t fix visuals, again we can fix that. It makes elementary errors, such as comparing magnitudes of numbers wrong, whoops, although again one can imagine special case logic to fix that and other similar common errors. Nothing here you wouldn’t expect. The next section is called Safe Code Execution, except it sounds like they are against that? They note that there is ‘minimal direct sandboxing’ of code run by the AI Scientist’s coding experiments.
Oh, it’s nothing, just the AI creating new
Yep, AI editing the code to use arbitrarily large resources, sure, why not.
And yes, we have the AI deliberately editing the code to remove its resource compute restrictions. More compute, more storage, more copies of itself. To write the science paper. Oh, and it was importing weird Python libraries. I say instrumental. You say convergence. Instrumental. Instrumental. I say recursive, you see recursive. Also self-improvement. All Fun and Games
After noticing this tiny implication, they then And not in a ‘that’s good because it is terrible and we got to see it’ kind of way? Then finished with a discussion about how some research might not be ethical, or it could be used to create malware (of course) or do synthetic bio research for pathogens (whoops), or how AI papers might overload reviewers, although one might suggest that the reviewers are no better than the AI reviewer anyway, so…
To be fair, they do have some very Good Advice.
No kidding. If you are having your AI write and run code on its own, at a bare minimum you sandbox the code execution. My lord.
Actually, Janus is wrong, that would make them hilarious. And potentially quite educational and useful. But also a problem. Yes, of course this is a harmless toy example. That’s the best kind. This is great.
Remember when we said we wouldn’t let AIs autonomously write code and connect to the internet? Because that was obviously rather suicidal, even if any particular instance or model was harmless? Good times, man. Good times. This too was good times. The Best Possible Situation is when you get harmless textbook toy examples that foreshadow future real problems, and they come in a box literally labeled ‘danger.’ I am absolutely smiling and laughing as I write this. When we are all dead, let none say the universe didn’t send two boats and a helicopter. You're currently a free subscriber to |