---
subject: "How Batteries Are Making the Electrical Grid More Reliable"
from: "Construction Physics <constructionphysics@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-06-19 12:02:34
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Construction Physics", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8588207018748827248", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
To operate reliably, the US electrical grid needs to balance supply and demand: to make sure, at any given moment, that the amount of electricity demanded by homes, businesses, and factories is equal to the amount being supplied by nuclear reactors, gas turbines, and other types of power plants. Historically, this was done by connecting and disconnecting power plants, or ramping their output up and down as demand rises and falls. Some power plants might operate at full output nearly continuously (“baseload” generation, like nuclear), while others might only be ramped up when demand spikes (“peaker” plants, like gas turbines) and ramped down when no longer needed. Today, electrical grids have a new tool for balancing supply and demand and ensuring grid reliability: batteries. Because of their ability to charge and discharge, and because they can be ramped up to full power quickly, batteries excel at the grid-balancing tasks required to ensure electricity supply always equals demand, as well as letting us match supply and demand with intermittent sources of generation like wind and solar. With batteries, reliably meeting electricity demand can be done without relying solely on traditional, turbine-based power plants. Battery storage is growing rapidly in the US. Between 2013 and 2023, battery storage power capacity A reliable grid means balancing supply and demandOperating the power grid requires balancing supply and demand: ensuring that at any given moment, the load on the grid is matched by supply from various sources of electricity generation. If supply and demand don’t match, the result can be blackouts, brownouts, or damage to electrical equipment connected to the grid. At a high level, this means making sure electricity generation connects to the grid when demand goes up, and disconnects when demand drops. To help maintain this balance, and ensure the grid is stable and reliable, utilities pay power providers for what are known as " Some of these services are designed to maintain the frequency of the grid. The electrical grid uses alternating current, which means the electrons "slosh" back and forth along power lines at a certain rate (60 cycles per second, or Hz, in the US). If this rate rises too high or falls too low, problems occur and the grid may shut down: the recent large-scale blackout in the Iberian Peninsula was caused when grid frequency suddenly dropped from Maintaining a given frequency requires power supplied and power demanded to match. If energy supplied to the grid falls (or if power demand rises), the frequency of the grid will fall. The sudden drop in frequency on the Iberian grid followed Regup and regdown services are used to provide minor frequency corrections to the grid, and require relatively small amounts of power. But grid operators also must have larger backup reserves in case of emergencies (such as a large power plant or transmission line suddenly getting disconnected from the grid). For this, grid operators require what’s known as “spinning” or “synchronized” reserves, sources of electricity generation that can be brought online very quickly, typically in less than 10 minutes. (Historically, these were called spinning reserves because they often consisted of a power plant that was already on — the turbine and generator were already spinning). There are also non-spinning or non-synchronized reserves: emergency sources of generation that take longer to come online. (These might still be conventional power plants with spinning turbines and generators, just ones that aren’t immediately able to provide power.) Regulation up/down and spinning/non-spinning reserves are commonly purchased by most grid operators, but some operators also have markets for additional ancillary services. California’s CAISO, for instance, has a market for Batteries help balance supply and demandBatteries are very good at supplying many of these grid stability services. A battery at a partial state of charge can either supply power to the grid (by discharging) or take power off the grid (by charging), making them extremely well-suited to providing regulation up and regulation down services. Batteries can also ramp up to full power extremely quickly (fractions of a second), making them excellent at providing “spinning” reserves (though of course there is no physical spinning at all). A recent Because batteries excel at providing these services, and because providing them was often Since 2016, PJM has been thoroughly eclipsed as the largest operator of battery storage by California’s CAISO and Texas’ ERCOT. In California, battery storage adoption has been driven by commitments to remove carbon-emitting sources of electricity generation. SB 100, passed in 2018, requires California to achieve For both California and Texas, the result has been an enormous increase in battery storage capacity. As of 2023 CAISO operates around 50% of the US’s 16 gigawatts of battery storage, and ERCOT operates just under 25%, compared to PJM’s 2.3%. As with PJM, early on much of this battery storage capacity was used to provide ancillary services. In 2020, over 80% of CAISO’s and 90% of ERCOT’s battery capacity was being used for regup, regdown, and spinning reserves. By 2023, roughly 2/3rds of regup and responsive reserve services in Texas were being US Battery Storage Capacity Used For Ancillary Services Capacity used for frequency regulation or spinning reserve. Batteries and peak shavingAncillary services are key for keeping the grid reliable, but many of them require a relatively small amount of power. Battery capacity has grown to such an extent in CAISO and ERCOT that it now greatly exceeds what’s needed to provide ancillary services. The 63% and 80% of regdown and regup services provided by batteries in California in 2023, for instance, were provided by just 16% and 8% of California’s Rather than provide these sorts of services, batteries in California and Texas are increasingly being used for energy arbitrage: buying power when it’s cheap (such as the middle of a sunny day when output from solar panels is high), and selling it when it’s expensive (such as the evening when demand rises and output from solar panels falls). In ERCOT for instance, in 2023 only 15% of battery revenues came from energy arbitrage; by 2024 that had This energy arbitrage allows grids to make use of excess solar or wind energy that would otherwise simply be wasted (known as “curtailment”). But it also makes energy grids more reliable. By storing excess power, batteries can help supply power during periods of peak demand, reducing the overall burden on other sources of generation (as well as In Texas, the increase in battery storage has been credited with helping reduce the risk for summer power outages. In 2023, Texas’ ERCOT issued 11 conservation calls (requests for consumers to reduce their use of electricity), including
At its peak, battery storage provided In California, large-scale deployment of battery storage has Prior to California’s large-scale battery storage deployment, generation from natural gas power plants spiked in the early evenings as output from solar PV declined. But thanks to battery storage, power output from natural gas in the evening hours declined by roughly 50% between 2021 and 2024. This has reduced the amount of natural gas capacity that needs to be kept online during the day. You can see the progression of battery use in California by looking at snapshots of their daily output. On June 1st 2019, battery storage output rapidly shifts back and forth, going from positive to negative as it helps regulate the grid frequency. Maximum discharge is less than 200 megawatts, and net contribution to meeting power demand is essentially zero. On June 1st 2022, batteries are beginning to be used more for meeting load (peaking at around 4.5% of overall demand); the rapid charging and discharging to help regulate frequencies is now superimposed on a trend of negative load during the day (when batteries are charging) and positive load in the evenings. Discharge peak has risen from less than 0.2 GW to nearly 1.5 GW. On June 1st 2025, this pattern is even more pronounced. Discharge peaks are even higher, over 6GW, and the overall shape of the charge/discharge pattern is much smoother. While in 2019 batteries were rapidly alternating between charging and discharging to help maintain frequency, now this variation is a small disturbance on an otherwise smooth pattern of charging during the day and discharging at night. CAISO Battery Storage Activity on June 1st 2025 Positive indicates discharging, negative indicates charging. Batteries and grid-formingBatteries, solar panels, and wind turbines are all “inverter-based resources” (IBRs): while power plants that spin a generator generate alternating current directly, IBRs generate direct current and convert it to alternating current using an inverter. Historically, these inverters have been what’s known as “grid following”: they require some other source of power, generally a large spinning generator, to establish an alternating current frequency, and then match that frequency. If frequency on the grid unexpectedly declines sharply (due to things like a transmission line or power plant suddenly getting disconnected), spinning generators will resist this change due to Critically, grid-following inverter-based resources don’t have the capability of automatically stabilizing the grid via inertia effects. This has created concerns that large-scale deployment of inverter-based resources, and removing sources of inertia from the grid, will result in grid instabilities and power system failures. The recent Iberian Peninsula blackout has been blamed on having too many inverter-based resources (over 70% at the time of the blackout) and insufficient generation with inertia to counteract grid instabilities. However, inverters, particularly battery inverters, can also be designed to be “grid forming,” capable of establishing a reference frequency.⁶ Grid-forming inverters can counteract grid instabilities via what’s known as “synthetic inertia”: detecting sudden drops in frequency, and rapidly ramping up their power to counteract them. In fact, because of how batteries function, they can supply much more of this equivalent inertia than spinning generators. The inertia response of a spinning generator is a small fraction of its total capacity, and declines quickly. Batteries can supply 100% of their capacity as inertia response, and do so until they run out of charge. The inertia response provided by 1000 megawatts of spinning generation could be provided by just Batteries with grid-forming inverters are relatively new, but are ConclusionThanks to their ability to rapidly charge and discharge, and to store electricity for when it’s most needed, batteries are becoming an important tool for making electrical grids reliable. While today grid-scale battery storage capacity is still small in absolute terms (energy storage supplied by batteries is about 1 Though limited energy capacity means that batteries could only supply that power for a few hours 2 Sometimes these are just called “regulation services.” 3 Though ERCOT calls it Rapid Reserve Service, not spinning reserves. 4 An example of how lucrative ancillary services can be: in 2023 regup and regdown made up roughly 5 Battery storage power capacity at the end of 2023 6 IBRs can also provide inertia by adding Construction Physics articles will always remain free, but if you find this work valuable, I encourage you to Construction Physics is produced in partnership with the Institute for Progress, a Washington, DC-based think tank. You can learn more about their work by visiting their You can also contact me on |