---
subject: "The Monday Media Diet with Shain Shapiro"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-10-09 10:00:17
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Tell us about yourself. I am the Founder and now Chairman of Describe your media diet. I read far too much current affairs and political news. I have subscriptions to both The Guardian and the Telegraph, so I can get both sides and am an infrequent Economist reader. I listen to a ton of podcasts, including What’s the last great book you read?
What are you reading now? Being on the book tour, I’m actually not reading anything because I’m spending most of my time outside of traveling trying to keep up with the day job. At home I’m in between a few books, including one What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication? I flip through and go back to things. I’m extremely non linear in my reading. I also read most things online, which I know it’s good for the eyes but because I’m on the road, carting books and magazines around is exhausting. Who should everyone be reading that they’re not?
What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone?
Plane or train? Train if I can, but it’s more often a plane. But I much prefer trains. What is one place everyone should visit? Greenland. It was a life changing experience for me to go to a place with such a unique culture, history & take on things that most people have never experienced or know nothing about. I learned a lot about myself visiting and what I want my mark on this world to be spending 10 days up there. I will be back. And the Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into. I am obsessed with why we don’t value music economically the way I believe it could be. I get that we all appreciate music, but for example, in 108 of the 195 United Nations countries, there is a lack of copyright policy that provides the framework for music to be an economy, which means if you live in one of those countries and want to pursue music professionally, you have to leave. I have been digging into each of these 195 countries in a deep, deep way and have developed quite an expansive spreadsheet that explores all sorts of different data points related to music and what the country has done, has signed up to, has mandated and so on. My goal is to change this in my lifetime - so that where you live and what you look like has no bearing on your ability to pursue music as a career, if that is something you choose to do. This is a lifelong rabbit hole, but it is, admittedly, what I am obsessed with right now. Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Shain (SS) — Why is this interesting? is a daily email from Noah Brier & Colin Nagy (and friends!) about interesting things. If you’ve enjoyed this edition, please consider forwarding it to a friend. If you’re reading it for the first time, consider subscribing (it’s free!). Invite your friends and earn rewardsIf you enjoy Why is this interesting?, share it with your friends and earn rewards when they subscribe. |