---
subject: "The Nutgraf: Build AI and they will ask you to go"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-05-17 04:34:25
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
I suppose the most consequential event of the previous week happened not in India, but thousands of miles away in Redmond, Seattle.
Microsoft Corp.’s recently announced job cuts fell hardest on the people who build the company’s products, showing that even software developers are at risk in the age of artificial intelligence.
In Microsoft’s home state of Washington, software engineering was by far the largest single job category to receive layoff notices, making up more than 40% of the roughly 2,000 positions cut, according to state documents reviewed by Bloomberg.
Microsoft on Tuesday said it would cut about 6,000 workers across the company. The Washington state data represents about a third of the total.
As Microsoft and its rivals make steep investments in AI, they are scrutinising costs and reprioritising budgets. In recent weeks, Microsoft executives have pledged to keep a lid on spending amid huge investments in data centre construction.
At the same time, AI-powered tools capable of writing or analysing code are automating elements of software development previously done by engineers typing away on keyboards. At Microsoft, as much as 30% of some projects’ code is now written by AI, Chief Executive Officer Satya Nadella said in April.
Microsoft layoffs hit coders hardest with AI costs on the rise, [Bloomberg](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2025-05-14/microsoft-layoffs-hit-software-engineers-as-industry-touts-ai-savings)
Job cuts in tech happen all the time, but this one feels different. Microsoft didn’t get rid of its employees for the usual reasons—poor performance, macroeconomic conditions, or lower-than-expected earnings. In fact, Microsoft shares jumped by nearly 10% a couple of weeks ago when it announced its earnings, [which has turned out to be better](https://www.cnbc.com/2025/04/30/microsoft-msft-q3-earnings-report-2025.html) than expected. As of today, Microsoft’s share prices are trading at close to its all-time high. If you wanted to, you could easily make the case that Microsoft, the most valuable company in the world, is in the most powerful and dominant position in its history.
And at this point, what did Microsoft do?
It eliminated human roles to focus on investing in machines instead.
And the humans it got rid of weren’t people who’d been stuck in middle management, but those who’d built the machines in the first place.
For the last several months, I’ve generally refrained from writing much about AI, partly because it was hard to tell the difference between what was actually happening and what tech companies claimed was happening. Tech people have been hyping new technology cycles as radically disruptive for a long time, and I’ve learnt that it’s best to chill and wait a bit. I’ve worked inside tech companies building products while constantly hearing technologists claim that the next big thing was blockchain, big data, the Internet of Things, Elon Musk, virtual reality, and many more. Some of these things catch on, but more slowly than expected. Others fade away entirely. And a few dabble in ketamine and try to mess with the government. Broadly though, everyone gets time to adjust and reorient themselves to a new reality that creeps in slowly.
However, in the past few months, I’m starting to believe that AI is fundamentally different.
And it’s not clear to me why that’s a good thing.
The Ken’s premium audio experience is here!
From original podcasts to writer-narrated versions of our subscriber newsletters, you can now listen to The Ken each day. Discover them all at [the-ken.com/podcasts](http://the-ken.com/podcasts).
Existing Premium subscribers? You already have FULL access to ALL of our premium audio. They are available exclusively via our subscriber apps. If you don’t have them, just download one and log in to unlock everything. Premium subscribers on the app can listen to this edition of The Nutgraf [here](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/the-nutgraf/build-ai-and-they-will-ask-you-to-go/).
Not a Premium subscriber? You can subscribe to [The Ken Premium](https://podcasts.apple.com/in/channel/the-ken-premium/id6744577070) on Apple Podcasts for an easy monthly price (Rs 299 in India). The channel will include ALL our premium podcasts and audio.
In all my interactions with tech founders in India, the thinking about AI is essentially the following:
1. AI must be adopted. Unless you reskill yourself to wholeheartedly and openly embrace it, you will be left behind.
2. AI won’t replace you, instead it will augment you. It’ll make everyone 10X better and more productive by taking away ‘mundane’ tasks.
3. AI will help make everyone a startup founder and entrepreneur. Imagine a world where anyone can code, build, create, and ship products.
I get the merits of these arguments, but what’s most striking is the uniformity of thought behind them. Forget disagreeing with any of these, I can’t think of a single prominent founder, CEO, or tech entrepreneur who even offers an interesting nuance that builds on top of these ideas. AI hasn’t just drained the depth from our art, writing, and code—it’s flattened the way we think about AI itself too.
There are several reasons why India’s smartest technologists have accepted these as doctrine. Part of it is because we’ve been constantly told—mostly by Silicon Valley technologists who want to sell a constantly evolving stream of products and services—that technological change is inevitable and that any effort to question and interrogate the change is an exercise in futility or, even worse, irrelevance. When I’ve tried to have this conversation, the response I end up with is a version of, “What are we supposed to do? Ignore that it exists?” Technologists have successfully framed AI’s dichotomy—either adopt and submit to it fully. Or die. As if those two are the only options in front of everyone.
I guess being non-conformist in technology also extracts a social price. It takes a brave person to say that Sam Altman isn’t a visionary but a sophisticated swindler. Or that OpenAI isn’t a technological marvel but an orchestrated theft of the world’s collective intellectual property. Or that eventually, no matter how you look at it, there’s no future where AI will make humanity better off as a whole.
I’ve constantly tried to envision this futuristic state where AI gets mass adoption, which also makes everyone better off than they are today. How exactly will this pan out? The arguments I’m presented with are those of past technological cycles—the industrial revolution, computers replacing typewriters, the information revolution, and smartphones. All of these were tremendously disruptive, and yet, as a whole, humans adjusted, learnt new skills, and got more prosperous. This is true.
But that’s no reason to believe that this will always be true.
And more importantly, there’s even less reason to believe that this will be true for India’s future.
My somewhat alarmist view is that AI, if it continues to scale at current adoption, will result in huge social and economic upheaval in India. It’s hard to see who will really benefit from this. Not India’s IT giants, who built their empires on the backs of the country’s software developers—cheaper than their Western counterparts for now, but soon to be pricier than GPUs. India’s BPO industry employs around four million people. How long will it take for OpenAI, Microsoft, and others like them to displace these jobs with data centres? For the last ten years, Indian SaaS companies outcompeted others on product and pricing, but if AI agents make it easy for anyone anywhere in the world to create a better, hyper-personalised CRM, then what advantage do Indian companies have left? India’s biggest and most successful product and tech companies are in the business of delivering food, groceries, cabs, or consumer products. How will AI make them stronger and better? We already get anything we want at our doorstep in less than 10 minutes? How will AI make this better?
Once you go beyond the obvious, these questions about AI make things much more dire. What exactly is this new AI-powered future where many more millions of Indians have jobs, lives, and money? What are they doing that the machines aren’t doing? In a world where the average person becomes 10X better due to AI, what do the other nine do? I try to imagine this world where all of these people have more income driven by increased economic activity, and I can’t picture what that looks like. It feels like a fantasy.
For decades, tech companies have monetised everything humans have. Just examine what you spend your money on every month, and observe the share that tech companies have on your wallet. This used to be much smaller. Retail. Commerce. Finance. Entertainment. Communication. And even attention. All of these have been squeezed dry.
The final thing left is knowledge—and the act of learning itself.
The layoffs at Microsoft are the consequence of this last act of monetisation. If you build machines that contain knowledge, and can ‘learn’, then you really don’t need a lot of humans. People like to say AI will free up humans to do more ‘meaningful work’, but are quite vague about what exactly this work is, and how many of us will be actually doing it.
As India’s tech founders keep following in the footsteps of Silicon Valley, sharing all the exciting ways AI will transform their companies, I just hope a few of them also take the time to explain how the unique strengths of being human can continue to drive India’s growth and resilience.
Regards,
Praveen Gopal Krishnan
Survey: How do employees use AI at work?Unlike other technologies, employees across all roles and levels are exploring the use of AI. As companies urge their workforces to be AI-literate, how are employees taking to it? What kind of a workplace does this result in? Take the survey and let us know. It’s fully anonymous, and your responses will help us with a story we’re working on. |