---
subject: "Attention is All You Need"
from: "Not Boring <notboring@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-03-27 12:37:27
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Not Boring", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_2982495070691762429", "UNREAD"]
---
Welcome to the 1,205 newly Not Boring people who have joined us over the past week! If you haven’t subscribed, join 194,036 smart, curious folks by subscribing here: Today’s Not Boring is brought to you by… Prospects are asking about security earlier in the buying cycle. Companies need a way to get compliant that is faster and takes less employee involvement. With Secureframe makes it fast and easy to get SOC 2, ISO 27001, HIPAA, PCI & GDPR compliant. With guided workflows and one-click integrations, the entire process is automated and backed by a support team of industry experts. Get compliant fast with Secureframe. Click Hi friends 👋, Happy Monday! I had a lot of fun writing this one. While I’ve written about AI, I haven’t written much about OpenAI because there’s already so much attention on the company that it’s been hard to find much new to say. GPT-4 is amazing. There will be implications for white collar workers. Here are 75 things you didn’t know you could do with ChatGPT 🧵 👇 Are foundation models defensible? Are GPT Wrappers defensible? Then, on Thursday, OpenAI introduced ChatGPT plugins, and the more I thought about it, the more excited I got. Through a series of seeming accidents, great product, and user pull, OpenAI has attracted attention, turned that attention into the must-use API, and with the release of plugins, is turning that attention into a platform unlike any platform that exists, one that ingests the capabilities of the apps built on it. If OpenAI chooses to, it can build an Apex Aggregator and define the new best business model on the internet. We need to lay some groundwork to explain why. Let’s get to it. Attention is All You NeedThe paper that kicked off the AI Revolution had a catchy title, as these papers go: Written by a team at Google Brain in 2017, the paper introduced the now-famous Transformer architecture that powers large language models such as OpenAI’s GPT-4. As That same year, in a follow-up to his canonical Direct Relationships with Users Zero Marginal Cost for Serving Users Demand-driven Multi-sided Networks with Decreasing Acquisition Costs
Think Google and Facebook, the Super-Aggregators. Billions of users come to their sites, where they’re served content created by other people for free, and it gets cheaper to acquire users over time as demand attracts supply which attracts more demand which attracts more supply, and so on. Better experience leads to more users which leads to more suppliers and advertisers which leads to more users, and so on. The takeaway from that post was essentially the same as the Transformer paper: to win big on the internet, attention is all you need.
One prominent VC who looked at investing early on said he loved the idea and the team, but that with no revenue and no plans to make any, he couldn’t justify investing his LPs’ money in the startup. As recently as last summer, when DALL•E 2 brought OpenAI into the limelight, a team member told me that while their tech was excellent, they weren’t quite sure how they were going to monetize it. Then, in December, OpenAI released ChatGPT. The ChatGPT exploded. Two months in, it reached 100 million users. Nearly half of the YC W23 class is building apps using OpenAI’s APIs. GPT-4 became the most eagerly anticipated drop since the last Beatles album, and it delivered. Then last week, OpenAI released Since the launch on Thursday, a bunch of people have compared plugins to Apple’s App Store, which paid developers $60 billion in 2022 (and likely took $15 billion for itself). I think it has the potential to be much bigger than that, and I really don’t want to be yet another person who overhypes OpenAI, so I’ll spend this entire piece walking you through why I think so. In under a year, OpenAI has gone from under-the-radar and unsure-how-to-monetize to one of the most potentially dominant strategic positions and business models in the history of tech. It happened almost by accident. While the technology deserves the praise it receives, its translation into a juggernaut business was far from certain until tens of millions of people rushed to use its new consumer-friendly interface. Since then, the dominos have fallen rapidly. When it comes to turning mind-blowing technology into an equally mind-blowing business opportunity, it turns out, you guessed it: attention is all you need. As it stands today, if OpenAI chooses to, it can build the Apex Aggregator by building an Action Engine. The Action Engine subsumes search and any number of products that let users do things, and it does them for users with nothing more than a simple prompt. If Aggregators controlled demand and commoditized supply, the Apex Aggregator can control demand on multiple fronts, turn attention into actions, disaggregate any supplier that feeds it, and even aggregate the aggregators. It could make Apple, Google, and Facebook’s models seem soft and cuddly… until they fight back. I’ll explain what’s gotten me so excited about OpenAI’s accidental business model, but first, we need to do a quick refresher on the current tech business model kings. The Super-AggregatorsIf you’re reading this, I assume you know a lot about how Google and Facebook’s business models – the greatest cash-generating machines known to humanity – work, so I’ll keep this section very brief. Facebook (and its family of apps) use billions of users to attract billions of users, collect a lot of data on those users, and let advertisers target those users based on that data. If you’re a company that wants to get in front of a lot of a certain type of buyer because you think that type of buyer might like your product, Facebook is the place to go. Then, you just serve them a colorful ad, a certain number of them will click on it, and a certain number of those will buy. Because Facebook has the most social attention – over 3 billion users – it attracts more people, and because it has the most people and the most data on them, it attracts the most brand advertising dollars. Both demand and supply cost it practically nothing to acquire, and ads cost it practically nothing to serve. Google’s model is even more direct. Billions of people go to Google explicitly to tell the site exactly what they’re looking for – from information to hotels in certain cities to accounting software – and Google auctions off well-placed links to advertisers who offer exactly what those people are searching for. Those people have expressed intent, and Google rakes in cash from advertisers intent on capturing it. Because Google captures the most search attention – 93% of searches worldwide go through Google – it attracts the most advertising dollars of any business on earth. Both demand and supply cost it practically nothing to acquire, and ads cost it practically nothing to serve. In 2022, Facebook/Meta did $116.6 billion in revenue and Google/Alphabet did $282.8 billion in revenue, the vast majority of which, in both cases, came from serving ads. It’s hard to think of better internet business models. But I think OpenAI just did by accident. Attention with IntelligenceOpenAI’s potential business model is hard to comp directly because it’s so many things at once: an aggregator, an API, and a platform. Imagine that a bunch of apps used Google Search as their core feature, Google was the main place to find those apps, and those apps worked better when you used them in concert with each other through Google, and you’re getting close to what OpenAI might be able to do. OpenAI hits its partners from all angles: Attention Grabber. ChatGPT is the front-end for OpenAI, the “aggregator” to which over 100 million users flocked within the first two months. ChatGPT will let OpenAI control demand for abundant resources, which are themselves tailored to OpenAI. Intelligence API. A number of new products are being built around OpenAI’s API and a bunch of incumbent products are re-architecting themselves around OpenAI’s API. Unlike most APIs, which serve non-core functions, the OpenAI Intelligence API is core to many of these product experiences. Plugin Play. Products, whether built on OpenAI’s APIs or not, can now be plugged into ChatGPT itself (and potentially into OpenAI’s Intelligence API over time), turning the product into both platform and aggregator, and bringing more attention to ChatGPT. Unlike an App Store, which just lists apps but doesn’t ingest its capabilities, this essentially turns any plugin into an API that gives ChatGPT its company’s full capabilities.
By attracting so much user attention with a genuinely excellent product, OpenAI has also attracted developers to build with its Intelligence API and on its plugin platform. In the short-term, this is great for developers – they get more capabilities and more users – but it’s a sort of Faustian bargain. Developers building on the Intelligence API are relying on OpenAI for their core functionality, and plugin developers are handing their core functionality to OpenAI. In both cases, OpenAI gains more attention, reach, and power. But the bullets above are based on what’s been announced to date. I’ll save speculation for later. For now, let’s go a little deeper into each leg of the stool. Attention Grabber Attention is all you need. And ChatGPT is an attention grabber.
Time it took to reach 100 million users worldwide:
Telephone: 75 years
Mobile phone: 16 years
World Wide Web: 7 years
iTunes: 6.5 years
Twitter: 5 years
Facebook: 4.5 years
WhatsApp: 3.5 years
Instagram: 2.5 years
Apple App Store: 2 years
ChatGPT: 2 months |