---
subject: "Inciting Incident: India’s food regulator bares its teeth"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-09-06 10:32:03
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031"]
---
|
|
Inciting Incident
Fri, 06 Sep 24
Inciting Incident is our weekly newsletter about the most powerful tool of our age—stories. Stories told by businesses, leaders, governments..
Good Morning Ishan,
Two decades ago, at the age of 96, American economist John Kenneth Galbraith distilled a lifetime of experience into a book you could read in just a few hours. The 62-page treatise—titled The Economics of Innocent Fraud: Truth for Our Time—is a summary, essentially, of what truth and trust means in the world of economics and business, and what Galbraith had learned from decades of observing the markets and governments.
The book has many crucial lessons on business storytelling and fascinating insights into the various degrees of truth employed by companies in their narratives. I’d recommend you pick it up for a quick weekend read. But the most pertinent aspect for today’s edition is the titular one.
“Innocent fraud”, according to Galbraith, is a lie or half-truth that’s presented as fact because it benefits those in power, and is then repeated so often that it becomes ‘common wisdom’ perpetuated by millions. To quote Galbraith:
Since Galbraith released his book, much research and study has gone into the costs and benefits of such phenomena, and stakeholders and regulators have wisened up to the many greys in the equation and how some companies exploit them. But his explanation of what makes such innocent frauds possible still holds true.
Over the last fortnight, we’ve had two stories in the news media that illustrate how businesses take advantage of this human trait, and how regulators are finally starting to say enough is enough.
First, India’s food regulator is taking on businesses that continue to claim that the consumption of A2 milk results in some form of special health benefits. In the last week of August, the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) [made its point](https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/fssai-orders-removal-of-a1-a2-milk-claims-from-products/article68555559.ece) quite forcefully:
Food safety regulator FSSAI on Thursday directed food businesses, including e-commerce players, to remove claims of ‘A1’ and ‘A2’ types of milk and milk products from packaging, calling such labelling misleading…”FBOs are instructed to remove such claims from their products,” the regulator said, referring to food business operators. E-commerce platforms were also told to remove these claims from products and websites immediately. Companies have been given six months to exhaust pre-printed labels, with no further extensions to be granted.
To make sense of the order, you need to dial back to a story The Ken [published](https://the-ken.com/story/the-dodgy-science-behind-indias-us300-million-a2-milk-industry/) two years ago.
When we published this story, over 50 startups in large Indian cities were selling A2 milk with claims that it was beneficial to health in many different ways, all without any solid scientific evidence to back them up. They were doing this simply because people had bought into the premise that A2 was somehow healthier than other forms of milk, and were willing to pay anywhere between 2X to 10X the price of normal milk and milk products.
The A2 milk industry in India, which is the world’s largest milk producer, is estimated to be worth just over US$300 million. But Indian A2 milk companies are operating in a regulatory grey area. The Food Standards and Safety Authority of India (FSSAI) does not distinguish between A1 and A2 milk. Only nine of the 50-odd companies publicly upload DNA test certification documents to support their claim of selling A2 milk.
Well, fast forward to now, and the FSSAI seems to have finally had enough, calling A2 branding on milk as just another “[marketing gimmick](https://www.downtoearth.org.in/food/misleading-marketing-gimmick-fssai-announces-curbs-on-dairy-products-from-being-labelled-as-a2)” and terming the health claims as entirely “misleading”.
This is likely the end for an entire product category that had grown up around the claims (and a lucrative one at that), taking advantage of the millions of instances of “innocent fraud” and the resultant public trust. But when narratives are fundamentally flawed, they usually tend to die a painful death, even if they manage to flourish for a while.
The other piece of news I want to talk about is how the government is going after another high-flying sector.
In February, India’s government formed a panel to [consider](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/cons-products/food/govt-panel-to-review-if-nutraceuticals-should-be-brought-under-cdsco/articleshow/107794633.cms?from=mdr) regulating nutraceuticals as drugs, a major departure from the current system where they are regulated as food products. The goal is to weed out false and misleading claims that are rampant in the sector, and judging them by the far tougher standards that medicinal products have to meet.
Some officials said several supplements are marketed with disease management/disease risk reduction claims considering that the same ingredients are permitted in both drugs and nutra regulations, the sources stated. “Besides, there is no mandatory medical supervision for products covered under nutra regulations as a result people might consume it for longer duration and/or in higher doses which might prove harmful,” the sources said.
The nutraceuticals industry has been [spooked](https://nuffoodsspectrum.in/2024/09/05/continuing-nutraceuticals-under-fssai-would-be-a-prudent-move.html) by the proposal, and for good reason, because much of the evidence suggests that the industry is working like the Wild West. We’ve already [written](https://the-ken.com/story/how-healthy-are-health-supplements-indias-food-regulator-wants-to-find-out/) about the many public health concerns over the misuse and abuse of such supplements last year.
The ACP study also points to e-commerce sites as the source for both false claims and quality issues. “In India, the sale of these products happens mainly through health-care professionals (HCPs) or distributors’ networks and e-commerce sites. Most established companies work through the HCP network. The real compliance problem is with the e-commerce industry,” said Srivastava.
This is yet another case of the authorities squaring up for battle against a powerful and deep-pocketed industry where the truth is murky and companies waltz through the shades of grey. But evidence of [false claims](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/services/advertising/beware-misleading-ad-game-tricking-indians-rather-than-offering-umeedo-wali-dhoop/articleshow/110534209.cms?from=mdr) and [misleading advertisements](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/services/advertising/81-of-ad-violations-were-on-account-of-misleading-claims-in-fy24-asci/articleshow/110340193.cms?from=mdr) have been steadily piling up, enough that they can’t be ignored anymore.
These businesses would do well to learn from Galbraith, and also the many academic studies that show that [transparency](https://hbr.org/2022/11/why-startups-should-embrace-radical-transparency) and [accountability](https://hbr.org/2022/05/a-better-approach-to-avoiding-misconduct) are the foundations on which successful businesses are built.
The Ken conducts a limited number of workshops on [Journalistic Storytelling](https://the-ken.com/learning/three-principles/?section=leaders-as-storytellers) every quarter, so if you want to enrol your team, please [apply here](https://theken.typeform.com/Narrative).
For now, it’s a wrap for this week.
Please let me know what you think about this newsletter. What did you like? What did I miss? What would you like to read about? Write to me at inciting-incident@the-ken.com. I’ll be back in your inbox at 4 pm India time next Friday.
Have a good weekend.
Take care.
Yours,
Ruhi
[Got a tip? If you have a lead for a great story that The Ken can pursue, please send it to [tips@the-ken.com](mailto:tips@the-ken.com) or share it through [this form](https://theken.typeform.com/got-a-tip). To find out more about how to do this securely, read our [blog post](https://the-ken.com/blog/help-the-ken-tell-the-next-big-story/) about sharing tips with The Ken.]