---
subject: "Netflix's $500B What Ifs?"
from: "Trung Phan <trungphan@workweek.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-05-24 05:57:12
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Trung Phan", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_7971156048460647958", "UNREAD"]
---
Netflix recently crossed the $500B market cap mark.
If you had invested $1,000 at Netflix’s IPO in 2002 when the company was a ~$500m DVD-by-mail service with less than 1m subscribers, you’d now have $0 because you definitely would have paper-handed it during one of the 4x that the stock fell by 25%+ in a single day.
For the rare big-balled investors that actually HODL’d their NFLX bags, that $1,000 is now worth ~$100,000.
The crazy thing is that Netflix is up more than 5x since 2022. The gains came from adding subs, raising prices, rolling out an ad tier and forcing your cousin’s co-worker’s wife’s personal trainer to stop using your login credentials and actually pay for a subscription after the devastating password crackdown.
Netflix has clearly won the streaming war with 300m+ subscribers and annual sales near $40B. According to the Wall Street Journal, the streamer has [very aggressive goals for 2030](https://link.workweek.com/click/40009086.53846/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cud3NqLmNvbS9idXNpbmVzcy9tZWRpYS9uZXRmbGl4LWFpbXMtdG8tam9pbi10aGUtMS10cmlsbGlvbi1jbHViLWZkYWNiMjUwP2hhc2hlZF91c2VyPTBlYmVmMTJjNDI5MTE4NDU2MmRhYzA5OTY1YmNlODA4/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B9fcf4a13):
- $1T market cap
- 410m subscribers
- Sales of ~$80B with $9B from ads (up from the current ad sales of ~$2B)
The subscriber growth will have to be international as North America is very saturated. Meanwhile, the ads business will require more live content. But Netflix is willing to spend after success with NFL Christmas games and [Mike Tyson’s naked ass](https://link.workweek.com/click/40009086.53846/aHR0cHM6Ly94LmNvbS9SYW1wQ2FwaXRhbExMQy9zdGF0dXMvMTg1NzY0ODQ4MzYzNDY0MzAyMD9oYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Bea61a49e). This changing business model is why Netflix stopped reporting subscriber growth and is training Wall Street on its new key benchmark of…oh god, sorry…have to say it…“engagement” (aka total hours viewed).
Whether or not Netflix achieves these milestones, the streamer has been on one heckuva run filled with multiple near misses that could have tanked the entire operation.
On that note, I looked through my highlights of Gina Keatin’s 2013 book [“Netflixed: The Epic Battle for America's Eyeballs”](https://link.workweek.com/click/40009086.53846/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYW1hem9uLmNvbS9OZXRmbGl4ZWQtRXBpYy1CYXR0bGUtQW1lcmljYXMtRXllYmFsbHMvZHAvMTU5MTg0NjU5NT9oYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Bde8f9512). There were three wild “what-if” moments before Netflix’s 2002 IPO that would have changed the entire trajectory of my streaming binge-ing habits:
- Jeff Bezos Gives a Low-Ball Offer
- Bernard Arnault Throws a Lifeline
- Blockbuster With An All-Time Fumble
***
1. Jeff Bezos Gives a Low-Ball Offer
Netflix was founded in 1997 by Reed Hastings and Marc Randolph.
Hasting’s had sold his company Pure Software — a UNIX debugging tool — for a then-Silicon Valley record of $750m. Randolph was a marketing director at the software firm and the two of them began kicking around new startup ideas.
You’ve probably heard some version of the origin story: Hastings had a lightbulb moment for Netflix after renting Apollo 13 from Blockbuster and getting hit with $40 in late fees for not returning the VHS on time.
That is just the perfect business rationale. Who in the 1990s hadn’t returned Top Gun or Pulp Fiction or Basic Instinct a few days late and forgotten to rewind the tape, which was also another onerous penalty fee (“Be Kind, Please Rewind”…shut up Blockbuster).
However, it's not true according to Randolph: “That’s a load of crap. It never happened…it’s a convenient fiction [because people want] a rage-against-the-machine story.”
The duo were actually trying to ape Amazon’s business model. In 1994, Jeff Bezos launched the e-commerce platform with a focus on books because they were easy to ship and there were more unique items in that category than any other category (an internet store front can stock millions of book titles, which is a huge differentiation relative to physical book stores).
A similar-ish category of product hit America’s shores in 1997: DVDs.
The video rental stores (Blockbuster, Hollywood Video, Movie Gallery) initially didn’t want to stock DVDs because they were competitive to VHS, so there was an opening for a new type of company.
Hastings invested $2.5m and Netflix launched as a DVD sales and rental business offering just under 1,000 titles. The two would run the startup as co-CEOs.
Within a year, it became clear that the real opportunity was in DVD rentals.
Why? Because the “DVD sales” business had become a knife fight with Amazon and other Big Box retailers. Hastings and Randolph even met with Big Daddy Bezos to see how everyone could work together:
[Hastings and Randolph] had to solve their retention problems fast and get out of DVD sales before high-volume retailers got in and crushed them. Hastings made it clear to Netflix’s executive team that they were pulling out of DVD sales even though it was providing the company’s only profit. They were on notice that they had to find a way to make rental work, or the company would go down. Randolph and Hastings flew to Seattle and met with Amazon founder Jeff Bezos, who had indicated that he wanted to explore a partnership with Netflix. The two CEOs were willing to trade their DVD sell-through business for a crack at pitching online DVD rental to Amazon’s customers. Hastings also wanted to discuss selling Netflix to Amazon, if the price was right.
While Randolph and Bezos hit it off immediately, trading launch-day stories, Hastings was less than impressed with Amazon’s $12 million offer. Instead, they agreed to a cross promotion—Netflix would direct customers who wanted to buy DVDs to Amazon in exchange for placement of Netflix ads on Amazon’s Web site and a royalty for each recommendation. The arrangement went down hard at Netflix, where some team members felt Hastings had acted prematurely in ceding DVD sales to Bezos.
$12m? What is this? An acquisition offer for ants?!?!?! Hastings owned 70%+ of the startup and his decision to reject the offer was final.
Obviously, that turned out to be the correct move.
The funniest side bar for me is that Bezos’ offer was a fraction of what he paid for IMBD. Flush off of Amazon’s May 1997 IPO, Bezos actually dropped $155m on April 28th, 1998 to acquire three companies: IMDB, Bookpages and Telebook (or $55m each).
Netflix would have been a better call than any of those, but I will say that IMDB is probably my favourite Amazon deal ever. I’m making this assessment based solely on the fact that you can filter IMDB’s database for every movie that stars both Rob Schneider and Adam Sandler (the 200m+ monthly site visits and subsidiary Box Office Mojo are also pretty good).
The most regretful part of the IMDB deal is that Amazon shut down the message forums in 2017 due to toxic comments. This sucked because IMDB forums had some of the greatest internet content in existence. My favorites were people arguing about movie “plot holes” like this [comment](https://link.workweek.com/click/40009086.53846/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cucGFzdGVtYWdhemluZS5jb20vbW92aWVzL2ltZGIvMTItZGFya2x5LWNvbWljLWV4YW1wbGVzLW9mLXdoeS1pbWRiLXNodXQtZG93bi1pdHMvP2hhc2hlZF91c2VyPTBlYmVmMTJjNDI5MTE4NDU2MmRhYzA5OTY1YmNlODA4/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B0f533e72):
Was Forrest Gump imagining everything? None of the stuff he talked about when he was sitting on the bench actually happened? At least not to him directly. Think about it. Here’s a guy who won the medal of honor, international ping pong championship, cross-country runner, multi-millionaire, etc, etc, etc yet no one on the bench that he talks to recognizes him (or really believes him)? Also, once we’re in the present time, he doesn’t do anything extraordinary anymore, nor does he do anything to show his vast wealth!
If Bezos hadn’t spent money like a drunken sailor on that Spring day in 1998, he very well could have upped his Netflix offer and we’re looking at a very different tech timeline.
***
2. Bernard Arnault Throws a Lifeline
By 1999, Netflix had sharpened its focus to a DVD rental subscription service mediated through a website. The new focus also meant that Hastings would take over as the sole CEO (with Randolph becoming Netflix’s President).
Hastings was more of a technologist and his reputation building Pure Software was catnip for VC funding. This was important because the logistical costs of DVD rentals combined with a slowing economy meant Netflix needed to keep raising funds.
However, the flood of VC money was slowing as the Dotcom Bubble started deflating. So, Netflix had to tap someone outside the Valley…leading to what may be the greatest cameo in tech funding history:
In early 1999, French luxury goods tycoon [and LVMH head] Bernard Arnault approached Technology Crossover Ventures cofounder Jay Hoag for advice about investing in dot-com companies. Hoag, a former fund manager whose earliest investments as a venture capitalist included Pure Software, pointed out Hastings’s latest enterprise and scheduled a pitch meeting at his office for Arnault with Hastings and Randolph. Arnault’s holding company committed $30 million to Netflix in July, becoming its largest investor just as the company was about to run out of money.
The details weren’t in the book but I’m guessing Arnault probably received ~10% of Netflix for his investment. That funding provided the momentum for Hastings to raise another $180m over the next 18 months.
Literally, he got in right under the wire as the Nasdaq’s Dotcom Bubble reached its peak in March 2000.
I couldn’t find any information on whether Arnault held the stock. Guessing he probably unloaded Netflix shortly after its 2002 IPO. But since we already started playing the “if you invested in Netflix 2002, you would have” game, Arnault’s ~10% stake would be worth $50B now (his current 49% stake in LVMH is worth about $120B).
Incredibly, Arnault’s legacy includes iconic luxury brands such as Louis Vuitton, Dior, Givenchy, Tiffany & Co., Moët & Chandon…and the Skip Intro button.
***
3. Blockbuster With An All-Time Fumble
The greatest tech fumble in history was Yahoo! turning down Sergey Brin and Larry Page’s offer to buy their little search company in 1998 for $1m.
The two Stanford students were ready to cash out and get back to academia.
Yahoo! whiffed hard. Fast forward to 2002 and Yahoo! has another bite at the apple: it spent months negotiating with the now much more legit Google.
Yahoo! offered $3B but Page and Brin wanted $5B. It whiffed again. Ugh. The rest is history and Yahoo! ended up selling itself to Verizon for $4.8B in 2016 (my napkin math isn’t great but that’s a smidgen less than Alphabet's current $2T market cap).
Similarly, Blockbuster also had a legendary tech acquisition whiff and it also happened in the early-2000s with a smaller competitor.
Obviously, I’m talking about Netflix:
[Netflix] losses of $57.4 million loomed in 2000, so Hastings and [CFO Barry] McCarthy decided to approach Blockbuster again to try for an alliance that would give Netflix a ready source of customers and a link to an established rental brand.
It was a bit far-fetched, McCarthy thought, but he admired Hastings for having the guts to pitch it to the company they considered their top rival. Hastings got a call, during a staff retreat in the faux Dutch town of Solvang, that his contact at Blockbuster, Ed Stead, was ready to meet. He boarded a rented private jet that belonged to former game show hostess Vanna White early the next morning, along with McCarthy and Randolph, and flew to Dallas.
The summons was unexpected, and none of them had brought business attire along to the retreat. [Blockbuster CEO] John Antioco stopped in for a few moments to shake hands with them all at the glass-and-steel Renaissance Tower in downtown Dallas, and made a crack about McCarthy’s Hawaiian-style shirt and jeans. McCarthy still retained enough East Coast banking decorum to feel slightly mortified. Hastings laid out his proposal: Why not turn Netflix into an online arm of Blockbuster?
The win-win, as he saw it, was that Blockbuster would be spared the expense of converting its huge VHS inventory to DVDs and Netflix would get access to Blockbuster’s twenty million active store users, and pay a fee for the privilege. Netflix would concentrate on back catalog and niche films, leaving Blockbuster with the new-release trade that made up about 80 percent of its business. He envisioned putting Netflix promotional materials and a sign-up computer in every Blockbuster store. Antioco expressed skepticism about the viability of Internet companies and groused that the market had grossly overvalued unproven business models, a sentiment with which McCarthy secretly agreed.
They weren’t surprised when Stead essentially laughed at Hastings’s alternate proposal—that Blockbuster buy Netflix for $50 million. Talk on the flight back to California was tinged with bravado: Blockbuster was making a mistake that it would soon regret. Antioco was kidding himself if he thought Blockbuster could replicate Netflix’s technological innovations. They now had no choice but to kick Blockbuster’s ass, Randolph vowed.
Laughed out of the room for asking for $50m? Damn, son. Also, sounds like Bezos picked the wrong companies to give $55m to!
Anyway, Netflix shook off the Blockbuster rejection and the Dotcom bubble to go public at a ~$500m valuation in May 2002. The quarter prior to the IPO saw it post an operating loss of $4m on sales of $30m. It had 600,000 subscribers paying $19.99 a month (with no late fees) for access to a library of 11,500 films. After leading the company to a successful IPO, Randolph left Netflix a year later.
As for Blockbuster, its hubris was compounded by a series of Ls. For one, it was paying a fat dividend which could have been used to re-pivot the business…or, I dunno, buy a growing web-enabled DVD rental service? Then in 2004 — almost 20 years after its founding — the home video rental service finally cancelled late fees, which were $2 a day (!!!) on new releases and $1 a day on older films. The end of late fees was estimated to cost Blockbuster up to $400m a year in operating income, 40% of its ~$1B in total operating income (on revenue of $6B). That year, it also finally launched its web-based DVD-rental service (Blockbuster Online) but it was too little too late.
At its peak, Blockbuster operated over 9k stores and had a large rental expense. Netflix’s DVD business started eating into the foot traffic and the launch of Netflix streaming in 2007 led to the inevitable (Netflix announced its streaming service in the same week Steve Jobs announced the iPhone, which means a few days in January 2007 has led to 99.999% of our wasted time in the past 18 years).
By 2010, Blockbuster filed for bankruptcy and become fodder for an incredible Michael Scott joke in The Office.