---
subject: "The Surprisingly Long Life of the Vacuum Tube"
from: "Construction Physics <constructionphysics@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-01-15 13:03:28
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Construction Physics", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8588207018748827248", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
The last several decades of technological progress have, in large part, been about finding more and more things we can do with semiconductors and the technology for producing them. Microchips have found their way into virtually every car, aircraft, appliance, and electronic device. Light-emitting diodes are steadily replacing older, less efficient methods of generating light (such as incandescent bulbs). Solar photovoltaic panels have become the most rapidly deployed energy source in history. Semiconductor lasers have enabled fiber-optic communication. Semiconductor-based charge-coupled devices (CCDs) and CMOS sensors are used for digital imaging. The list goes on. But decades before the invention of the transistor, another enormous technological ecosystem was built around a device that manipulated the flow of electrons — the vacuum tube. In the first half of the 20th century, vacuum tube technology found its way into all manner of devices, from radios to TVs to the earliest computers. And like semiconductors today, vacuum tubes had applications far beyond electronic logic — the phenomenon they leveraged could be applied to everything from lighting and displays to video cameras and radars. And while the vacuum tube feels like an ancient technology that has long been superseded, much of the technological edifice still stands. Origins of the vacuum tubeA vacuum tube is an evacuated tube (often, though not always, made of glass) containing electrodes, between which electrons flow. These tubes, along with various offshoots and technological cousins, were the product of two parallel strands of development. The first line of descent was via what are known as “gas discharge tubes” — tubes where electricity is discharged through a highly rarefied gas (gas at very low concentration and pressure). Not long after the German scientist Otto von Guericke invented the first vacuum pump in 1650, early scientists began using such pumps to study highly rarefied gasses. It was observed that running an electric current through rarefied gasses could make them glow colorfully, but for many years this was mostly regarded as an interesting curiosity. It wasn’t until the 1830s, with the experiments of the English chemist and physicist Michael Faraday, that the effects of electricity on rarefied gasses began to be studied more seriously. Faraday subjected a variety of rarefied gasses to electric current, observing their colorful glow, along with a curious “dark space” between the two electrodes. Faraday was a well-regarded scientist, and others took notice of his work: in 1855, Julius Plücker, a German scientist who “idolized Faraday”, endeavored to replicate Faraday’s experiments. To perform the experiments, Plücker obtained some highly evacuated glass tubes from the well-known instrument maker Heinrich Geissler. Geissler had built a vacuum pump capable of achieving a far lower vacuum than any pump previously, and Geissler’s tubes could function over a range of temperatures thanks to their platinum lead-in wires. (Platinum has nearly the same coefficient of thermal expansion as glass; several decades later, Edison would use the same strategy of platinum lead-in wires for this first incandescent light bulb.) These would later be known as “Geissler tubes”. By using a series of well-crafted, highly evacuated glass tubes “of ever-escalating complexity”, Plücker followed Faraday’s footsteps in investigating the behavior of electrical discharge through highly rarefied gasses. During his experiments, Plücker observed what appeared to be some sort of emanation from the negative electrode (cathode). These emanations moved in a straight line, could be deflected by a magnetic field, and caused the wall of the tube near the positive electrode (anode) to glow green. Other scientists, including William Crookes and Plücker’s collaborator Johann Hittorf, investigated these emanations further, and they eventually came to be known as “cathode rays”. The tubes used to study cathode rays began to be referred to as “Hittorf tubes” or “Crookes tubes”, and proved to be an important scientific instrument for studying the nature of matter. In 1895, the German physicist Wilhelm Roentgen, using a Crookes tube to study cathode rays, stumbled upon X-rays, for which he would be awarded the first Nobel Prize in physics in 1901. In 1897, the British physicist J.J. Thomson discovered that cathode rays were actually streams of negatively charged particles — which were dubbed ‘electrons’ — for which he was awarded the Nobel Prize in physics in 1906. The other line of development for vacuum tubes was via incandescent lights. In 1802, the British scientist Humphry Davy created an incandescent light by connecting a thin strip of platinum to a “ Early incandescent bulbs had the tendency to gradually blacken on the interior, reducing the light emitted and eventually rendering the bulb unusable. While studying this phenomenon in the hopes of eliminating it, Edison placed a small metal plate within the bulb of various lamps. It was eventually discovered that electric current was unexpectedly flowing from these metal plates, a phenomenon that Edison modestly dubbed “the Edison Effect”. (Today we know this current is due to The rise of the vacuum tubeBy the turn of the 20th century there were two types of devices — Crookes tubes and other similar gas-discharge tubes, and experimental Edison Effect lamps — in which electrons flowed between electrodes within a highly evacuated glass tube. Over the next several decades, these two devices would spawn a broad array of vacuum tube technology. In the 1880s, British scientist and engineer John Fleming began studying the Edison Effect, and discovered that electric current could flow from the hot filament to the metal plate but not vice versa. In 1904, Fleming used this phenomena to build the De Forest eventually discovered that by changing the current in the metallic grid, the flow of electricity from the cathode to the anode could be controlled, allowing the device to act as an amplifier. De Forest had little idea how his device (which he dubbed “ AT&T studied the Audion, working out a theory for how it behaved, and turned it into the more useful and reliable In 1896, the same year that the Italian inventor Guglielmo Marconi demonstrated his radio to British Post office officials, the German physicist Ferdinand Braun was looking for a way to measure the waveforms of alternating electrical current — current which changes its direction of flow through a circuit periodically. Some high-frequency alternating currents alternated back and forth thousands of times per second, so fast that any recording device that worked by moving a physical object back and forth couldn’t keep up. But Braun suspected that cathode rays could be used to make a measuring device for these high frequency currents. If the rays were made to pass through a narrow opening, the glowing spot on the tube would be reduced to a small point. And by using a magnetic field, the path of the beam could be deflected, moving the point of illumination and drawing the shape of the current’s waveform. Because a beam of cathode rays had virtually no intertia, it would be able to respond to changes in an electrical current (which would induce changes in the magnetic field) almost instantly. With the help of Franz Müller (an instrument maker who took over Geissler’s firm following Geissler’s death), Braun had several experimental tubes fabricated, and used them to study the behavior of high-frequency alternating currents, publishing his first paper in 1897. Braun called his device a cathode ray indicator tube. Braun tubes (more commonly referred to as “cathode ray tubes”) became widely used to create electronic displays. In the 1920s, cathode rays saw a number of other uses, including The gas discharge tubes that spawned Braun’s cathode ray tube also found numerous other applications. In the 1860s, French engineer Alphonse Dumas and doctor Camille Benoit built the And the gas discharge tube had many applications beyond merely providing lighting. Gas discharge lamps generate light (a type of electromagnetic radiation) by using electric current to excite gas molecules within the tube. But vacuum tubes could also be used to generate other sorts of electromagnetic radiation. As we’ve noted, Wilhelm Roentgen accidently discovered that a Crookes tube generated X-rays in the 1890s, and today, modern X-ray machines still use Beyond their use in particle accelerators and fusion energy experiments, vacuum tube-based devices were powerful instruments for enabling scientific research. Four Nobel Prizes were the product of vacuum tube devices (five if you include ConclusionIn Construction Physics articles will always remain free, but if you find this work valuable, I encourage you to Construction Physics is produced in partnership with the Institute for Progress, a Washington, DC-based think tank. You can learn more about their work by visiting their You can also contact me on |