---
subject: "Everything drugs"
from: "Works in Progress <worksinprogress@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-05-14 14:57:28
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Works in Progress"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_1644361085112560554"]
---
We’re hosting a Stripe Press pop-up coffee shop and bookstore on Saturday, June 28, in Washington, DC. Natália Coelho Mendonça writes about the promise of SGLT2 inhibitors. Read it on the website Most drugs get approved to do one thing. In rare cases, drugs get multiple indications, allowing their manufacturers to advertise them as treatments for a range of conditions. Sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 (SGLT2) inhibitors, also called flozins, began as diabetes drugs. Surprisingly, they turned out to also be very effective at improving heart health. Then they were discovered to slow the progression of chronic kidney disease, one of the leading causes of death and disability worldwide. Preliminary evidence indicates that they show promise in helping several other conditions, but no one knows exactly how they achieve this yet. Could SGLT2 inhibitors be a new medical Swiss Army knife? The backstory of flozinsSGLT2 is a protein found in the kidneys that stops the body from wasting calories. It works like a pump that extracts glucose from urine and moves it back into the blood. The sodium in the name refers to how that pump is powered: like a water wheel using a gradient in water height to move machinery, SGLT2 uses the gradient in sodium concentration between the urine and the blood as an energy source. Phlorizin was the first drug that blocks SGLT2 to be isolated, in 1835. This compound was extracted from the root bark of the apple tree by French chemists and studied It took a long time before anyone found a use for phlorizin. About 50 years after its original discovery, German physician Josef von Mering The paradigmatic sign of type 2 diabetes is high blood sugar. In a healthy person, the pancreas releases the hormone insulin in response to increases in blood sugar. Insulin, in turn, tells various cells in the body to absorb the excess sugar. But when someone has type 2 diabetes, the cells do not listen as well: they become resistant to the effect of insulin and let sugar build up in the blood. This is a problem because very high blood sugar, known as hyperglycemia, causes damage to multiple organs. In 1987, This kindled interest in using flozins – the name of the group of drugs that block SGLT2, also called SGLT2 inhibitors – as antidiabetic medications. But phlorizin has other effects as well. It doesn’t just block SGLT2 – it also blocks SGLT1, the main protein that’s responsible for glucose absorption in the small intestines. This blockage These issues created problems with the feasibility of using flozins medically. But in 2000, Japanese researchers solved the absorption problem by Soon this problem was solved too. More work by Japanese researchers on synthesizing flozins led to the development of Meanwhile, evidence grew that indirectly supported the safety of flozins for long-term use. In the 2000s, researchers It turned out that familial renal glycosuria was caused by genetic mutations in the SGLT2 gene that reduced the effectiveness of the SGLT2 pump, creating an effect similar to that of flozins. The fact that people could live completely normal lives with an impaired SGLT2 gene (and thus sweeter urine than everyone else) provided evidence that flozins, which artificially mimicked the condition, could be safely used in the long run. The diabetes trialsIt was time for clinical trials. In the late 2000s, the two synthetic flozins developed by Japanese researchers, canagliflozin and dapagliflozin, were bought by Johnson & Johnson and AstraZeneca respectively, and both began clinical trials for the drugs. These trials were for diabetes, following the train of research since the 1980s that had established that inhibiting SGLT2, and thus lowering blood sugar, can help control type 2 diabetes. But rather than looking at how the compounds affected survival or the symptoms or complications of diabetes, the trials were based on surrogate endpoints, meaning that they only had to show that they directly affected biomarkers of the disease, such as high blood sugar. Surrogate endpoints were introduced to speed up drug research and encourage more research into compounds that take a long time to impact the things we care about directly. The results were conclusive, though unsurprising. By stopping SGLT2 from extracting sugar from the urine into the blood, both flozins directly reduced rates of hyperglycemia, which by this point was known to be a major symptom of diabetes, and also a contributory cause. The heart trialsAfter flozins were approved as diabetes drugs, on the basis that they lower the markers of diabetes, they had to go through further trials to be sure that they did not increase the risk of heart attacks, strokes, or deaths due to cardiovascular disease. This requirement was These trials were imposed to confirm the benefits of the drugs were not outweighed by cardiovascular side effects. Yet something unexpected happened: Other flozins followed suit, backing up their diabetes trials with heart health trials. Not only did they get to stay on the market as antidiabetic drugs, but between 2020 and 2023, the FDA gave three of them indications for heart failure as well. As discussed, SGLT2 is a protein primarily found in the kidneys which prevents sugar and sodium chloride from being passed into the urine. It is obvious how the inhibition of SGLT2 decreases blood sugar, making flozins good medications for type 2 diabetes. But we’re not sure why they’re so good for the heart. We know that flozins reduce blood pressure, but this effect is small – nowhere near enough to account for their protection against heart diseases. Conventional blood pressure therapy reduces the risk of heart failure by It similarly has been There have been a whole range of additional Kidney disease: one of our biggest problemsA tenth of the world’s population has chronic kidney disease. About a million people died from it last year. If it happens to you, it will begin with your kidneys removing waste from the blood less efficiently than they do in healthy people. The disease often starts silently, without noticeable symptoms. It’s often detected through routine blood tests that show higher levels of waste products in your blood. When your disease gets worse, however, you can start feeling quite ill. Your body might begin to swell up because it is holding on to more fluid than it should, which also leads to higher blood pressure and even damage to the heart. As waste products build up in your blood, you may feel tired, weak, and less sharp mentally. At advanced stages of the disease, your bones become weaker and more prone to fracture. You might feel muscle weakness and fatigue. As the condition progresses, you might lose your appetite, leading you to lose weight without trying, and your muscles might begin to waste away. If the disease progresses to the last stage, called end-stage kidney disease, to survive you will need regular dialysis – an extremely time-intensive, costly, and painful process that ultimately only alleviates the symptoms rather than the underlying problem – or a kidney transplant. For about two decades, there have been relatively minor changes to treatment guidelines for chronic kidney disease. The last major change was in 2002, when the National Kidney Foundation released clinical practice guidelines for chronic kidney disease that But those drugs are And the burden of the disease is still large and rising. Around 130,000 people in the United States develop end-stage kidney disease each year, and more than 800,000 people have the condition. Because the population has been growing older, these numbers are The kidney trialsInitially, there was Instead, more trials found that, over longer time horizons, treatment with flozins
In the meantime, pharmaceutical companies were willing to put in yet more resources on further trials of patients with kidney disease but without diabetes, to see if they could have these drugs approved to treat a wider range of patients. In 2020, the first major trial to test flozins on patients with or without diabetes also had dramatic results: chronic kidney disease patients who were given dapagliflozin had a By the following year, the FDA The mystery link between flozins and kidneysThe mechanism behind the benefits of flozins to kidney function is not fully understood. One possible explanation for why flozins are effective at preventing kidney disease in diabetic patients is because, in their absence, some kidney cells are overburdened as they try to filter sugar out of the blood. Chronic kidney disease typically starts when a condition – such as diabetes, hypertension, or lupus – causes damage to part of the kidneys. To compensate for this damage, other cells start Initially, this can help maintain someone’s overall kidney function despite damage from their disease. But with time, the overworked remaining kidney cells start to suffer. This can mean that chronic kidney disease continues to worsen even after the other clinical condition that initially caused kidney damage is brought under control. Flozins might protect the kidney by reducing this process of overwork by surviving kidney cells. When patients take these drugs, more sodium passes along those cells, instead of being filtered out along with the extra glucose. Special cells in another part of the kidneys, called the macula densa, respond to the extra sodium and constrict blood vessels that are channeling blood into the kidneys, which reduces the pressure in the kidneys, and is speculated to be protective. This may be part of the reason these drugs also protect the heart, since poor kidney function can lead to excess blood in the heart, or volume overload, which makes it harder for the heart to function normally. Although previous kidney disease drugs, like ACE inhibitors and ARBs, also have benefits for heart function, there is no consensus on why specifically these drugs have such large beneficial effects. But their effects have been sufficiently large that these drugs The potential of flozinsOverall, the potential of flozins is large. In the United States, there were Broader effectsRecent exploratory research has suggested that flozins might also have benefits on a range of other diseases – liver disease, dementia, and respiratory diseases – which could each be important areas for future trials. Post hoc analyses of human trials have suggested that they might The fact that flozins have positive impacts on some of the most common age-related diseases that affect us might make you wonder if flozins can be conceptualized as slowing down aging, rather than only treating a narrow set of diseases. The National Institute on Aging’s Interventions Testing Program (ITP) funds studies attempting to increase the life span of genetically heterogeneous mice with various compounds. It has a Despite that context, an ITP-funded study found that canagliflozin This is interesting because the causes of natural death in these lab mice are very different from those in humans. Unlike humans, mice studied in the ITP almost all die from cancer; they do not develop diabetes naturally, and they very rarely die from kidney or cardiovascular disease. This makes it one of the most promising antiaging drugs studied by the ITP – one pharmaceutical researcher Maybe it will turn out that flozins do not have any special effect on slowing down aging in healthy humans. But still, it is such an intriguing prospect that is likely to see much more research. Downsides and side effectsEven if flozins were, hypothetically, proven to be helpful in healthy people, one major reason they are unlikely to be rolled out that broadly is that, like acarbose, they have meaningful side effects. Flozins Sugary urine has another downside: it could get those providing a urine sample in trouble. Police sometimes take weeks to analyse a sample from a drunk driving case. Urine from a patient taking empagliflozin fermented into ethanol while sitting at room temperature, meaning it gave a false positive for an alcohol screening, Occasionally, patients taking flozins face The condition is rare, and the mortality rate of euglycemic diabetic ketoacidosis is still uncertain. In An even rarer but more concerning complication, also caused by sweeter urine feeding infections in the genital area, is Fournier’s gangrene, which causes large patches of skin in the genital area to die. Around a But most of these issues are rare, and most patients seem to tolerate these drugs well. The discontinuation rates in human clinical trials are Whatever we discover on greater use of those drugs, flozins are extremely promising in treating diseases that affect hundreds of millions of people. They change the outlook of patients with some of the most common chronic diseases, saving many from early death or disability, and show promising signs that they might do even more. This story first appeared in Natália Coelho Mendonça is a software engineer and blogger based in San Francisco. 1 Flozins also increase the risk of condition in other ways, such as by stimulating the release of glucagon from the pancreas and increasing ketone absorption. Thanks for subscribing to |