---
subject: "The Monday Media Diet with Molly Hawkins"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-12-18 11:00:34
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Molly Hawkins (MH) is the creative director for Harry Styles and a woman of many talents. We’re happy to have her taste on the page this week. Enjoy the run-up to the holidays. -Colin (CJN) Tell us about yourself. For the last eight years I’ve been Harry Styles’ creative director which means I help him conceive album art and music videos, I direct the live show with a huge team of talented people and generally oversee all visual communication. I also helped conceive Harry's brand Pleasing as creative director. It was really fun to work across so many mediums with so many talented people, from naming the brand to coming up with the product design- I’’m especially proud of our fragrance bottle- campaigns, designing the pop up stores. It was fun to test my idea out on a non-music project, seeing if you can tell a story with a bottle for example. Before that I worked at Young f.k.a. Young Turks, a British indie record label who during my tenure was responsible for The xx, Sampha, fka Twigs, Jamie xx and Koreless. I have two baby girls, ages 1 and 2, Pearl and Georgie respectively. For podcasts, I listen to In Our Time, Code Switch, Science Friday, Lovett or Leave It, New Yorker Radio Hour, Not Just the Tudors, Cafe insider and Strict Scrutiny every week. Like I said, when you have two babies you get a lot of headphone time. I keep up to speed with the news via Pitchfork, The Guardian, the Axios newsletter, the Planetary Society newsletter. Politico I stopped reading in the aforementioned overhaul. The New York Times I get delivered on Sundays so I read it on Sundays, sometimes begrudgingly. I read another trilogy just before I gave birth to my older daughter Georgie that I thought about everyday when I was pregnant with my second—The Broken Earth series by NK Jemisin. The depiction of a mother as an unbreakable anti-hero messiah at the end of the world resonated. What can I say? I just went ahead and read them again. Train is of course more romantic but plane for the quiet and the solitude and the distance. We moved into a house in Pasadena that is 120 years old and has only had two owners. The last person that lived here raised her three children and grand children here, lived here for 76 years! The house is in great condition with a lot of original features but needed a lot of updating. It’s an Arts & Crafts, so I started researching the methods and artists of the period to help inform the approach. I began by going to the book departments in the antique stores around Pasadena and getting monographs of tile makers of the period (for example). I spoke to my neighbors and the people who work at Pasadena Architectural Salvage who have so much knowledge about this specific era. Then I kind of let that information recede to the background and began looking for inspiration in textiles. When my girls grow up, I want them to remember each room, surfaces, light fixtures. With my husband’s help I’m pushing myself out of my comfort zone visually to try to make little moments of whimsy for them- little surprises to discover. It’s going to be a life long project for which I am very deeply grateful. (MH) Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) —
You're currently a free subscriber to |