---
subject: "For the love of stories"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2021-06-06 03:32:15
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "The Ken"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031"]
---
If you are looking for a distraction, I have a Sunday movie recommendation for you—Meddah. I watched it at a film festival first and sat through the end credits for an extra few minutes, all teared up, moved at the art that had unravelled on screen.
Meddah’s true genius, though, lies in documenting storytelling itself. Now an almost-extinct profession in Turkey, meddahs (or storytellers) were carriers of the country's oral literature. Travelling from caravanserais to coffeehouses, they told tales of heroism and harsh truths alike.
As any meddah would've told you, it's not easy to perfect the underlying art of narrating a powerful story—from the right pauses to improvisations to great anecdotes. It’s what we strive for at The Ken. To tell you, the reader, extraordinary stories that make up for great journalism. Let’s see how we delivered on the promise this week:
We opened the week with an essential read—and a free story—about a silent crisis in the making in the face of India’s oxygen concentrator shortage. Olina’s [story](https://the-ken.com/story/concentrator-oxygen-supply-india/?utm_source=daily_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=daily_newsletter) documented the race to a “make-in-India” oxygen concentrator, detailing the local efforts to a high-quality, low-cost version and the challenges it faces in scaling. The context is all-important: the desperation caused by the second wave has created a free-for-all concentrator market in India with barely any quality control, making way for cheap imports.
A day later, Arundhati [wrote about](https://the-ken.com/story/wallets-super-apps-and-the-twists-in-bajaj-finances-digital-turn/?utm_source=daily_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=daily_newsletter) one of India’s largest and most successful non-bank lenders, Bajaj Finance, and how it's trying to convert its offline success in the consumer durable segment online. It has some very interesting intel on how top management has been studying and benchmarking itself against tech giants—such as Amazon, Netflix, and Booking.com—as it looks to launch Bajaj Pay, an omnichannel financial services app.
Bhumika’s[ story ](https://the-ken.com/story/dotpe-thrive-and-the-orderdirect-movement-hoping-to-eat-zomato-swiggys-lunch/?utm_source=daily_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=daily_newsletter)about the #OrderDirect movement shed light on why most restaurants want customers to slowly untangle themselves from the easy lure of Swiggy and Zomato. It unpacks the changing world of food delivery and chronicles how platforms like Thrive, DotPe and Peppo—which do for restaurants what Shopify did for e-commerce—are leading the way in the still-too-nascent sector.
On Thursday, Sumanth [wrote](https://the-ken.com/story/indus-os-and-the-acquisition-tug-of-war-between-phonepe-and-affle/?utm_source=daily_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=daily_newsletter) about the tug-of-war between PhonePe and Affle over the acquisition of vernacular app marketplace Indus OS. Sumanth parses the motivations and ambitions of the triumvirate—the founders, the acquirer, and the investors—to lay out why an acquisition that seemed a certainty turned into a sour event instead.
We wrapped up the week with Ruhi’s [deep dive](https://the-ken.com/story/million-hole-indias-healthcare-workforce/?utm_source=daily_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=daily_newsletter) into the million-plus hole in India’s healthcare workforce. From phlebotomists and lab technicians to housekeeping and call centre staff, the allied healthcare workforce is a critical spoke in the healthcare wheel—yet, India today has less than half the 2.3 million workers it needs. Read her story to understand why this is crucial and what’s being done about it.
Praveen, in our weekly newsletter
The Nutgraf,
[took us through](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/covaxins-battle-of-light-and-darkness/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) the story of Covaxin. On the one hand, it’s a vaccine that has been developed indigenously by a company with an illustrious track record and expertise. On the other hand, its development has been marred with allegations of corner-cutting, favouritism, and
lack of transparency. The story of Covaxin, he argues, is one of light and dark.
We also had some interesting pieces throughout the week in our daily newsletter Beyond the First Order. We wrote about how India's central bank raises the question of 'rational' bubbles in the stock market. But aren't bubbles inherently irrational? Not quite,
[wrote](https://the-ken.com/bfo/stock-bubbles-irrationality-and-assumptions/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) Nithin; an edtech company called Rohin with the same cold call script we've seen before. So, he
[narrated](https://the-ken.com/bfo/inside-indian-edtechs-most-popular-cold-call-script/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) the conversation for the newsletter; and as Manipal Hospitals takes over Vikram Hospitals from PE firm Multiples Equity, Seema
[raised](https://the-ken.com/bfo/the-dog-that-did-bark-manipal-hospitals-buys-out-multiples-equitys-sole-hospital-asset/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) the question of whether PE investments in standalone healthcare assets are a smart idea.
That’s a wrap for now. See you tomorrow with a new story!
Regards,
Munsif