---
subject: "Why is Chapel Hill Interesting?"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-06-16 12:08:03
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Rick Webb (RW) and Perry Hewitt (PH) are (i) friends of WITI and (ii) two New Yorkers turned Chapel Hill residents. I love it as well. -Colin (CJN) Perry here. All of the Research Triangle can be divided into three parts: state capitol Raleigh, music and foodie haven Durham, and, well, Chapel Hill. The smallest by far, Chapel Hill is a university town — In late 2020 when family circumstances dictated a pandemic move from Manhattan, Chapel Hill was a surprise choice. While it doesn’t boast as many northern transplants as Raleigh suburb Cary (now rumored to be an acronym for Containment Area for Relocated Yankees), proximity to major universities UNC, Duke, and NC State, terrific healthcare, and a strengthening tech sector are driving local growth. In pre-vaccine COVID, when we surveyed the options for a little more space and a local culture we’d enjoy -- with a filter of 25 minutes to an international airport offering nonstop flights to Europe -- Chapel Hill rose to the top of a long list. So what keeps people here and happy? Apart from the booming employment market, anchored by Rick here. The Chapel Hill/Carrboro downtown is thriving and walkable, ranging from the yuppie standards on the east side, student dives and cheap fare by UNC, and hipster and hippie gems to the west of the main drag. The music scene includes the legendary Chapel Hill and Carrboro offer a great blend of university town progressive political vibe and the warmth of Southern culture. The town struggles to embody those progressive ideals, from one of the nation’s only The neighborhood kindness has been a bit of a shock -- after years of living in Newton, Massachusetts where my neighbor would snowblow the sidewalk right up to the property line and not one single inch farther, I never would have imagined a world where a Republican neighbor was so committed to keeping this incompetent northerner’s Cheri Beasley lawn sign up. This morning as I wrote this I looked up to see American goldfinches swarming our bird feeder, reminding me that the mercifully short winters and bright sunshine seal the deal. (RW and PH) |