---
subject: "33 life tips/Secret Museum of Mankind/Small egg cooker"
from: "Recomendo <recomendo@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-09 10:01:51
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Recomendo", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8455078693589186571", "UNREAD"]
---
33 life tips, Japanese styleA friend shared this Always follow the rules: Japan loves rules. Suffocating? Yes, but it makes the machine run smoothly. “People love to follow rules here,” Tokyo-based producer Kaori Oyama says. “It can be tiring, but at the same time it means that generally you know what to expect.”
Enjoy the silence: Tokyo might be home to nearly 14 million people, but apart from the jingles you’ll hear at the train stations and in the convenience stores, it can be surprisingly quiet. “Very few people speak on the trains,” says Mr Paul McInnes, senior editor of Tokyo Weekender magazine, who has lived in the city since 2000. “It’s a wonderful way to have some quiet space and think about your day.”
— MF Photos of a bygone worldThe strangest book I own is the Small egg boilerThe Useful kitchen tipsThis short wordless Maximize your vacation daysThis Dozen memorable quotesEach of these short quips contain bookfulls of wisdom. — KK The world is a museum of other people’s passion projects. — John Collison If you are like most people, then like most people, you don't know you're like most people. ― Daniel Gilbert I oscillate between thinking I am crazy, and thinking I am not crazy enough. — Joyce Carol Oates The cause of death is birth. — David Hockney When dreaming, imagine success. When preparing, imagine failure. — James Clear Today is the worst AI will ever be. — Alex Irpan We are never definitely right; we can only be sure we are definitely wrong. — Richard Feynman The things you do badly are as much part of your style as the things you do well. — Martin Scorsese Self employment is a never-ending contest between the world’s worst manager and the world’s laziest employee. — Daniel Akst If you want new ideas, read old books. — Shane Parrish I’m thinking of Leonard Nimoy’s spiritual journey from writing I Am Not Spock (1975) to writing I Am Spock (1995). This is a journey we all must make. — Tim Kreider This present moment was once the unimaginable future — Stewart Brand
Recomendo is an authentic, hand-crafted, human-written weekly newsletter that is free, but not cheap. Consider supporting our work with a paid option, now at the low price of $45 per year. Paid subs enable us to keep making it free for others. Recomendo is published by Cool Tools Lab, a small company of three people. We also run the Recomendo Unclassified Ads work! UNCLASSIFIEDS Wildfires. Ice Storms. Hurricanes. You’ll be ready for anything with the Disaster Bundle. A top-rated disaster prep system designed to get you in, get you prepped, and get you back to your life. The best part? The go-to newsletter for smart leaders with heart: The Leaflet. 3 thoughts each Thursday helping you & your team grow. Read it in <5min and use it the same day. (We always include some provocative literary quotes, too.) Humor, delivered daily. Discover your new favorite read. Chortle delivers original short humor writing—essays, lists, and more—every weekday. Perfect for fans of McSweeney's or The New Yorker. Check out our most popular post:
Recomendo is copyrighted by Cool Tools Lab, LLC. Commissions may be earned from the links above. |