---
subject: "VR's \"iPhone moment\" 🌎, AI frontiers 🤖, ChatGPT teaches CS 👨‍💻"
from: "TLDR <dan@tldrnewsletter.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-06-05 10:41:33
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "TLDR"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_795315172960844453"]
---
[Augmented reality needs an iPhone moment (8 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.theverge.com%2F2023%2F6%2F4%2F23747110%2Fapple-headset-augmented-reality-vr-industry-rumors-wwdc-2023%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001888b25da0c-cec76f31-640a-4e1e-9cd1-e31e1690be46-000000/b2-nT0t3LGyfliLaqvsqnWJNn_dwN14EQn_gNW1vkUo=303)
Apple's highly anticipated AR/VR headset could push the technology to the mainstream. The AR industry will benefit from Apple's 'it just works' philosophy. While the exact uses for the headset are not known yet, Tim Cook has said before that AR is for communication and connection, and other reports say that the device will offer access to iPad apps, games, entertainment, and a version of Apple Fitness Plus. Apple is expecting to sell under a million units a year. Its release may result in a gold rush of app designers trying to replicate the success of early iPhone developers. |
[Exclusive: Everything you want to know about the Pixel 8's processor leaked (8 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.androidauthority.com%2Fpixel-8-tensor-g3-specs-3331398%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001888b25da0c-cec76f31-640a-4e1e-9cd1-e31e1690be46-000000/3W3g1JpWr9BhXNOK1MdEkMOD13pqwfjTwgzUkHh_6Fs=303)
The Tensor chip has allowed Google to leverage its AI expertise and build experiences on the Pixel that would have otherwise been impossible. The Tensor G3, which will power the upcoming Pixel 8 series, will have 9 ARMv9 cores and new security technologies. The Pixel 8 will ship exclusively with 64-bit binaries. It will have a GPU with ray-tracing capabilities. Many more details about the new processor are available in the article. |
Science & Futuristic Technology
|
[They plugged GPT-4 into Minecraft - and unearthed new potential for AI (3 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Farstechnica.com%2Fai%2F2023%2F06%2Fthey-plugged-gpt-4-into-minecraft-and-unearthed-new-potential-for-ai%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001888b25da0c-cec76f31-640a-4e1e-9cd1-e31e1690be46-000000/PkNUYWLFPQUZzXEQGo-UfXnEc2ycGfxVJUf7W_zfYEI=303)
A team at Nvidia created a bot called Voyager that uses GPT-4 to solve problems inside Minecraft. The bot uses GPT-4 to generate objectives and code that help the agent explore the game and improve its skill. It sees the state of the game directly via an API, so it doesn't play the game exactly like a human would. Voyager is able to build a library of code to learn the game over time. It can perform significantly better than other similar AI agents. Voyager shows the huge potential for language models to perform helpful actions on computers. |
[Scientists Hacked Human Cells to Make Insulin, And It Reversed Diabetes in Mice (2 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.sciencealert.com%2Fscientists-hacked-human-cells-to-make-insulin-and-it-reversed-diabetes-in-mice%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001888b25da0c-cec76f31-640a-4e1e-9cd1-e31e1690be46-000000/pUu9xj3OuNN1jCrjS1U3AlOT40Il1L45EyllGVOMWGw=303)
Scientists have repurposed human stomach cells into tissues that release insulin in response to rising blood sugar levels. The treatment showed long-lasting effects on diabetes in mice. The breakthrough could help people more naturally manage conditions such as type 1 diabetes. The process for creating the tissues isn't particularly complicated and the tissues can last for many months after being transplanted. There are several differences between human and mouse stomach tissue that need to be addressed in future studies, but initial signs are promising. |
Programming, Design & Data Science
|
[Introducing PostgresML Python SDK: Build End-to-End Vector Search Applications without OpenAI and Pinecone (4 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fpostgresml.org%2Fblog%2Fintroducing-postgresml-python-sdk-build-end-to-end-vector-search-applications-without-openai-and-pinecone%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001888b25da0c-cec76f31-640a-4e1e-9cd1-e31e1690be46-000000/1m2SnfUl1HVhUDhPZVjr0v6umWaN53AAcKmlrtBD8Ow=303)
The Python SDK for PostgresML streamlines the development of scalable vector search applications on PostgreSQL databases. It offers tools for managing database tables related to documents, text chunks, text splitters, LLM models, and embeddings. The SDK features automated database management, embedding generation from open source models, and flexible and scalable vector search. It can be used for search, clustering, recommendations, anomaly detection, and classification apps. |
[JDK 21: The new features in Java 21 (3 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.infoworld.com%2Farticle%2F3689880%2Fjdk-21-the-new-features-in-java-21.html%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001888b25da0c-cec76f31-640a-4e1e-9cd1-e31e1690be46-000000/Wa2maNZ5l3-RxrRblKEGBZnOTqQGXDNZyV3g82Td3yk=303)
The Java Development Kit 21 is due in September. There are 16 features officially proposed for it. The feature set is due to be frozen on June 8. JDK 21 will get five years of Premier support and extended support until September 2031. This article provides an overview of the specific proposals for JDK 21 so far. |
[frontiers, startups, 2023++ (17 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.linkedin.com%2Fpulse%2Ffrontiers-startups-2023-shyamal-hitesh-anadkat%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001888b25da0c-cec76f31-640a-4e1e-9cd1-e31e1690be46-000000/3_5EIiR_rr-HRig6O6ZMdKYpYIwM78kaOiwkU64Vr_c=303)
The past year saw AI technology become more mainstream. The article looks at development made across key severity verticals and the factors that determine the success of startups in the space. AI has given rise to new interaction paradigms and capabilities. It has enabled new possibilities, but there is still a lot of work to be done to really unleash its potential. Startups have many opportunities to harness the power of AI to help solve customer problems. |
[Harvard professor taps A.I. to help teach world's most popular online computer class (2 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ffortune.com%2F2023%2F06%2F03%2Fai-to-help-teach-harvard-university-online-computer-science-course%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001888b25da0c-cec76f31-640a-4e1e-9cd1-e31e1690be46-000000/VSCAKgLoZD953OlNqIgPak9Ez2_izb_neawD6QfwPSU=303)
Harvard's CS50 introductory course in computer science plans to use AI to grade assignments, teach coding, and personalize learning tips. Despite having more than 100 real-life teaching assistants, it has become difficult to fully engage with the growing number of students logging in from all over the world. The teaching team is now fine-tuning an AI system for the course. The team hopes that the AI will give human teaching assistants more time for in-person or Zoom-based office hours. |
[Ruby SHell (GitHub Repo)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fisene%2Frsh%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001888b25da0c-cec76f31-640a-4e1e-9cd1-e31e1690be46-000000/pFk5omISw41mZqqTLdrMVGqQNdKGqPdjmFCbElAVpy4=303)
The Ruby SHell features aliases, syntax highlighting, tab completions, command suggestions, history, a full set of Ruby commands, and much more. |
[vectorious (GitHub Repo)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fmateogianolio%2Fvectorious%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001888b25da0c-cec76f31-640a-4e1e-9cd1-e31e1690be46-000000/HbdjAv449BEMgQRF4eYM3WHxd-zuB-PDixotScwyQ-g=303)
vectorious is a linear algebra library that can be used for solving linear systems of equations, low-level BLAS routines, and machine learning. |
[TLDR is hiring a curator for TLDR Founders](mailto:jobs@tldr.tech)
TLDR is hiring a part-time curator to join our TLDR Founders newsletter curation team.The ideal candidate would be a current or former startup founder, preferably someone who has raised venture capital, enjoys keeping up with the latest trends in the startup ecosystem, and generally spends a lot of time hanging out with other founders. Time commitment is roughly 6 hours/week (Sunday, Tuesday, Thursday), to apply please send your LinkedIn or resume to [jobs@tldr.tech](mailto:jobs@tldr.tech) along with a couple sentences on why you'd be a good fit! |
[TLDR Talent](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fdanni763618.typeform.com%2Fto%2FrSL4lOH3/2/010001888b25da0c-cec76f31-640a-4e1e-9cd1-e31e1690be46-000000/CEJpC_ZXYnx8uhZfoNZ4Eutn5ip8v9l9aVwhyPJRQUU=303) is our exclusive community where we help world-class tech talent and get intros to companies of their choice, along with a number of exciting startups and tech companies curated by TLDR.
We give you full control of the process, you can specify if you’re actively searching or passively interested only if something amazing comes along. Set your preferred compensation, seniority/title/role, specific companies (or types of companies) you’d like to work for and more. [Click here to apply](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fdanni763618.typeform.com%2Fto%2FrSL4lOH3/3/010001888b25da0c-cec76f31-640a-4e1e-9cd1-e31e1690be46-000000/3mN4fRx9qn02Fa1xa-LweZP-QtJg2MM_s3fGlKpJsNk=303).
|
If your company is interested in reaching an audience of tech executives, decision-makers and engineers, you may want to [advertise with us](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fshare.hsforms.com%2F1OxvmrkcFS4qsxKpNXCi76wee466%3Futm_source=tldr%26utm_medium=newsletter/2/010001888b25da0c-cec76f31-640a-4e1e-9cd1-e31e1690be46-000000/3auMlvQ7uVbmlU9hEymoGRCDc6q9ZiJ0E0k3x8odhsM=303).
If you have any comments or feedback, just respond to this email!
Thanks for reading,
[Dan Ni](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2Ftldrdan/1/010001888b25da0c-cec76f31-640a-4e1e-9cd1-e31e1690be46-000000/R9FBcuxar_Qmae-pTntL_tUqkcXEWpE6Q_b6sttxmOc=303) and [Stephen Flanders](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2FSteveFlanders22/1/010001888b25da0c-cec76f31-640a-4e1e-9cd1-e31e1690be46-000000/j7OZ3CnNne_5E3oqsHCiEPAMszEyWTiUY3nrpOeyoOI=303)
|
|
|
|