---
subject: "Open Thread 320"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-03-18 10:17:18
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX"]
---
This is the weekly visible open thread. Post about anything you want, ask random questions, whatever. ACX has an unofficial 1: Update on the 2023 2: But also, in the process of sending these emails, we discovered that there was an ambiguity in the scoring criteria. By one possible algorithm, the winners were the people named in the original post. By the other, the winners were: Datscilly, a Metaculus Pro Forecaster who was ranked #1 on the Metaculus leaderboard from 2018 to 2021 for baseline accuracy. Shahar Avin, a researcher at the Centre for the Study of Existential Risk at the University of Cambridge. Josh King, a technology lawyer, former wireless M&A guy, and advisor to startups who lives in Tucson, AZ and works as General Counsel for Realself.com. Phil G, a software engineer in the US interested in AI and urbanism, who can be found on Twitter at [https://twitter.com/pgodzin](https://substack.com/redirect/8973827b-373a-43dd-9f24-a3b742987981?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Jan Kulveit, who leads [ACSresearch.org](https://substack.com/redirect/135d6ee1-708c-4824-930d-b7fd0f4919b6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), a research group working on how to have complex systems composed of AIs and humans exist in harmony. He sometimes teaches at events about rationality and epistemics organized by[Fabric](https://substack.com/redirect/8002064c-956c-4441-880e-486be0138ea4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).
Some other winners from last time have moved up a spot in the new algorithm, including Ezra Karger (1st in Full Mode), Peter Wildeford (2nd in Full Mode) and Adam (1st in Blind Mode). Sorry for the ambiguity, and I’ll try to be more careful next time. 3: The ACX Grants impact market on Manifund is up to 53 proposals, including 4: Comment of the week - sort of, kind of, in a terrible warning type of way - is You're currently a free subscriber to |