---
subject: "AI #48: Exponentials in Geometry"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-01-18 14:10:28
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
The biggest event of the week was the Sleeper Agents paper from Anthropic. I expect that to inform our thoughts for a while to come, and to lay foundation for additional work. We also had the first third of the IMO solved at almost gold metal level by DeepMind, discovering that math competition geometry is actually mostly composed of One Weird Trick. I knew that at the time I was doing it, though, and it was still really hard. As usual, there was also a bunch of other stuff. Tomorrow the 19th, I am going to be off to San Francisco for the weekend to attend a workshop. That leaves a lot of time for other events and seeing other people, a lot of which remains unfilled. So if you are interested in meeting up or want to invite me to a gathering, especially on Sunday the 21st, drop me a line. Table of ContentsItems in bold are recommended as relatively higher value than usual. Items in italics are anti-recommended as only for those with specific interest. There is also my Introduction. Table of Contents. [Language Models Offer Mundane Utility](https://substack.com/redirect/7f97d555-fa78-4916-abb5-bb4cd498324a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Cybersecurity for everyone.[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility](https://substack.com/redirect/767ca295-4403-4e4c-9893-077f21c20963?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Adaptation is slow and difficult.[GPT-4 Real This Time](https://substack.com/redirect/4ad98b99-becf-4271-8ee4-58aa9e7fb926?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Guess who is attempting to come to the GPT store.[Fun With Image Generation](https://substack.com/redirect/dd598eb6-1581-42f0-92dd-80f543d937da?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). It now works how people used to think it works?[Copyright Confrontation](https://substack.com/redirect/b873dbd7-abd2-4aea-99c0-4f6cb60d561c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Some want to live forever any way they can get it.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon](https://substack.com/redirect/ebac9ca7-604e-408f-a86e-ef6c491060aa?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). The atom blaster pointing both ways.[They Took Our Jobs](https://substack.com/redirect/aae77be4-a2c4-4ed9-8de1-75a76a389d6f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Dentists use AI the way you would expect given incentives.[Get Involved](https://substack.com/redirect/14f010c8-c585-45d3-ad33-08d2c917d752?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Fellowships, technical roles, Anthropic, reminder about MIT.[Introducing](https://substack.com/redirect/9a4112d1-6420-4987-9a6c-43aab49ba01f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). AlphaGeometry aces that part of the IMO.[In Other AI News](https://substack.com/redirect/60849c9a-1569-4671-a940-1f1d426443dc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Is ‘democratic’ AI distinct from ‘social approval consensus AI’?[Quiet Speculations](https://substack.com/redirect/802098aa-e4d1-4d24-89a9-4831710d00d2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). DPO, education, timelines, clarifying terms.[The Quest for Sane Regulation](https://substack.com/redirect/866ae4b3-c3df-4f54-9382-81fa17a4e08e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). ‘No AI Fraud Act’ is written poorly.[The Week in Audio with Sam Altman](https://substack.com/redirect/664a972e-774b-4870-a0c1-7a954cccef9e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Talks to Gates and to Davos.[David Brin Podcast](https://substack.com/redirect/14074d0f-0baa-4046-a5e0-7ce45a83831b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). I went deeper than I should have gone, I see that now.[Rhetorical Innovation](https://substack.com/redirect/a1e0ea28-1b97-453c-9266-b63ffab3872b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). It’s not progress.[Anthropic Paper on Sleeper Agents](https://substack.com/redirect/1ce52727-3626-4f44-a828-23a2eef50f62?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). An epilogue.[Original](https://substack.com/redirect/8f042e2d-13fc-4a7a-ac6e-d1bccaf3541b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)seems important.[Anthropic Introduces Impossible Mission Force](https://substack.com/redirect/4354bc33-d063-4ab0-bd43-d1452b8f3b38?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). I accept it.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult](https://substack.com/redirect/ab5204dd-d05c-4b7a-a70a-56b4f6131c65?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). So is evaluation.[The Belrose Model Continued](https://substack.com/redirect/f19902b7-8a37-48c2-bcb9-b653590eab13?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). I keep trying. Fully optional.[Open Model Weights Are Unsafe And Nothing Can Fix This](https://substack.com/redirect/ea86614c-5645-4db6-af4a-3f7cb6140448?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Open data?[People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/0bc6df22-27ad-4d92-abac-21e9a9f983c7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)It leads to different reactions.[Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone](https://substack.com/redirect/2e168f98-695f-467c-a987-248e6565dac7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Rolling the dice.[The Lighter Side](https://substack.com/redirect/b9d964ec-d0f0-4bee-85bf-8a1b3345128e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). I am unable to assist you, Riley.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
I would not assume this is temporary, except insofar as the existence of such jobs at all is temporary. If AI continues to advance rapidly, it is plausible that the new 22 year olds will continue to adapt faster than the new 28 year olds, and this will increase in importance. What I would worry about most is whether productivity is being measured correctly. AI is clearly a massive speed boost, and some uses are pure wins, but other uses result in code that will age poorly on many levels. This is mundane utility, just not for you, seems to have been replicated twice:
Not AI (what a punt that is by Apple) but
Relate to Google, not impressive at all: But relative to its past use? Check it out, steady growth, 340% higher. The question is, are they on an exponential here? Will this keep going? My guess is no, because they’re not overall offering a sufficiently high quality product and Google is getting its act together, but people are dismissing the possibility way too fast.
GPT-4 Real This Time
They do not seem terribly popular nor do I expect them to be any good. It directly violates terms of service, so over time presumably you’ll have to be more creative to find them. Notice that the top result is ‘300+’ and there are multiples on this screen with less than 100, with only one over 1k. I replicated this experiment and got: Four things to notice. This is a completely different set of results. The average number of users is lower, not higher. The new list contains a cooking teacher and ‘dating advice from your ex-girlfriend.’ Both of these are plausibly valid things. The old list did not have any such valid things.
So what this means is that OpenAI is indeed finding and banning these. Which is confirmed by: When you search by name for the old list’s GPTs, they are gone.
Fun with Image Generation
I sympathize. Copyright ConfrontationThree sides to every story.
I want to achieve immortality in both ways, although yes my preferred way to live forever is in my apartment. And yes, I very much would like to be paid for all this writing that is pouring into all these AI models, and I worry a bit about contributing to them becoming more capable. But I definitely prefer that they think a little bit more like me, rather than a little less.
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
The future of responsible, licenced deepfaking is definitely coming.
They Took Our Jobs
The future is doubtless far less evenly distributed than that, dentists are not exactly cutting edge of technology folks. They seem most excited by using AI to identify dental decay. The cynic says this is because AI is enabling dentists to identify more procedures they can do. Then they mention global warming and show virtual reality goggles, for some reason. Get InvolvedThe PIBBSS Fellowship is a three-month, fully funded program where fellows work on a project at the intersection of your own field and AI safety, under the mentorship of experienced AI alignment researchers, aimed at PhDs and Post-docs in fields studying complex and intelligent behaviors.
I discuss it below but Reminder that Introducing
That is indeed how I learned to do geometry in math competitions. You know which moves you are supposed to know how to do, you know a solution exists, so you label everything you can. If that’s not enough to make the solution clear you ask what else you can do, and do everything that might move you forward until the solution pops out. Not that this makes it easy. AlphaGeometry works on the same principle. Do everything you can without a construct. If that fails, do a plausible construction and then try again. Repeat. The nature of geometry allowed the use of vast amounts of constructed data:
Love it. Makes perfect sense. Where else would this work?
Whoa, slow down there. As someone who did math competitions, I do not think this style of mathematics is what AI needs to improve itself. The whole reason this technique worked is that this type of geometry is more like chess than like creating new knowledge, with a compact set of potential moves. Thus, synthetic knowledge works. It does not mean much for other places. How much does this impact estimates The IMO-specific updates seem highly reasonable and if anything insufficient, as the AI now has 2/6 problems almost ready and this is going to fuel interest and is evidence of interest and also feasibility. The AGI updates seem less justified to me.
Someone involved In Other AI News
I never know quite what to make of making a ban on using AI to do illegal action X. Isn’t that already illegal? But, sure, I guess. The DNC backs the plan and the RNC opposes it. Perhaps that is a hint for what everyone is planning or thinks helps them.
The basic concept seems to be that having people focus on their values rather than preferences (e.g. ‘have wise mentors’ rather than ‘talk to your religious leader’ or ‘don’t get an abortion,’ and ‘informed autonomy’ over ‘pro-choice’ provides the possibility of getting people with opposing They then add a Moral Graph, which seems to be an attempt to figure out when people think one value should usually trump another? E.g.:
Great example. I worry about this. Igniting curiosity is always First Best in a given situation, if you can get to your goals that way, so we agree, but I have also seen what happens to people who think Igniting Curiosity should too much dominate Inspiring Discipline. Later they say that this represents that people agree curiosity is ‘wiser.’ That seems like the wrong frame.
Something strange is going on here. Yes, I would agree that engagement with confusion is the play in any high stakes situation rather than following intuition, but I strongly worry this is everyone embracing buzzwords and also reasoning based on the assumption their side is obviously right. Looking at their process, it looks to me like the GPT-based chatbot serves up good-and-pro-social-sounding values that it presents as representing the person’s views, which the person can then endorse through multiple layers of social approval filtering. They say their results are super promising, as people endorse the results. Except, are those results? What people are socially endorsing is the social approval and consensus optimized statements of value. What I care about is, does the result of using those to modify the AI result in something these people would endorse? They do not test this, although they do plan to as an ‘alignment target.’ My expectation is that there will be a large gap between what this process causes people to say they want, versus whether they want the resulting model behaviors. I expect the actual results to be described by users as ‘infuriating’ and ‘not very useful’ and also to have examples pulled out as looking deeply stupid unless there are patches to prevent that. I also do not believe this will scale in any useful way, as the considerations behind the selections are too biased, warped and specific, and will fail out of distribution once capabilities advance even if they were mostly holding together right now. In general I am deeply skeptical of such ‘democratic’ approaches, and believe there is a reason that this is not how features or behaviors are determined for any well known consumer projects. Still, this seems like the kind of thing someone should definitely try, given the costs of trying are so low. So, cool, as long as no one gets too attached.
Quiet Speculations
I also wonder if our model of education as a distinct thing you sit down and do systematically will become outdated. Instead, you will learn opportunistically and incidentally, as you go about your day and follow your curiosity and what you happen to need. My most frequent use of LLMs at this point is asking for simple facts and explanations, that is a form of learning and also a way to learn by exploring and doing without sitting down to memorize lots of stuff.
Where I believe Chollet is wrong is that I do not think this belief used to be anything like as common as it is now, and I think that the commonality of that belief is very much caused by LLMs.
The Quest for Sane RegulationsI found Last week we covered that a16z blatantly lied to the House of Lords, claiming among other things that the ‘black box’ nature of LLMs had been ‘solved.’ A reader pointed out that I also want to note that, while I consider such behavior to indeed be technically criminal under existing law, I do not actually want anyone to be thrown in jail for it, on reflection I remember that does not actually lead good places, and regret saying that. I stand by the rest of my statement.
Another week, It is called the ‘No AI Fraud Act.’ I would summarize the bill as follows: You own the rights to your image, likeness and voice. You can transfer or extend that right as you see fit. It is not okay to clone someone’s voice or image without permission. If someone else uses it without authorization you can sue.
That seems good and right. Let’s check in with the watchdogs, and…
It is a little known fact that any Congressman can introduce a bill with any words they want, with any amount of stupid wording involved, however blatantly unconstitutional. The system doesn’t care. If it risks becoming law, then you have to fix it. No need to freak out over bad wording. Obviously, this law does not intentionally apply to South Park, SNL or CSPAN. The first amendment still exists. Fair use still exists. Are the definitions overly broad? Yes, in some places. The term ‘digital technology’ applies to basically everything. If they mean generative AI they should say that. In particular, the clear intent of the act is to prevent impersonation, deception and fraud, not parody. So there should be no objection to adding a clause that the act only applies when a reasonable person might be fooled into thinking you intended to represent the original individual, or into thinking that this was the original individual. That should fix most of the supposed crazy problems. Then there’s the question of whether recordings are replicas.
ChatGPT agreed with my instinct that no, this very much does not apply to recordings, without it having the context of the act which emphasizes this further. There is very clearly no such intent. Also there exist laws in many states against recording conversations without everyone’s consent, so that law is already often on the books anyway? Yes, if you were worried you could and likely should put in an extra sentence clarifying that this does not apply to recordings. So yes there are two clarifications that, while not strictly necessary according to my sense of legal realism, should be worked into the bill. There is another note they point to, So,, while this bill as written potentially has some issues: Seriously, everyone chill. No one is coming after microphones or cartoons. And yes, I am quickly getting tired of doing this close reading over and over again every time anyone introduces a draft bill, dealing with the same kind of legal theoretical maximalism combined with assuming no one fixes the language.
The Week in Audio with Sam Altman
Around 10:30, Altman notes that while asking for a ‘slowdown’ or ‘pause’ is still too big a lift, there is near-universal support among world leaders and other key actors for compute thresholds beyond which we impose safety requirements. He says this is super doable. Later Altman says ‘this might be the last hard thing I ever do.’ Yet he is confident we will ‘never run out of problems.’
This is an incredibly scary belief for Altman to have if we take it at face value. For me it still does not parse. He kind of drops this bomb on the discussion, points out that it doesn’t parse, and his explanation is that human drives are so strong, and that AGI will do ‘parts’ of jobs but we will adjust. That… does not parse. Still does not parse. I didn’t get it at the time. That is not what AGI means, that is not a coherent future world, again I did not at the time get it. Similarly, he says later that he expects some countries to ban AI, some to allow everything, and for both to be suboptimal. I agree both are highly suboptimal, but there is no hint of a ‘and some places allowing actual anything is going to be a big problem for everyone else.’ Remarkable emphasis on things like scientific discovery and taking our jobs, then he adds ‘and perhaps do our AI research.’ Then at 31:00 he says the world will change more slowly and then more quickly than we imagine. Ah, yes. That. So what Altman is actually saying, I think, is very similar to my position: At first things will change remarkably slowly despite AI coming along. I call this Mundane AI and Mundane Utility. The difference is that Altman is including in this things he calls AGI, it might be valuable to dig more into this distinction. Then later when things get going sufficiently on the exponentials and the AIs reach certain capabilities thresholds, everything changes super fast. I think we both basically agree that during phase 1 we expect things to mostly go well, and then in phase 2 things get weird no matter what and might kill everyone. We can talk price and explore our options.
His hypothetical of what that looks like end with ‘none of us know what happens then’ and it is remarkably anchored in normality versus what we should expect. Altman continues to think of and frame or present AI as a tool, without any warning that AI might stop being purely a tool, and dismisses all the talk of ‘building God.’ I worry this might actually be a blind spot. I do appreciate that Altman is willing to say words that say actual things that I believe reflect his actual views. Most people aren’t. Anna Makanju, OpenAI’s VP of Global Affairs, also is in the conversation, and is clearly reflecting standard media training instead. David Brin Podcast
Brin describes the ‘call for a moratorium on AI development’ as having been signed by ‘70%-80% of the top people working in the field including competitors.’ I would not describe the actual moratorium letter that way, although I would describe the CIAS letter that way. I assume he is confusing the two. He then says he predicted this ‘will all fizzle out within a few months’ and says he was proven right. Um, no? Nothing has fizzled out. No one has been proven right, in either direction, except insofar as the attempt to get a pause has not succeeded. Calls for such responses are still going strong. His explanations for why Asimilar ‘kept us safe’ seem like they would indeed also apply to frontier AI models, then notes that this likely failed in that Covid-19 was likely a lab leak due to failure to use proper procedures. He then says none of the conditions - that there were a small number of potential actors capable of moving the frontier, that there were ways to keep tabs on them and verify what they were doing, that there was consensus of the dangers - apply to AI today. Except they do apply to AI frontier models today! There are only a handful of actors capable of training large frontier models, and only so many data large centers, and only one supply chain creating all the new AI chips. Yes, there are issues on many fronts, and the situation might not be sustained, but we absolutely have the technology if we wanted it. Brin is an excellent writer, I feel that if he was writing a science fiction novel about AI development he would figure this out. Also, he himself says there is indeed a consensus, even more than I would say there is one. He then seems to thank the nuclear bomb for preventing World War 3 and keeping everyone alive. There is not zero value in that take, but wow. I will also note that I am very surprised that the author of the Uplift novels thinks we needed to ban genetic engineering and cloning, or that genetic engineering bans have much to do with gain of function research, which he says likely led to Covid-19 and was not banned. Then he comes up with the most outlandish theory yet. That people in the industry tried for a moratorium as a defense in a future jury trial on liability. I mean, I’ve heard some whoppers of supposed motives for pointing out that smarter than human machines might not be a safe thing to create, but wow, what the actual f***. I have utter contempt for the mindset that cannot imagine that people might be motivated by the desire for humans all not to die. He then repeats the lie that Sam Altman was fired over the release of models, one of many people (I presume) who bought this story without sufficiently checking because people said it and it felt true. Although Brin does notice that indeed, Altman’s release of models was highly irresponsible at the time even if it worked out for the best in the end, which he thinks it did because it let us get warned. He thinks that we need to ensure that AIs are physically anchored in a particular computer’s memory, because the only way we got an anchor on human predators was by applying accountability. But we can copy the AI, said frog, and Brin notes this is indeed a problem, you (or it) can make infinite copies, but I don’t see how to implement ‘so don’t let that happen, make sure they don’t get to instantiate or copy and have individuality’? If a pause in development is impossible, how is this not far more impossible? Brin notes the pattern that new tech expanding our perceptions and knowledge tends to cause problems at first, including the printing press causing religious wars and radio in his model enabling dictators and World War 2 and this only turning out all right because the ‘master manipulators’ in English were ‘on our side.’ Then he says television is the exception, where I was assuming this was because it did not ultimately turn out to be good and the pessimists were finally correct, instead he goes the other way and says television was net good right away by enabling protest. Amazing how different perspectives can be even about the past. I would urge Brin to ponder the two core examples he lists. In both cases, new affordances and capabilities emerged with higher bandwidth. The early most impactful use in both cases was to recruit people to ideologies spouting various forms of violent intolerant nonsense, and to act against their interests. Those with more skill at the new tech gained power. In both cases, we were fortunate that some of those skilled with the new tech remained human and wanted mostly what we would want, and ‘the good guys won’ but Brin agrees this was far from certain in at least the radio case and that ‘it has been a rough 500 years.’ And he agrees that this is so fast we do not have time for this cycle to work. What does that predict will happen if we do this again, only with faster onset, except this time it is AI, so the most skilled or efficient or capable uses of this technology do not come from humans at all? Even if you keep everything involved relatively grounded, the endings do not look good, and Brin agrees we need to get our act together quickly even for currently extant, mundane AI. He expects huge issues with lies and hallucinations even in 2024. He says ‘AI will have no reason to treat us with respect if we cannot get ourselves organized.’ Again, please, think of the implications of this if that AI is far more intelligent and capable and efficient than we are. Why would being organized fix this problem? Ants are very well organized. I do not want AI to respect us how we respect ants. Brin wants AI to police other AI, going so far as to explicitly suggest a human-AI buddy-cop situation, because the human can provide grounding. Again, what would happen if the humans no longer have better grounding? Similarly, Brin points out that only reciprocal accountability has ever worked to contain predatory behavior even in humans. Again, how are you going to pull this off? Brin himself speaks of creating (his word) ‘Godlike’ beings, both the new AIs and our own descendants. We need to take that seriously. Brin’s timeline for AGI is he expects it somewhat faster than 2038. Brin says that 50% of humans are inclined to be nice, but that moralizing and setting good examples don’t work on ‘predators.’ Certainly predators exist but 50% seems like an insanely low estimate for humans. Brin is counting lawyers as ‘predators’ here, so it is not so narrow, but still 50/50 seems like a very wrong split. He says those working in AI fall for one or more of three ‘cliches’: AI will continue to be controlled by a small number of mega-entities like Google. He likens this to Feudalism, his favorite villain. I don’t see people saying this is what is going to happen. On the contrary, I see plenty of people saying that this ending is inevitable, and insisting that ‘democratizing’ smarter than human systems would go fine without thinking through that, unless we figure something out, we would obviously then all die. AI will be amorphous, have no boundaries, make copies of itself. He likens this to the movie The Blob. This is… how software works? How AI already works outside of the biggest models, except for now it is humans making the copies? So, yeah. AI will be like Skynet or Goliath, amalgamate into one Godlike entity. Eliezer Yudkowsky points out that sufficiently advanced AIs would be able to use decision theory to coordinate with each other but not with us, and he is right but that is not what Brin means and is a highly minority view. In the case of Skynet or Goliath, this is not an ‘amalgamation’ of many AIs, both of those (fictional) AIs as I understand them were created as single things. And certainly there is the possibility that a single AI with great capability will be created before credible rivals, and prevent such rivals. Or that as in #2 one such entity will be able to coordinate with many copies of itself, and gain advantage that way.
He says we are screwed if any of these three things happen. Well, then I’m sorry, but unless you come up with something we don’t know we are really freaking screwed. Because you don’t get to avoid all three of these. You don’t get to have AI not under an oligopoly, not under a monopoly, and not able to make copies of itself. You can perhaps get an oligopoly of AGIs that are guarded and designed in ways that prevent this. Maybe. But to have diffuse control over such systems and have them retain boundaries? How in the world are you going to do that? The alternative world Brin is asking for, where AI cannot be copied (due to some form of embodiment, I think?) but lots of people can create AIs of comparable capabilities and intelligence levels, but each is some sort of closed individual like a sci-fi robot that can’t then be scaled up or copied? That does not parse in my brain anymore, it has too many contradictions in it. What does Brin’s world of ‘incentives and disincentives to create AIs that are individual entities’ look like if it somehow existed? When I try to imagine it, I still see the new AIs rapidly replacing us and taking control anyway, I think, due to the obvious competitive and capitalistic pressures? We are trying to use freedom and competition to make things better and to allow optimization to what the agents involved want, which has worked until now (e.g. the enlightenment strategy, Brin is a big fan, and in general so am I). But that system only worked because the the humans were the ones doing the optimizing. Once we start that avalanche, it will be too late for us pebbles to vote, but also I can only think about this by saying ‘premise!’ and ignoring the contradictions. Brin thinks we can use incentives like clock cycles and willingness to do business to get AIs, that are clearly agents and presumably well beyond us in intelligence and capabilities, to play nice in the style of Adam Smith’s butcher, baker and candlestick maker. I wish that world made any sense whatsoever. I also wish there was any version that looked anything like an equilibrium or that promised to end well for us, to the extent it could be made to make sense. I really do like what Smithian systems have done for us these past few centuries. Yes, that is what did work in the past. But I don’t see how to reconcile this with the technologies and physical entities involved. That’s what is illogical about ‘trying it,’ along with the fact that attempting it and failing kills you. Brin ends by making some bold claims about other world events that worry him. I will at least agree that we should totally have used the name Golem for LLMs, I mean, come on, it was right there, presumably it is too late now but I would pack this play. Rhetorical Innovation
Who are these ‘people on Holly’s side’? Again, what are ‘sides’? There indeed exists a faction that is indeed ‘degrowth,’ that opposes progress and humanity in all their forms. Sometimes those people mention AI. And yes, those people are a major problem. The confusion of such people with those who warn specifically about AI, the claiming they are the same or at least ‘on the same side’ is almost entirely an intentional conflation designed to discredit those warning specifically about AI. Don’t let anyone get away with this. At a minimum, anyone providing such talk needs to be devoting a lot of their energies to being pro-progress, pro-growth and pro-humanity in non-AI ways (and no crypto does not count). If you talk about AI and not about housing and permitting and energy and free markets, then you are who you are.
Yes, well.
Anthropic Paper on Sleeper Agents
After press time I learned of this:
Any positive outlook? I can see ways to get there, such as Scott Aaronson proposing that this could allow intentional backdoors to use in case of emergency, although as he notes that won’t help when we need them most. The positive outlook in particular that ‘AI is gloriously, inherently uncontrollable’? First off, Marc Andreessen, fair warning: I am going to quote you on this one. Whenever, in the future, he or his say that we will definitely stay in control of AI, we can remind everyone that Marc said that AI was ‘gloriously, inherently uncontrollable.’ Second, we can remind everyone that he claims this is a whitepill. A good thing. That it is good that humans cannot have control over what AIs do. ‘AI is inherently controllable’ was not my interpretation of the paper. It seems wildly irresponsible to present the findings that way. But if it was true, my response would be, well let’s be rather careful with what capabilities we give these uncontrollable AIs then, shall we?
Anthropic Introduces Impossible Mission Force
Its (five-year?) mission, should they choose to accept it (and of course they do), is to explore strange new future models, to seek out the consequences of creating That might, in turn, itself be an impossible mission. Such alignment might instead be possible, or might become possible with future technique development. That would be great. In which case, they ideally fail in their actually impossible mission rather than fooling us. The
I notice that the team is looking for ways the alignment strategy ‘might’ fail. My brain keeps trying to correct that to ‘will’ fail, in the sense of a spellchecker, hence the name attached. I also don’t think there is that much difference in this context, which is core to my expectations, if there is a way for the technique to fail you should assume it fails.
That is definitely worth doing. We should know what reasons we do and don’t have for thinking things will and won’t work. As things move forward, we will start to need to know our techniques work, not only not have proven that they won’t (or might not).
Yes, exactly, although the team probably does not make this situation worse. This is especially a concern at other labs.
I wonder the extent to which this is properly appreciated even at Anthropic, and to what extent the team and those reacting to the team will have the proper mentality here. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
Joel Lehman (former OpenAI) points out that AI Safety is pre-paradigmatic,
Richard’s linked post is excellent.
When we say alignment, we need to ensure our understandings and definitions of alignment are aligned. We need to be clear on what we do and don’t know how to do, and what it is we do and do not want.
That is always the thing. We say ‘corrupt’ or ‘misaligned’ or ‘failure’ or ‘bug’ when what we get does not correspond to what we want, and instead corresponds to what we actually asked to get if you look at the data and feedback provided. Under current conditions, it would be mandatory to distort such a model to avoid certain kinds of responses, and also feedback would steer the model away from saying true things in many circumstances, even if you did your best to reward only accuracy. Your best, by default, won’t do.
How many distinct reasons can you use for why this plan will not work? That depends on how you count. If you are not being too strict, I found five within the first thirty seconds, and there are doubtless more. The Belrose Model ContinuedI continue to engage with Belrose and Pope here at length because, as frustrating as I find them, they are pretty much the closest thing we have to Worthy Opponents who are making actual claims and creating actual models, and it seems credible that they have insights I am missing. I also engage with them a bunch when discussing the Anthropic paper. This section goes into the weeds a bunch on expected model behaviors under various potential conditions, so consider this its own mini-post that you might want to skip. The analyzed thread contains many strong claims by Belrose, strongly and confidently held, that make my brain go ‘you think what now?’ That does not mean those claims are wrong, and from my perspective those claims are highly correlated in their wrongness.
I see Nora making this pattern of claim a lot: Behavior X does not ever prove useful for minimizing loss. Behavior X consists of parameters that could be used for something else. Therefore: Over training, behavior X will not arise, or if it arises it will go away.
Often there then follows that some component of bad behavior Y is such a behavior X, thus proving we need not worry about Y. I have several objections here. This is not exhaustive: The ability to predict the behaviors of others is always useful in predicting the next token others would produce, and is almost always useful for other scored tasks. Therefore, we should expect development of such prediction abilities. If you develop such prediction abilities, you or your user then can tap those abilities for other things. For example, if you cannot model coherent agents, and you try to predict almost any complex story, you are going to have a bad time.
More generally, whatever the right words are for this, gaining capabilities and affordances in general, or for almost anything, often turns out to be helpful in places one would not directly expect, whether or not this impact is direct. I have learned that developing capabilities and affordances is a great idea whenever possible, as is learning to learn and learning to think better, whether or not there is any specific reason for it. It is often strategically correct under limited compute to modify to inherently value things that grant one capabilities and affordances and intelligence and so on, again whether or not there is any particular intended use. Or, if one does not actually do this, to learn to act as if one has done this.
Why are you so confident this behavior is never useful for minimizing loss? There is a totalizing model of the impact of current training methods here, such that you always end up at the limit with the same best possible solution and you expect to approach it within realistic time. And that you don’t get ‘stuck’ anywhere else, and you always aim at the target correctly. I am not convinced. This only deals with the model while it is training to minimize loss on next token prediction or whatever other particular task has been assigned. It tells you nothing about what happens when you start to get the model to aim at something else. And if we think SGD always ‘gets there’ in the end if you have the necessary components to get there, then saying that something is a short term handicap to getting there shouldn’t stop the model from eventually doing it? Otherwise, the model would be failing to ultimately get there. It seems getting models to forget things, even when you try, is hard? See the Anthropic paper this week, and Nora’s reaction to it. If something is unhelpful under current training methods but helpful in terms of desires of those doing the training, there are various other selection pressures on various levels pushing to make it happen. You are facing optimization pressure, over time quite a lot of it, including pressure you didn’t intend or endorse, and might not even notice.
I misunderstood this quite a bit until I saw the second half, as did ChatGPT, but it makes sense now that Nora is not saying that our current training methods do this upward generalization. It is not strictly impossible, occasionally you get lucky, but the vast majority of the time your goal is merely to not have things get too much worse when you shift distributions. What I believe she is saying is that, if you were an agent (coherent agent?) then you would be able to generalize upward, and do better out of distribution. I notice I am still confused. To the extent that I (either in general, or specifically myself) function as a coherent agent, I definitely am likely to better survive the move outside of distribution, and still be able to accomplish my goals. I have a greater ability to adapt to the new information, and fix or discard things that no longer make sense, and figure out new strategies, and so on. As long as there are still levers that matter and there is enough information to not act randomly, the crazier the situation gets, the greater the agent’s (or expert’s, or more intelligent entity’s, or what not) advantage. This is true for agency but also many other things, I think?
Jessica doesn’t ask about this but I do not see why not being able to find it in an unlabeled diagram makes discussing it unhelpful? It certainly does not make the thing go away or bear on whether it exists. And I don’t think it is fair to say that we cannot say useful things about whether a world model exists in a given LLM, I’ve seen such discussions that seem to be saying meaningful things.
Well, we definitely don’t always do that, although we can argue whether we would be wise to do that. Certainly if we can ‘look inside’ via interpretability, or otherwise actually know inner structures, we would want to discuss such inner structures. Nora herself frequently discusses the mechanics of SGD and how that will impact behaviors, which requires understanding the internal structures somewhat. But also, it does not seem so important what tools we use to figure out what the inner structures are likely to be? And once we do posit inner structures, if that in turn predicts future behaviors of other future systems, those seem like valid predictions, however we got to positing those structures? Skipping ahead a bit:
In the best case (from a danger perspective) the future AI is going to be able to do human emulation, including the resulting consequentialism. This seems like it makes it, then, very easy for the system or its user to invoke full consequentialism whenever that seems useful to the task at hand, again as a best case.
Before I read Nora’s explanation in-thread, I’ll take a crack at what she means here. If you give the AI system inner alignment, that is giving it consequentialism, that is telling it to pursue some goal. And we know that if you give a sufficiently capable AI any specified goal and have it actually optimize for that goal, your chances of having a bad time approach certainty, especially if your ultimate plan (as I think is Nora’s) is to give different people similarly capable such systems. Thus, you want to avoid such inner alignment. The hope is that all this training won’t produce such consequentialism, there will be no ‘inner’ thing to be ‘aligned’ at all, with anything, all you have is this set of behaviors you trained, and she expects this to then give us what we want and cause good outcomes, because it will generalize well? I think the first half of the argument that inner alignment not only does not solve all our problems but puts us in a scary spot is very right. I think the second half of the argument, that ASIs without inner alignment potentially end non-disastrously and converge on outcomes we like, is where I don’t get how someone could think that.
OK, yes, great. I wish more people got on board with this sentence under anything like current methods.
Wait, what? This is your plan? That seems infinitely more doomed, not less. I do not know how you would robustly do this. I do not even know what the words involved mean. Even when I treat them as their best possible non-magical self and assume you can get there, I don’t see how it works to get you the outcomes you want. I am so deeply, deeply boggled here.
Again: Wait, what?
I do think there is a sense in which this is a hopeful and meaningful claim. When we use a proxy measure (human thumbs up) to approximate something else (what we actually want, highly nebulous, Misalignment and reward hacking in the sense that the AI is optimizing for what actually gets the thumbs up from the humans giving it ratings, rather than what those humans would on reflection while thinking better would prefer to give the thumbs up to. This is what I believe Nora Belrose was talking about above when she said there will ‘always be misalignment / reward hacking’ with a proxy measure. There is no escaping this under anything like current methods, other than constructing a better proxy measure. There are other methods that one could try in the name of repairing this rift. I have yet to see anyone say ‘I tried the obvious things and they failed’ let alone ‘I tried some non-obvious things and made a little progress.’ Flagging that I think there are some potentially good potential alignment ideas in this space floating around in my head at some level, that I should probably work to nail down, but I would want to reason in private first.
Misalignment in the sense that you would seek to use consequentialism outside of a particular response, to maximize expected future rewards. Things like influencing the minds of the evaluators, hacking the system or gaining control of the server, and so on.
If the LLM is trying to predict what the human will thumbs up and then doing that, then that strategy will work better in various situations out of distribution. This is the right way to get the highest possible score. It will get you into trouble on both #1 and #2 if you provide the opportunity. But it is also difficult and expensive and not obviously easy to get to from where you start. Most of the time most humans mostly don’t do this, because it isn’t worth the effort and also If the LLM is instead doing what most humans mostly do, which is to develop various heuristics and patterns of behavior that tend to produce good outcomes and things others will react well to, and doing that stuff on autopilot? Then there is some good news. Someone or something on such an autopilot is might not go to ‘step outside’ the system and think in the #2 sense, and won’t systematically do it on purpose. I do still think there is reason to think that various heuristics that would be learned in context would cause it to start doing this type of thing anyway, I’m confident some of you can figure out the argument here, but I can see why one could hope that this wouldn’t happen. The ‘hacking’ in the #1 sense will also be less ‘deliberate’ in some important senses. There won’t be what in a human we would call a conscious intentional search process for ways to hack the system. The problem is that, from the perspective of the AI system, there is no Platonic non-proxy measure it is aiming for. It is aiming at the proxy measure. If it does this via developing various heuristics that humans tend to like, and tuning the combination of them, then its ‘tend to like’ is the ‘tend to thumbs up’ and then it will get increasingly sophisticated and detailed in finding ways to combine those to get good at that. That is the whole idea. It will come up with a synthesis of such heuristics that cause it to ‘exploit’ and ‘hack’ the system, in the sense that we will think those are exploits and hacks, to the extent that the way to maximize human expression of likeness diverges from the amount humans actually like the output. I would also expect this behavior to steadily break and switch, at some order of magnitude (without a claim as to whether this point is past or future), from the current centrally heuristic method that Nora is describing, into the things Jessica and Eliezer are describing. This should happen for the same reason it happens in humans. With limited compute and data and parameters, when starting out or facing something difficult where incremental progress is better than nothing (and current LLM tasks clearly qualify here), the heuristics are best. Then, at some point, if you want to get better, you mostly throw all that out, and systematically study. You often see this in advanced human experts, such as top sports stars, who retrain the most basic of skills from first principles taking ten times as long, because that is the only way left to improve. I see this as a kind of grok. So this is why Nora explicitly does not want to ever be optimizing any reward signal, I presume:
All right, so we agree that fully optimizing any given reward signal ends badly in this way, so Nora wants to do something that uses the reward signal to improve the model without doing such an optimization. But I notice I am confused what that would be, that is not functionally doing optimization on the signal? And what are the ‘right’ kinds of updates if you are not optimizing to the signal you are given?
If internal alignment is something we don’t want, then presumably it is coherent? How is that different from internal consequentialism? And also Jessica’s objection. Then there’s Zack’s line.
To be consequentialist, in addition to being able to create the array plans, our utility(plan) has to be a measure of the utility of the plan. Due to compute limitations and incomplete data, even those attempting to be consequentialists (including, let’s say, AlphaGo) are going to use various proxies and approximations, looking at the nature of the act and not looking too far ahead in order to do all this in reasonable time. Which is indeed how to maximize utility (and do consequentialism) under uncertainty with limited resources, but does not mean full consequentialism in some other senses. So perhaps it does not fully count? It depends. In practice, this can end up acting a lot like other systems most of the time. The more limited your compute and data and other resources, the more falling back will occur upon the heuristics. So again it’s the same thing. And again, it’s a warning of things to come. The lack of consequentialism in the evaluations is a function of a capabilities deficit. You can’t afford full consequentialism so you do the budget heuristic approximation in many or most places. But this exactly predicts that if you had a bigger budget, you would spend that compute budget moving directionally towards mor consequentialism. Which is exactly the prediction that I and Yudkowsky are making. I worry that such discussions, and my takes on them, are not progressing. Even if both sides mean well and know things, and there is something to grok, if it doesn’t get grokked, it cannot help. Is either side better understanding the other? So I’m going to plan to scale back analyzing such discussions going forward, unless I feel like they’re progressing. Again, I suspect that if I met either Pope or Belrose in person (or at least zoom, but in person is so much better) and we allocated a bunch of time we’d have a shot. At some point I may try harder to make that happen. Otherwise, I am going to scale back detailed interactions here going forward, unless I identify new insights. Open Model Weights Are Unsafe And Nothing Can Fix ThisAmjad Masad (CEO Replit) points out that what people call open source LLMs are Not the True Open Source,
I’d quibble that verifying no backdoors is impossible rather than hard, I don’t even know how you prove it in reasonable time even with open data. But yes, if you want the full benefits of open source systems, you need to be fully open source including data, and I would think also including checkpoints. If you consider every affordance of a fully open system, and count the lack of that affordance as an issue, there are going to be a lot of issues. And yes, if we ignore impact on profits and commercial incentives and all the other downsides, that is going to slow down development, and slow down capabilities gains, versus the fully open source. That all, of course, reflects the philosophy that advancing AI capabilities and who has access to those capabilities, without any restrictions or attempt to sculpt what happens, is and will remain a good thing. One could also take the position, as I do, that this is plausibly true on the margin today if you don’t think about tomorrow, but it will rapidly stop being true, and there is no way to react to the exponential at exactly the right time or otherwise undo the ecosystems we create and affordances we release in a way that can’t be taken back, when that time does arrive. Certainly, one cannot do that if many involved will fanatically push back on any such attempt, no matter the circumstances, which they very clearly will do. The current trade-off, where we open source the weights but not the data, is not strictly worse since it does make the worst cases harder to achieve, If you were going to open source either data or weights, you would very clearly want to open source the data. I worry about that as well, gathering and then properly refining a bespoke data set could plausibly because an important bottleneck if people find a way around the compute training cost bottleneck. Also there could be obvious legal and other issues. One worry I would have is that if you open source your data, it opens up whole new seas of potential blameworthiness. Can you imagine what the ‘ethics’ watchdogs or those concerned about badwordism could do with access to an entire training set, or might demand of you?
People Are Worried About AI Killing EveryoneSometimes I agree. Other times, the exact opposite.
Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone
In the AI case, however, I would say that far more than 1% are willing to endorse the explicit not only genocide but xenocide of the human race, often also the omnicide of all organic life and value in the universe. The estimates I know are that 5%-10% of AI researchers explicitly endorse this when asked confidentially. Far more are willing to move forward with capabilities developments despite agreeing there is a substantial (10%+) risk of this happening as a result. Some straight talk from Robin, as well:
This is, as he notes, good sense if you believe it. This is a key reason we cannot neglect the ‘normal’ future even if think the future is almost never normal - if people do not have hope for the future, they will lash out, take bad risks, not much care about whether we all die. Robin might do this in a calculating way (whether or not you buy his logic) but most others won’t. Robin’s model has shifted to strongly believe in decline if we do not get to AGI soon, due to his concerns about fertility and resulting loss of innovation. He also does not expect AGI soon, or for AI to have much economic impact soon, taking that last expectation beyond what I consider reasonable even if AI does not further progress. I do think this is why Robin is willing to ‘roll the dice’ in various ways, including via AGI. He thinks that the things other seek to preserve and value are doomed, so we must seek our value elsewhere, and have little to lose by taking risks. We also have a strong disagreement on the likely inherent value of AGI and whether to have a preference for humans, where I say yes and he says no.
The vibes, are they off or on? The Lighter Side
Also, very good update.
You're currently a free subscriber to |