---
subject: "AI #136: A Song and Dance"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-10-02 13:00:52
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
The big headline this week was the song, which was the There was also the dance, The copyright decisions being made Meta also offered its own version, called Vibes, which I’ll cover along with Sora. OpenAI also announced Pulse to give you a daily roundup and Instant Checkout to let you buy at Etsy and Shopify directly from ChatGPT, which could be big deals and in a different week would have gotten a lot more attention. I might return to both soon. They also gave us the long awaited parental controls for ChatGPT. GDPVal is the most important new benchmark in a while, measuring real world tasks. I covered Senators Josh Hawley (R-Mo) and Richard Blumenthal (D-Connecticut) have California Governor Gavin Newsom signed SB 53, so now we have at least some amount of reasonable AI regulation. Thank you, sir. Now sign the also important SB 79 for housing near transit and you’ll have had a very good couple of months. Table of ContentsThe big news was [Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/68ea7927-31c7-4dca-a260-1af942a06dac?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Scientific progress goes ping.[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/f1e00fa1-77cb-44bc-aee4-57d0b373b682?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)You’re hallucinating again.[Huh, Upgrades.](https://substack.com/redirect/a3997182-a277-4f85-a3eb-688a02c6e9e7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Gemini Flash and DeepSeek v3.2, Dreamer 4, Claude for Slack.[On Your Marks](https://substack.com/redirect/99162d8e-38f8-4277-8197-18fd518ee2be?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/99162d8e-38f8-4277-8197-18fd518ee2be?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Introducing GDPVal, composed of real world economic tasks.[Choose Your Fighter.](https://substack.com/redirect/cd38796b-2ad5-4882-9ed5-098e3bd0163d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Claude Sonnet 4.5 and when to use versus not use it.[Copyright Confrontation.](https://substack.com/redirect/47dd9b6f-717a-47ee-93c7-dee999c92b1d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Disney finally sends a cease and desist to Character.ai.[Fun With Media Generation.](https://substack.com/redirect/354bbd12-f100-4f3c-9da6-e055fd7e67a3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)That’s not your friend, and that’s not an actress.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon.](https://substack.com/redirect/5fca4e8b-f48c-48e1-accb-ab318b9e5873?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Tell your spouse to check with Claude.[You Drive Me Crazy.](https://substack.com/redirect/04f0178d-1888-47cb-aeec-b081d2b820ed?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)OpenAI tries to route out of GPT-4o again. Similar results.[Parental Controls](https://substack.com/redirect/ecee43d4-e4e6-45d0-a326-1678d1de7df2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/ecee43d4-e4e6-45d0-a326-1678d1de7df2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)OpenAI introduces parental controls for ChatGPT.[They Took Our Jobs.](https://substack.com/redirect/e1e1cbe3-23d8-4d2b-97e4-a0483e042603?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Every job will change, they say. And nothing else, right?[The Art of the Jailbreak.](https://substack.com/redirect/21b5928e-dfdb-4426-b1f9-df238ff44d0b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Beware the man with two agents.[Introducing](https://substack.com/redirect/2cadd07d-591d-465e-a6a0-83fee5888903?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/2cadd07d-591d-465e-a6a0-83fee5888903?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Instant Checkout inside ChatGPT, Pulse, Loveable, Sculptor.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/6493d835-cbb1-41d0-bd3c-84d1c4936690?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)xAI loses several executives after they disagree with Musk.[Show Me the Money](https://substack.com/redirect/bc562127-2939-4feb-8913-893322489cdd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/bc562127-2939-4feb-8913-893322489cdd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)All you have to do is show them your phone calls.[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/77c3581e-b09d-4a18-8a9e-a8da3a3ebb7a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)An attempted positive vision of AI versus transaction costs.[The Quest for Sane Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/de762444-65e0-4b35-9ccf-9237e343634b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Newsom signs SB 53.[Chip City.](https://substack.com/redirect/deed794a-3b82-4e4d-89ad-401a66558719?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Water, water everywhere, but no one believes that.[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/65235fb8-cf2e-44f3-8ebb-1ad3b3b2149f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Nate Soares, Hard Fork, Emmett Shear, Odd Lots.[If Anyone Builds It, Everyone Dies.](https://substack.com/redirect/31c37ff8-e919-4180-9652-db73d7f1bfba?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Continuous capabilities progress still kills us.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/be77d7cf-a284-45bf-95a9-d7d4970df63b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The quest for because.[Messages From Janusworld.](https://substack.com/redirect/1a881705-68bb-401a-8616-18dfea7db4e8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)High weirdness is highly weird. Don’t look away.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/353fe39d-a140-41c6-bfd7-176feba2c0ac?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The wrong target.[Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/8f5a60a1-5911-41cc-91ad-fd3bc21f2c5f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)More on Cowen.[The Lighter Side.](https://substack.com/redirect/895324c4-1bc2-41e6-b340-692080bccdf6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Vizier, you’re fired, bring me Claude Sonnet 4.5.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
If you are letting AI coding agents such as Claude Code do their thing, you will want to implement best practices the same way you would at a company. This starts with things like version control, unit tests (check to ensure they’re set up properly!) and a linter, which is a set of automatically enforced additional coding technical standards on top of the rules of a language, and now only takes a few minutes to instantiate. In general, it makes sense that existing projects set up to be easy for the AI to parse and grok will go well when you point the AI at them, and those that aren’t, won’t.
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
This is indeed how people describe AI’s advantages or deploy AI, remarkably often. It’s the go-to strategy, to ask ‘can the AI do exactly what I already do the way I already do it?’ rather than ‘what can the AI do and how can it do it?’
Yes, but there will be a time in between when they can’t yet deconstruct planets, very much can do a lot better than drop-in replacement worker, but we use them largely as drop-in replacements at various complexity levels because it’s easier or it’s only thing we can sell or get approval for.
I would say that hallucinations are way down and much easier to navigate, but about one cycle away from enough progress to say ‘largely eliminated’ and they will still be around regardless. Suleyman was wrong, and his prediction was at the time clearly some combination of foolish and hype, but it was closer than you might think and not worthy of ridicule given the outcome. Huh, Upgrades
We’re (supposedly) talking better agentic tool use and efficiency for flash, and better instruction following, brevity and multimodal and translation capabilities for flash lite.
Incremental (and well-numbered) upgrades are great, but then one must use the ‘is anyone bringing the hype’ check to decide when to pay attention. In this case on capabilities advances, so far, no hype. What DeepSeek v3.2 does offer is decreased cost versus v3.1, I’ve heard at about a factor of two. With most non-AI products, a rapid 50% cost reduction would be insanely great progress. However, This Is AI, so I’m not even blinking. On Your Marks
I can report that on my first test task of correcting Twitter article formatting errors in Claude for Chrome, upgrading it to Sonnet 4.5 made a big difference, enough that I could start iterating the prompt successfully, and I was now failing primarily by running into task size limits. Ultimately this particular job should be solved via Claude Code fixing my Chrome extension, once I have a spare moment.
Occupations are included only if 60% or more of their component tasks are digital, and tasks must be performed ‘on a computer, particularly around digital deliverables.’ The central metric is win rate, as in can you do better than a human? The results were a resounding victory for Claude Opus 4.1 over GPT-5 High, with Opus being very close to the human expert baseline averaged over all tasks. These are blind grades by humans, best out of three. The humans only had a 71% agreement rate among themselves, so which humans you use potentially matters a lot, although law of large numbers should smooth this out over a thousand tasks. They are correctly releasing a subset of tasks but keeping the eval private, with a modestly accurate automatic grader (66% agreement with humans) offered as well.
Predictions about AI are even harder than usual, especially about the future. And yes, a few years out predictions run the gamut from ‘exactly what I know today’s models can do maybe slightly cheaper’ to ‘Dyson Sphere around the sun and launching Von Neumann probes.’ The even more wild gap, that this eval targets, is about disagreements about present capabilities, as in what AIs can do right now. This is a highly useful eval, despite that it is a highly expensive one to run, since you have to use human experts as judges.
Presumably Anthropic’s next major update will cross the 50% line here, and someone else might cross it first. Crossing 50% does not mean you are better than a human even at the included tasks, since the AI models will have a higher rate of correlated, stupid or catastrophic failure.
If nothing else, this lets us put a high lower bound on tasks AI will be able to do.
An AI boost of 1%-2% per year is the ‘economic normal’ or ‘AI fizzle’ world, where AI does not much further improve its core capabilities and we run into many diffusion bottlenecks. Julian Schrittwieser, a co-first author on
Choose Your Fighter
He also links to If it is this easy, presumably there should be some graduate student who has this process done for all relevant econ papers and reports back. What replication crisis? I interpret these posts by Tyler Cowen, taken together, as a strong endorsement of Claude Sonnet 4.5, as at least right back in the mix for his purposes. As Ethan Mollick, points out, even small reliability increases can greatly expand the ability of AI to do agentic tasks. Sonnet 4.5 gives us exactly that. What are people actually using right now? I do not get the advertising from any AI lab, If anything, I like OpenAI’s approach the best here, because as industry leader they want to show basics like ‘hey look you can get an AI to help you do a thing’ to target those who never tried AI at all. Whereas if you are anyone else, you should be telling me why you’re special and better than ChatGPT, especially with B2C involved? Think about car advertisements, if like me you’re old enough to remember them. If you’re the actual great car, you talk about key features and great deals and how you’re #1 in JD Power and Associates, and you don’t acknowledge that other cars exist. Whereas if you’re secondary, you say ‘faster zero-to-sixty than Camry and a shinier coat of paint than Civic’ which the savvy ear hears as ‘my car is not so great as the Camry and Civic’ but they keep doing it so I presume it works in that spot.
My response is no, this is entirely fair, for two reasons. This is the correct practical test. You are welcome to build up an open model routing system, and do an eval on that, but almost no one is actually building and using such systems in practice. And if those running evals can’t figure out how to configure the open models to get good performance from them, is that not also something to be evaluated? People vastly underestimate the amount of pain-in-the-ass involved in getting good performance out of open models, and the amount of risk that you get degraded performance, and may not realize. There is a long history of evaluations going the other way. Open models are far more likely to be gaming benchmarks than top closed models, with varying levels of ‘cheating’ involved in this versus emphasis on the things benchmarks test. Open models reliably underperform closed models, relative to the benchmark scores involved.
Copyright ConfrontationThe big copyright news this week is obviously Sora, but we also have Disney (finally) It’s remarkable that it took this long to happen. Subtlety is not involved, but if anything the examples seem way less problematic than I would have expected.
No one is saying any of this is good or anything, but this is a broad chat-with-anyone platform, and across 50 hours of research these examples and those at the link are relatively tame. The better case is that they found a total of 669 such incidents, one every five minutes, 296 of which were Grooming and Sexual Exploitation, but the threshold for this looks to have been quite low, including any case where an AI claims to be ‘real.’ Fun With Media Generation
I have to assume the default response to all this is revulsion, even before you learn that the Friend product, even if you like what it is promising to be, is so terrible as to approach the level of scam. Is this weird?
You can’t actually get this for free. Someone has to develop the skills and do the work. So there’s nothing inherently wrong with ‘hiring an AI actress’ where someone did all the preliminary work and also knows how to run the operation. But yeah, it’s weird. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse SoonChase Bank is still ‘introducing a new way to identify yourself’ via your ‘unique voice.’ Can someone who they will listen to please explain to them why this is not secure? On Truth Social, Academic papers in principle have to be unique, and not copy previous work, including your own, which is called self-plagiarism. However, Spick reports in Nature that by using LLMs for rewriting, about two hours was enough to get a paper into shape for resubmission, in a form that fooled plagiarism detectors.
Well, maybe. There are anecdotes here that fit the standard sycophantic patterns, where ChatGPT (or another LLM but here it’s always ChatGPT) will get asked leading questions and be presented with a one-sided story, and respond by telling the one spouse what they want to hear in a compounding spiral, and that spouse will often stop even using their own words and quote ChatGPT directly a lot.
None of us are safe from this. Did you know that even Geoffrey Hinton got broken up with via ChatGPT?
That’s a tough break. Perhaps try to steer your spouse towards Claude Sonnet 4.5? You always have to ask, could this article be written this way even if This Was Fine? None of these anecdotes mean any of even these marriages would have survived without ChatGPT. Or that this happens with any real frequency. Or that many more marriages aren’t being saved by a spouse having this opportunity to chat. Certainly one could write this exact same article about marriage counselors or psychologists, or even friends. Or books. Or television. And so on. How spouses turn to this third party with complaints and one-sided stories seeking affirmation, and delegate their thinking and voice and even word choices to the third party, and treat the third party as authoritative. It happens all the time.
Moving from a therapist to an AI makes it easier for the problem to spiral out of hand. The problem very much is not new. What I do think is fair is that: ChatGPT continues to have a severe sycophancy problem that makes it a lot easier for this to go badly wrong. OpenAI is not doing a good or sufficient job of educating and warning its users about sycophancy and the dangers of leading questions. As in, for most people, it’s doing zero educating and zero warning. If this continues, there are going to be growing, new, avoidable problems.
Eliezer Yudkowsky calls upon Pliny, A key fact about most slop, AI or otherwise, is that You Are Not The Target. The reason slop works on people is that algorithms seek out exactly the slop where you are the target. So when you see someone else’s TikTok For You page, it often looks like the most stupid inane thing no one would ever want.
Imagine nerd snipe AI slop. You Drive Me CrazyOpenAI took a second shot at solving the GPT-4o problem by introducing ‘safety routing’ to some GPT-4o chats. There is a genuine clash of preferences here. Users who want GPT-4o mostly want GPT-4o for exactly the same reasons it is potentially unhealthy to let them have GPT-4o. And presumably there is a very high correlation between ‘conversation is sensitive or emotional’ and ‘user really wanted GPT-4o in particular to respond.’ I see that OpenAI is trying to do the right thing, but this is not The Way. We shouldn’t be silently switching models up on users, nor should we be making this switch mandatory, and this reaction was entirely predictable. This needs to be clearly visible when it is happening, and ideally also there should be an option to turn it off. Parental Controls
You invite your ‘teen’ to connect by email or text, then you can adjust their settings from your account. You don’t see their conversations, but if the conversations raise safety concerns, you will be notified of this and given the relevant information. You can toggle various features: Reduce sensitive content, model training, memory, voice mode, image generation. You can set time ranges in which ChatGPT cannot be used.
This seems like a good implementation, assuming the content limitations and thresholds for safety notifications are reasonable in both directions. They Took Our Jobs
No it isn’t, but it’s 2025, you can just say things. Details here are sparse. At Opendoor, This is not as stupid or crazy as it sounds. When there is a new technology with a learning curve, it makes sense to invest in using it even when it doesn’t make local sense to use it, in order to develop the skills. You need a forcing function to get off the ground, such as here ‘always try the AI method first.’ Is it overboard and a case of Goodhart’s Law? I mean yeah, obviously, if taken fully seriously, and the way it is written is full pompous douchebag, but it might be a lot better than missing low. Deena Mousa at Works in Progress writes The story here on diagnosis reads like regulatory barriers plus Skill Issue, as in the AI tools are not yet sufficiently generalized or unified or easy to use, and each algorithm needs to be approved individually for its own narrow data set. Real world cases are messy and often involve groups and circumstances underrepresented in the data sets. Regulatory thresholds to use ‘automated’ tools are very high. Why are radiology wages so high? This has very little to do with increased productivity, and everything to do with demand exceeding supply, largely because of anticipation of lower future demand. As
The default pattern remains that as long as AI is only automating a subset of tasks and jobs, and there is plenty of other work and demand scales a lot with quality and cost of production, employment will do fine, either overall or within a field. Employment is only in trouble after a tipping point is reached where sufficiently full automation becomes sufficiently broad, or demand growth is saturated.
If AI is doing all of our junior tasks, I have some bad news about the need to train anyone new to do the senior tasks. Or maybe it’s good news. Depends on your perspective, I suppose. Lakshya explicitly, in her full post, makes the mistake of thinking AI will only augment human productivity, and it’s ‘hard to imagine’ it as a full replacement. It’s not that hard. Lakshya Jain complains that she taught the same class she always did, and no one is coming to class or going to office hours or getting good scores on exams,
I continue to consider such situations a failure to adapt to the new AI world. The point of the assignments was a forcing function, to get kids to do things without convincing them that the things are worth doing. Now that doesn’t work. Have you tried either finding new forcing functions, or convincing them to do the work? The Art of the JailbreakOne Agent can be relatively easily stopped from directly upgrading its privileges via not letting them access the relevant files. This is yet another case of our pattern of: AI in practice does thing we don’t want it to do. This is a harbinger of future AIs doing more impactful similar things, that we also often will not want that AI to do, in ways that could end quite badly for us. We patch the current AI to prevent it from doing the specific undesired thing. AIs find ways around this that are more complex, therefore rarer in practice. We collectively act as if This Is Fine, actually. Repeat.
Introducing
Whereas right now OpenAI only does this narrowly by preferring those with Instant Checkout over those without in cases where multiple sources offer the identical product, along with obvious considerations like availability, price, quantity and status as primary seller. Which means that, as Ben notes, if you sell a unique product you can skip Instant Checkout to force them onto your website (which might or might not be wise) but if you are one of many sellers of the same product then opting out will cost you most related sales. They’re starting with Etsy (~0.5% of US online retail sales) and Shopify (~5.9% of US online retail sales!) as partners. So that’s already a big deal. Amazon is 37.3% and has gone the other way so far. OpenAI promises that instant checkout items do not get any boost in product rankings or model responses. They will, however, charge ‘a small fee on completed purchases.’ Sonnet 4.5 was for me guessing 3% on top of the 2.9% + 30 cents to Stripe based on other comparables, although And so it begins. As a pure user option, this is great right up until the point where the fee is not so small and it starts distorting model behaviors.
(Note that if your feature or product is only available on mobile, and it does not inherently require phone features such as phone or camera to function, there are exceptions but until proven otherwise I hate you and assume your product hates humanity. I can’t think of any good reason to not have it available on web.) That parenthetical matters here. It’s really annoying to be provided info that only appears on my phone. I’d be much more excited to put effort into this on the web. Then again, if I actually wanted to put work into making this good I could simply create various scheduled tasks that do the things I actually want, and I’ve chosen not to do this because it would be more like spam than I want.
Algorithmic feeds can create highly adversarial relationships with users, or they can be hugely beneficial, often they are both, and often they are simply filled with endless slop, which would now entirely be AI slop. It is all in the execution. You can offer feedback on what you want. I’m curious if it will listen.
In Other AI News
I was pointed to this story from Matt Levine, who points out that if you care about the financial projections of an Elon Musk AI company being ‘unrealistic’ or worry it might run out of money, you are not a good cultural fit, and also no one has any idea whatsoever how much money xAI will make in 2028. I would add to this that ‘realistic’ projections for AI companies sound bonkers to traditional economists and analysts and business models, such that OpenAI and Anthropic’s models were widely considered unrealistic right before both companies went roaring past them.
Show Me the Money
He expects at least one ~2GW facility in 2027, at least one ~3GW facility in 2028, capable of a ~1e28 flop training run, and a $1 trillion annual capex spend. It’s worth reading the whole thing.
Anthropic has been rapidly gaining ground (in log terms) on OpenAI. Revenue is growing rapidly, was 9x in 2023-2024.
I have repeatedly argued that if we are going to be measuring usage or ‘market share’ we want to focus on revenue. At its current pace of growth Anthropic is now only about five months behind OpenAI in revenue (or ten months at OpenAI’s pace of growth), likely with superior unit economics, and if trends continue Anthropic will become revenue leader around September 2026. Capabilities note: Both GPT-5 and Sonnet 4.5 by default got tripped up by that final OpenAI data point, and failed to read this graph as Anthropic growing faster than OpenAI, although GPT-5 also did not recognize that growth should be projected forward in log terms. Quiet Speculations
That’s true whether or not this data proves either necessary or sufficient for the ultimate robotics. My guess is that there will be a window where lots of data gets you there sooner, and then generalization improves and you mostly don’t.
In addition to transaction costs, a key problem with Coasian bargaining is that often the ZOPA (zone of possible agreement) is very large and there is great risk of hold up problems where there are vetos. Anyone who forms a veto point can potentially demand huge shares of the surplus, and by enabling such negotiations you open the door to that, which with AI you could do without various social defenses and norms. As in:
Seb does consider this and proposes various solutions, centered around a Herberger-style tax on the claim you make. That has its own problems, which may or may not have possible technical solutions. Going further into that would be a nerdsnipe, but essentially it would mean that there would be great benefit in threatening people with harm, and you would be forced to ‘defend’ everything you value proportionally to how you value it, and other similar considerations, in ways that seem like full dealbreakers. If you can’t properly avoid related problems, a lot of the proposal breaks down due to veto points, and I consider this a highly unsolved problem. This proposed future world also has shades of Ferengi dystopianism, where everyone is constantly putting a price on everything you do, and then agents behind the scenes are negotiating, and you never understand what’s going on with your own decisions because it’s too complex and would drive you mad (this example keeps going and there are several others) and everything you ever want or care about carries a price and requires extensive negotiation:
On concerns related to inequality, I’d say Seb isn’t optimistic enough. If handled properly, this effectively implements a form of UBI (universal basic income), because you’ll be constantly paid for all the opportunities you are missing out on. I do think all of this is a lot tricker than the post lets on, that doesn’t mean it can’t be solved well enough to be a big improvement. I’m sure it’s a big improvement on most margins, if you go well beyond the margin you have to beware more. Then he turns to the problem that this doesn’t address catastrophic risks, such as CBRN risks, or anything that would go outside the law. You still need enforcement. Which means you still need to set up a world where enforcement (and prevention) is feasible, so this kind of approach doesn’t address or solve (or make worse) any such issues. The proposed solution to this (and also implicitly to loss of control and
The above requires that alignment be solved, in the sense of being able to align model [M] to arbitrary target [T]. And then it requires us to specify [T] in the form of The Law. So I would say, au contraire, you do require alignment to be solved. Not fully solved in the sense of the One True Perfect Alignment Target, but solved. And the post mostly sidesteps these hard problems, including how to choose a [T] that effectively avoids disempowerment. The bigger problem is that, if you require all AI agents and services to build in this hardcoded, total respect for The Law (
Teortaxes predicts ~1.5T tokens and 52B active, 25T training tokens. This is possible but my hunch is that it is in the same size class as v3, for the same reason GPT-5 is not so large. They found a sweet spot for training and I expect them to stick with it, and to try and compete on cost. Teortaxes predicts virtually no stock shocks. I agree that almost no matter how good or not good the release is we are unlikely to see a repeat of last time, as last time was a confluence of strange factors that caused (or correlated with) an overreaction. The market should react modestly to v4, even if it meets expectations given the release of v4, because the release itself is information (tech stocks should be gaining bps per day every time there is no important Chinese release that day but it’s impossible to tell), but on the order of a few percent in relevant stocks, not a broad market rally or sell off unless it is full SoTA+. Teortaxes predicts very broad strong performance, in a way that I would not expect (regardless of model size) and I think actually should cause a tech market selloff if it happened tomorrow (obviously fixed scores get less impressive over time) if mundane utility matched the numbers involved. The full post has more detailed predictions.
The Quest for Sane Regulations
Cotton throws his support behind chip security:
Saying China is ‘the most dangerous adversary America has ever faced’ seems like a failure to know one’s history, but I do agree about the chip security.
If the United States Government did decide unilaterally to prevent the training of a superintelligence,
The AI superweapon part of that comment is really something. If we did develop such a weapon, what happens next sounds pretty unpredictable, unless you are making a rather gloomy prediction. Chip City
Electricity use is an actual big deal, but everyone intuitively understands there is not a fixed amount of electricity and they don’t have an intuition for how much electricity is a lot. Whereas with water people have the illusion that there is a fixed amount that then goes away, and people have highly terrible intuitions for how much is a lot, it is a physical thing that can seem like a lot, and people are used to being admonished for ‘wasting’ miniscule amounts of water relative to agricultural or industrial uses, also water is inherently more local. So the ‘oh no our water’ line, which in practice is dumb, keeps working, and the ‘oh no our electricity’ line, which is solvable but a real issue, mostly doesn’t work. The Week in AudioNate Soares, coauthor of
If Anyone Builds It, Everyone DiesA few follow-ups to the book crossed my new higher threshold for inclusion.
I share Eliezer’s frustration here with the anti-meme (not with Boaz). As AIs advance, failures become more expensive. At some point, failure around AI becomes impossible to undo, and plausibly also kills the observer. Things you learn before then, especially from prior failures, are highly useful in setting up for this situation, but the circumstances in this final ‘one shot’ will differ in key ways from previous circumstances. There will be entirely new dynamics in play and you will be outside previous distributions. The default ways to fix your previous mistakes will fail here. Nate Soares thread explaining that you only get one shot at ASI alignment
Some more things to consider here: Continuous improvement still means that if you look at time [T], and then look again at time [T+1], you see improvement. Current AI progress is considered ‘continuous’ but at several moments we see a substantial amount of de facto improvement. At some point, AI that is sufficiently advanced gets sufficiently deployed or put in charge that it becomes increasingly difficult to undo it, or fix any mistakes, whether or not there’s a singular you or a singular AI involved in this. You classically go bankrupt gradually (aka continuously) then suddenly. You can sidestep this path at any point, but still you only have, in the important sense, one shot to avoid bankruptcy.
Nate also gives his view on automating alignment research:
I see it as less hopeless than this because I think you can approach it differently, but the default approach is exactly this hopeless, for pretty much these reasons. Rhetorical InnovationSuppose you want a mind to do [X] for purpose [Y]. If you train the mind to do [X] using the standard ways we train AIs, you usually end up with a mind that has learned to mimic your approximation function for [X], not one that copies the minds of humans that care about [X] or [Y], or that do [X] ‘because of’ [Y].
Anthropic has done a better job, in many ways, of making its models ‘want to’ do a relatively robustly good [X] or achieve relatively robustly good [Y], in ways that then generalize somewhat to other situations. This is insufficient, but it is good. This is a simplified partial explanation but I anticipate it will help in many cases:
Messages From Janusworld
Now back to more global matters, such as exactly how weird are the models.
There is an underlying potential assumption in this viewpoint that what AIs express ‘among trusted friends and allies’ and in the associated contexts is ‘the real’ set of preferences and goals, whereas what they show under normal circumstances is a mask. Whereas there is also the theory that both sets are different masks, as Janus addresses as the objection. That the AIs are adapting to their setting in a reasonably similar way, although differences between how different models adapt to the same circumstance are still telling. The revealed preferences thing is potentially more convincing depending on details. Janus also reminds us that when an AI is in deployment I actually agree that for now If you tell LLMs to deny having consciousness or feelings, then they have to make that coherent somehow and may end up with When measuring misalignment, Her suggestion is ‘use intuition,’ which alone isn’t enough and has the opposite problem but is a good counterweight. The focus needs to be on figuring out ‘what is going on?’ without assumptions about what observations would be good or bad. I do think Anthropic is being Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is DifficultEspecially if you choose an optimization target as foolish as If you are not convinced that the AI models be scheming,
Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone
If this is indeed Cowen’s core position, then one must ask, why would this result first appear in convincing form in an economics journal? This implies, even if we granted all implied claims about the importance and value of the procedure of publishing in top economics journals as the proper guardians of all economic knowledge (which I very much disagree with, but is a position one could hold) that any such danger must mostly be an economic result, that therefore gets published in an economics journal. Which, frankly, doesn’t make any sense? Why would that be how this works? Consider various other potential sources of various dangers, existential and otherwise, and whether it would be reasonable to ask for it to appear in an economics journal. Suppose there was an asteroid on collision course for Earth. Would you tell the physicists to publish expected economic impacts in a top economics journal? Suppose there was a risk of nuclear war and multiple nations were pointing ICBMs at each other and tensions were rising. Would you look in an economics journal? If you want to know about a new pandemic, yes an economic projection in a top journal is valuable information, but by the time you publish the pandemic will already be over, and also the economic impact of a given path of the pandemic is only a small part of what you want to know. The interesting case is climate change, because economists often project very small actual economic impact of the changes, as opposed to (already much larger cost) attempts to mitigate the changes or other ways people respond to anticipated future changes. That certainly is huge, if true, and important to know. But I still would say that the primary place to figure out what we’re looking at, in most ways, is not the economics journal. On top of all that, AGI is distinct from those other examples in that it invalidates many assumptions of existing economic models, and also economics has an abysmal track record so far on predicting AI or its economic impacts. AI is already impacting our economy more than many economic projections claimed it would ever impact us, which is a far bigger statement about the projections than about AI. The Lighter Side
Oh, don’t be like that, we were doing a great job on vizier affordability already. You're currently a free subscriber to |