---
subject: "Why Does Ozempic Cure All Diseases?"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-08-13 08:16:12
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX"]
---
Fine, the title is an exaggeration. But only a small one. GLP-1 receptor agonist medications like Ozempic are already FDA-approved to treat diabetes and obesity. But an increasing body of research finds they’re also effective against There’s a pattern in fake scammy alternative medicine. People get excited about some new herb. They invent a laundry list of effects: it improves heart health, softens menopause, increases energy, deepens sleep, clears up your skin. This is how you know it’s a fraud. Real medicine works by mimicking natural biochemical signals. Why would you have a signal for “have low energy, bad sleep, nasty menopause, poor heart health, and ugly skin”? Why would all the herb’s side effects be other good things? Real medications usually shift a system along a tradeoff curve; if they hit more than one system, the extras usually just produce side effects. If you’re lucky, you can pick out a subset of patients for whom the intended effect is more beneficial than the side effects are bad. That’s how real medicine works. But GLP-1 drugs are starting to feel more like the magic herb. Why? Medicine is bad at answering “why” questions. Often the answer looks like “because it modulates ABC transmission, which inhibits XYZ, which signals to MNO, and MNO is involved in the disease.” This is all very scientific-sounding but totally fails to satisfy any normal human curiosity. I’m going to discuss a few of GLP-1 drugs’ effects on this level, but also try to speculate about some broader principles behind why these medicines seem so magical¹. DiabetesThis is the one we understand best. When a recently-eaten meal reaches food-detector cells in your intestine, they release glucagon-like-peptide 1 (GLP-1). This is one of the many hormones that tell your body that you’ve eaten and that it should adjust its activities accordingly. Various organs have GLP-1 receptors. When they sense GLP-1, they start various digestion-related tasks. Since eating a meal increases blood sugar, your body wants to push blood sugar back down. So GLP-1 tells the pancreas to release more insulin (sugar ↓) and less glucagon (sugar ↑). Diabetes involves excessive blood sugar, so this is the profile you want for an antidiabetic drug. But natural GLP-1 decays within a minute or two, so there’s no way to use it as a medication. In 1992, scientists discovered a chemical in Gila monster venom which looked like GLP-1, activated GLP-1 receptors, but lasted a whole two hours. This became exenatide, the first GLP-1 receptor agonist (one of my favorite paper names is All of these work the same way: they mimic the natural hormone that the intestine produces to tell your body that it’s just eaten. Weight LossGiven that GLP-1 receptor agonists’ weight loss effects have There are two plausible places GLP-1 drugs could lower weight: the body or the brain. In the body, it could change stomach contraction rate, hormone production, etc. In the brain, it could control the mental sensation of hunger. To separate these two effects, scientists bred rats that only had GLP-1 receptors in the body vs. in the brain. This is pretty surprising: the brain is protected by the blood-brain barrier (BBB), which usually prevents large molecules from reaching the brain. Ozempic is a large molecule. Scientists are still working on tracing exactly how it gets through. Some seems to The new neurotransmitter GLP-1 makes it to at least two other brain regions: the arcuate nucleus and the mesolimbic system. The arcuate nucleus is a pinhead-sized collection of neurons in the hypothalamus. By this point there are dozens of “master regulators” for hunger, but the master master regulator is probably the ventromedial part of this structure. It has two populations: AgRP neurons, (which make you feel hungry) and POMC neurons (which make you feel full). Each of these populations is downstream of several other slightly-less-masterful master regulators of hunger; one of these is a group called TRH neurons. The TRH neurons use GABA to inhibit the AgRP neurons, thus making you less hungry. And We’ll come back to the mesolimbic system later. For now, have this flowchart: Interlude: Do All Treatments Work Through GLP-1?The converse of the original question. How many treatments that we thought didn’t involve GLP-1 are actually just GLP-1 drugs in disguise? How about diet? A thousand diet gurus insist that it’s not just about calorie-counting - some foods help you lose weight faster than others. Why should that be? Remember, the intestine naturally releases GLP-1 when it detects food, in order to tell the rest of the body to be full. What if some foods make the small intestine release more GLP-1 than others? A diet focused on those foods could be like nature’s Ozempic. (every diet guru who read that sentence is calling their lawyer to see if they can trademark the phrase “Nature’s Ozempic”) So we have How about exercise? Sure, see for example Whenever we discover a new wonder drug, scientists rush to demonstrate that all those lifestyle changes that you should do anyway, actually work through the same mechanism as the drug. So for example, when SSRIs were the hot new thing, psychiatrists announced that all the normal stuff that brightens your mood worked through serotonin. Sunlight? Now that GLP-1 drugs are exciting / on-patent, we’re going through the same process. Everything works through GLP-1! GLP-1 makes the sun shine! GLP-1 makes the grass grow! Nobody knows what caused the Big Bang, but cosmologists are increasingly convinced that GLP-1 might have been involved! You should come back in ten years and check which of these claims have survived. My guess is very few. For a while, I was taken in by one of these: bariatric surgery, aka gastric bypass. This is a giant mystery. We tell patients that it work by making the stomach smaller so you can’t fit as much food in, but that’s just a tiny part of the effect. We thought that was going to cause weight loss, we invented the surgery on that basis, but surprise! - a bunch of metabolic parameters change before the patient has even had time to lose any weight, and the weight loss tracks the metabolic parameters, not the stomach size. Some scientists thought maybe Cool theory, but it turns out AddictionSpeaking of giant mysteries… It makes sense that an intestinal hormone could work for both diabetes and weight loss. When you eat a big meal, your body needs to deal with the sudden blood sugar spike. And it also needs to signal to the brain to be full. At least in retrospect, all of this makes sense. But Ozempic and other GLP-1 drugs appear to be a promising treatment for The second pathway by which GLP-1 causes weight loss Speculatively, there are two reasons you might eat. First, because you feel hungry. Second, because you crave delicious food. So to fulfill its evolutionary role of making you eat less, GLP-1 needs to do two things. First, make you less hungry (via the arcuate nucleus / master-hunger-regulator pathway). Second, make you crave food reward less (via the mesolimbic / reward-center pathway). Broad-spectrum dampening of the reward system is a terrible fate. Some antipsychotic drugs like haloperidol do this. Take too much haloperidol, and you’ll sit motionless until you die, because no action feels worth it. But the existence of silver bullet anti-addiction medication - Ozempic isn’t the only one, naltrexone seems to treat a whole host of different drug and behavioral addictions - suggests there’s also a sort of narrow-spectrum dampening, one which affects addictions and nothing else. Why? Isn’t addiction just the extreme version of normal wanting? Apparently not. None of these anti-addictive drugs will affect the rewarding feeling of a job well done or a child’s smile. Just drug addictions, and a few compulsive behaviors like porn and gambling. Maybe the job well-done and the smile get implemented through some system other than dopamine (oxytocin?), or maybe these medications lop off some extreme part of the reward distribution that only addictive drugs ever reach in real life. But why? Why did God give your brain a special lever that only cocaine and porn can pull? GLP-1 suggests maybe this was originally a food reward system. Or at least food was a big enough part of its portfolio that it was a weird but functional hack for a satiety-signaling chemical to just turn off a whole subsection of the reward system. “You’re already full and well-nourished; why would you need the ability to crave things?” Here’s
If I’m understanding this right, the researchers found two separate behavioral effects of GLP-1. First, it made rats eat less. But second, when presented with very tasty food vs. normal food, it made the rats stop preferring the very tasty food. At least in this study, the extreme part of the reward system that governs addiction got used to determine how much to prefer very tasty food over normal food². If you want to learn more about GLP-1 receptor agonists and addiction, including the application to public policy, I highly recommend the Alzheimers And Parkinson’sOkay, now God is just trolling us.
…which, as is a running theme in this post, doesn’t make me feel more enlightened in any way. Why does GLP-1 do all these things? Diabetes is a well-known risk factor for Parkinson’s, Alzheimers, and other dementias. The exact mechanism isn’t clear, but the extra sugar that diabetics have in their blood tends toward uncontrolled reactions with various other chemicals, creating slightly toxic glycosylated species that damage the cells. So the simplest mechanism by which GLP-1 drugs could prevent dementia is by lowering the concentration of these toxic metabolites. But GLP-1 drugs also prevent dementia in non-diabetics, so there has to be more going on. Most of the relevant papers say the drugs work by preventing inflammation. This is a catch-all term for the immune response to microbes; although it helps fight the microbes, it’s slightly toxic to the rest of the body and generally bad unless you’re actively fighting an infection. In chronic inflammation, ie the thing most of us with modern diets have all the time, general bad health damages the body, the immune system mistakes the damage for a microbial infection, and it provokes a constant low-grade inflammatory response. This is bad, so (if you’re not fighting an infection) anti-inflammatories are generally pretty useful. There are lots of anti-inflammatory drugs (aspirin is one, ibuprofen is another), but inflammation is a multifaceted process and no one drug can stop it entirely. GLP-1 drugs seem to be especially potent anti-inflammatories that stop some of the inflammatory processes most implicated in dementia. How? Research is still very early, but the best explanation I can find is in Same question as before: why would an appetite-related hormone do this? I can’t find anyone studying this question, so I asked That’s as far as I got with this one, but this is a very active area of research and we’ll hopefully know more soon. And Many More…?Just this month, Modern Westerners eat too much food. This is bad in various ways. So if GLP-1 drugs reduce obesity, that has the potential to be good in various ways. This makes sense and is definitely part of the story. But some of these effects (eg addiction) aren’t obviously linked to obesity. And others that seem linked to obesity (eg heart disease) turn out to be obesity-independent; scientists can observe them even in weight-neutral rats. So this doesn’t explain everything on its own. Some of those explanations will be evolutionary. GLP-1 is a master signal for the starving vs. well-fed state. Lots of bodily processes change based on whether you’re starving vs. well-fed. Naively you’d expect that there would be as many side effects as positive effects (wouldn’t some conditions be better in the starving state?), but maybe that’s not true. In particular, maybe the inflammatory nature of the starving state really hurts a lot of systems. Maybe we’ll manage to trace everything back to various food-related pathways, until all of GLP-1’s effects feel natural and satisfying. Other explanations will be more sinister. GLP-1 receptor agonists have already doubled the economy of Denmark. But Denmark’s a pretty small country; maybe they’re going for something more like France or Germany. Pharma companies are always looking for more reasons to prescribe their drugs. And even unaffiliated scientists can get caught up in the excitement. Being a GLP-1 researcher now is probably a pretty great job, just like being an SSRI researcher thirty years ago. Probably some of these won’t replicate, and in a few years we’ll be left with a thinner and more believable profile of GLP-1 effects. But I don’t believe it’s all pharma marketing. These drugs seem really special. We’re going to have an exciting next few years as we fully unwrap this weird new gift Nature has given us. 1 Thanks to Stephan Guyenet, who reviewed an earlier draft of this post. As always, any mistakes are mine alone. 2 Sex is the other extremely-rewarding, sometimes-addictive behavior old enough that it might have shaped the evolution of the reward system. Do GLP-1 receptor agonists lower libido? Mouse studies say You're currently a free subscriber to |