---
subject: "Highlights From The Comments On Criticism Of Criticism Of Criticism"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-07-28 03:31:23
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX"]
---
1: I said in the original post that I wrote this because I knew someone would write the opposite article (that organizations accept specific criticism in order to fend off paradigmatic criticism), and then later Zvi did write an article kind of like that. He writes:
2: The anonymous original reviewer of Anti-Politics Machine wrote:
And added:
I think all of this is fair and agree with all of it. 3: A surprising amount of discussion focused around the perihelion of Mercury example in particular! For example, archpawn
Dirichlet-to-Neumann
Chaostician
There was also some discussion of paradigms that seemed opposed at first getting synthesized - did you know that in the 19th century, people thought that Darwinian evolution was incompatible with Mendelian genetics? From
4: Kronopath
Yeah, this is good, and now I’m wondering if I missed a more fundamental (less fundamental?) issue here. Going back to the church example: suppose I’m a new pastor, I’m running my church for the first time, and I tell everyone I’m looking for criticism. Maybe I’m hoping to hear something like “you sing the hymns off-key” or “you speak too softly when you give your sermons, nobody can hear you” or “there’s never enough food for everyone at the church picnic”. If someone instead tells me “Religion is fake and there is no God”, am I allowed to tell her I was looking for a different kind of criticism? I agree that if God doesn’t exist, pastors should want to know this. But I also think it’s fair for pastors to say that currently the type of criticism they’re most interested in hearing is about how to run their church effectively, and they either have already decided the God question to their satisfaction, or will deal with it later in some other context. I don’t think a pastor who asked for criticism/suggestions/advice about basic church-running stuff, but rolled his eyes when someone tried to convince him that there was no God, is doing anything wrong, as long as he specifies beforehand that this is what he wants, and has thought through the question of God’s existence at some point before in some responsible way. So maybe my thoughts on the actual EA criticism contest are something like “I haven’t checked exactly what things they do or don’t want criticism of, but I’m prepared to be basically fine if they want criticism of some stuff but not others”. 5: Yuliaverse (writes
I want to stress that I wasn’t making the point “EA is only faking wanting criticism, they actually just solicit paradigmatic criticism to escape specific criticism” - ie the exact inverse of the point I thought some people were making where “EA is only faking wanting criticism, they actually just solicit specific criticism to avoid paradigmatic criticism”. I think that would be continuing to reason through narrative beats instead of through evidence. Once you talk about how an organization really likes criticism, you have to argue that this is just a fakeout and they really like [nonthreatening type of criticism] instead of [real criticism]. I think some organizations are actually just good, and genuinely solicit criticism because they want to know how to be better. This is what I would do, if I had a big organization. I know cynicism is popular now and we’re supposed to pretend that everyone is bad in every possible way, but my impression is that EA would really like to know if it’s doing something wrong. (this isn’t to say they will necessarily agree with anyone else’s assessment, any more than the pastor is required to agree that there is no God). 6: Remmelt, who wrote the criticism post I called too paradigmatic in the original essay,
7: Alex I feel like the example of paradigmatic criticism given in the article about how do we know we know reality is real or that capitalism is good is a bit of a straw man. I've always thought paradigmatic criticism of EA work was more more points like:
I agree that to some degree these are good paradigmatic criticisms. One thing I get out of this is that all of these have been discussed a zillion times before, and if you still support EA it’s because you disagree with them for some reason or have some argument against them. Maybe one advantage of specific vs. broad criticism is that specific criticisms are more likely to be new, simply because there are so many details you can criticize? Or that they’re more likely to get debated rather than just create in-the-movement vs. out-of-the-movement fault lines, since you can’t schism your movement over every tiny detail? 8: Matthew Carlin
Aren’t you evangelizing non-evangelism here? I’m so angry about you cramming your non-evangelism down my throat that I’m going to evangelize one million times harder from now on, just to spite you! This is actually seriously my point: there’s no clear line between expressing an opinion and evangelizing. Was I evangelizing about my view of criticism when I wrote the original blog post? But surely it’s my blog, you’re under no obligation to read it, and if I have good ideas I should be allowed to write about them. Heck, some of you guys pay me to write my interesting thoughts; that suggests they’re providing you with value. Last month, when I posted why I thought that a recent crime wave was because of anti-police protests, was that evanglizing? If I were Ba’hai, and I posted something about why I thought the Ba’hai religion was true, using the same style of argument, would that be evangelizing? If I posted my interesting thoughts about charity in 2005, and those happened to be the exact same thoughts that later became effective altruism, would I have been evangelizing then? If I write a post now about why you should all join EA, would that be evangelizing now? I don’t want to deny that there’s a real thing called evangelism - I hear EA has been doing some pretty organized recruitment work in colleges. But most of you aren’t college students. If you’ve heard about EA, it’s been on blogs like this one. So what are you complaining about? I think there’s something where whenever a philosophy makes unusual moral demands on people (eg vegetarianism), then talking about it at all gets people accused of “evangelizing”, in a way unlike just talking about abortion or taxes or communism or which kinds of music are better than which other kinds of music. I think people feel threatened and offended, and instead of interpreting that as a statement about their own feelings (“I feel threatened by this idea”), they interpret it as a failure in their interlocutor (“This person is doing inappropriately pushy evangelizing”) But one other point I want to make here: it seems relevant that Ba’hai is false. Or, sorry, you can’t just call someone else’s religion false, but we’re not expecting it to be true in some relevant sense of the word “true”. Suppose Ba’hai had a bit more content than we usually bargain for in a religion - suppose its most important tenet was “in a bunker somewhere beneath the western suburbs of Chicago, there is a mad scientist working on a superplague which he will release on September 1, he must be found and stopped before that date”. And suppose you have lots of strong evidence this is true - for example, you infiltrated the bunker, met the scientist, and escaped. Now you’re going around alerting the authorities - or perhaps it’s too late for that, and you’re trying to convince regular citizens to flee. Is this evangelism? Are you wrong to do it? What if you are the first person to consider abolitionism? Is the right course to just keep quiet about it, and hope maybe someone asks you “Hey, what are your thoughts on this thing where we all have slaves?” Or should you get aggressive about it? Sure, Of course, this is all overly simplistic: the trick is evangelizing without making people hate you. I’ve worked on this skill for many years, and the best solution I’ve come up with is talking about a bunch of things so nobody feels too lectured to about any particular issue. Speaking of which, can I convince you to use prediction markets? You’re a free subscriber to |