---
subject: "Childhood Roundup #3"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-10-10 14:17:35
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
It’s time once again for a roundup of all the childhood-related stories I’ve noticed since the last such post that don’t fit in elsewhere. In addition to the standard post, I have a personal note, which is that unfortunately our current nanny’s health does not allow her to continue, and thus we in the process of searching and doing interviews for a new full-time nanny for our three children here in Manhattan. I hope to have someone in place by the end of the week. If you are or know someone we should consider, please do quickly contact me right away with the relevant information. You can DM me on Twitter, PM me on LesssWrong or email me through substack (or email directly if you know it). Thanks in advance. We All Need a Friend
I feel his pain. Finding friends for my kids has been difficult as well - if anyone has kids about 10 or younger reasonably close to lower Manhattan and wants to try setting up playdates to bring the kids over, please reach out. Time Spent on Children is Historically Anomalous
Yep. I interpret the ‘parents don’t matter’ statistics in a similar fashion. If you fail in one or more of many ways one can fail, that does a lot of damage. You can then do vastly better than baseline, but that requires you to put in unusually more work or work unusually smart, or both. That doesn’t happen often enough to show in the stats. There is still a lot of room to make a big impact on the margin, but also not in ways systematic enough to show up in the statistics.
I do worry some people will take such things too far. I continue to disbelieve all the claims that nothing matters, or it matters little, or that all that matters is not doing something massively stupid or harmful. I think this is such studies reliably failing to capture the inputs and also outputs that matter, and also comparing remarkably similar environments. It is trivial to say that with a sufficiently different environment you can explain an arbitrarily large share of educational attainment differences. Let Your Children PlayJon Haidt and Peter Gray present a plausible hypothesis: Note also that to count as play it has to be outside adult control, exactly what we are dead set against so often.
I find it convincing that this is at least a major part of the puzzle. Great news:
Mostly this is actually good news. The mom in question was confused by why the other kids’ parents were not freaking out, rather than freaking out herself or not letting the kids play. She recognizes that it was fine. The fear of strangers or neighbors calling Child Protective Services (CPS) on you
Some of those CPS reports are cursory, such as those automatically triggered by certain injuries as a precaution. Many others are not. With such high rates of reports, everyone scrambles to avoid being the target, which makes everyone else have to scramble all the more, and so on. Or, alternatively:
Well, yes. Why do you think all the children are miserable? Because we have defined being a child as too risky, put everything on rigid guardrails, and are not letting our kids be kids. This is not a case of ‘in spite of’ it is a case of ‘because of.’
If this was because the extra time brought joy, that would make sense.
This makes intuitive sense. You have two inputs, a sense of obligation and a genuine desire to spend time because it is joyful or useful. Whether higher output is associated with happiness will depend on which effect is driving. Illusion of Safety
Post ends with a perfect this-is-something-therefore-we-must-do-it sighting out in the wild.
Reminder that strange abductions are not a thing. They can be safety ignored.
When stranger abductions do happen it’s normally because the stranger calls the police to report a child that is not being sufficiently directly supervised, and then one thing leads to another and strangers from the state abducts your child. Social Media is Badly Named
The theory continues along similar lines. The core insight here seems right to me. If you do not want kids lives to be dominated by screens, they will at minimum need to not be physically prevented from engaging in real world physical activities. The same applies to phones in school, where children are even more held prisoner.
You want to take the phones away from kids, to free them from constant interruptions? Great, but you also have to allow them things worth not interrupting. Kids Respond To Incentives
I wonder how long it would take such a child to use a mixed or reversed strategy. Do this to me three times and I’m going to start raising my hand only when I don’t know the answer. The primary lessons of school are often different than the ones we think. Let Them Eat Lunch
The regulations can always be stupider and more expensive,
No Child Left Behind
The first was to simply defy the data on strategic behavior, and presume that various forms of cheating and adjustment were going unmeasured. Graduation is largely about negative selection. Did you fail anything? It is easy to send the message to teachers not to fail their students. It is easy to, on the margin, disregard a few extra unexcused absences, or not expel a student. None of that would be measured here as ‘strategic behavior,’ which was categorized as changing graduation requirements or cheating on tests. One does not need to formally alter requirements to radically alter them in practice. As for the tests, yeah, I’m willing to guess some of them got easier. I know for sure there was a lot more teaching to the tests.
I see the theory here, that tests are the hardest thing to cheat. Except that when the tests are what is gating graduation, it seems plausible schools can find ways to pass those tests without building human capital, or even by sacrificing it. Worst case, state can respond to pressure by issuing a weaker test, or teaching directly to it. One can also see this as, places with gating tests had slack in the form of students who could plausibly graduate otherwise, if only some right answers can be made to appear in the right places. It is also very easy to see how NCLB can harm human capital development. If you are focusing on children not failing, and on them passing tests, you are going to invest less in building their actually valuable human capital. You are going to alienate your best students, waste their time, get them out of good habits and teach them the wrong lessons. So it’s hard to presume that all of this largely lines up with human capital. It lines up with the capital of saying you graduated, but to what extent is that an absolute good versus a positional good? Similarly, one could presume that NCLB need not be all that causal here, as the economic cost of non-graduation has been rising, which also should lead to higher graduation rates, and also schools being more hesitant to fail a student since it would ruin their lives more. In conclusion, I am not convinced here. Then there are the schools where no children are left behind,
School Reinvented
For comparison, the average public school student costs the state roughly $13k/year. State funding for these micro schools seems much lower than that. Another data point is that NYC schools Even at $13k, one has to wonder about the ‘get a few kids and hire a teacher’ option.
Whereas Did you know that letting kids learn what they are curious about helps them learn?
The two obvious concerns are socialization and situational tail risk. For socialization, I would continue to make the case that most socialization in schools is not the kind you want, and that a few close friends from a micro school or otherwise is vastly superior, and you can find friends in much better and cheaper ways and situations. The real issue is that while most micro school situations with attentive parents are going to go quite well, some parents are not so attentive or caring, and some children could end up in bad spots in ways that are highly blameworthy, as opposed to it happening in a public school where if it happens everyone followed procedure, and admittedly things could go farther south this way. Presumably the solution for that is some form of periodic check-in, a test if you will, to ensure that things are going all right. If you are doing very well, warping things to pass the test will be unnecessary, provided it is not too particular (e.g. the student can demonstrate mastery of the Constitution or Egypt, and either counts for history).
Everyone tells me the lives of kids must be structured around having them ‘socialize’ with others exactly their age, a ‘peer group.’
School Choice
I would caution that providing religious instruction is distinct from shielding a child from outside influences, so perhaps that number is too low, or is better expressed as ‘moral instruction’ that is largely about religion. Also noteworthy is that parents robustly say there is too much school focus on gender identity, 31-16 among those with kids in school and 53-16 among home schoolers. School Hidden
Except, they don’t go away. Which means everyone who ever hires anyone is breaking employment law constantly. It’s not like you can look at resumes, or talk to people, and avoid learning who has a college degree. You can try to ban algorithms from considering college or various other things, and perhaps with some bespoke work you could even kind of do it, which would then mean you’d want humans in the loop to fix that, I guess, if you did in fact care about such things in either direction. It’s hard not to do that when everyone else is doing it, various signaling game dynamics, and so on. What you can partially do is ban using college degrees as a requirement, so that anyone with statistically observable size has to give those without one a chance. However this risks making things even worse for those without degrees when such discrimination can go undetected, because they will now have no sign of where they can and cannot usefully apply. Then again, right now the requirements at such places are often only suggestions, so it is not obvious much would change.
School Evaluation HardI intended for this section to be longer: I did some back and forth exchanges with the author of the paper, attempting to reconcile the claims that KIPP was effective with statistics that said that giving students access to KIPP middle schools did not make them substantially more likely to graduate from college, which seems like the best endpoint measured here. I haven’t had time to get sufficient confidence in my understanding here, so I’m pushing that for later, while asking if any of you have a reading here. A MetaphorThere has been a bunch of recent discussion of the concept of Two-Parent Privilege, as described in the book of that name by Melissa Kearney.
Children are better off if they have married parents. That does not mean that every child’s parents should get or remain married. It does not mean that you should not have children in other circumstances. What it does mean is: Children are better off if they have married parents. If you fail to agree with this, presumably it is because you do not care for the implications. I would also add: Children are better off being raised by two parents than being raised by one parent, even if marriage is not strictly involved. One problem is that those who would traditionally ever be willing to apply any pressure to anyone can’t The sleeper thing to notice is that only 76% of conservatives think it is acceptable for a married couple to decide not to have children. The weirdest one of all is an unmarried man and woman raising a child only get 58% approval, versus 70% for a single parent. Presumably this is because the unmarried couple could choose to get married whereas the single parent cannot not have a kid. It still seems like this is actively going to point incentives in the wrong direction, when most of the approval benefit of getting married is also available if the father leaves.
That is the question of what to do about a particular child, in isolation, already faced with a non-ideal situation. And yes, sometimes given who the parents are, their circumstances or their relationship to each other, it will sometimes be impossible or unwise to retroactively ‘fix’ the situation in this way. The best time to intervene and change the situation is before it gets to that point, including on a broader scale. The second best time will in a particular case sometimes be right now, sometimes not. Matt then makes the claim that since upper class people marry upper class people but mostly don’t marry lower class people, they are only providing evidence that marriage is good when you marry someone upper class. There is certainly a coherent position that says something like ‘if you have a good enough situation lock it down, otherwise don’t until you get one.’ I would argue that if anything this throws shade on arguments of the form ‘lower class people should be able to get the message from the actions upper class people take.’ Instead, they often take to heart that they need similarly secure circumstances first, which they rarely will get. So all the more reason one must say the full arguments out loud. This all follows the common pattern where we used to get good thing X via method Y, then we realized (usually correctly) that Y is terrible and stopped doing Y (or we got it via mechanism Z that went away or changed for other reasons), except now we are getting steadily less X and we don’t have a solution. We need more X, so we need alternative methods for getting more X. The most obvious X is fertility, which makes this particular situation even trickier. The obvious thing to do is some combination of financial support for X or some alternative mechanism Z that causes X, or financial punishment for ~X or ~Z, or supporting helpful norms and other cultural features. In general, people say ‘it is impossible to get more X’ or ‘X is outdated’ or ‘we cannot afford X’ or some such, before trying much. More than that, they refuse to say X is good, or that we need more X, because they associate that with support of nasty, no-good method Y or outdated mechanism Z, or otherwise the use of force or shame or pressure. We are against shame, but we also don’t see any way to offer praise or honor for X without considering that shame of ~X. Meanwhile, more and more forms of punishment are being considered Ys. Every parent knows this dilemma well. We need some knob, somewhere, that we can turn to reward the good and discourage the bad. What to do? Lies
I am with Eucaliculia here. At first, children can’t lie without giving the game away. Then, slowly, they skill up, until finally they can mostly lie with impunity absent evidence, and they get good at knowing when their story can get double checked. By the end, I was very confident that most of my lies were getting through, and was willing to rather aggressively lie to my parents despite a strict honesty policy for everyone else. Whereas with my kids right now, they’re young enough that I’m very confident they almost never successfully fool me. I do expect that to change, but as we say to the God of Death: Not today. I do, however, think that parents likely systematically overestimate how often they can detect kids’ lies, and kids overestimate how often they can get away undetected, because parents don’t always tell you that they know you’re lying. Rick from Baltimore asks Tyler Cowen, given he does believe in the value of two-parent families, Rick’s suggestions mostly involve a variety of proposed cultural shifts towards favoring marriages by moving back towards some older cultural norms, including better tax incentives and perhaps job programs and otherwise helping create more eligible men. Tyler responds that he does not know what would work, but that it could not hurt to indeed get buy-in that this problem really matters and is not a hopeless one, and asks who is on board. I am definitely on board. I also notice this kicks the can down the road and dodges the question, and that Tyler would point this out in other contexts. If you want to get buy-in for the importance and tractability of X, you need to help move towards or at least affirm some method Y of getting more X, or it’s all talk and also people won’t know what they are getting behind. The answer necessarily involves a combination of financial incentives, lifestyle changes, cultural and norm shifts and attributions of status and honor. Which is dodging the question again, although less so. Concretely, where should we start? I would say there are three distinct fronts here - pro-fertility pro-child actions in general, direct pro-marriage incentives and cultural factors. We should do the pro-fertility and pro-child actions anyway. Doing this has other benefits that justify doing so, it would make marriage and raising a family more attractive and help move the needle here as well. So much higher subsidies for those who have children, and even more than that get rid of the various albatrosses we tie around parents’ necks, that are doubtless driving potential fathers away. We can and should combine that by tying some of those financial incentives to marriage, and ensuring that the tax code, including various virtual taxes (such as the taxes imposed by schools in the form of usually-discounted tuition) essentially never penalizes marriage. The obvious way to start on this is to offer a universal option - couples can be given the option to file as individuals if filing jointly would be more expensive. And we should make it illegal to consider spousal income or wealth in need-based educational or other similar assessments. Yes, there are obvious concerns and details that need to be worked out there, and it won’t be cheap, but the alternative is forcing people to choose. Cultural shifts are harder to mandate. Financial incentives help, but culture also has a life of its own. That part is less my area. I would start with a bigger fight, where we have developed a norm that when a choice has superior outcomes, we are afraid to point this out and reward those who make that choice or say things that look down upon those who do not make that choice, even in relatively mild form. We are going to have to walk some of that back. Don’t Worry, Be HappyAnother kind of lie is that unhappy childhoods are good, actually.
There is indeed a failure mode where you prioritize your child’s present happiness so much that you do not prepare them for the future. What is good for them will not always be what makes them happy. So sometimes you shouldn’t do what makes your kid most happy. Tradeoffs are a thing. That is very different from happiness being an active detriment to ambition or success. You Might Learn Something
This is standard procedure. Constantly, as children and as adults, we are taught that if something is going to go badly, we should avoid interacting with it. If we are going to mess something up, better to not try, we will only get blamed. Parents who understand this problem will go to extraordinary lengths to do the opposite. Restorative Justice Does Not Scale
The core problem with restorative justice is that it is not justice. That is not a claim that it is a bad thing. Most useful policies are not justice. Instead, it is a claim that: This is poorly named. This should be called conflict mediation or something. This aims to address root causes of individual conflicts, which can be great. But which is not incentive compatible with preventing future conflicts. Nor does it provide an actual sense of individual justice. Thus, it needs careful implementation and a mixed strategy, or will backfire.
If you have a system that is mostly working well, where people are mostly cooperating, then such initiatives have the necessary groundwork and can succeed. If you do not have that, then you are giving the green light to bad actors and such policies seem doomed unless you also fix the other problems. Thus it is an especially strong candidate for working in a pilot program and then failing when scaled up. Other Things In Brief
Daycare is often thought to be an inadequate substitute for individualized (maternal or otherwise) child care.
Imagine if I said the same thing to a worker, you have 6.5 hours at home and you can’t find time for this hour of extra paperwork that we don’t even use? People somehow don’t think children’s time has value if it isn’t being used on school. Let your children play. I would go so far as to say that it’s fine to ask children to do some amount of homework-style work, but if it’s so valuable then set aside school time for that. When the work is done, the work is done. The Lighter Side
Patrick McKenzie: Lillian is having trouble playing Guess the Password in math class because the material assumes the kids can’t do the math, and because she hasn’t yet learned how to play Guess the Password with an American teacher. Humorous example:
You're currently a free subscriber to |