---
subject: "Inciting Incident: Indian homes have a million stories to tell. So do home-decor brands"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-09-13 10:32:28
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
Inciting Incident
Fri, 13 Sep 24
Inciting Incident is our weekly newsletter about the most powerful tool of our age—stories. Stories told by businesses, leaders, governments..
Good Morning Ishan,
I have spent the last three months buying decor for my newly renovated home, and I’ve gotten a peek into the US$20 billion industry that’s [expected to grow](https://www.indianretailer.com/interview/d2c-new-commerce/ecommerce/how-dusaan-is-disrupting-indias-20-billion-home-decor-market) at nearly 10% over the next five years. I came across international brands that have been around for a while—like Ikea, which is focussed mainly on furniture but also has a product portfolio of affordable decor products, and [West Elm](https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/companies/west-elm-enters-india/article37593724.ece#:~:text=The%20company%20has%20launched%20two,a%20part%20of%20Reliance%20Industries.), which has been here since 2021. And also others who are relatively new entrants—like [Pottery Barn](https://www.vogue.in/culture-and-living/gallery/first-look-pottery-barn-finally-launches-in-india-decor-lovers-are-you-ready%20In%202022.), which launched in 2022, and H&M Home, which came to India around the same time and has set up [four stores](https://www.indiaretailing.com/2024/08/16/hm-home-debuts-in-mumbai/) since.
There have also been reports that suggest others like Zara Home will [enter the market](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/cons-products/fashion-/-cosmetics-/-jewellery/inditex-to-launch-bershka-and-zara-home-in-india-this-year/articleshow/109294147.cms?from=mdr) sometime this year.
As is now common, my Instagram page is full of suggestions for candle holders, flower vases, and hourglasses of different shapes and sizes from these brands. These international companies, I know, are trying to bring minimalist western design sensibilities to India across price ranges.
Their products are clearly differentiated from the vast majority of products developed and sold by Indian retailers, which tend to be more colourful, bright, and use more traditional designs. During my search, I came across a wide range of such players using all kinds of business models, from online marketplaces to offline experience stores. And many of them are attracting investor interest, like Nestasia, which announced [raising](https://inc42.com/buzz/nestasia-nets-8-35-mn-to-expand-its-home-decor-lifestyle-play/) a US$8.35 million Series B round this week to fund the opening of 30 new stores by the end of next year.
Clearly, the Indian home decor market is now a battleground. And it isn’t a simple one to navigate. You need to crack the code on price, range, and design, yes, but just as importantly, you also need to come up with a solid brand story that connects with Indian consumers.
And not everyone is seeing much success with that second part.
One Sunday afternoon during my extended home decor search, I spent an hour looking for beige cushion covers with a minimalist botanical print and a clear glass vase in a Homestop outlet in Noida. The store was empty, except for me, and to cut a long story short, I didn’t get what I was looking for.
Just a few kilometres away was a Home Centre outlet in the basement of another mall, and the scene here was completely different. Bustling, crowded… though it, too, did not have what I was looking for.
So consider this. A few years ago, there were three major brands trying to crack the affordable home decor market with large stores in India. Future Group’s Hometown, Shoppers Stop’s Homestop, and Dubai-based Landmark Group’s Home Centre. As of now, while Home Centre has close to 100 stores across the country, Hometown has about 40 and Homestop has less than [one dozen](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/services/retail/shoppers-stop-aims-to-open-60-new-intune-stores-in-fy25/articleshow/111233239.cms?from=mdr).
What has differentiated Home Centre, the only one of the three that is from outside India, to the other two?
One answer is, of course, the wide [range of products](https://www.indiaretailing.com/2024/01/19/home-centre-setting-the-house-in-order/) it features in its stores. But also important is its focus on a very brand sharp story, something many other brands haven’t been able to execute as well as it has.
For Mumbai-based Architect Anuja Pradhan of AJ Interiors, there is only one destination to source from when she wants to accessorise the homes she’s designing—Home Centre. “Their biggest USP is their colour palettes—they are trendy and available in a wide range of home products, which helps in colour coordination. It’s my go-to place to bring a negative or dull space to life,” said Pradhan, who has been sourcing from the home improvement chain since it launched in India in 2005.
[…]
“Home Centre, Homestop and Hometown were the three formats that came about around the same time, some two decades back. And the onus of category creation was on them,” explained Ankur Bisen, Senior Partner & Head, Retail, Consumer Products and Food, Technopak Advisors Pvt. Ltd. However, being retail conglomerates with other formats such as food and fashion to focus on, for all three, the home business ran as a sort of addendum to the entire retail story, he explained. Realising the limited addressable opportunity in the market, not for a lack of demand, but given the supply chain complexity and the focus it required to build this category grounds up, Shoppers Stop scaled down its ambitions in the category. And Future Group collapsed. Then Ikea and other players like Urban Ladder and Pepperfry entered the market and Home Centre still continued. “That is where and that is why Home Centre is a story,” said Bisen adding that Home Centre was one of the first to help organise the home category.
Now, of course, many other companies are trying to develop authoritative and prominent brands in the home decor sector. While some are just looking to develop addendums to their existing retail story, others are more focussed.
For instance, Welspun Living, a prominent player in the home textile industry, is trying to [capitalise](https://www.constructionworld.in/policy-updates-and-economic-news/welspuns-home-decor-strategy-revamped/61020) on the growing home decor market, and so is online fashion retailer Myntra, which is [accelerating](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/tech/technology/myntra-has-gained-market-share-across-categories-in-12-18-months-ceo-nandita-sinha/articleshow/110473093.cms?utm_source=contentofinterest&utm_medium=text&utm_campaign=cppst) diversification into what it considers peripheral sectors. But others, like [Dusaan](https://www.indianretailer.com/interview/d2c-new-commerce/ecommerce/how-dusaan-is-disrupting-indias-20-billion-home-decor-market), which offers curated marketplace models, and DLF Brands, which has [exited some of its retail tie-ups in order to focus](https://www.financialexpress.com/business/brandwagon-dlf-brands-exits-retail-tie-ups-for-home-decor-biz-3423363/) on the home decor business, are going about things in a more targeted, deliberate manner.
DLF Brands, best known for bringing some of the top international labels into India such as Kiko Milano, LensCrafters, Mothercare and Forever21, will focus on its home decor business under Pure Home + Living, MD & CEO Timmy Sarna told FE.
The firm has exited its international retail associations, with LensCrafters, a US-based, but Italian-owned eyewear brand sold to Reliance Brands recently; Forever21 acquired by Aditya Birla Fashion and Retail, Mothercare and Sunglass Hut also bought by Reliance Brands, which is part of Reliance Retail. And Kiko Milano, an Italian make-up brand likely to be acquired by Reliance Retail as it beefs up its beauty business.
“I started Pure Home + Living around 8-10 years ago. However, I could not focus on this brand because the foreign labels were taking much of my time. Now that we have exited these foreign brands, I am putting my attention on growing Pure Home + Living. We want to scale up this business,” Sarna said.
Just reading about what brands want to do might make the whole thing sound pretty simple, but things in the Indian home decor space are the very opposite. And even erstwhile trump cards like strong distribution capability are no longer likely to ensure success. Here’s a little excerpt from a June 2024 [report](https://www.praxisga.com/PraxisgaImages/ReportImg/what-s-shaping-the-indian-home-interior-market-Report-3.pdf) by business consultancy Praxis Global:
The competitive landscape of India’s home and interior market is characterized by a diverse array of players vying for market share. Established brands leverage their strong distribution networks and brand recognition, while newer entrants focus on innovation and niche product offerings to carve out their market presence. E-commerce platforms have democratized access, allowing smaller brands to reach a broader audience and compete effectively. As consumer preferences evolve towards premiumization and sustainability, brands are increasingly investing in product differentiation, customer engagement strategies, and omnichannel approaches to stay competitive in this dynamic market.
In short, strong brand narratives are as important as large companies with resources and strong distribution networks, and elimination and focus are as crucial to business storytelling as they are to decorating a home. And while some brands are trying to tell a lasting story, others are just looking to get in on the gold rush.
Please let me know what you think about this newsletter on [business storytelling](https://the-ken.com/inciting-incident/). What would you like to read about? Please share your stories on crafting business narratives at inciting-incident@the-ken.com. I’ll be back in your inbox at 4 pm India time next Friday.
Have a good weekend.
Take care.
Yours,
Ruhi
P.S: The Ken’s learning vertical launched a first of its kind one-day workshop on Data Storytelling this week based on conversations with nearly 1,000 business leaders. If you want to enrol your team of engineers or data professionals in the programme, please enrol [here](https://the-ken.com/learning/case-study/narratives-eat-data-for-breakfast/). We have limited slots available for this year.