---
subject: "The answer is in dreams and stories"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-10-15 03:36:01
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
If, like me, you have been wishing for a better future, this email is for you. And I want to start by saying: do not stop dreaming.
Why, you ask? Because only dreamers can succeed in turning dreams into reality.
Take these two personalities, for instance. In 1942, Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi gave a speech when he launched the Quit India Movement, putting into words his dream of a free India. Then, over two decades later, Martin Luther King Jr told the world about his dream of equality through his famous “I Have a Dream” speech.
Now, if you are wondering what this optimistic, historical speeches-inspired Sunday email is about, I will tell you. But first, let me recap the stories my colleagues wrote this week.
On Monday, Gaurav narrated the [story](https://the-ken.com/story/slice-proves-rbi-can-love-fintechs-after-all/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) about a merger that’s drastically changing India’s financial ecosystem. After a ban on prepaid payment instruments by the RBI last year, Slice’s business was facing an existential crisis. But early this month, the fintech got a lifeline when its merger with North East Small Finance Bank was approved by the regulatory body.
On Tuesday, we saw Nuha tell us about how Third Wave Coffee is competing with Starbucks in India. The young cafe chain is flush with funds and expanding rapidly, but how far can this growth strategy go? Read [this piece](https://the-ken.com/story/third-wave-coffee-is-bad-news-for-starbucks/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) to find out.
Last week, Groww broke new ground. With 750 stocks spanning large caps to micro caps, the stockbroker platform’s Nifty Total Market Index Fund is unlike any other passive investing vehicle in India. Anand, on Wednesday, zoomed in on why Groww chose to go [this way](https://the-ken.com/story/groww-has-a-mutual-fund-sales-pitch-you-havent-heard-before/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter).
Ever since Rajnish Kumar—the former chairman of the State Bank of India—retired, he gets offered a board position almost every other week. But a picky Kumar has chosen to [rescue](https://the-ken.com/story/how-rajnish-kumar-went-from-sbi-chief-to-startup-whisperer/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) startups namely Byju’s, Oyo, and Bharatpe, all with their unicorn-sized financial or governance-related problems. On Thursday, Rounak told us why Kumar does what he does, which he learnt from the man himself.
Finally, Alifiya ended the week by [bringing us](https://the-ken.com/story/job-hunt-was-once-a-skill-test-now-its-a-patience-test-too/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) the latest trends (read: changes) from the employment market. The biggest factor driving this transformation is that it’s now an employers’ market. So, for those currently looking for a job, the waiting period has just gotten longer.
Assuming you are done catching up on The Ken’s published stories, I will continue with mine (about dreams).
I spent the majority of this week conducting the [Narrative Thinking Programme](https://the-ken.com/blog/it-is-about-the-business-first-stories-follow/) with my co-trainers Rohin and Pravin, The Ken’s CEO and COO, respectively.
Through our workshop, we shared the fundamentals of storytelling and discussed how heroes struggle hard because they dream harder. And as we listened to more participants share with us their challenges, it only became more evident.
If you, too, wish to enrol your team in a workshop to learn the basics of storytelling, please apply [here](https://theken.typeform.com/Narrative).
Have a wonderful Sunday, and remember, dreams do come true.
Yours,
Ruhi Kandhari
[ruhi@the-ken.com](mailto:ruhi@the-ken.com)
PS: We are conducting a survey to understand how Gen Z workers chart their career paths. If you are in the 18-25 age group and have quit your first job within 12 months of joining it, we would like to hear from you. [Here](https://theken.typeform.com/to/wobNIlej).
What you just read is the personalised daily introduction to The Ken's story. Written by a different person each day. Often insightful, sometimes witty, and very rarely boring. Someone sent this to you? [Sign up for free](https://the-ken.com/?modal=register&utm_source=footer&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=morning_email_ind_recap). [Dont like these? You can unsubscribe](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/unsubscribe/?user_id=2349339&data=yfqebIR7DJaaBvWQJ4uBhpCrTcFWtxfqdEgzxghDrcZoMDAwdTAwMBV-y-wZVH9EKONR--_jEoa6BplJVhlo-HR7IqWX2FxWmEt5gzOwXTJz2Xp-5G3CYEmxxwaRJ2oevBcm-jwsMX7Wh_yDuXim_ww6V49kOZHP43qnetyESlQnhAAhr4hKsMoWIhh61ZO4662MgvaYwhNxQ5Xt7fqoNUTub-bmRFOF6IIO58O5tZVLygdjiIGROcHHRS4u9C477fbH-gmsCzJTX6fFyW19522K7zpscPzKlKavsoAh8Y3sMAaQryEeSpu20R90dnlgCeBpBBTgCf-A-lemyI4EuEu4MsFQyxwAF4btFNZi9YFr7b2g_M7wPr-CScerB14c4mIaZGrC9vwQJ_afKdP4oeKbxJ6Da8-DtHQl3DIK6s80W-8vo0zMBwxXJflD5pM6MZyCfLik1Wo42SLcwueNSjmuuFruv3vR0RBV9B0XrcQu9A0qNwFegGojTvfvrSvRxCZamiUmOw65dpnFBOOsapN5pNzlGc8rFWQJRu_Znh7Yrnb4ruYD15spTVI-hZhmnFjlCL9Bkn0=) Dont want to hear from us again? [ Unsubscribe from our emails here](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/?user_id=2349339&data=37x3fVM9BfTGB8KULy8Nn6j7E_FmhhiFpmsOHfxFlZNoMDAwdTAwMHDC2ATOsQ5RcmjXlN7yi4f-epL6k5fbplKoxgjbFQn20JUgNu0E_wywXEy-g3KkQWDbJEZ2Q-fluZViGpKQFGS-i7jtIVkttHWdxbQ441GJoOJwtaH3J2-ZaFI7rWYT_r7grsb-BH92Tzeh0KLzeI1w4Y0rHHWv2l7WOV1o5YhprLCxeafEzjEr59VunkumSfvlK_-rqVHZbSRgW0gsmPXASePD8WkikDE6f_BwZoobbSugS4NA52iqrZWxDVlvT6RfA9GsfKiE5SfugebAYOFw15yG0O7thZzhCHj6lKnpc2J_NWF6q7j9uSvWjPguVfw5GOtO1SJfo__GY1lfBuIC0u9MPilnuYxSwS7xplG5io7II7nSc0-bb9cOeR1xbGU23_b_VQFTEqV4jfLmxkfZdVmIOo4eQ4bWZh9VgDEpf0n27QngKmP6CySC6POZEm8WrUcGwic28tVv3kBnTGbVw9aji4MOvz05YnjrcP1asm-PD0su4GZ4MlYLAzkiic1hCf780BVqA5qrkxLHh90=).
Something wrong? Tell us at [support@the-ken.com](mailto:support@the-ken.com)