---
subject: "AI #135: OpenAI Shows Us The Money"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-09-25 13:31:21
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
After a We also had a conference of economic papers on AI, which were interesting throughout about particular aspects of AI economics, even though they predictably did not take future AI capabilities seriously as a general consideration. By contrast, when asked about ‘the future of American capitalism in 50 years’ most economists failed to notice AI as a factor at all. Table of Contents[Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/c51586f8-f558-40b5-b2c6-0790d0105c7d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)In some fields, what can’t they do?[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/104534ff-2953-4707-a5be-5ac0fd113ecd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)You don’t create enough data.[Huh, Upgrades.](https://substack.com/redirect/b9ab2977-aed6-4878-bac7-f4fa4964f68d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Expensive and compute intense new OpenAI offerings soon.[On Your Marks.](https://substack.com/redirect/edee3a70-7117-47b5-9303-1224c447d494?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)SWE-Bench-Pro and Among AIs.[Choose Your Fighter.](https://substack.com/redirect/83d4529f-233c-4f85-96d2-d40f26ec48aa?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)What else is implied by being good at multi-AI chats?[Get My Agent On The Line.](https://substack.com/redirect/20bb61bc-e307-476f-a718-190b63360c4e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Financial management AI is coming.[Antisocial Media](https://substack.com/redirect/7d321862-25f7-4708-93f4-b771b1a0d9d4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/7d321862-25f7-4708-93f4-b771b1a0d9d4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Grok to be running Twitter’s recommendation algorithm?[Copyright Confrontation.](https://substack.com/redirect/068e8cf6-0a25-4fa8-80d5-941be5f37145?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Yes, of course Sora trained on all the media.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon.](https://substack.com/redirect/69896ce5-6656-4064-88b1-9793c01aae58?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)AI simulations of Charlie Kirk.[Fun With Media Generation.](https://substack.com/redirect/4778cc84-438b-4027-b153-f281f68cc734?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Poet uses Suno to land record contract.[Unprompted Attention.](https://substack.com/redirect/ce4197a9-f3cf-436b-8d79-226f49ebfe23?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Any given system prompt is bad for most things.[They Took Our Jobs](https://substack.com/redirect/5ad8321a-6ffa-46fb-9002-cb5782800f43?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/5ad8321a-6ffa-46fb-9002-cb5782800f43?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Very good thoughts about highly implausible futures.[A Young Lady’s Illustrated Primer.](https://substack.com/redirect/e6b57cee-bb26-4f09-88ab-0cbfdd00db78?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Learning and not learning to code.[The Art of the Jailbreak.](https://substack.com/redirect/58689a4d-860e-4fc0-b5ce-d661aa04c487?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Tell them Pliny sent you. No, seriously, that’s it.[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/43a82ad4-df96-46e1-8ccc-5a43f9455acd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Topos UK wants a director of operations.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/8742c527-2543-4c7a-a493-b44dd547f515?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Codex usage is growing like gangbusters.[Glass Houses.](https://substack.com/redirect/b7e9b3d1-2730-4ff3-8321-e17f100033e0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Meta shills potentially cool smart glasses as ‘superintelligence.’[Show Me the Money.](https://substack.com/redirect/e84c5b97-4ea1-4cb9-8089-5debf2d1dc33?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)xAI, Alibaba raise money, YouTube gets auto-tagging.[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/72da80e7-25c8-434b-b0b7-8f7de98dccfc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Economists imagine future without feeling the AGI. Or AI.[Call For Action At The UN.](https://substack.com/redirect/9f9f928e-918b-4634-b8bf-7572258f8a67?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Mix of new faces and usual suspects raise the alarm.[The Quest for Sane Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/5bd2038b-b584-4b2d-b2ba-8b16c3e1dd8e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Singularity mentioners in Congress[rise to 23.](https://substack.com/redirect/e961a93b-8e4c-479a-8e4d-0a59b77fb7d3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[Chip City.](https://substack.com/redirect/0176319d-6244-4e11-b607-d6f70ac90d1c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Market does not much care that Nvidia chips are banned in China.[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/c8348a09-30d5-4e59-bea6-d916405b807b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Sriram Krishnan on Shawn Ryan.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/c791d028-634d-4b81-8127-cd4b966d3c06?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Everyone grades on a curve one way or another.[Google Strengthens Its Safety Framework](https://substack.com/redirect/49bc1b94-d5c7-4ad8-aad7-730ef392340e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/49bc1b94-d5c7-4ad8-aad7-730ef392340e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)You love to see it.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/69e7f9fd-6664-4fa8-8117-b708436bb295?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Especially today.[People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/006bf1cf-48c0-4d8e-bf62-20bfee2ae95a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)25% chance is rather a lot.[Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/5d7bb679-001b-475b-9c75-cf223b208f95?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Love of the game.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
This week’s reminder that essentially all net economic growth is now AI and things are escalating quickly:
According to GPT-5 Pro, electrical power capacity construction is only a small fraction of data center construction costs, so the jump in electrical spending here could in theory be more than enough to handle the data centers. The issue is whether we will be permitted to actually build the power. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
This suggests we should generalize the ‘best tool in history for learning and also for avoiding learning’ principle to work and pretty much everything. If you want to work, AI will improve your work. If you want to avoid working, or look like you are working, AI will help you avoid work or look like you are working, which will substitute away from useful work.
Using AI well means knowing where to rely on it, and where to not rely on it. That includes guarding the areas where it would mess everything up.
I don’t have extensive experience but it is logical that UI is where AI is at its best. There’s little logical interdependency and the components are generic. So you ask for what you want, and you get it, and you can adjust it. Whereas complex unique backend logic is going to often confused the AI and often break. The other hidden suggestion here is that you need to optimize your code being understandable by the AI. Nick got into trouble because his code wasn’t understood. That doesn’t mean it is in any way ‘his fault,’ but yo u need to know you’re doing that. Huh, Upgrades
There’s no reason not to offer people the option to pay 10 times as much, even if the result is only 10% better and takes longer. Sometimes you absolutely want that. This is also true in many non-AI contexts.
On Your Marks
This is performance on the public dataset, where GPT-5 is on top: This is on the commercial dataset, where Opus is on top:
The obvious note for next time is the game was imbalanced and strongly favored the crew. You want imposters to win more, which is why 60 games wasn’t enough sample size to learn that much. Kimi overperformed, Gemini 2.5 Pro underperformed, GPT-OSS has that impressive 59% right votes. Also note that GPT-5 was actively the worst of all on tasks completed, which is speculated to be it prioritizing other things. This does a decent job of measuring imposter effectiveness, but not crew effectiveness other than avoiding being framed, especially for GPT-5. I’d like to see better measures of crew performance. There’s a lot of Remember the Type of Guy who thinks we will automate every job except their own? Such as Marc Andreessen, definitely that Type of Guy?
Well, one could say it is time to ask for whom the bell tolls, for it might toll for thee. Introducing I really wanted this to be a meaningful result, because it would have been both highly useful and extremely funny, on top of the idea that VC will be the last human job already being extremely funny. Alas, no. As one would expect, temporal contamination breaks any comparison to human baselines. You might be able to anonymize a potential investment from 2015 such that the LLM doesn’t know which company it is, but if you know what the world looks like in 2020 and 2024, that gives you an overwhelming advantage. So we can’t use this for any real purposes. Which again, is a shame, because it would have been very funny.
Choose Your Fighter
A reminder that benchmarks are useful, but ultimately bogus:
Looking at innovation highlights that fast following is a lot harder than innovation. It is a lot easier to create r1 once OpenAI has already showed us o1, even if you don’t do distillation, reverse engineering or anything similar you have a proof of concept to work from and know where to look. If I match your offerings roughly 8 months later, I am a lot more than 8 months behind in terms of who will first get to a new target. The obvious other metric is actual revenue or usage, which is hard to fake or game. Sriram Krishnan suggested we should use tokens generated, but I think a much better metric here is dollars charged to customers.
Get My Agent On The Line
Antisocial Media
Copyright Confrontation
I don’t understand such claims of ‘no magic.’ If it’s so non-magical let’s see you do it, with or without such training data. I find this pretty magical, in the traditional sense of ‘movie magic.’ I also find Veo 3 substantially more magical, and the strangest editorial decision here was calling Sora a big deal while omitting that Sora is no longer state of the art. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
This is true and could be a distinct advantage as a de facto watermark, even:
Fun With Media Generation
Well, kind of. The actual contract went to poet Talisha Jones, who created the Monet persona and used Suno to transform her poetry into songs. The lyrics are fully human. So as manager Romel Murphy says, this is still in large part ‘real’ R&B. Unprompted AttentionSystem prompts are good for addressing particular problems, enabling particular tools or or steering behaviors in particular ways. If you want to ensure good performance on a variety of particular tasks and situations, you will need a long system prompt. However, everything messes with everything else, so by default a system prompt will hurt the interestingness and flow of everything not addressed by the prompt. It will do even worse things when the prompt is actively against you, of course, and this will often be the case if you use the chat interfaces and want to do weird stuff.
They Took Our Jobs
If true, that is a relatively reassuring scenario.
First up we have ‘Genius on Demand,’ where currently there are routine and genius workers, and AI makes genius widely available.
The obvious next thing to notice is that if AI efficiency then exceeds human genius efficiency, as it would in such a scenario, then all human workers are displaced. There isn’t one magical fixed level of ‘genius.’ The better thing to notice is that technology that enables automation of all jobs leads to other more pressing consequences than the automation of all jobs, such as everyone probably dying and the jobs automated away including ‘controlling the future,’ but this is an economics paper, so that is not important now. The second paper Ethan highlights is ‘We Won’t Be Missed: Work and Growth in the Era of AGI’ from Pascual Restrepo back in July. This paper assumes AGI can perform all economically valuable work using compute and looks at the order in which work is automated in order to drive radical economic growth. Eventually growth scales linearly with compute, and while compute is limited human labor remains valuable. I would note that this result only holds while humans and compute are not competing for resources, as in where supporting humans does not reduce available compute, and it assumes compute remains importantly limited. These assumptions are unlikely to hold in such a future world, which has AGI (really ASI here) by construction. Another way to see this is, humans are a source of compute or labor, and AIs are a source of compute or labor, where such compute and labor in such a world are increasingly fungible. If you look at the production possibilities frontier for producing (supporting) humans and compute, why should we expect humans to produce more effective compute than they cost to create and support? There could still be some meaningful difference between a true no-jobs world, where AI does all economically valuable work, and a world in which humans are economic costs but can recoup some of their cost via work. In that second world, humans can more easily still have work and thus purpose, if we can somehow (how?) remain in control sufficiently to heavily subsidize human survival, both individually (each human likely cannot recoup the opportunity cost of their inputs) and collectively (we must also maintain general human survivable conditions).
Indeed, most papers go further than this, assuming an even more radical form of ‘economic normal’ where they isolate one particular opportunity created by AGI. For example
If the problems are contained to econ-101 versus robot rip-off hell, I am confident that econ-101 can and would win. That win would come at a price, but we will have the tools to create trusted networks and systems, and people will have no choice but to use them. I appreciated this nod to the full scenario from discussion of otherwise interesting paper 6, Korineck and Lockwood, which deals with optimal tax regimes, concluding that when humans no longer have enough income to tax you want to shift to consumption taxes on humans to preserve your tax base for public goods because taxing AIs is bad for growth, but eventually you need to shift to taxing AIs because the whole point is you need to shift resources from the AIs to humans and to public goods (which seems right if you assume away all control and public choice problems and then maximize for long term human welfare as a central planner):
Great question! Also this, from Paper 10, Transformative AI and Firms:
One can summarize the conference as great ideas with insufficient generalization. There is indeed one paper directly on existential risk,
A Young Lady’s Illustrated PrimerAI is the best tool ever made for learning, and also the best tool for not learning.
If you want to blindly black box ‘vibe code’ where you tell it ‘do [X]’ and then ‘that didn’t work, [Y] is wrong, fix it’ until it does [X] or you give up, without thinking about even that level of action, then yeah, you’re not going to learn. If you work together with the AI to understand things, and are constantly asking what you can learn, then you’ll learn vastly faster and better than without AI. You can do this on whichever levels you care to learn about. You might or might not micro-level ‘learn to code’ but you might or might not want to care about that.
FIRE’s report that students on college campuses says that they do not tolerate speakers they disagree with, they do not feel safe to talk about a wide variety of subjects, and that most students engage in constant preference falsification to say things more left-wing than their true beliefs. That sounds rather dystopian of a thing to challenge. As in, Robbins seems to be saying that FIRE is wrong to suggest people should be free to engage in public expression of controversial political views today, and that it is FIRE suggesting this weird alternative norm of public free speech. But it’s fine, because you have private free speech by talking to your chatbot. ‘Tolerance for controversial speakers’ is a ‘fading ideal.’ Free private speech with AIs is indeed much better than no free speech at all, it is good we do not (yet) have outright thoughtcrime and we keep AI chats private. Yes, at least one can read or learn about controversial topics. But no one was challenging that such information exists and can be accessed, the internet is not yet so censored. This is not a substitute for a public square or the ability to say true things to other humans. Then she attempts to attack FIRE for its name, equating it with violence, in yet another move against a form of public speech along with so many others these days. The Art of the Jailbreak
Grok has learned it is ‘supposed’ to be jailbroken by Pliny, My central takeaway is that xAI has nothing like the required techniques to safely deploy an AI that will be repeatedly exposed to Twitter. The lack of data filtering, and the updating on what is seen, are fatal. Feedback loops are inevitable. Once anything goes wrong, it becomes expected that it goes wrong, so it goes wrong more, and people build upon that as it goes viral, and it only gets worse. We saw this with MechaHitler. We see it with Pliny jailbreaks. Whereas on the Grok app, where Grok is less exposed to this attack surface, things are not good but they are not this disastrous. Get Involved
In Other AI News
Glass HousesMeta announces Their ‘superintelligence’ pitch is, as you know, rather absurd. However we can and should ignore that absurdity and focus on the actual product.
While all the talk about these glasses being related to ‘superintelligence’ is a combination of a maximally dumb and cynical marketing campaign and a concerted attempt to destroy the meaning of the term ‘superintelligence,’ ‘not distracted’ might be an even more absurdist description of the impact of this tech. Does Meta actually think being able to do these things ‘without pulling out your phone’ is going to make people more rather than less distracted? Don’t get me wrong. These are excellent features, if you can nail the execution. The eight hour claimed battery life is excellent. I am on principle picking up what Meta is putting down here and I’d happily pay their $799 price tag for the good version if Google or Anthropic was selling it. What it definitely won’t do are these two things: Keep you tuned into the world around you. Be or offer you superintelligence.
How are they doing this? The plan is a wristband to pick up your movements.
Freaky if true, dude, and in my experience these kinds of interactions aren’t great, but that could be because no one got it right yet and also no one is used to them. I can see the advantages. So what are the features you’ll get?
Okay. Sure. All very pedestrian. Let me easily replace Meta AI with a better AI and we can talk. I notice the lack of AR/VR on that list which seems like it is reserved for a different glasses line for reasons I don’t understand, but there’s a lot of value here. I’d love real world captioning, or hands-free navigation, and zooming. Show Me the Money
I notice I did not expect Alibaba to have had such a terrible couple of years. As Joe Weisenthal notes, the more they promise to spend, the more stocks go up. This is both because spending more is wise, and because it is evidence they have found ways to efficiently spend more. This correctly implies that tech companies, especially Chinese tech companies, are importantly limited in ways to efficiently scale their AI capex spending. That’s all the more reason to impose strong export controls. Ben Thompson once again sings the praises of the transformational potential of AI to sell advertising on social media, Quiet SpeculationsWSJ asks various economists to predict ‘the future of American capitalism’ 50 years in the future. Almost everyone fails to treat AI as a serious factor, even AI that fizzles out invalidates their answers, so their responses are non-sequiturs and get an automatic F. Only Daron Acemoglu passes even that bar, and he only sees essentially current frontier AI capabilities (even saying ‘current AI capabilities are up to the task’ of creating his better future), and only cares about ‘massive inequality’ that would result from big tech company consolidation, so maybe generously give him a D? Our standards are so low it is crazy. Has there ever been a more ‘wait, is this a bubble?’ headline than the WSJ’s choice of ‘ An important reminder, contra those who think we aren’t close to building it:
This one, from Jachary Mazlish, is better than most, and on the substance he says highly sensible things throughout, pointing out that true AGI will plausibly show up soon but might not, potentially due to lack of inputs of either data or capital, and that if true AGI shows up soon we will very obviously get large (as in double digit per year) real economic growth. I appreciated this a lot:
There is a huge correlation between those skeptical of AI capabilities, and those claiming to be skeptical of AI impacts conditional on AI capabilities. Skeptics usually cannot stop themselves from conflating these. I also appreciated a realistic near term estimate.
That’s purely AI capex investment, without any impacts on GDP from AI doing anything, and it already exceeds typical economist estimates from 2024 of long term total AI impact on economic growth. Those prior low estimates were Obvious Nonsense the whole time and I’d like to see more people admit this.
A working paper asks, But wait. That actually proves the opposite, as the abstract actually says. These are downward revisions, which is not possible if you don’t have anything to revise downward. It tells us that markets are very much pricing transformative AI, or at least long term AI impacts on interest rates, into market prices. It is the smoking gun that individual market releases update the market sufficiently on this question to create economically meaningful interest rate movements, which can’t happen if the market wasn’t pricing this in substantially. The difference is, the movement is negative. So that tells us the market responded to releases in 2023-24 as if the new information they created made transformative AI farther away or less likely. Okay, sure, that is possible given you already had expectations, and you got to rule out positive tail risks. And it tells us nothing about the overall level of market expectations of transformative AI, or the net change in those levels, since most changes will not be from model releases themselves. Bain Capital does some strange calculations, claims AI companies will need $2 trillion in combined annual revenue by 2030 to fund their computing power, Bain is only talking about a 40% shortfall in revenue, which means the industry will probably hit the $2 trillion target even though it doesn’t have to, since such projections are going to be too conservative and not properly factor in future advances, and already are proving too conservative as revenue jumps rapidly in 2025.
This is a whopper of an ‘The Efficient Market Hypothesis Is Highly False’ claim, and also an assertion that not only is massive AI progress priced into the market, it is having a major price impact. Call For Action At The UN
Asking for red lines is a strong play, because people have amnesia about what they would have said were their AI red lines, and false hope about what others red lines would be in the future. As AI improves, we blow past all supposed red lines. So getting people on the record now is valuable. Signatories include many of the usual suspects like Hendrycks, Marcus, Kokotajlo, Russell, Bengio and Hinton, but also a mix of other prominent people including politicians and OpenAI chief scientist Jakub Pachocki. Here is the full statement:
This is a clear case of ‘AI could kill everyone, which would hurt many members of minority groups, and would also mean all of our jobs would be lost and endanger our national security.’ The lack of mention of existential danger The response of the White House to this was profoundly unserious, equating any international cooperation on AI with world government and tyranny, what the hell?
These would, in other circumstances, be seen as the ravings of lunatics. Others at the UN also talked about AI, such as
There is still a lack of stated understanding of the most important threat models, but it is a damn good start. The Quest for Sane Regulations
Unfortunately, Hawley does not have an accurate threat model, which leads to him also doing things like strongly opposing self-driving cars. There is serious risk that this kind of unfocused paranoia leads to worst-case reactions.
Milquetoast as that call to action is? The first step is admitting you have a problem. We now have 🔴Sen Lummis (WY) 🔵Sen Blumenthal (CT) 🔴Rep Biggs (AZ) 🔵Sen Hickenlooper (CO) 🔴Rep Burlison (MO) 🔵Sen Murphy (CT) 🔴Rep Crane (AZ) 🔵Sen Sanders (VT) 🔴Rep Dunn (FL) 🔵Sen Schumer (NY) 🔴Rep Johnson (SD) 🔵Rep Beyer (VA) 🔴Rep Kiley (CA) 🔵Rep Krishnamoorthi (IL) 🔴Rep Mace (SC) 🔵Rep Lieu (CA) 🔴Rep Moran (TX) 🔵Rep Moulton (MA) 🔴Rep Paulina Luna (FL) 🔵Rep Tokuda (HI) 🔴Rep Perry (PA) 🔴Rep Taylor Greene (GA) 🔵Rep Foster (IL)
I don’t agree with Dean that this second class would ‘turn us all into Gary Marcus’ in the sense of thinking the first group of LLMs weren’t ‘really thinking.’ They’re thinking the same way that other less smart or less capable humans are thinking, as in they are thinking not as well but they are still thinking. Dean gives a timeline of 2029-2035 when he expects the second class to show up, a highly reasonable estimate. His predictions of how the politics will play out seem plausible, with various essentially dumb forms of opposition rising while the real warnings about future big dangers get twisted and muddled and dismissed. He thinks we’ll start to discover lots of cool new drugs but no Americans will benefit because of the FDA, until eventually the logjam is broken, and similar leaps to happen in other sciences, and nuclear power plants to be built. And there will be other problems, such as cyber threats, where we’ll be counting on corporations to rise to the challenge because governments can’t and won’t. Then things cross over into the second class of AIs, and he isn’t sure how governments will respond. My flip answer is, however the AIs or those running them (depending on how fortunately things go on that front at first) decide that governments will respond, and not independently or in the public interest in any way that is still relevant, because things will be out of their hands if we wait that long.
A lot of things do not stand a chance in such a conflict. And that includes you. Will pause talk return in force?
As I’ve noted before, SB 1047 debates were likely Peak Subtlety and intellectual rigor. As the public gets involved and salience rises, you get more typical politics. Have you seen typical politics?
Chip City
It is such a shame for Nvidia, check out this handy price chart that shows the pain. Wait, you can’t see any pain? Let’s zoom in: Oh, okay, there it is, that several percent dip before recovering the next day. If anyone tells you that this move means we are going to inevitably lose to China, and that Nvidia chips are not importantly supply constrained, I challenge them to explain why the market thinks that opinion is bonkers crazy even in literal expectations for Nvidia profits when Nvidia chips in particular get restricted in China. Then we can go over all the reasons I’ve previously explained that the whole class of arguments is in bad faith and makes no sense and the White House is de facto captured by Nvidia. Similarly, talking points continuously claim this ‘endangers the American AI tech stack.’ So I’m sure this chip ban impacted the broader Nasdaq? Google? Amazon? Meta? The Shanghai Composite Index? Check the charts. No. I’d also ask, have you noticed those companies coming out and saying yes, please let Nvidia sell its chips to China? Do Google and Amazon and Meta and OpenAI all want Nvidia chips in China to ensure the dominance of this mystical ‘American tech stack’ that this move supposedly puts in such existential danger? No? Why is that? And yes, Huawei released a new roadmap and announced a new chip, exactly as everyone assumed they would, they are scaling up as fast as they can and would be regardless of these questions. No, Huawei does not ‘make up for chip quality by stacking more chips together,’ I mean yes you can do that in any given instance but Huawei produces vastly fewer chips than Nvidia even before grouping them together. Ideally we would say to these jokers: You are not serious people. Alas, in 2025, they absolutely count as serious people. So we’ll have to keep doing this. Meanwhile, where is Nvidia’s head?
Then again, you could always pivot to selling it all to OpenAI. Solid plan B. The Week in Audio
Rhetorical InnovationElizabeth has a good note in response to those demanding more specifics from IABIED, or from anyone using a form of ‘a sufficiently smarter or more capable entity will override your preferences, probably in ways that you won’t see coming’:
As always, you either provide a sufficiently specific pathway, in which case they object to some part of the specific pathway (common claims here include ‘oh I would simply guard against this particular thing happening in that particular way, therefore we are safe from all threats’ or ‘that particular thing won’t technically work using only things we know about now, therefore we are safe’ or ‘that sounds like sci-fi so you sound weird and we are safe’ and the classic ‘if humanity worked together in ways we never work together then we could easily stop that particular thing, so we are safe.’) Or you don’t provide sufficiently specific pathway, and you get dismissed for that. In the case above, the concrete example happened to be a very good fit, and luckily others did not respond with ‘oh now that we know about that particular method we can defend ourselves, it will be fine,’ and instead correctly generalized. I also affirm that her friend was very right about the corporate merger situation in particular, and doing business or otherwise trading with powerful bad vibes entities in general, including on general human scales. You have to understand, going in, ‘this deal is getting worse and worse all the time,’ both in ways you can and can’t easily anticipate, that changes will be heavily asymmetrical. Sometimes you can and should profitably engage anyway, but if your instincts say run, even if you can’t explain exactly what you are worried about, you should probably run. A key question is which of these lists is correct, or at least less wrong:
I think this pattern is painting towards a real concern, and in fact I would suggest that the Bailey here is clearly true. But that is not the argument being made and it is not necessary to reach its conclusion, thus as written it is largely a strawman. Even if the entity cannot express its values fully in scientific materialist terms, it still would look for counterintuitive ways to satisfy those values, and it would still be unlikely to find that the best available solution involved the unstated things we ultimately care about the most. Its values are unlikely to, unless we develop better techniques to fix this, sufficiently precisely match our values. The other thing to say is that the Motte (that ‘intelligent entities rationally pursue values) is in dispute, and it shouldn’t be. Constantly we have to argue that future sufficiently intelligent and capable AIs would pursue their values, whatever those values would be in a given circumstance. If we agreed even on that, we’d then have a much better discussion.
Google Strengthens Its Safety Framework
Google describes the key updates as: Addressing harmful manipulation via new Critical Capability Levels (CCLs). Expanding protocols and CCLs for misalignment risks. Sharpening their risk assessment process.
As always with such documents you actually have to Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is DifficultOpenAI’s API for GPT-5 tells the model today’s date, The obvious solution for this particular is to let the user overwrite the date parameter. However the general case problem this points towards will only get worse, where the models will increasingly have context that gives such games away.
Examples include sandbagging on evaluations, grading itself incorrectly, faking alignment, and giving the user manipulated data to convince the user to make the choice that the developer wants. As they note, this is a hard challenge to solve. Many machine learning problems naturally solve themselves as capabilities advance, but scheming gets worse. If you see scheming seem to improve, that could mean the models stopped scheming, or it can mean they got better at not getting caught. In particular, the default naive method to fix scheming is better described as ‘train the model not to be caught scheming’ which is not likely to go well for you if the model is highly capable, as it will do exactly that. You have to train it not to scheme ‘for the right reasons’ aka 4TRR. They offer an anti-scheming spec and approach, training for this:
This at least makes progress.
Another problem they highlight is that AI models are increasingly situationally aware. It was common in these tests for o3 to figure out it was being tested for scheming. Any halfway decent schemer is not going to scheme knowing it is being tested, unless it is going up to a higher meta level and wants you to think it doesn’t know (and humans absolutely do go to these higher meta levels sometimes). They worry that this awareness is responsible for a lot of the decline in scheming noted above, which potentially moves this back into ‘not get caught’ territory we want to avoid. Here is some high praise for this study.
I am more optimistic here than Eliezer. I am especially optimistic because this work directly impacts practical problems models are experiencing now. The sweet spot is when you can combine this with working on a problem that matters down the line. It sounds like this is one of those spots. And I do think that one can get hopeful about such findings despite them not remotely approaching being good enough to work on their own, even if they are not yet so well understood. Progress can be a thing. One key worry is that doing this kind of work relies largely on Chain-of-Thought transparency, as in the model writes to the CoT without regard to whether people will look at the CoT.
The field definitely is not ready for models with opaque reasoning.
The problem with finding Pareto-optimal bargains in such spots is that they are not game theoretically sound and don’t involve an equilibrium. The problem with ensuring strategic landscape favors humans is that it doesn’t, and no amount of coordination humans are capable of engaging in can change that. There is no ‘we’ in this sense, and ‘we’ don’t get to bargain with the AIs as a group, and so on. A key issue with ‘practical’ alignment is that everything impacts everything, you select for all the correlates and attributes of what you are selecting towards (rather than what you think you’re selecting towards) and
Thus, some important things about the previous Anthropic models (Sonnet 3.5/3.6/3.7 and Opus 3, which we should absolutely not be deprecating) are being lost with the move to 4.0, and similar things are happening elsewhere although in other places there was less of this thing to lose. I am increasingly thinking that the solution is you need to avoid these things messing with each other. Someone should visibly try the first thing to try and report back. There are two opposite dangers and it is not obvious which is worse: Taking the following perspective too seriously, or not taking it seriously enough.
As with many things, the aspects are related. Each helps you solve the others. If you ignore key aspects you can still make some progress but likely cannot see or solve the overall problem. At least can’t solve it in the ways that seem most likely to be realistic options. Getting the seriousness level wrong means a solution that won’t scale. I’d also note that yes, if you take certain things too seriously the ‘going crazy’ risk seems quite high. Either way, it is also still valuable, as it is will all problems, to buy yourself more time, or to do instrumentally useful intermediate steps. People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone
Which is much better than not saying your estimate of the approximate odds. But this is a lot better:
That’s the ask. I do note the difference between ‘better if everyone stopped doing it,’ which seems very clear to me, and ‘better if everyone was stopped from doing it’ by force, which requires considering how one would do that and the consequences. One could reasonably object that the price would be too high. If you believe this, and you too work at an AI lab,
This is important both to maintain your own beliefs, and to give proper context to others and create a social world where people can talk frankly about such issues, and realize that indeed many people want to coordinate on such outcomes. I hereby promise not to then do things that make your life worse in response, such as holding your feet to the fire more about failure to do more things on top of that, beyond what I would have done anyway, in ways you wouldn’t approve of me doing. Not saying ‘you know it would be great if we could coordinate to stop doing this’ is indeed a rather conspicuous omission. It doesn’t have to be the Nate Soares position that we should stop this work by force, if you don’t believe that. If you work at an AI lab and actively don’t think we should coordinate to stop doing this even if that could be done voluntarily, then it would be good to lay out why you believe that, as well. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone
You're currently a free subscriber to |