---
subject: "The [Tuesday] Media Diet with Sari Azout"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-05-30 10:00:43
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Welcome back after a day off for Memorial Day. Happy to welcome Sari Azout (SA) to the page this week. She is a founder and investor, currently building a product called Sublime (still in stealth mode). Have a great week. -Colin (CJN) Tell us about yourself. I am a founder, writer, (sometimes) investor, mom of three boys, and extremely online person on a mission to build a more human and nourishing Internet. I’m currently building Sublime – a simpler, more beautiful way to collect and connect all of the interesting ideas, quotes, articles, links, screenshots, etc. you come across. I’ve spent the past year quietly building it and obsessing over every pixel. It’s launching privately this summer. I also write a weekly newsletter at Describe your media diet. It's messy - on purpose. I've tried read-it-later apps and other ways to streamline my media consumption, but I've come around to the fact that I like the serendipity and the accidental rabbit holes of getting lost on the Internet without structure. I like to read widely and try to keep my inputs decor-related – old books, Twitter, personal blogs, many Substacks I pay for, and more. I try to avoid corporate media and optimize for more authentic sources. And I much prefer text over video (which makes me feel… uh, old?). I made a decision two years ago to not read the news. I am not interested in getting sucked into the news or facts of the day - I just want to go deeper into a few areas I really care about. What’s the last great book you read?
The basic argument is that we've been wrong about what the job is for people in the healthcare profession. We think their job is to ensure health and survival. But really it is to enable well-being. And well-being is about the reasons one wishes to be alive. What are you reading now? I'm always reading many books simultaneously but never pressure myself to finish them. I mostly read non-fiction (except Other things on my Kindle at the moment:
[I'll Show Myself Out](https://substack.com/redirect/e5a5e1f8-18e3-42b6-9c26-8650598e997e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o): essays on midlife and motherhood by Jessi Klein[Metaphors we Live By](https://substack.com/redirect/6ec83098-c6f7-4426-ac62-b25915be7419?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)by George Lakoff[Am I Being too Subtle?](https://substack.com/redirect/165616de-d7e9-42e2-8030-c69280410045?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)by Sam Zell[The Myth of Normal](https://substack.com/redirect/4d984de8-d67a-47b5-b340-49285014ed5e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)by Gabor Mate
What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication? I don’t have a strategy, it really depends on my mood. Sometimes I’ll read The Atlantic cover to cover, other times I will just pick up Vogue or Architectural Digest and scan the photos. I am a sucker for editor-in-chief letters though. Who should everyone be reading that they’re not? I think I subscribe to over 800 newsletters at this point. But the ones that consistently make my soul and brain sing are Bookbear express by What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone? I am obsessed with Plane or train? Planes are just a flying experiment in spreading germs, so by process of elimination – train. While we’re at it, can we make all trains look like What is one place everyone should visit? In my backyard on the rare occasion of a Sunday morning when my kids slept at their grandparents, I got a solid eight hours of sleep, and I can sit in my comfy lounge chair, drink a cup of tea, and catch up on my reading with no interruptions. Absolute bliss. Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into. So many rabbit holes. Right now, I'm really trying to make sense of
I am also endlessly fascinated by the ways in which the tools we use to consume information shape the information we produce in the first place, and ultimately shape culture. For example, clay tablets were hard to move but durable, so they made empires endure within a small geographic radius. Paper made ideas transient and disposable. Television turned everything into entertainment. Instagram taught us to document our lives in aspirational ways. There’s a range of possibilities for how information exchange and human connection can be structured and organized, and right now most of the tools we use on the Internet look the same. The Internet wasn’t supposed to be six men with too much money forcing us to behave in ways that don’t help us live the kinds of lives we want to live. — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Sari (SA) —
|