---
subject: "100 Billion Humans"
from: "Tomas Pueyo from Uncharted Territories <unchartedterritories@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-11-19 13:02:11
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tomas Pueyo", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_28238133486362596", "UNREAD"]
---
Some people fear there are too many humans on Earth. Where would we all fit? This is what we’ll answer today. Our Current PathToday’s world population is ~8B, and according to the UN, it will peak close to 10B around 2080: This is probably an overestimate: It’s not the first time the UN has revised the estimate downwards, and it has incentives to not reflect the true decline in population forecasts.¹ So we’re on a trajectory to only reach about 10B people at most, and one of the reasons is that many people aren’t having kids because they fear overpopulation and the destruction of the environment.
So should we be concerned about reaching 10B people? After looking at the numbers, I believe we shouldn’t, because the Earth can carry at least 10x more people. Where Would We Fit 100 Billion Humans?The Netherlands is the 6th happiest country on Earth. It has ~18M people living on ~33,500 km2. That’s a population density of ~545 people per km2. And the Netherlands is nice! If the Earth had the population density of the Netherlands, it could hold 70 billion people!² And the Netherlands doesn’t pack people with particular intensity: Dutch scientist Antoni van Leeuwenhoek (1632-1723) estimated that if the population of Holland in his day (one million people) were extrapolated across the estimated area of inhabitable land around the globe, it would equal 13 billion people. Now, that same extrapolation yields 70 billion. Increase population density in the Netherlands a bit and extrapolate it to the rest of the world, and you get 100B. If there were that many people, most would live in dense urban areas. The city of Hong Kong, for example, has 40k people per square km.³ If Algeria had the population density of Hong Kong, we would get to 100B people. The rest of the world—98%—would be left to nature. Of course, neither of these extremes will happen. What we will get is hundreds of megalopolises like Hong Kong, huge swaths of built up areas with densities like in the Netherlands, and plenty of open land leftover. The point is we can fit if we want to. There’s physical room for us while still retaining nice natural areas. This assumes we would keep the population density of Hong Kong, but in fact We could also expand the land we live in by making the uninhabitable habitable. A perfect example is the Sahara desert, a huge sea of nothingness.⁴ The only things we need to make it livable are water and cooling. I explained in Speaking of water: Do we have enough? Watering 100B HumansWith 100B humans, we would need much more water. And you might be concerned about the fact that we’ve already been using our aquifers to water our crops and hydrate ourselves. But the only reason this is a problem is because we’ve been using the water that is conveniently below our feet, the way the English of the 18th century first used the coal that was lying on the beach before venturing deeper into mines. Similarly, as water from aquifers becomes scarcer, we will look to the sea for more. Consider this:⁵ 70% of the Earth’s surface is water. The Earth’s total water supply is basically constant. Water changes form, from liquid in the sea to gas in the clouds to rain or snow. It also changes location, from sea to mountains to rivers to aquifers to fields. Only 2.5% of our water is freshwater. We can participate more actively in this cycle, transforming saltwater into freshwater, the way the Earth does naturally today. The [cost of desalination](https://substack.com/redirect/48a3ff67-ce7a-4c6b-8aeb-98e7aabc26df?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[today](https://substack.com/redirect/48a3ff67-ce7a-4c6b-8aeb-98e7aabc26df?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)is $0.40/ton—93% less than what San Franciscans pay for their tap water.⁶Most crops could be profitably grown with desalinated water today if the water cycle was controlled (ie, no spillage or filtering in the soil).
You can read more in the OK, so we have plenty of water, we just need to convert it from saltwater to freshwater. But what about food? Feeding 100B HumansIn And this is why the Netherlands is the second largest global food exporter! So if you shape the world into the image of today’s Netherlands, not only do you fit 70B people, but you also end up with a huge food surplus. And this is without vertical farming! In And since it would take us centuries to reach 100B people, we would have time for technology to keep improving, shrinking energy and labor costs, making food plentiful. Imagine AI managing our vertical farms with nuclear energy in underground facilities. How much food could we produce? As much as we want! You might say: Yeah but that’s for crops. What about meat? Of course, we couldn’t feed 100B with free-range, grass-fed beef. But we could grow that same beef in a facility. Lab meat is already a reality, and by the time there are 100B of us, the technology will be good enough. Fun fact: After chicken, the second biggest source of protein for humans is not beef, it’s not pork, it’s farmed fish! And it’s growing fast. You can farm fish anywhere on land, just build bigger pools. Build them underground if you want to save surface space. And that’s just using land! There are huge swaths of ocean devoid of life, but we could So the only food limit is our imagination. Powering 100B Humans100B humans is 12x the current population. Once we get there, our energy consumption will be more efficient, but we will also require much more of it. So let’s assume we will also need 10x more energy per person than we do today. That’s a total of 120x the amount of energy we produce today! Where are we going to get it from? Today, we consume 180,000 TWh of energy per year.⁸ If we grew our energy demand by 120x, we would need about 21 million TWh. How much of that could come from solar electricity? You can see from this map that the Sahara has plenty of surface area that receives over 2,200 kWh of solar energy per year. Once we have 100B people, our solar panel efficiency will be at the very least 30%, so we can generate 660 kWh of electricity per m2 of Sahara every year. So how much surface do we need to cover to gather 21 million TWh of electricity? About 33M km2, which is a bit more than two Russias. I can guarantee you this won’t happen. So solar electricity won’t be enough. It could work if we captured solar energy in space panels and beamed it to the Earth, but I don’t want to assume science-fiction for this article. For that same reason, I don’t want to assume we will figure out fusion. Luckily, we have another, already proven tech. As I explained in Paradoxically, the drawback is not the use of nuclear energy, but the simple fact that if we use 120x more raw energy than we do today, this energy will dissipate in the atmosphere and warm it up. Anders Sandberg estimates⁹ that this would add about 1ºC to the atmosphere. Will this be a problem? It depends on how long it would take for us to get to 100B humans? Right now, humans are not having enough babies. So we would first need fertility to turn around. Let’s imagine a crazy scenario where we get to 2.5 children per woman. That would mean every generation (let’s say 30 years), our population grows by 25%. It would take us 300 more years to get to that point. Meanwhile, CO2 is a 21st century problem that is very likely to be solved by the end of the century, as I’ll cover in the premium article this week. So 1ºC of additional heat sounds manageable, and if we don’t want to tolerate even that, we can In other words: We already have the technology to power a world with 100B humans, and by the time we get there, we will be able to mitigate the only big downside—a warming of the atmosphere from all this new heat. Go host 100B humans, the Earth will have enough: Space Food Water Energy
What about the other factors Now, I know what you’re thinking: Tomas, what about pollution? Are we going to destroy the Earth in the process? What’s this thing about CO2 that you’re talking about: Will it really be solved within a century? Are we going to exhaust the Earth’s resources? I looked into this, and the answer is no for a simple reason: Every person afraid that we’re going to run out of something or pollute the Earth too much never accounts for a changing world. Look at what I just described in terms of food, water, and energy: Our technology is already close to what we need to get to 100B. If you just assume that technology will keep improving the way it has, we will have the technology we need. These details are what we’re going to explore in this week’s premium article. 1 Fertility rates globally are shrinking faster than anticipated, yet many countries’ finances are based on high projections of population growth. If the UN were to highlight how population projections are too optimistic, it would expose the fragile state of these finances, so it has a strong incentive to slowly revise the number downwards rather than making a dramatic adjustment all at once. 2 The Earth has 3 Hong Kong has many parks and green spaces. The city itself has about 3M people in ~75 km2. 4 I can already hear some people: “No but the Sahara is full of life and has plenty of endemic species!” No it does not. It has 5 From 6 This is not apples to apples, because tap water also pays for canals, storage, water treatment… But it gives you a sense of orders of magnitude. 7 Fish converts two thirds of its protein intake into its own protein. This compares to 10% for beef. 8 1 TWh is 1 million megawatt-hours. 9 I saw it in one of his tweets but couldn’t find it again, so I asked him about it in person when I met him in a conference in 2024 and he confirmed the number. 10 Space mirrors are probably doable today, but since we’re not doing it yet, this approaches science-fiction. You're currently a free subscriber to |