---
subject: "World of Interiors/Elemental videos/Anxiety Toolkit"
from: "Recomendo <recomendo@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-09-21 09:02:11
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Recomendo"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8455078693589186571"]
---
Look inside people’s houses.
Elemental videosI have a thing for the elements – the diverse atoms that make up the world. I think more of them should be better known. I’ve previously recommended Anxiety ToolkitThis Magnetic necklace claspsI’ve been replacing some of my necklace clasps with these Solar trail camI installed my first trail cameras in the early 1990s hoping to capture the elusive mountain lion in the hills behind our house. Back then trail cams were cumbersome film cameras with only 36 shots before you had to change rolls. It was expensive to develop and a chore to constantly replenish and keep the film and batteries replaced. Today you can get solar powered digital trail cams that have cell connections and display the images from remote locations instantly on your phone. (These are outlawed for hunting purposes in some states.) There is a whole range of intermediate, inexpensive digital trail cams that will pair with your nearby phone. I use a Kitchen timer with silent modeThe timer app on a phone is not helpful in the kitchen. You have to prop it up to see the time, the screen goes dark after a few minutes, and if your hands are wet, it makes the app unresponsive to your finger. I use a battery-powered THIS ISSUE IS SPONSORED BY HEURISTICAAll-in-one AI platform for learning and research. Create concept maps, flashcards, quizzes, notes, summarize YouTube videos, and chat with AI to explore complex ideas. Recomendo Unclassified Ads work! UNCLASSIFIEDS 9 Hidden Perks of Your Amazon Prime Membership. Are you taking advantage of your Amazon Prime perks? Amazon Prime offers much more than just free shipping! Save these links in This Product Comparison Tool allows you to thoroughly evaluate side-by-side what product you should buy so you can enter the store ready to buy without being sold by sales associates. We are looking for people to Beta test an early (fully functional) version and provide feedback. Recomendo is an authentic, hand-crafted, human-written weekly newsletter that is free, but not cheap. Please consider supporting our work with a paid option, now at the low price of $45 per year. Paid subs enable us to keep making it free for others. Recomendo is published by Cool Tools Lab, a small company of three people. We also run the Recomendo is copyrighted by Cool Tools Lab, LLC. Commissions may be earned from the links above. |