---
subject: "DeepSeek-r1-0528 Did Not Have a Moment"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-06-06 15:32:55
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
When r1 was released in January 2025, there was a DeepSeek moment. When r1-0528 was released in May 2025, there was no moment. Very little talk.
It seems like a solid upgrade. If anything, I wonder if we are underreacting, and this illustrates how hard it is getting to evaluate which models are actually good. What this is not is the proper r2, nor do we have v4. I continue to think that will be a telltale moment. For now, what we have seems to be (but we’re not sure) a model that is solid for its price and status as an open model, but definitely not at the frontier, that you’d use if and only if you wanted to do something that was a very good fit and played to its strong suits. We likely shouldn’t update much either way on v4 and r2, and DeepSeek has a few more months before it starts being conspicuous that we haven’t seen them. We Had a MomentWe all remember Over several months, a clear picture emerged of (most of) what happened: A confluence of narrative factors transformed DeepSeek’s r1 from an impressive but not terribly surprising model worth updating on into a shot heard round the world, despite the lack of direct ‘fanfare.’ In particular, these all worked together to cause this effect: The ‘ [six million dollar model](https://substack.com/redirect/5896ee57-1eb7-460d-b9ed-7961c26f8ea4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)’ narrative. People equated v3’s marginal compute costs with the overall budget of American labs like OpenAI and Anthropic. This is like saying DeepSeek spent a lot less on apples than OpenAI spent on food. When making an apples-to-apples comparison, DeepSeek spent less, but the difference was far less stark.DeepSeek simultaneously released an app that was free with a remarkably clean design and visible chain-of-thought (CoT). DeepSeek was fast following, so they had no reason to hide the CoT. Comparisons only compared DeepSeek’s top use cases to the same use cases elsewhere, ignoring the features and use cases DeepSeek lacked or did poorly on. So if you wanted to do first-day free querying, you got what was at the time a unique and viral experience. This forced other labs to also show CoT and accelerate release of various models and features. It takes a while to know how good a model really is, and the different style and visible CoT and excitement made people think r1 was better than it was. The timing was impeccable. DeepSeek got in right before a series of other model releases. Within two weeks it was very clear that American labs remained ahead. This was the peak of a DeepSeek cycle and the low point in others cycles. The timing was also impeccable in terms of the technology. This was very early days of RL scaling, such that the training process could still be done cheaply. DeepSeek did a great job extracting the most from its chips, but they are likely going to have increasing trouble with its compute disadvantage going forwards. DeepSeek leveraged the whole ‘what even is safety testing’ and fast following angles, shipping as quickly as possible to irrevocably release its new model the moment it was at all viable to do so, making it look relatively farther along and less behind than they were. Teortaxes notes that the R1 paper pointed out a bunch of things that needed fixing but that DeepSeek did not have time to fix back then, and that R1-0528 fixes them, and which weren’t ‘counted’ during the panic. DeepSeek got the whole ‘momentum’ argument going. China had previously been much farther behind in terms of released models, DeepSeek was now less behind (and some even said was ahead), and people thought ‘oh that means soon they’ll be ahead.’ Whereas no, you can’t assume that, and also moving from a follower to a leader is a big leap. There was highly related to a widespread demand for a ‘China caught up to the USA’ narrative, from China fans and also from China hawks of all sorts. Going forward, we are left with a ‘missile gap’ style story. There are also a lot of people always pushing the ‘open models win’ argument, and who think that non-open models are some combination of doomed and don’t count. These people are very vocal, and vibes are a weapon of choice, and some have close ties to the Trump administration. The stock market was highly lacking in situational awareness, so they considered this release much bigger news than it was, and it caused various people to ‘wake up’ to things that were already known and anticipate others waking up, and there was widespread misunderstanding of how any of the underlying dynamics worked, including Jevon’s Paradox and also that if you want to run r1 you go out and buy more chips, including Nvidia chips. It is also possible that a lot of the DeepSeek stock market reaction was actually about insider trading of Trump policy announcements. Essentially: The Efficient Market Hypothesis Is False.
The R2 Moment Will MatterI continue to believe that when R2 arrives (or fails to arrive for a long time), this will tell us a lot either way, whereas the R1-0528 we got is not a big update. If R1-0528 had been a fully top model and created another moment, that would of course huge, but all results short of that are pretty similar. I stand by
Is it possible this was supposed to be R2, I will however note that DeepSeek has a reputation for being virtuous straight shooters that is based on not that many data points, and one key point of that was their claim to have not done distillation, a claim that now seems questionable. On Your MarksThe state of benchmarking seems rather dismal. This could be the strongest argument that the previous DeepSeek market reaction was massively overblown (or even a wrong-way move). If DeepSeek giving us a good model is so important to the net present value of our future cash flows, how is no one even bothering to properly benchmark r1-0528? And how come, when DeepSeek released their next model, Nvidia was up +4%? It wasn’t an especially impressive model, but I have to presume it was a positive update versus getting nothing, unless the market is saying that this proves they likely don’t have it. In which case, I think that’s at least premature. Evals aren’t expensive by the standards of hedge funds, indeed one of the hedge funds (HighFlyer) is how DeepSeek got created and funded.
I notice that on GPQA Diamond, DeepSeek claims 81% and Epoch gives them 76%. I am inclined to believe Epoch on that, and of course DeepSeek gets to pick which benchmarks to display whether or not they’re testing under fair conditions. DeepSeek clearly have in various ways been trying to send the impression that R1-0528 is on par with o3, Gemini-2.5-Pro and Claude 4 Opus. That is incompatible with the lack of excitement and reaction. If an open weights model at this price point was actually at the frontier, people would be screaming. You wouldn’t be able to find a quiet rooftop.
Math level 5 is fully saturated as of o3 so this should be the last time we use it.
In The NewsThe initial headlines were what you would expect, and were essentially ‘remember that big DeepSeek moment? Those guys gave us a new version.’
Yakefu is effectively talking their own book here. I don’t see why we should interpret this as catching up, everyone is reducing hallcinations and costs, but certainly DeepSeek are competing. How successfully they are doing so, and in what league is the question. One can perhaps now see how wrong we were to overreact so much to the first r1. Yes, r1-0528 is DeepSeek ‘catching up’ or ‘closing in’ in the sense that DeepSeek’s relative position looks now, right after a release, better than it looked on May 27. But it does not look better than when I wrote ‘on DeepSeek’s r1’ in January and LiveCodeBench appears at best cherry picked. The article concludes with Nvidia CEO Huang making his typical case that because China can still make some AI models and build some chips, we should sacrifice our advantages in compute on the altar of Nvidia’s stock price and market share.
A search of the Washington Post and Wall Street Journal failed to find any articles at all covering this event. If r1 was such a big moment, why is this update not news? Even if it was terribly disappointing, shouldn’t that also be news? Other ReactionsNormally, in addition to evals, I expect to see a ton of people’s reactions, and more when I open up my reactions thread. This time, crickets. So I get to include a lot of what did show up.
Teortaxes highlights where the original R1 paper says they plan to fix these limitations. This seems like a reasonable way to think about it, R1-0528 is the version of R1 that isn’t being rushed out the door in a sprint with large compute limitations.
This was the high end of opinion, as xjdr called it a frontier model, which most people clearly don’t agree with at all, and kalomaze calls it ‘excellence’ but this is relative to its size:
However:
Different people had takes about the new style and what it reminded them of.
The Distillation AccusationA key question that was debated about the original r1 was whether it was largely doing distillation, as in training on the outputs of other models, effectively reverse engineering. This is the most common way to fast follow and a Chinese specialty. DeepSeek explicitly denied it was doing this, but we can’t rely on that. If they did it, this doesn’t make r1’s capabilities any less impressive, the model can do what the model can do. But it does mean that DeepSeek is effectively a lot farther behind and further away from being able to ‘take the lead.’ So DeepSeek might be releasing models comparable to what was available 4-8 months ago, but still be 12+ months behind in terms of ability to push the frontier. Both measures matter.
Then again, claims can differ:
I agree with Fraser, it’s not a bad move to be doing this if allowed to do so, but it would lower our estimate of how capable DeepSeek is going forwards. If Teortaxes is saying the claim of distillation is sound, I am inclined to believe that, especially given there is no good reason not to do it. This is also consistent with his other observations above, such as it displaying a more ‘westoid’ flavor and having a sycophancy issue, and a different style of CoT. It’s Quietly Probably a Solid Model, SirIf you place high value in the cost and open nature of r1-0528, it is probably a solid model for the places where it is strong, although I haven’t kept up with details of the open model space enough to be sure, especially given so little attention this got. If you don’t place high value on both open weights and token costs, it is probably a pass. The biggest news here is the lack of news, the dog that did not bark. A new DeepSeek release that panics everyone once again was a ready made headline. I know I was ready for it. It didn’t happen. If this had been an excellent model, it would have happened. This also should make us reconsider our reactions the first time around. You're currently a free subscriber to |