---
subject: "Links for July 2024"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-07-24 04:00:16
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX"]
---
[I haven’t independently verified each link. On average, commenters will end up spotting evidence that around two or three of the links in each links post are wrong or misleading. I correct these as I see them, and will highlight important corrections later, but I can’t guarantee I will have caught them all by the time you read this.] 1: The data show teenage depression rates going way up around 2012, lending credibility to stories about social media harming mental health. But 2: Congress 3: Claims:
4: 5: When I studied Cognitive Behavioral Therapy, the textbook cases would involve people with ridiculously distorted thoughts, like a billionaire who worried he wasn’t successful enough. I always wondered if any real people were that messed-up; as always, Twitter delivers: 6: Mind and Mythos essay club looks at
7: Alex Tabarrok: three years after the government 8: Leopold Aschenbrenner 9: 10: Claims: The Google comparison briefly confused me - “queries” here means “messages to the AI”, so a conversation with a hundred back-and-forth questions counts as 100 queries (whereas most people only query Google a few times daily). In terms of total visitors, c.ai is still only at about 0.02% of Google’s. Still, this is way more than I expected, given that even trying to follow AI trends I’d never really heard anything about this. “People getting addicted to AI girlfriends en masse” should be considered a present-day problem rather than a future one. 11: The founders of Iowa divided it into 100 equally-sized square-ish counties, giving it a pleasing and orderly geometry. Then Iowans keep trying to split Kossuth County to make their state pleasing and orderly again, and the Kossuthians 12: Did you know: Emory Tate, the father of martial arts influencer Andrew Tate, 13: Related: 14: Arc Institute (Patrick Collison et al’s biotech research lab) claims to have discovered a gene editing method which is safer and more precise than CRISPR ( 15: 16: Harvard 17: William Robinson was a traveling stage magician in 1890s America. He was less successful than newcomer Ching Ling Foo, a competing magician who benefited from his exotic Chinese origins. So Robinson painted his face yellow, rebranded as 18: Related: the obsolete anti-malaria drug mepacrine has an odd side effect: it turns your skin yellow. During World War II, some American spies in China
19: Claim: 20: Guardian “reporter” who wrote hit piece on the rationalist community Have I mentioned I’m still annoyed about Elizabeth Spiers 21: Followup to discussion on how dictatorial Modi is vs. isn’t: famous Indian author and Modi critic Arundhati Roy is 22: Slightly related: history of 23: 24: In the early 20th century, it was understood that the world of engineering and technology was a particular hotbed of socialist activity. Now the opposite is true. 25: Emil Kierkegaard: 26: It’s conventional wisdom in these parts that “Ban The Box” (the campaign to make it illegal to ask employees about their criminal records) backfired - unable to tell which minorities were vs. weren’t criminals, employers discriminated against all of them. But a new paper finds 27: 28: When Warren Buffet was just a young early-career businessman, he wanted to join a country club. Although he wasn’t Jewish, he was so angry that his local country club banned Jews that 29: 30: Related: geneticist Sasha Gusev has 31: Well, Harris has finally replaced Biden. Let this be a lesson to all the commenters who told me that the Democratic Party was rudderless and didn’t have enough shadowy elites to enforce obviously-correct actions. What bothers me most about this whole thing was how good 32: An r/slatestarcodex poster from Argentina
33: 34: 35: Metaculus is running an AI bot forecasting tournament. You write the bot, they provide the questions, best bot wins $30,000 prize. Learn more 36: 37: Charles Lehman responds to my posts on mentally ill homeless people: 38: Claims: 39: WeAreNotSaved 40: “Z-poetry” is the new genre of poetry supporting the Russian side in the Ukraine war. Konstantin Asimonov 41: The You're currently a free subscriber to |