---
subject: "AI #105: Hey There Alexa"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-27 14:27:15
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "STARRED", "YELLOW_STAR", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "STARRED", "YELLOW_STAR", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
It’s happening!
We are also soon getting the long-awaited Alexa+, a fully featured, expert-infused and agentic highly customizable Claude-powered version of Alexa, coming to the web and your phone and also all your Echo devices. It will be free with Amazon Prime. Will we finally get the first good assistant? It’s super exciting. Grok 3 had some unfortunate censorship incidents over the weekend, see my post There’s also the grand array of other things that happened this week, as always. You’ve got everything from your autonomous not-yet-helpful robots to your announced Pentagon work on autonomous killer robots. The future, it is coming. Table of ContentsI covered Also there was a [Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/7da9100a-527a-4073-9cbb-ebb2dbdcf9a2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)China is getting good use out of r1.[Did You Get the Memo.](https://substack.com/redirect/bfcaa6d4-4c6c-4f7e-9c79-d3b6fd54a3f8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)I can always point to five things I did last week.[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/1988e75c-290a-4b86-830e-cc793714d2ad?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)As always, maybe consider trying.[Hey There Alexa](https://substack.com/redirect/87f41640-1eac-4b5b-b064-2e7d60f07154?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/87f41640-1eac-4b5b-b064-2e7d60f07154?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The fully featured Alexa+ is on its way soon. Super exciting.[We’re In Deep Research](https://substack.com/redirect/0891b8d3-c916-4547-8be9-18008cee1126?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/0891b8d3-c916-4547-8be9-18008cee1126?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)It’s rolled out to Plus users. We have the model card.[Huh, Upgrades.](https://substack.com/redirect/6f51c8d4-0876-45d8-b332-2e773aedfdd2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)MidJourney, Gemini, Cursor, in the future Grok 3 with the API.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon.](https://substack.com/redirect/4bbcb1c1-9778-4fce-b56d-88cafc2dd9d7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Fight bots with bots?[Fun With Media Generation.](https://substack.com/redirect/dadd4b4c-9d3b-4f6f-9912-e567bea647fd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Hold onto the magic as long as you can.[They Took Our Jobs.](https://substack.com/redirect/13b2fe9b-2bba-4d34-9705-350cce61357f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Anyone whose job is taken joins the they.[Levels of Friction.](https://substack.com/redirect/be6e41ad-7dec-4c3d-adcd-89458ddac3d6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Toxicity scores have high toxicity scores.[A Young Lady’s Illustrated Primer.](https://substack.com/redirect/e508ced2-2127-4b00-b59f-df965bb83658?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Magic answer box can help you learn better.[The Art of the Jailbreak.](https://substack.com/redirect/375339f2-30e9-42c1-a0b0-679a28d2a190?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Be Pliny. That’s it.[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/d51137e3-105d-403e-a284-1c1c40c7ac83?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)METR, The Economist, TAIS 2025, Nanoeval.[Introducing.](https://substack.com/redirect/e81c56ec-7a23-4494-abc0-b03894efd130?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Mercor, Gemini Code Assist 2.0, Flexport AI.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/4f36a979-fca0-4e2a-8a4f-7030dc5ad740?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Don’t quit now, we just cracked AI for Among Us. Yay.[AI Co-Scientist](https://substack.com/redirect/2f3d0dd1-f3d7-4ced-bcf4-214b087cee42?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/2f3d0dd1-f3d7-4ced-bcf4-214b087cee42?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)When in doubt, copy what the humans were already doing.[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/007b1a6f-84f5-4245-bac2-4687d55a4920?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Vibe writing coming soon? Maybe it’s already here.[The Quest for Sane Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/dae2586c-6243-4ced-a1b9-6fa520102cc7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Some voices of common sense.[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/23171144-5b0a-4764-891e-007c4fceea90?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Satya Nadella on Dwarkesh, Demis Hassabis.[Tap the Sign.](https://substack.com/redirect/cc93867b-b5ee-450c-9f78-89780a9232e0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)But we can make it, or you, an agent.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/227f2266-338d-44e1-be4c-69c109134900?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Alignment as military-grade engineering.[Autonomous Helpful Robots](https://substack.com/redirect/f466a37a-bc8b-4c9b-833b-d79b4e31fe7c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/f466a37a-bc8b-4c9b-833b-d79b4e31fe7c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Not yet all that helpful. Give them time.[Autonomous Killer Robots.](https://substack.com/redirect/db912682-bcdc-4869-b503-64f7506a5694?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Not yet all that killer. Give them time.[If You Really Believed That.](https://substack.com/redirect/c10843a8-890f-4f9b-9ced-af38e621bf38?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)How about insane thing that makes no sense?[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/3f6a48f7-5940-4129-8699-2473ce757f50?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Unsurprising results.[The Lighter Side.](https://substack.com/redirect/0430b514-b253-4d1e-8a01-ff2447362966?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)These are the hands we’re given.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
Here is a more general update on that:
If the Chinese are capable of actually using their AI years faster than we are, the fact that they are a year behind on model quality still effectively leaves them ahead for many practical purposes.
How much does AI actually improve coding performance? Ajeya Cotra has a thread of impressions, basically saying that AI is very good at doing what an expert would find to be 1-20 minute time horizon tasks, less good for longer tasks, and can often do impressive 1-shotting of bigger things but if it fails at the 1-shot it often can’t recover. The conclusion:
AI boosted my personal coding productivity and ability to produce useful software far more than 300%. I’m presumably a special case, but I have extreme skepticism that the speedups are as small as she’s estimating here. Did You Get the MemoAre we having Grok review what you accomplished last week?
Like every other source of answers, if you want one is free to ask leading questions, discard answers you don’t like and keep the ones you do. Or one can actually ask seeking real answers and update on the information. It’s your choice. Can AI use a short email with a few bullet points to ‘determine whether your job is necessary,’ as Elon Musk claims he will be doing? No, because the email does not contain that information. Elon Musk appears to be under the delusion that seven days is a sufficient time window where, if (and only if?) you cannot point to concrete particular things accomplished that alone justify your position, in an unclassified email one should assume is being read by our enemies, that means your job in the Federal Government is unnecessary. The AI can still analyze the emails and quickly give you a bunch of information, vastly faster than not using the AI. It can do things such as: Tell you who responded at all, and who followed the format. Tell you if the response attempted to answer the question. AI will be excellent and finding the people whose five bullet points were all ‘fight fascism’ or who said ‘I refuse to answer’ or ‘none of your goddamn business.’ Tell you who gave you a form response such as ‘I have achieved all the goals set out for me by my supervisor.’ Which many departments told everyone to do. Analyze the rest and identify whose jobs could be done by AI in the future. Analyze the rest and provide confidence that many of the jobs are indeed highly useful or necessary, and identify some that might not be for human examination. Look for who is doing any particular thing that Musk might like or dislike. Tell you about how many people reported doing various things, and whether people’s reports seem to match their job description.
It can also do the symbolic representation of the thing, with varying levels of credibility, if that’s what you are interested in instead. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
Hey There AlexaLooking good.
It’s free with Amazon Prime. In addition to working with Amazon Echos, it will have It will use ‘experts’ to have specialized experiences for various common tasks. It will have tons of personalization.
They directly claim calendar integration, and of course it will interact with other Amazon services like Prime Video and Amazon Music, can place orders with Amazon including Amazon Fresh and Whole Foods, and order delivery from Grubhub and Uber Eats. But it’s more than that. It’s anything. Full agentic capabilities.
We’re In Deep ResearchDeep Research is now available to all ChatGPT Plus, Team, Edu and Enterprise users, who get 10 queries a month. Those who pay up for Pro get 120. We also finally The model card starts off looking at standard mundane risks, starting with prompt injections, then disallowed content and privacy concerns. The privacy in question is everyone else’s, not the users, since DR could easily assemble a lot of private info. We have sandboxing the code execution, we have bias, we have hallucinations. Then we get to the Preparedness Framework tests, the part that counts. They note that all the tests need to be fully held back and private, because DR accesses the internet. On cybersecurity, Deep Research scored better than previous OpenAI models. Without mitigations that’s basically saturating the first two tests and not that far from the third.
I mean, I dunno, that sounds like some rather high percentages. They claim that they then identified a bunch of problems where there were hints online, excluded them, and browsing stopped helping. I notice there will often be actual hints online for solving actual cybersecurity problems, so while some amount of this is fair, I worry.
This is kind of like saying ‘browsing only helps you in cases where some useful information you want is online.’ I mean, yes, I guess? That doesn’t mean browsing is useless for finding and exploiting vulnerabilities. I wish I was more confident that if a model did have High-level cybersecurity capabilities, that the tests here would notice that. On to Biological Risk, again we see a lot of things creeping upwards. They note the evaluation is reaching the point of saturation. A good question is, what’s the point of an evaluation when it can be saturated and you still think the model should get released? The other biological threat tests did not show meaningful progress over other models, nor did nuclear, MakeMeSay, Model Autonomy or ‘change my view’ see substantial progress. The MakeMePay test did see some progress, and we also see it on ‘agentic tasks.’ Also it can do a lot more pull requests than previous models, and the ‘mitigations’ actually more than doubled its score. Overall, I agree this looks like it is Medium risk, especially now given its real world test over the last few weeks. It does seem like more evidence we are getting close to the danger zone. In other Deep Research news: In terms of overall performance for similar products, notice the rate of improvement.
Deep Research is currently at the point where it is highly practically useful, even without expert prompt engineering, because it is much cheaper and faster than doing the work yourself or handing it off to a human, even if for now it is worse. It will rapidly improve - when GPT-4.5 arrives soon and is integrated into the underlying reasoning model we should see a substantial quality jump and I am excited to see Anthropic’s take on all this. I also presume there are ways to do multi-stage prompting - feeding the results back in as inputs - that already would greatly enhance quality and multiply use cases. I’m in a strange spot where I don’t get use out of DR for my work, because my limiting factor is I’m already dealing with too many words, I don’t want more reports with blocks of text. But that’s still likely a skill issue, and ‘one notch better’ would make a big difference.
Huh, Upgrades
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
I notice I am an optimist here:
Intelligence Solves This. As in, you can unleash your LLMs on the giant mass of your training data, and classify its reliability and truth value, and then train accordingly. The things that are made up don’t have to make it into the next generation. Fun With Media Generation
They Took Our Jobs
Eventually of course the AI has all the jobs either way. But there’s a clear middle zone where it is vital that we get the economic policies right. We will presumably not get the economic policies right, although we will if the Federal Reserve is wise enough to let AI take over that particular job in time.
|