---
subject: "Weekly Dose of Optimism #58"
from: "Not Boring <notboring@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-09-01 12:38:01
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Not Boring", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2982495070691762429", "UNREAD"]
---
Hi friends 👋, Happy Friday and welcome back to our 58th Weekly Dose of Optimism. In Let’s get to it. The Weekly Dose is brought to you by… We can’t recommend WoP is the writing course that Packy took back in 2019 that jumpstarted his writing career. The course is run by David Perrell, and it was started with the simple belief that when you publish your ideas online, you unleash the full power of the Internet. For Packy, it worked: he went from no audience in 2019 to over 200K subscribers and a full-time career in internet writing just a couple of years later.
The next cohort of (1)
Not only are we capable of building beautiful things today, they also tend to be more functional. Take the newly retrofired Pyxis Ocean, a bulk carrier equipped with sail-like wind turbines that could reduce the ship’s greenhouse gas emissions by ~20%. The maritime industry accounts for nearly 3% global CO2 emissions. And as we all experienced during the supply chain crisis, it’s also critical for maintaining our way of life. The solution to the industry’s emissions problem is not to stop shipping things, or even to ship less things. That would be disastrous. One solution is to use technology, like these “wind-wings,” to reduce the emissions per shipment. We’re still early here — there’s approximately 50,000-60,000 cargo ships in the world and only one is currently outfitted with this technology. But proving out feasibility is important. Over time, more ships will be outfitted, we’ll develop new technologies that make the wind-wings more efficient, and then eventually, a whole new technology will drop that lowers emissions so much that the wind-wings will be obsolete. We still know how to build beautiful, functional things. (Ed. Note: Just getting in a “A sailboat. You invented a sailboat.” before the comments.) (2) Speaking of building beautiful, functional things… The US is currently suffering a shortage of 5 million homes, and 90% of building projects end up over-budget or delayed. Most homes are still built on-site, piece by piece with stick-framing, hammers, and nails—as they have been for the last century. It’s an incredibly fragmented and inefficient building process. Cover is flipping that process on its head, in an effort to solve the US’ housing shortage. The company uses software to design custom homes and then produces those homes right in its LA factory. The result is beautifully designed, affordable custom homes. Pre-fab has been tried (and failed) before, but Cover is taking a fresh approach that learns from those pitfalls, as seen in the video and as founder Our man (3) Kaufmann et al for Nature
OK, IDK if I agree with the paper’s assertion that drone racing is a “real physical sport.” Honestly, if drone racing is a sport then I’m also calling myself an athlete for publishing this newsletter every week. But whether it’s a sport or not is kind of besides the point. The important thing to note is that we now have AI-powered drones capable of outperforming human drivers. As noted, that’s a big deal for this “sport”, but the implications spread well beyond a couple of hobbyist-athletes racing drones for kicks. A company like Anduril could use high-performance AI-powered drones to keep soldiers safe on the battlefield or Amazon could use them to increase the feasibility of drone delivery. Whether drone racing is a sport or not, it holds true that what starts out looking like a toy can often end up being the next big thing. (4)
This conversation is an in-depth primer on the history of nuclear energy in America and an analysis of where things are headed, with a nuclear energy practitioner. Putting aside the ambition of the project for a second, Matt is a good example of a new breed of founder that’s become more common over the last couple of years. He touches on his journey in the pod, but a quick glance at If this keeps up, who knows, maybe one day we might be able to turn in these 140 characters for nuclear-powered flying cars. (5) h/t
And oldie, but a goodie People think that cynical people are smarter than other people Cynical people are less smart than less cynical people Less competent people embrace cynicism as a protective strategy
Taken together, it goes something like this: We think cynical people are smart, but they are not any smarter than less cynical people; in fact, less smart people adopt cynicism as a defense mechanism. So if you encounter any unnecessary cynicism this weekend, just know where it’s coming from. That’s all for this week. Packy is taking the week off for Labor Day, so no Tuesday essay this week, but we’ll be back in your inbox Friday. Thanks for reading, Dan + Packy |