---
subject: "From Railway Madness to Digital Anxiety"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-11-12 12:51:30
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
People simply weren’t built to go that fast. To put a bunch of fragile bodies made of flesh and blood in a metal canister and hurtle them toward their destination was unnatural. On top of that, the constant noise wasn’t good for the ears or the mind, was it? And what would happen to the vulnerable people inside if there were ever a crash? Railroad travel in the 19th century must have seemed completely bonkers. For people used to traveling no faster than the speed of a horse — which was under the rider’s control at all times — being transported around the country in a loud mechanical contraption that moved as fast as 60 miles per hour was not just frightening; people feared that the experience pushed the human body and mind beyond their limits. The effects of railroad collisions were new and somewhat mysterious to doctors. The prominent British doctor John Erichsen wrote a book on
Survivors of railroad accidents often sued the railways for compensation for their physical suffering. Over time, they started to sue for their mental symptoms, too, whether or not they’d suffered an accident. People with no physical injuries Some came to believe that the repeated experience of train travel — the noise, the crowding, the stress, the danger — could break someone mentally. Stories began to spread about “ Railway spine and its attendant mental maladies were just some of the ways in which urbanized, industrial society threatened the human mind. For the last two centuries, humans have been fearful that our rapidly changing technological environments — so different from humanity’s “natural” surroundings — are going to break our brains. Today, we worry about diminishing attention spans, depression, and anxiety, but our modern concerns are echoes of previous fears over railway madness and the other mental disorders of industrial life. What did 19th-and early-20th-century The man who coined the term,
A doctor named
And how did these evils manifest in American society? Beard saw them everywhere:
Neurasthenia seemed to By living their new modern lifestyles, people were in danger of using up their nervous system’s supply of energy. Their brains, the experts warned, would simply give out. So let’s say you found yourself afflicted with the symptoms of neurasthenia — your hair was falling out, you were too hot to too cold, or you were simply too anxious. What could you do to heal yourself? The cure When men like Theodore Roosevelt and Walt Whitman went to their doctors complaining of nervousness and exhaustion, they were often told to go outdoors — preferably to the rugged American West. Doctors like
Roosevelt’s time in the Dakotas became the stuff of legend; he went there an asthmatic, anxious, and, some said, But if you were a woman, you were expected to take to your bed. Mitchell saw the increasing social and intellectual activity of young women as dangerous to their mental health and a threat to their reproductive abilities:
Women’s mental problems were, Mitchell argued, due to a lack of fat and blood. They needed to But most people couldn’t afford to spend months on a dude ranch or locked in a room. They needed a quicker fix. That’s where the “ It’s easy to chuckle at the clumsy attempts of people in the past to grapple with the effects of modern life, but are we all that different today? We no longer diagnose people with neurasthenia or railway madness, but we still worry about the ways in which new technology and the accelerating pace of life affect our brains. Nowadays, we give these afflictions different labels: ADHD, anxiety, internet addiction disorder, etc. Just as in the 19th century, we know that we’re living in a world that our bodies and minds aren’t really built for. We feel the effects of our struggle to adapt to our new circumstances, and we worry that our new technologies are warping our brains. It feels better to place a definitive-seeming medical diagnosis on these problems than to simply know that our world makes us feel bad. I’m not arguing that modern diagnoses aren’t real, or that people shouldn’t seek treatment for them. But it’s useful to understand that every era has invented its own language for the stresses associated with rapid technological and social change — and searched for remedies, some of which are helpful and some of which are not. As in the 19th century, the diseases of modernity that we suffer from represent our fears and anxieties about the world that we’ve built and our ability to live within it. This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are three ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: You can share the newsletter with others: You can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading! You're currently a free subscriber to |