---
subject: "Gemini 1.0"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-12-07 14:37:25
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
It’s happening. Technical SpecificationsContext length trained was 32k tokens, they report 98% accuracy on information retrieval for Ultra across the full context length. So a bit low, both lower than GPT—4 and Claude and lower than their methods can handle. Presumably we should expect that context length to grow rapidly with future versions. There are three versions of Gemini 1.0.
This makes sense. I do think there are, mostly, exactly these three types of tasks. Nano tasks are completely different from non-Nano tasks. This graph reports relative performance of different size models. We know the sizes of Nano 1 and Nano 2, so this is a massive hint given how scaling laws work for the size of Pro and Ultra. Gemini is natively multimodal, which they represent as being able to seamlessly integrate various inputs and outputs. They say their benchmarking on text beats the existing state of the art.
I love that ‘above 90%’ turns out to be exactly 90.04%, whereas human expert is 89.8%, prior SOTA was 86.4%. Chef’s kiss, 10/10, no notes. I mean, what a coincidence, that is not suspicious at all and no one was benchmark gaming that, no way.
I wonder when such approaches will be natively integrated into the UI for such models. Ideally, I should be able to, after presumably giving them my credit card information, turn my (Bard?) to ‘Gemini k-sample Chain of Thought’ and then have it take care of itself. Here’s their table of benchmark results.
GPT-4 is pretty excited about this potential ‘Gemini Ultra’ scoring 90%+ on the MMLU, citing a variety of potential applications and calling it a substantial advancement in AI capabilities. They strongly imply that GPT-4 got 95.3% on HellaSwag due to data contamination, noting that including ‘specific website extracts’ improved Gemini’s performance there to a 1-shot 96%. Even if true, performance there is disappointing. What does this suggest about Gemini Ultra? One obvious thing to do would be to average all the scores together for GPT-4, GPT-3.5 and Gemini, to place Gemini on the GPT scale. Using only benchmarks where 3.5 has a score, we get an average of 61 for GPT 3.5, 79.05 for GPT-4 and 80.1 for Gemini Ultra. By that basic logic, we would award Gemini a benchmark of 4.03 GPTs. If you take into account that improvements matter more as scores go higher, and otherwise look at the context, and assume these benchmarks were not selected for results, I would increase that to 4.1 GPTs. On practical text-only performance, I still expect GPT-4-turbo to be atop the leaderboards. Gemini Pro clearly beat out PaLM-2 head-to-head on human comparisons, but not overwhelmingly so. It is kind of weird that we don’t have a win rate here for GPT-4 versus Gemini Ultra. Image understanding benchmarks seem similar. Some small improvements, some big enough to potentially be interesting if this turns out to be representative. Similarly they claim improved SOTA for video, where they also have themselves as the prior SOTA in many cases. For image generation, they boast that text and images are seamlessly integrated, such as providing both text and images for a blog, but provide no examples of Gemini doing such an integration. Instead, all we get are some bizarrely tiny images. One place we do see impressive claimed improvement is speech recognition. Note that this is only Gemini Pro, not Gemini Ultra, which should do better. Those are error rate declines you would absolutely notice. Nano can run on-device and it is doing importantly better on YouTube than Whisper. Very cool. Here’s another form of benchmarking.
I read the training notes mostly as ‘we used all the TPUs, no really there were a lot of TPUs’ with the most interesting note being this speed-up. Does this mean they now have far fewer checkpoints saved, and if so does this matter?
Their section on training data drops a few technical hints but wisely says little. They deliberately sculpted their mix of training data, in ways they are keeping private. In section 6 they get into responsible deployment. I appreciated them being clear they are focusing explicitly on questions of deployment. They focus (correctly) exclusively on the usual forms of mundane harm, given Gemini is not yet breaking any scary new ground.
Their instruction tuning used supervised fine tuning and RLHF. A particular focus was on attribution, which makes sense for Google. Another was to avoid reasoning from a false premise and to otherwise refuse to answer ‘unanswerable’ questions. We need to see the resulting behavior but it sounds like the fun police are out in force. It doesn’t sound like their mitigations for factuality were all that successful? Unless I am confusing what the numbers mean. Looking over the appendix and its examples, it is remarkable how unimpressive were all of the examples given. I notice that I watch how honestly DeepMind approaches reporting capabilities and attacking benchmarks as an important sign for their commitment to safety. There are some worrying signs that they are willing to twist quite a ways. Whereas the actual safety precautions do not bother me too much one way or the other? The biggest safety precaution is one Google is not even calling a safety precaution. They are releasing Gemini Pro, and holding back Gemini Ultimate. That means they have a gigantic beta test with Pro, whose capabilities are such that it is harmless. They can use that to evaluate and tune Ultimate so it will be ready.
Level Two BardGemini Pro, even without Gemini Ultra
Even before Gemini, Bard did a very good job helping my son with his homework assignments, such that I was sending him there rather than to ChatGPT.
When will Bard Advanced (with Gemini Ultra) be launched? Gemini ReactionsSome were impressed. Others, not so much. The first unimpressive thing is that all we are getting for now is Gemini Pro. Pro is very clearly not so impressive, clearly behind GPT-4.
Simeon: Gemini is here. Tbh it feels like it's GPT-4 + a bit more multimodality + epsilon capabilities. So my guess is that it's not a big deal on capabilities, although it might be a big deal from a product standpoint which seems to be what Google is looking for.
For the big multimodal video, this issue is a big deal.
Was this faked? I am sure it was cherry-picked, and likely the result of various iterations. I doubt they would actually fake it, certainly doubt they’d fake it and also tell us with another document exactly how they faked it, and I think those saying this are misunderstanding how the process worked. You should not however expect to have this quality of experience in a typical interaction. Setting aside integrity issues, wow are we all jaded at this point, but when I watch that video, the biggest impression I get is… big lame dad energy? I do get that this is happening in real time, but none of this is surprising me. Google put out its big new release, and I’m not scared. If anything, I’m kind of bored? This is the best you could do? Whereas when watching the exact same video, others react differently.
Does it? I mean, I guess, if you didn’t already assume all of it, and it was this smooth for regular users? I can think of instances in which a camera feed hooked up to Gemini with audio discussions could be a big game. To me this is a strange combination of the impressive parts already having been ‘priced into’ my world model, and the new parts not seeming impressive. So I’m probably selling it short somewhat to be bored by it. If this was representative of a smooth general multimodal experience, there is a lot to explore.
Liv Boeree? Impressed.
I love that this is saying that OpenAI isn’t valuable both because Gemini is so good and also because Gemini is not good enough.
Google’s central problem is not wokeness, it is that they are a giant company with lots of internal processes and powers that prevent or slow or derail innovation, and prevent moving fast or having focus. And there are especially problems making practical products, integrating the work of various teams, making incentives line up. There is lots of potential, tons of talent, plenty of resources, but can they turn that into a product? Too soon to tell. Certainly they are a long way from ‘beat OpenAI’ but this is the first and only case where someone might be in the game. The closest anyone else has come is Claude’s longer context window. You're currently a free subscriber to |