---
subject: "The Transit Card Naming Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-09-20 15:49:36
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Mark Slavonia (MJS) is an investor, a pilot, and an Mark here. One place technology has undoubtedly made life simpler is public transportation. Routes and timetables for most systems are integrated into mapping apps, waiting times are prominently displayed, and payment no longer requires exact change or even individual tickets and tokens. Why is this interesting? Before we were all carrying around iPhones, contactless smart cards that work across all of a region’s disparate transportation systems hugely simplified public transportation. First introduced in the mid-90s in Seoul, South Korea with Hong Kong’s Octopus Card Hong Kong followed shortly after Seoul in 1997 and kicked off the trend of giving these systemwide cards excellent names. The Octopus Card, commemorated the intelligent and adaptable creatures that live in the city’s bay, and evoked the broad reach of the region’s many types of public transportation. Soon after, other cities followed suit and introduced cards with clever and regionally-appropriate names. Around the world there are many great transit card names, loads of decent ones, and few terrible ones. London evoked its fishmonger past when it launched the Oyster Card in 2004. London’s Oyster Card Most, but not all, of the most clever card names commemorate local or symbolic animals, such as the ORCA card in Seattle and the LeoCard in Lviv, Ukraine (the latter’s city shield prominently features a lion). San Francisco’s Clipper Card recalls the fast clipper sailing ships of the 19th century while suggesting the way one just clips the card against the reader. Los Angeles’s TAP makes a more direct suggestion for how to use the card. Boston’s spectacularly-named CharlieCard Boston’s subway system historically had a maddening and incomprehensible payment system that often required additional payment before exiting. A rider without exact change could theoretically be stuck in the subway. In 1949, a Progressive mayoral candidate named Walter O’Brian used a traditional folk song, adapted by Jacqueline Steiner and Bess Lomax Hawes, in his campaign, promising lower subway fares by singing the ballad of a man named Charlie who got stuck in the system for want of a nickel. A decade later The Kingston Trio recorded a version of the political protest song and scored a surprise #1 hit, A [Wikipedia list](https://substack.com/redirect/b773b061-04e3-4357-ad1a-54dcc8b644ac?r=8o54n)of smart transit cards around the world. Some of these are probably great names in the local language.The history of the [New York City subway token](https://substack.com/redirect/0f498943-20ad-4f62-af4a-e4099d7fa712?r=8o54n)
— WITI x McKinsey: An ongoing partnership where we highlight interesting McKinsey research, writing, and data. How industrial technology is creating a more inclusive economy. McKinsey reveals 35 cutting-edge companies in the industrial tech sector, highlighting a robust “titanium economy” that creates American jobs and fuels innovation. They’re some of the fastest-growing and most profitable in the US. — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Mark (MJS) —
You’re a free subscriber to |