---
subject: "Projecting Ourselves Onto the Past"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-12-29 14:02:47
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
First, a note of thanks to all of you who have read this newsletter this year! The number of subscribers doubled in 2024, which is incredibly gratifying. I especially appreciate those of you who have gone out of your way to share the newsletter or sign up as paid subscribers. Your support keeps this project going! I’ve enjoyed exploring history with this community, and I’m hoping to spend even more time on this project in 2025, adding some midweek posts in addition to the usual Sunday deep-dives. I hope you’ll come along for the ride. Thanks again, and happy New Year! James Lewis was more interested in history — especially old coins — than he was in his day job as an artilleryman in the army of the British East India Company. So he deserted in 1827, changed his name to Charles Masson, and spent years in search of ancient coins from the Greco-Indian kingdoms that existed in central Asia. He traveled all over the region, apparently leaving graffiti above one of the famous Buddhas carved into a cliff at Bamiyan, Afghanistan. In the end, he was very successful, amassing a collection of thousands of coins. But the most important part of Masson’s 15-year exploration had nothing to do with coins or graffiti. In 1829, he followed tips from local residents that led him to a site in modern-day Punjab, Pakistan. He was the first known European to visit this place, called Harappa. Masson didn’t excavate much at this site, but he did write about it in a book. His writings alerted later archaeologists, both professional and amateur. Over the course of the late 19th and early 20th centuries, British archaeologists dug at Harappa. In time, they realized that it was just one of many ancient sites in the region. Charles Masson had stumbled across a civilization four millennia old, as ancient as the pyramids in Egypt. The Indus Valley people are now seen as one of the great early civilizations, boasting important advances in architecture, agriculture, and city-building that rivaled better-known societies like ancient Egypt, Mesopotamia, and China. But we know much less about the Indus Valley than we do about these other civilizations because we can’t read Indus Valley writing. The Indus Valley script remains one of the most tantalizing Until the Indus Valley code is cracked, all we have to work with is the material culture of the Indus Valley cities. Though the sites were technologically advanced — they even had flush toilets! — archaeologists have noticed several distinctive characteristics at Indus Valley sites: The cities are unusually uniform, featuring the same basic layout and dimensions. There are no monumental structures, no obvious palaces or temples. There is no clear indication of governmental structure or rulers — no statues of kings like the other ancient societies, and no evidence of standing armies.
What were historians to do with such a difficult and intriguing historical puzzle? Make it about themselves, of course. The history of the Indus Valley Civilization may tell us more about the people who studied it than about the subjects of that study. Presented with a relatively blank historical canvas, historians projected their own hopes, dreams, preoccupations, and fears onto the Indus Valley people. It all started with the intrepid “discoverer” of Harappa, Charles Masson. He didn’t pay a ton of attention to Harappa because he didn’t understand what he had stumbled upon. His understanding of Indian history was shaped by his English education, which centered on the Greeks and Romans. In his eyes, the most important event in early Indian history was Alexander the Great’s failed invasion of the subcontinent in 327 BCE. So he assumed that the ruins at Harappa were a city built by Masson wasn’t alone in his assumptions. The mostly British scholars who excavated the Indus Valley sites struggled to accept that Indian people could have accomplished something so impressive. Nineteenth-century European scholars speculated that the Indus Valley sites were Mesopotamian colonies or Egyptian trading cities. The problem with these theories is that there was no evidence to support them. Eventually, archaeologists realized that such a vast civilization — with over 1,000 towns and cities — must have been indigenous. But what to make of the differences between Indus Valley society and the other early civilizations? Where were the Indus Valley’s pyramids or royal tombs? Where were the statues of its kings and gods? As the idea that Indians couldn’t have created such an impressive civilization started to fade, scholars began to jump to the opposite conclusion — maybe the Indus Valley was a uniquely advanced society. Perhaps they had figured things out that the humans of the twentieth century still struggled with. We see this sentiment in the 1931 writings of
In the early twentieth century — a period defined by terrible warfare and bitter class struggle — scholars like Marshall saw tantalizing possibilities in the Indus Valley. What if these ancient people had created an advanced, sophisticated society without oppression, social hierarchy, or warfare? Could the relatively uniform and organized cities of ancient India be evidence that people could create a collective utopia? That must have sounded pretty good to scholars who had lived through the upheavals and injustices of the World Wars, revolutions, and economic upheavals of the 1910s-1940s. By the 1950s, a new generation had started to
These midcentury scholars, writing in the wake of the Second World War and living through a conflict between democratic freedoms and communist totalitarianism, wondered whether invaders had conquered the region and imposed sameness on it from the outside. Or perhaps a dominant class of people had forced this conformity from within. Maybe it was the priests, as Stuart Piggott
The argument over the Indus Valley’s uniformity and egalitarianism still rages. Was Indus society a hierarchy? A Most of the time, scholars found what they seemed to be looking for in the first place. One of the biggest mysteries of the Indus civilization is its decline and fall. Around 1900 BCE, the cities began to depopulate. The major cities were empty a couple of centuries later. Since we don’t have written accounts of the events that led to those events, scholars have been left to speculate. And these speculations, too, have reflected modern concerns. One of the first theories to emerge was the “ Historians have disputed the meaning of the seal below for a century — does it represent an early version of the Hindu god Shiva, which would mean that the Aryans did not bring Hinduism with them from Central Asia? Is it an image of another divine figure, like Indra, Durga, or Mahishasura? Or is it an image of something else entirely? Nobody knows — scholars can’t even agree on whether the figure is male or female. The racial and cultural identity of the Indus people has become important in modern Indian politics, as well. The question of whether one should see Indus culture as the true origin of Indian civilization carries great symbolic weight in India’s current culture war. Indus civilization — which is often The study of the end of the Indus civilization also reflects our modern environmental concerns. It’s not surprising that scholars living in an age of increasingly unpredictable weather and warnings of climate crisis would begin to see reflections of their own era in ancient India. Scholars have found soil I don’t doubt that changing weather patterns did disrupt Indus society. I find it exciting to imagine that the people of Harappa may have found a way to create an orderly society without the creation of the hierarchies that plagued other civilizations. In the absence of decipherable written evidence, scholars have done impressive work to decode the material clues left us by the Indus Valley people. We have to understand, however, that many of the most influential theories about this enigmatic ancient society have reflected as much about the modern people who did the investigating as they do about the ancient Indus people. After all, the study of history is, as the British historian R.G. Collingwood
This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: Or you can share the newsletter with others: Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week! Adapted (and improved, I think) from You're currently a free subscriber to |