---
subject: "Making american milk safe"
from: "Works in Progress <worksinprogress+notes-on-progress@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-05-16 14:15:09
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Works in Progress"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_1644361085112560554"]
---
We’re experimenting with turning on comments on our Substack. Please leave your thoughts below! We’re also hosting a Stripe Press pop-up coffee shop and bookstore on Saturday, June 28, in Washington, DC. In 1887, a New Jersey toddler called John Summerfield Coit died of milk-borne diphtheria. Neither his death at such a young age nor that he contracted the disease that killed him from drinking cow’s milk was unusual. In 1880, Raw milk was a particular threat to infants because it was common for babies to be fed partly or exclusively on cow’s milk, an ancient practice known as ‘artificial feeding’ that grew in popularity as bottle designs improved and more mothers worked One early twentieth-century Today, widespread pasteurization has made milk safe. Pasteurization, a low temperature heat treatment, was invented by French chemist Louis Pasteur in the early 1860s. But 20 years later, John Summerfield Coit and his peers were still dying of milk-borne pathogens. Delays in understanding that milk was a vector for disease, debates over the health effects of heat-treating milk, and confusion over effective pasteurization meant it took decades for milk pasteurization to become standard in the US, at a cost of hundreds of thousands of lives. A contributor to this delay was the origin of Pasteur’s experiments. Pasteur began his work after being Furthermore, germ theory was in its infancy in the 1860s. Instead, it was the impurity of milk due to adulteration, not pathogens, that was the Newspaperman Frank Leslie discovered that many of New York’s distilleries had acquired dairy cows. These distillery-dairies kept their cows in cramped, diseased conditions and fed them ‘swill’, the boiling alcoholic mash left over from making whisky. The distillery-dairies sold the milk produced by these sickly, ulcerated animals as ‘pure country milk’, after first improving its appearance with additives including plaster of Paris and starch. Leslie published a lengthy exposé, complete with illustrations showing the conditions inside the distillery-dairies and maps pinpointing their location. A step forward in identifying the presence of pathogens in milk came in 1882, when German microbiologist Robert Koch The staining method He then injected the bacilli into guinea pigs and saw that they went on to develop the symptoms of tuberculosis. The discovery made Koch Serious interest in pasteurizing milk did not arise until the late 1890s, when a doctor and microbiologist working for the American government, called Theobald Smith, showed that bovine tuberculosis was a distinct, though related, pathogen from human tuberculosis. Smith published a But even once it was established that milk could carry dangerous diseases, there was resistance to its widespread pasteurization. In the US, take-up faced strong medical opposition from doctors, particularly pediatricians, who argued that the heating process might be making milk less Notable among the medical men who resisted pasteurization was Dr Henry L Coit of Newark, father of John Summerfield. As a young man, Coit decided to become a doctor when he fainted upon seeing blood at the scene of an accident. After being The death of his young son made safe milk a driving Coit believed that the key factors in getting safe milk to children were the cleanliness of dairies, the health of the cows, the quality of the fodder that was fed to them, and the proper cold storage and transportation of milk. He created the Certified Milk Commission, a group of doctors working purely on a voluntary basis to regularly visit dairies and certify them as producing safe milk. But Coit, like many pediatricians of his day, completely dismissed pasteurization, believing it to be a dangerous red herring. He called pasteurization a ‘compromise for pure milk’ and a way of making ‘dirty milk clean’. The resistance of medical men like Coit contributed to public skepticism towards pasteurization and also made dairies less likely to take up the process. Pasteurization was also somewhat counterintuitive. In this era, the safest milk was procured quickly, with as little time as possible between cow and cup. Many people believed that adding extra steps only increased the risk while worsening the taste. Even as new research showed small children However, others became convinced that pasteurization was the key to providing the children of America with safe milk. Key among them was philanthropist and department store magnate Nathan Straus. Straus was born in what is now Germany in 1848, arriving in the US with his family as a 6 year old. First settling in Georgia, the Straus family Like Coit, Straus’s motivations in joining the fight for safer milk were personal: two of his children had Straus’s great project was to familiarize Americans with pasteurized milk by making it widely available to them at loss-making prices, putting to bed fears that it was an inferior product through easy access and familiarity. Inspired by a New York paediatrician who had established a heat-treated milk dispensary for children, Straus began opening up his own milk depots in In sharp contrast with Coit’s
In 1900, Straus’s depots distributed Straus and Coit knew of and disliked one another. When tuberculosis was discovered in one of Coit’s certified partner dairies, Straus In 1907, President Theodore Roosevelt ordered the US Public Health Service to investigate the benefits of pasteurized milk. The resulting By 1923, New York’s infant mortality rate had For Coit’s part, he was undoubtedly successful in getting safer raw milk to more people, and his emphasis on refrigeration and hygiene is mirrored in many of today’s practices. But he remained essentially blind to the value of pasteurization. Even after the US Public Health Service’s 1908 report set the tone for city health authorities across America by firmly recommending national take up of pasteurization, Coit Phoebe Arslanagic-Wakefield is co-founder of Boom and a fellow at the Center for British Progress. Thanks for subscribing to |