---
subject: "The Men's Party"
from: "Balaji <balajis@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-01-28 17:06:18
labels: ["Balaji", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_3304713803370614215", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
This post struck a nerve on Twitter, gaining more than Republicans are becoming the men’s party. The party of strong men and the women that love them. This is both obvious and non-obvious. Obvious because the Republicans have been attacked for decades as the party of “rich straight white men”, so of course they’re the men’s party! Non-obvious because this actually means a distinct shift in emphasis relative to the recent past. Let us count the ways. 1) First, the Republicans are no longer the party of “white men”, but anti-anti-white men. It’s a big tent; you just need to extend the common courtesy of not attacking white conservatives and libertarians on the basis of race. 2) Second, it’s not just the party of men. Because married men, married women, and single men all vote Republican. As of 2022, 3) Third, it’s now the party of strength. That could be actual physical strength in its 4) Fourth, it’s not really the “ A Republican today could well be a working class carpenter, but wants to get wealthier some day, and maybe run their own business. And they might be nonwhite, but they don’t define themselves by their race nor make a habit of attacking white people as white. In other words, they don’t define themselves by their victimization but by their aspiration. Democrats are the party of victims, Republicans are the party of men. 5) Fifth, modern Republicans are ultra-libertarian. It’s about individual ownership of firearms, redecentralization of power to the states, deregulation, Bitcoin, and anti-institutionalism. There is some continuity with Reaganism, but 6) Perhaps the single biggest thing about redefining the Republicans as primarily the men’s party is that it ensures they are always competitive. No matter what happens demographically, the percentage of men is flat at roughly 50% — and everyone has strong men they admire and respect. That gives all-weather traction and global appeal. So, that draws the political battle lines. On one side, strong men of many ethnicities and the women that love them. On the other side…the PostscriptWhat should we do with weak people? Help them I thought this was obvious too, but the question makes me realize it’s not. I guess folks expect a cartoon villain answer like “let the weak die, it’s their problem” or even “the strong do what they will, the weak do what they must.” But helping others become strong is the right strategy. It’s really just the teach-a-man-to-fish proverb. You can reconceptualize it as enlightened self interest, as The point is that you win and they win. By strengthening others, you strengthen your community, and thus indirectly yourself. Note that this isn’t pure Discuss this article with Balaji and your fellow subscribers at |