---
subject: "The Ancient Art of Color"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-03-02 14:01:14
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Pliny the Elder wasn’t all that impressed. He
But he ultimately didn’t get the “frantic passion for purple” in ancient Rome, especially given its disgusting origins:
Pliny was talking about Tyrian purple, the color that instantly signified to any Roman that its wearer was an important person. Purple became shorthand for significance; Marcus Aurelius advised his readers to avoid arrogance by telling them to Purple was symbolic because it was so expensive. The dye came from several types of sea snails, most notably the murex, a native of the eastern Mediterranean (near Tyre, a Phoenician trading hub), which today has the scientific name Bolinus brandaris. The path from snail to dye was not a pretty one. Pliny tells us that
After the snails were crushed, their goo was cooked for a week until it became a usable dye. The process was disgusting — the smell was so pungent that the workshops were far from the center of town — and wasteful. One gram of dye Tyrian purple was so important that ancient people invented a myth to explain its origins. The Phoenician god There aren’t a lot of examples of Tyrian purple that remain from ancient times. Since it was rare to begin with and was used to dye fragile textiles, we don’t quite know what it looked like. This mosaic of the Byzantine emperor Justinian and his retinue tries to capture it: Tyrian purple was so intertwined with the legacy of Rome’s greatness that Charlemagne — who, 300 years after the fall of western Rome, tried to reclaim the title of Roman Emperor — commissioned his burial shroud in Tyrian purple imported from Byzantium: Neither of these examples likely captures the richness of the original color. In the medieval period, the Byzantines generally kept the color to themselves, restricting its use to the clothing of royals and bishops or occasionally using it to stain the parchment of holy books. The purple industry took its toll on the snail population — How many snails gave their lives for this single page from a Bible? After the Ottomans took Constantinople, the use of Tyrian purple died out. Popes and cardinals Thanks for reading! This newsletter is reader-supported. To support my work, please click the button below: If you want to help keep this project going, please consider purchasing a paid subscription. Paid subscribers — it’s only about 75 cents a week! — get access to the archives, the satisfaction of supporting work they enjoy, and my undying gratitude. The story of Tyrian purple demonstrates that color in the ancient world was an extravagance. You probably don’t think much about where the colors in your life come from (I certainly don’t). You select a red shirt or a blue pair of pants without much sense of how they got that way. But in the ancient and medieval world, vivid color was often achieved through painstaking effort and monumental expense. To liven up your home or body with a splash of color took some doing. Another color that became famous long before the Phoenicians started to crush and cook snails was “Egyptian blue,” which is at least While many ancient colors are faded or gone entirely, washed away by centuries of weathering, Egyptian blue still packs a punch. This sphinx of Amenhotep III is almost 3,500 years old: This board game (also from the time of Amenhotep III) seems ready to play: And this hippo is coming up on its 4,000th birthday: The pigment is even vivid outside of human visual abilities. Egyptian blue The Egyptians weren’t the only ancient civilization to have a signature shade of blue. The Mayans also devised a blue pigment that has stood the test of time. They created it by grinding up the leaves of an indigo plant and mixing them with a particular type of clay. Maya blue was used everywhere — and I mean everywhere. Since the color was associated with the rain god Chaak, even human-sacrifice victims were More often, though, it shows up in the stunning art of the Mayan people. Since the pigment is remarkably durable — even modern solvents can’t remove it — it has outlasted the other colors on many Mayan objects. It’s a softer, more sky-blue pigment than the Egyptian version, as you can see on this 1,200 year old whistle: And this costumed figurine: The color continued to be used for a while after Spanish colonists conquered the Yucatan. It shows up in the Florentine Codex, created in the mid-1500s: And the work of artists like Our final shade ties together one of the world’s great ancient dynasties and cutting-edge modern science. Chinese artists developed their own pigments, creating the colors that we today call Han purple and Han blue, though they were created before the Han Dynasty took power. Both were made in a way similar to Egyptian blue — artists melted sand, barium, and copper together at high temperatures. In fact, because the processes are so similar, some historians have speculated that they are There’s not a lot of these pigments left on ancient works of art, at least as far as I could find. The famous Qin Dynasty terracotta warriors have traces of this blue pigment on them, though it’s mostly weathered away now. But this mural of people playing a board game gives a sense of the rich color that used to decorate many Han-era artifacts: Perhaps the most interesting thing about Han purple is its use in modern physics. I won’t pretend to understand the science here, but something about the mineral structure of the pigment causes weird things to happen when it’s at very low temperatures and exposed to magnetic waves. I’ll let science writer Esther Inglis-Arkell try to
While the Chinese artisans who produced these pigments likely had no idea that they were creating a substance that “ These ancient pigments can still stun us across the centuries. I’ve certainly had the experience of moving through a museum, drowsily looking at the faded gray and white art, and then being shaken awake by a vivid flash of Egyptian blue. These pigments must have done something similar for the ancient artists who used them — otherwise, why would they have sunk such immense amounts of time and money into producing them? This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: Or you can share the newsletter with others: Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week!
You're currently a free subscriber to |