---
subject: "Mantic Monday 9/16/24"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-09-17 00:13:15
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Probably No Superintelligent Forecaster YetFiveThirtyNine (ha ha) is a new forecasting AI that purports to be “superintelligent”, ie able to beat basically all human forecasters. In fact, its creators go further than that: they say it beats Metaculus, a site which aggregates the estimates of hundreds of forecasters to generate estimates more accurate than any of them. You can read the announcement (kudos to the team for making the model publicly available, especially since these things usually have high inference costs) The basic structure is the same as past forecasting AIs like The creators say the ChatGPT copy had a knowledge cutoff of October 2023, so they tested it on Metaculus questions from after that date. It got 87.7% accuracy, slightly above Metaculus forecasters’ 87.0%. Manifold is skeptical: The commenters, especially Neel Nanda, found that doing knowledge cutoffs properly is hard, and the ChatGPT base seems to know about news events after October 2023 - upon questioning, it seemed aware of an earthquake in November 2023. But also, my attempts to play around with the bot haven’t been encouraging: I asked it to predict the chance that Prospera would have a population of at least 1,000 in 2027. Like FutureSearch on the same question, it cited many interesting news articles on Prospera’s chances but failed to do the basic step of figuring out its current population and growth rate. It eventually concluded 35% chance, which is reasonable enough. But when asked whether Prospera would have a population of 100,000 in 2028, it also said 35% chance, which is absurd. A Twitter user pointed out (and I confirmed) that upon being asked “What is the probability that Joe Biden is still President in October 2025?”, it goes through a lot of reasoning about his age and dementia and finally concludes 55% because he’s not that demented. I originally thought this might be due to the knowledge cutoff (it doesn’t know Biden dropped out in favor of Harris), but if I ask the AI about October 2029, then it says that Joe Biden has dropped out in favor of Harris (even though in that question it doesn’t matter). So now I think it’s more like ChatGPT’s tendency to [round anything that sounds vaguely like the surgeon riddle off to the surgeon riddle](https://substack.com/redirect/f1067df4-a3dc-4b7a-89f5-7d682195c571?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)- in the same way, FiveThirtyNine rounds off anything that sounds vaguely like the popular question “is Biden too old and demented to stay president?” into that question, even though there are much stronger non-dementia-related reasons he can’t be president next year.
The FutureSearch team wrote a LessWrong post generalizing these kinds of observations, They conclude:
Still, FiveThirtyNine is a big advance in at least one way: as far as I know, it’s the first high-quality AI forecaster which is free to the general public. r/MarkMyWords
…most of them are “mark my words, time will prove Democrats right about everything, and reveal Republicans to be disgusting criminal hypocrites”. …so much so that it kind of fails as a potentially interesting institution and becomes just another monument to how sad the Internet’s gotten. Still, it might be fun to keep going until you find an old post where the prediction has already “resolved”, and see what happens. Here are some of the highest-upvoted posts from at least a year ago (minus pop culture and dumb in-jokes): MMW: [Somebody very important will be killed by an AI in 2021](https://substack.com/redirect/0d621536-2284-45e1-ba9b-bf8bf9dcb293?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).MMW: [For the next 20 years, news outlets will claim a new virus is the next COVID](https://substack.com/redirect/fb996bb1-87b6-404a-b994-a3fe980de4ba?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)
…okay, that wasn’t fun or interesting either. Also, it’s really hard (there are a lot more new posts than old ones). But I bet it’ll be fun to try the same thing a year or so after the election. Polymarket Is Rolling In CashWe talk about a lot of topics here. AI forecasters. Brier scores. Fixing science. But the average person is in forecasting for one thing: betting on presidential elections. Here’s Some of this is no doubt due to the hard work of Shayne and his team improving the site. But let’s be honest. It’s mostly because people really want to bet money on Trump/Harris 2024. The presidential market has a total volume of $910 million, far above eg markets about the Superbowl ($50 million), the World Series ($5 million), and the bird flu epidemic ($141,000). Even a 1% fee on all this trading would make Polymarket a lot of money. But they . . . don’t really seem to charge fees? According to
They’re rolling in money, it’s just not their money. Yet. Still, it’s hard to overstate their dominance. Remember, their presidential election market has $910 million. For their competitor, PredictIt, the same number Along with the cash, they’re collecting prestige and endorsements. Nate Silver I don’t talk about Polymarket much because they’re not doing anything too far-out or experimental. They don’t have the strongest accuracy track record, and they don’t have the most diverse markets. Still, they’ve carried out their fundamentals really well, with great UI, market making, and ability to navigate legal storms. From a business perspective, they’re the standout winners of the early 2020s bumper crop of prediction markets. This Month In The Markets1: You knew it was coming: See also various slightly-weaker or slightly-stronger versions of the same question ( 2: Why did this go down so much in April 2024? 3: I originally thought this was about Strawberry, but the timing is wrong: it’s a Google DeepMind AI that got just short of the gold threshold back in July. People seemed genuinely surprised by this! 4: 5: I hadn’t even heard of this theory before; you can learn more 6: Finally, prediction markets returning to their roots: 7: Forecasting Links1: Trouble in England as politicians are accused of betting on political topics. In July, 2: Dean Ball has 3: Kalshi vs. CFTC, round one million: after CFTC banned Kalshi from hosting political contracts last year, Kalshi appealed. You're currently a free subscriber to |