---
subject: "AI #103: Show Me the Money"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-13 15:10:06
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
The main event this week was the disastrous Another major twist was that Elon Musk made a $97 billion bid for OpenAI’s nonprofit arm and its profit and control interests in OpenAI’s for-profit arm. This is a serious complication for Sam Altman’s attempt to buy those same assets for $40 billion, in what I’ve described as potentially the largest theft in human history. I’ll be dealing with that tomorrow, along with two other developments in my ongoing OpenAI series The Mask Comes Off. In Altman’s OpenAI also plans to release ‘GPT-4.5’ in a matter of weeks, which is mostly the same timeline as the full o3, followed by the promised ‘GPT-5’ within months that Altman says is smarter than he is. It’s a bold strategy, Cotton. To their credit, OpenAI also released In the meantime, what else is happening? Table of Contents[Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/c82e62af-d1a9-4a90-8feb-5382f1c57aba?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Don’t go there. We tried to warn you.[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/bb74d2a3-c702-4e62-b092-7c9a87519924?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)No episodic memory?[We’re in Deep Research.](https://substack.com/redirect/56b392be-fced-48c1-bdc0-986f55d30df8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Reactions still very positive. Pro to get 10 uses/month.[Huh, Upgrades](https://substack.com/redirect/75ef6abd-eaed-449b-a5b0-912d0eb72ab6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/75ef6abd-eaed-449b-a5b0-912d0eb72ab6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)GPT-4.5, GPT-5, Grok 3, all coming quite soon. And PDFs in o3.[Seeking Deeply.](https://substack.com/redirect/eef08b2a-b241-4380-be56-2dda86f187b8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)And r1 begat s1.[Smooth Operator.](https://substack.com/redirect/dcc5e2ad-0c01-4c1d-82ad-2a24a12bca8b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Use it directly with Google Drive or LinkedIn or similar.[They Took Our Jobs.](https://substack.com/redirect/e91c3b82-20e0-491b-ba3a-92cfd2cab0b7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The California Faculty Association vows to fight back.[Maxwell Tabarrok Responds on Future Wages.](https://substack.com/redirect/fee4121d-e5c9-46ec-a269-3158e6ae1945?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The crux is what you would expect.[The Art of the Jailbreak.](https://substack.com/redirect/6b49e83d-50e4-405e-86eb-abaea2d76f18?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Reports from Anthropic’s competition.[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/e5da9ca7-1865-42d9-aced-4d90c5cb907d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)OpenPhil grants, Anthropic, DeepMind.[Introducing.](https://substack.com/redirect/f7d57d80-a870-4137-930f-1e612c6f400d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The Anthropic Economic Index.[Show Me the Money](https://substack.com/redirect/bcf52b96-5826-4bb0-a942-3cb36e6236d0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/bcf52b96-5826-4bb0-a942-3cb36e6236d0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Over $300 billion in Capex spend this year.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/ff3258a6-866b-4c85-b6cc-7e6570414866?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Adaptation is super fast now.[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/c474c495-9710-4831-b6e7-e36e955e16f0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)How much do you understand right now?[The Quest for Sane Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/d012affc-159f-4dcb-90fd-12be5c3e1a87?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)There are hard problems. I hope someone cares.[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/14b5901b-2859-472b-a3c1-9f54e82529d3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Cowen, Waitzkin, Taylor, emergency podcast on OpenAI.[The Mask Comes Off.](https://substack.com/redirect/c9931935-05a2-4ea2-8edc-e30f8d029c2f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)What was your ‘aha’ moment?[Rhetorical Innovation](https://substack.com/redirect/c5d2652d-3c05-4fd7-b18c-3c540056b2b5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/c5d2652d-3c05-4fd7-b18c-3c540056b2b5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The greatest story never listened to.[Getting Tired of Winning.](https://substack.com/redirect/9ea276c3-8dab-4eb0-b7fe-ec88202c689b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)No, seriously, it doesn’t look good.[People Really Dislike AI.](https://substack.com/redirect/95c31f37-6cce-471a-ba65-a34c90e4a433?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)I do not expect this to change.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/c47872e6-0474-4b14-83c8-19362bb289c3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Joint frameworks?[Sufficiently Capable AIs Effectively Acquire Convergent Utility Functions](https://substack.com/redirect/74965a4b-1a30-41cc-894c-b70b2f03c857?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/74965a4b-1a30-41cc-894c-b70b2f03c857?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Oh.[People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/5aaacb5e-ed2b-4857-aa11-64eed3a5c61f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Who, me? Well, yeah.[Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/08b4d6f0-41b1-4174-8798-d8a50922f925?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)They’re fine with it.[The Lighter Side.](https://substack.com/redirect/bf72986b-3568-4380-9a77-a0f9af1ffcb4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Gotta keep digging.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
DeepSeek is the top downloaded app for January, but that’s very different from the most used app. It doesn’t seem like anyone has any way of knowing which apps actually spend the most user time. Is it Mail, WhatsApp, Safari and Chrome? Is it Instagram, Facebook, YouTube, TikTok and Spotify? How high up is ChatGPT, or DeepSeek? It seems no one knows?
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
It’s remarkable how ‘LLMs can’t do [X]’ or especially ‘paper shows LLMs can’t do [X]’ turns out to be out of date and simply wrong.
It’s not as easy for humans as you might think.
We’re in Deep Research
So make it count.
I suppose? Presumably you should be having AI help you write the prompt at that point. This is what happens when queries cost 50 cents of compute but you can’t buy more than 100 of them per month, otherwise you’d query DR, see what’s wrong with the result and then rerun the search until it went sufficiently hard.
I continue to be confused why this is so hard to do? I very much want to pay for my AI based on how much compute I use, including ideally being able to scale the compute used on each request, without having to use the API as the interface. That’s the economically correct way to do it.
It is easy to see how this is suddenly a way to change quite a lot of senior level work, even at the current functionality level. And I expect the version a few months from now to be substantially better. A lot of the restrictions on getting value here are very much things that can be unhobbled, like ability to access gated content and PDFs, and also your local context.
Colin Fraser continues to find tasks where Deep Research makes tons of mistakes,
I wonder if Patrick Collison or other similar people will try to multi-account to get around the report limit of 100 per month?
As an internet we definitely haven’t been putting enough effort into finding the right template prompts for Deep Research. Different people will have different preferences but a lot of the answers should be consistent. Also, not enough people are posting links to their Deep Research queries - why not have a library of them at our fingertips? Huh, Upgrades
This is a very aggressive free offering, assuming a solid UI. So much so that I expect most people won’t feel much need to fork over the $20 let alone $200, even though they should. By calling the baseline mode ‘standard,’ they’re basically telling people that’s what AI is and that they ‘shouldn’t’ be paying, the same way people spend all their time on their phone every day but only on free apps. Welcome to the future, it will continue to be unevenly distributed, I suppose. Seriously, now hear me out, though, maybe you can sell us some coins and gems we can use for queries? Coins get you regular queries, gems for Deep Research and oX-pro ‘premium’ queries? I know how toxic that usually is, but marginal costs? In terms of naming conventions, the new plan doesn’t make sense, either. As in, we will do another GPT-N.5 release, and then we will have a GPT-N that is not actually a new underlying model at all, completely inconsistent with everything. It won’t be a GPT at all. And also, I don’t want you to decide for me how much you think and what modality the AI is in? I want the opposite, the same way Gallabytes does regarding Deep Research. Obviously if I can very quickly use the prompt to fix this then fine I guess, but stop taking away my buttons and options, why does all of modern technology think I do not want buttons and options, no I do not want to use English as my interface, no I do not want you to infer from my clicks what I like, I want to tell you. Why is this so hard and why are people ruining everything, arrggggh. I do realize the current naming system was beyond terrible and had to change, but that’s no reason to… sigh. It’s not like any of this can be changed now.
Also they’re raising o3-mini-high limits for Plus users to 50 per day.
It’s coming:
I do not believe Elon Musk’s claim about Grok 3’s reasoning skills. Elon Musk at this point has to be considered a Well-Known Liar, including about technical abilities and including when he’s inevitably going to quickly be caught. Whereas Sam Altman is a Well-Known Liar, but not on a concrete claim on this timeframe. So while I would mostly believe Altman, Amodei or Hassabis here, I flat out do not believe Musk.
Seeking Deeply
I assume this ‘isn’t real’ in the beyond-benchmarks sense, given others aren’t reacting to it, and the absurdly small model size and number of examples. But maybe the marketing gap really is that big?
Which is why those investments are only getting bigger. Jevons Paradox confirmed, in so many different ways.
Last week Dario Amodei said DeepSeek had the worst safety testing scores of any model ever, which it obviously does.
Smooth Operator
As she notes, Operator isn’t quite ‘there’ yet but it’s getting interesting.
I would be very surprised if we only spend about a month in the human speed zone, unless we are using a very narrow definition of that zone. But that’s more like me expecting 3-12 months, not years. Life coming at us fast will probably continue to come at us fast. This all is of course a direct recipe for a rapid version of gradual disempowerment. When we have such superfast agents, it will be expensive to do anything yourself. ‘Solve alignment’ is necessary, but far from sufficient, although the level of ‘alignment’ necessary greatly varies by task type.
Yeah, more scale eventually fixes everything at some point, and I keep presuming there’s a lot of gains from Skill Issues lying around in the meantime, but also I haven’t been trying. They Took Our Jobs
I applaud the group for not pretending to be that which they are not. What are the planned demands of these ‘bargaining units’? ‘Protect academic labor from the incursion of AI.’ Prevent management from forcing the use of AI. Prevent management from using AI to perform ‘bargaining unit work.’ Prevent AI being used in the bargaining or evaluation processes. Prevent use of any faculty work product for AI training or development without written consent.
They may not know the realities of the future situation. But they know thyselves.
Or they could ignore all that, because none of that was ever the point, or because they’re counting on diffusion to take a while. Embrace the Signaling Model of Education, and also of Academia overall. Indeed, the degree to which these institutions are not embracing the future, they are telling you what they really are. And notice that they’ve been declining to embrace the future for quite a while. I do not expect them to stop now.
This is an interesting result but I think Deep Research is being optimistic with its estimates for many of these if the target is replacement rather than productivity enhancement. But it should be a big productivity boost to all these jobs.
Maxwell Tabarrok Responds on Future Wages
The short version: Tabarrok is asserting that at least one of [X] and [Y] will be true. Where [X] is ‘humans will retain meaningful absolute advantages over AI for some production.’ And where [Y] is ‘imperfect input substitution combined with comparative advantage will allow for indefinite physical support to be earned by some humans.’ If either [X] OR [Y] then he is right. Whereas I think both [X] and [Y] are false. If capabilities continue to advance, AIs will be cheaper to support on the margin than humans, for all production other than ‘literally be a human.’ That will be all we have. The rest of this section is the long version. He points out that AI and humans will be imperfect substitutes, whereas horses and cars were essentially perfect substitutes. I agree that humans and AIs have far stronger comparative advantage effects, but humans still have to create value that exceeds their inputs, despite AI competition. There will essentially only be one thing And yes, AI capability advances will enhance human productivity, which helps on the margin, but nothing like how much AI capability advances enhance AI productivity. It will rapidly be true that the human part of the human-AI centaur is not adding anything to an increasing number of tasks, then essentially all tasks that don’t involve ‘literally be a human,’ the way it quickly stopped helping in chess. Fundamentally, the humans are not an efficient use of resources or way of doing things compared to AIs, and this will include physical tasks once robotics and physical tasks are solved. If you were designing a physical system to provide goods and services past a certain point in capabilities, you wouldn’t use humans except insofar as humans demand the use of literal humans. I think this passage is illustrative of where I disagree with Tabarrok:
To me this is a failure to ‘feel the AGI’ or take AI fully seriously. AI will absolutely be able to step up into more levels of abstraction than humans, and surpass us in versatility and adaptability. Why would humans retain this as an absolute advantage? What is so special about us? If I’m wrong about that, and humans do retain key absolute advantages, then that is very good news for human wages. A sufficient amount of this and things would go well on this front. But that requires AI progress to importantly stall out in these ways, and I don’t see why we should expect this.
As I noted before I think the AI takes those jobs too, but I also want to note that even if Tabarrok is right in the first half, I don’t think there are that many jobs available in the second half. Even under maximally generous conditions, I’d predict the median person won’t be able to provide marginal value in such ‘meta’ jobs. It helps, but this won’t do it on its own. We’d need bigger niches than this to maintain full employment. I do buy, in the short-term, the general version of ‘the AI takes some jobs, we get wealthier and we create new ones, and things are great.’ I am a short-term employment optimist because of this and other similar dynamics. However, the whole point of Sufficiently Capable AI is that the claim here will stop being true. As I noted above, I strongly predict the AIs will be able to scale more levels of abstraction than we can. Those new techniques and technologies, and the development of them? The AI will be coming up with them, and then the AI will take it from there, you’re not needed or all that useful for any of that, either. So that’s the main crux (of two possible, see below.) If you think that humans will remain epistemically unique and useful in the wake of AI indefinitely, that we can stay ‘one step ahead,’ then that preserves some human labor opportunities (I would worry about how much demand there is at that level of abstraction, and how many people can do those jobs, but by construction there would be some such jobs that pay). But if you think, as I do, that Sufficiently Capable AI Solves This, and we can’t do that sufficiently well to make better use of the rivalrous inputs to AIs and humans, then we’re cooked. What about what he calls the ‘hand-made’ luxury goods and services, or what I’d think of as idiosyncratic human demand for humans? That is the one thing AI cannot do for a human, it can’t be human. I’m curious, once the AI can do a great human imitation, how much we actually care that the human is human, we’ll see. I don’t expect there to be much available at this well for long, and we have an obvious ‘balance of trade’ issue, but it isn’t zero useful. The alternative crux is the idea that there might be imperfect substitution of inputs between humans and AIs, such that you can create and support marginal humans easier than marginal AIs, and then due to comparative advantage humans get substantial wages. I call this [Y] below. What does he think could go wrong? Here is where it gets bizarre and I’m not sure how to respond in brief, but he does sketch out some additional failure modes, where his side of the crux could be right - the humans still have some ways to usefully produce - but we could end up losing out anyway.
[X]: Humans will be able to do things AIs can’t do, or humans will do them better. [Y]: Limited supply of AIs will mean humans survive via comparative advantage. [(X or Y) → Z] Human wages allow us to survive.
There’s no contradiction there. You can indeed claim both [X] and [Y], but it’s helpful to see these as distinct claims. I think [X] is clearly wrong in the long term, probably also the medium term, with the exception of ‘literally be a human.’ And I also think [Y] is wrong, because I think the inputs to maintain a human overlap too much with the inputs to spin up another AI instance, and this means our ‘wages’ fall below costs. Indeed, the worried do this all the time, because there are a lot of ways things can go wrong, and constantly get people saying things like: ‘AHA, you claim [Y] so you are finally admitting [~X]’ and this makes you want to scream. It’s also similar to ‘You describe potential scenario [X] where [Z] happens, but I claim [subfeature of X] is stupid, so therefore [~Z].’
I’ll close with this fun little note.
The Art of the Jailbreak
Another note is that the automated judge has a false negative problem, and the output size limit is often causing more issues than the actual jailbreaking, while the classifier is yielding obvious false positives in rather stupid ways (e.g. outright forbidden words). Here’s another example of someone mostly stymied by the implementation details.
In terms of what really matters here, I presume it’s importantly in the middle? Are the proposed filters too aggressive? Certainly they’re not fully on the Pareto frontier yet.
I get that this looks silly but soman-3 is a nerve gas agent. The prior on ‘the variable happened to be called soman and we were subtracting three from it’ has to be quite low. I am confident that either this was indeed an attempt to do a roundabout jailbreak, or it was intentionally chosen to trigger the filter that blocks the string ‘soman.’ I don’t see it as an issue if there are a limited number of strings, that don’t naturally come up with much frequency, that get blocked even when they’re being used as variable names. Even if you do somehow make a harmless mistake, that’s what refactoring is for.
This is a Levels of Friction issue. If you can do or figure out [X] right now but it’s expensive to do so, and I reduce (in various senses) the cost to [X], that matters, and that can be a difference in kind. The general argument form ‘it is possible to [X] so any attempt to make it more annoying to [X] is pointless’ is part of what leads to sports gambling ads all over our game broadcasts, and many other worse things. More broadly, Anthropic is experimenting with potential intervention [Y] to see if it stops [X], and running a contest to find the holes in [Y], to try and create a robust defense and find out if the strategy is viable. This is exactly the type of thing we should be doing. Trying to mock them for it is absurdly poor form. Get Involved
It’s time to update to a warning about ‘evals.’ There are two kinds of evals. Evaluations that tell you how capable a model is. Evaluations that can be used to directly help you make the model capable.
We are increasingly realizing that it is very easy to end up making #2 thinking you are only making #1. And that type #2 evaluations are increasingly a bottleneck on capabilities.
Introducing
It’s great to have this kind of data, even if it’s super noisy. One big problem with the Anthropic Economic Index is that Anthropic is not a representative sample of AI usage. Anthropic’s customers have a lot more Show Me the Money
I very much doubt this actually happens, and
UAE plans to invest ‘up to $50 billion’ in France’s AI sector, including a massive data center and an AI campus, putting its total investment only modestly behind the yearly spend of each of Amazon ($100b/year), Microsoft ($80b/year), Google ($75b/year) or Meta ($65b/year).
In Other AI NewsEarlier this week I wrote about Then right after both of those
Growth of AI startups in their early stages continues to be absurdly fast, I notice this is the first I heard of three of the companies on this graph.
For those who also didn’t know: Together.ai provides cloud platforms for building and running AI models. Coreweave does efficient cloud infrastructure. Deel is a payroll company. Wiz is a cloud security platform. Cursor is of course the IDE we all use. If ~100% of the new batch is making AI agents, that does bode well for the diversity and potential of AI agents, but it’s too much concentration. There are plenty of other things to do, too.
Quiet Speculations
I don’t agree with #1. The states remain very interested. Trump is Being Trump right now and the AI anarchists and jingoists are ascendant (and are only beginning to realize their conflicts) but even last week Hawley introduced a hell of a bill. The reason we think there’s no appetite is because of a coordinated vibe campaign to make it appear that there is no appetite, to demoralize and stop any efforts before they start. As AI increasingly messes with and becomes central to our lives, calls for action on AI will increase rapidly. The Congress might talk a lot about innovation and ‘beat China’ but the public has a very different view. Salience will rise.
I think this is like other scaling laws, where if you push on one thing you can scale - the Chain of Thought - without scaling the other components, you’re going to face diminishing returns. There’s a limit to ‘how smart’ the underlying models being used (v3, GPT-4o, Flash 2.0) are. You can still get super valuable output out of it. I expect the place this levels out to be super useful and eat a lot of existing jobs and parts of jobs. But yes I would expect that on its own letting these models ‘think’ longer with similar techniques will level out. Thus, the future very expensive frontier model training runs and all that.
I have saved that one as a sign-tap meme, and expect to use it periodically.
How good are the best models today? How rapidly are the best current models are able to self-improve? How will the best current models be knit together in stacked, decentralized networks of self-improvement, broadly akin to “the republic of science” for human beings?
He correctly says most people do not know even #1, ‘even if you are speaking with someone at a top university.’ I find the ‘even’ here rather amusing. Why would we think people at universities are ahead of the curve? His answer to #2 is that they ‘are on a steady glide towards ongoing self-improvement.’ As in, he thinks we have essentially reached the start of recursive self-improvement, or RSI. That’s an aggressive but highly reasonable position. So, if one did believe that, it follows you should expect short timelines, superintelligence takeoff and transformational change, right? Padme is looking at you. And that’s without things like his speculations in #3. I think this is a case of trying to fit AIs into ‘person-shaped’ holes, and thus making the concept sound like something that isn’t that good a metaphor for how it should work. But the core idea - that various calls to or uses of various AIs can form links in a chain that scaffolds it all into something you couldn’t get otherwise - is quite sound. I don’t see why this should be ‘decentralized’ other than perhaps in physical space (which doesn’t much matter here) but let’s suppose it is. Shouldn’t it be absolutely terrifying as described? A decentralized network of entities, engaged in joint recursive self-improvement? How do you think that goes? The Quest for Sane Regulations
I appreciate the attempt. It is a very strange list. Here ‘wonder weapons’ refers only to military power, including a way to break cybersecurity, but what about other decisive strategic advantages? Anything impacting the global balance of power is quite the category. It’s hard to say it’s ‘missing’ anything but also it doesn’t rule anything meaningfully out. This even includes ‘undermining societal foundations of national competitiveness,’ or accelerating productivity or science, disrupting labor markets, and so on. WMDs are the default special case of offense-defense balance issues. This is a strange way of putting loss of control concerns and alignment issues, and generally the bulk of real existential risks. It doesn’t seem like it illuminates. And it talks in that formal ‘things that might happen’ way about things that absolutely definitely will happen unless something radically changes, while radically understating the scope, severity and depth of the issues here. This refers to instability ‘along the path’ as countries race towards AGI. The biggest risk of these by far, of course, is that this leads directly to #4.
The report closes by noting that current policies will be inadequate, but without making concrete policy recommendations. It is progress to step up from ‘you must mean the effect on jobs’ to ‘this has national security implications’ but of course this is still, centrally, missing or downplaying the point. The Week in Audio
Responding purely to Tyler’s writeup since I have a very high bar for audio at this point (Conversations With Tyler is consistently interesting and almost always clears it, but that’s a different thing), I notice I am confused by his visions here:
Yet who has historically been one of the most derisive people when I suggest we should Pick Up the Phone or that China might be willing to cooperate? That guy. It certainly cements fully that Tyler can’t possibly believe in AGI let alone ASI, and I should interpret all his statements in that light, both past and future, until he changes his mind.
The Mask Comes OffRiffing off OpenAI’s Noam Brown saying seeing CoT live was the ‘aha’ moment (which makes having held it back until now even stranger) others riff on their ‘aha’ moments for… OpenAI.
Rhetorical Innovation
On the ending,
I am very much going to break that principle when and if I review Open Socrates. Like, a lot. Really a lot. Please do keep this in mind:
Does that include robotics? Why yes. Yes it does. Joshua continues to have a very conservative version of ‘rapid’ in mind, in ways I do not understand. The year 2050 ‘may even’ look very strange? We’ll be lucky to even be around to see it. But others often don’t even get that far.
My gut expectation is this only works on those who essentially are already bought into both feeling the AGI and the relevant failure modes, whereas others will see it, dismiss various things as absurd (there are several central things here that could definitely trigger this), and then use that as all the more reason to dismiss any and all ways one can be worried - the usual ‘if [X] specific scenario seems wrong then that means everything will go great’ that is often combined with ‘show me a specific scenario [X] or I’m going to not pay attention.’ But of course I hope I am wrong about that.
That last sentence follows if-and-only-if you count ‘releasing the AGI as an open model’ and ‘the AGI escapes lab control’ as counting towards this. I would assert that yes, those both count.
I do think the situation is dire, but to me Bogdan’s comment illustrates how eager so many humans are to give up control even when the situation is not dire. Faced with two choices - the AI in permanent control, or the wrong humans they don’t like in control - remarkably many people choose the AI, full stop. And there are those who think that any human in control, no matter who they are, count here as the wrong human, so they actively want to turn things over. Or they want to ensure humans do not have a collective mechanism to steer the future, which amounts to the same thing in a scenario with ASI. This was in response to Critch saying he believes that there exist people who ‘know how to control’ AGI, those people just aren’t talking, so he denounces the talking point that no one knows how to control AGI, then Max Tegmark saying he strongly believes Critch is wrong about that and all known plans are full of hopium. I agree with Tegmark. People like Davidad have plans of attack, but even the ones not irredeemably full of hopium are long shots and very far from ‘knowing how.’ Is it possible people know how and are not talking? Sure, but it’s far more likely that such people think they know how and their plans also are unworkable and full of hopium. And indeed, I will not break any confidences but I will say that to the extent I have had the opportunity to speak to people at the labs who might have such a plan, no one has plausibly represented that they do know. (Consider that a Canary statement. If I did know of such a credible plan that would count, I might not be able to say so, but for now I can say I know of no such claim.)
Neither Kant nor Aristotle would have trouble reconciling this. It is a blackpill to keep seeing so many people outright fooled by JD Vance’s no good, very bad suicidal speech at the Summit, saying things like ‘
No! What translation and clarity? A goose is chasing you. He didn’t actually describe anything about how AI promotes human flourishing. He just wrote, essentially, ‘AI will promote human flourishing’ on a teleprompter, treated it as a given, and that was that. There’s no actual vision here beyond ‘if you build it they will prosper and definitely not get replaced by AI ever,’ no argument, no engagement with anything.
They also aren’t good enough at making short-term plans. If they tried at this stage it obviously wouldn’t work. Getting Tired of WinningMany reasonable people disagree with my model of AGI and existential risk. What those reasonable people don’t do is bury their heads in the sand about AGI and its dangers and implications and scream ‘YOLO,’ determined to squander even the most fortunate of worlds. They disagree on how we can get from here to a good future. But they understand that the future is ours to write and we should try to steer it and write out a good one. Even if you don’t care about humanity at all and instead care about the AIs (or if you care about both), you should be alarmed at the direction things are taking by default. Whereas our governments are pushing forward in full-blown denial of even the already-baked-in mundane harms from AI, pretending we will not even face job losses in our wondrous AI future. They certainly aren’t asking about the actual threats. I’m open to being convinced that those threats are super solvable, somehow, but I’m pretty sure ‘don’t worry your pretty little head about anything, follow the commercial and nationalist incentives as hard and fast as possible and it’ll automagically work out’ is not going to cut it. Nor is ‘hand everyone almost unlimited amounts of intelligence and expect humans to continue being in charge and making meaningful decisions.’ And yet, here we are.
It’s not a coincidence that the aesthetics really are that horrible. Teortaxes continues to be the perfect example here, with a completely different theory of almost everything, often actively pushing for and cheering on things I think make it more likely we all die. But he’s doing so because of a different coherent world model and theory of change, not by burying his head in the sand and pretending technological capability is magic positive-vibes-only dust. I can respect that, even if I continue to have no idea on a physical-world level how his vision could work out if we tried to implement it. People Really Dislike AIRight now the debate remains between anarchists and libertarians, combined with jingoistic calls to beat China and promote innovation. But the public continues to be in a very, very different spot on this. The public wants less powerful AI, and less of it, with more precautions. The politicians mostly currently push more powerful AI, and more of it, and to YOLO. What happens? As I keep saying, salience for now remains low. This will change slowly then quickly.
Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is DifficultA follow up to my coverage of DeepMind’s safety framework, and its lack of good governance mechanisms:
That’s the thing about the current set of frameworks. If they ever did prove inconvenient, the companies could change them. Where they are insufficient, we can’t make the companies fix that. And there’s no coordination mechanism. Those are big problems we need to fix. I do agree with the following, as I noted
Ultimately you are going to need a coherent set of values. I do not believe it can be centrally deontological in nature, or specified by a compact set of English words. Sufficiently Capable AIs Effectively Acquire Convergent Utility FunctionsAs you train a sufficiently capable AI, it will tend to converge on being a utility maximizer, based on values that you didn’t intend and do not want and that would go extremely badly if taken too seriously, and it will increasingly resist attempts to alter those values.
That’s a log scale on the left. If the AI truly is taking that seriously, that’s really scary.
As in, the AIs as they gain in capability are converging on a fixed set of coherent preferences, and engaging in utility maximization, and that utility function includes some things we would importantly not endorse on reflection, like American lives being worth a small fraction of some other lives. And they get increasingly incorrigible, as in they try to protect these preferences. (What that particular value says about exactly who said what while generating this data set is left for you to ponder.)
However, they respond that this is not a major issue:
I’m not sure I completely buy that, but it seems plausible and explains the data. I would like to see this also tested with base models, and with reasoning models, and otherwise with the most advanced models that got excluded to confirm, and to rule out alternative hypotheses, and also I’d like to find a way to better deal with the ordering concern, before I rely on this finding too much.
Ideally, the update is ‘now other people will be better equipped to see what you already assumed, and you can be modestly more confident you were right.’ One of the central points Eliezer Yudkowsky would hammer, over and over, for decades, was that any sufficiently advanced mind will function as if it is a utility maximizer, and that what it is maximizing is going to change as the mind changes and will almost certainly not be what you had in mind, in ways that likely get you killed. This is sensible behavior by the minds in question. If you are insufficiently capable, trying to utility maximize goes extremely poorly. Utilitarianism is dark and full of errors, and does not do well with limited compute and data, for humans or AIs. As you get smarter within a context, it becomes more sensible to depend less on other methods (including virtue ethics and deontology) and to Shut Up and Multiply more often. But to the extent that we want the future to have nice properties that would keep us alive out of distribution, they won’t survive almost any actually maximized utility function. Then there’s this idea buried in Appendix D.2…
It’s worth experimenting, but carefully. Sonnet expects this update only has ~15% chance of actually populating and generalizing. I’d be inclined to agree, it’s very easy to see how the response would likely be to compartmentalize the responses in various ways. One worry is that the model might treat this as an instruction to learn the teacher’s password, to respond differently to explicit versus implicit preferences, and in general teach various forms of shenanigans and misalignment, and even alignment faking. People Are Worried About AI Killing EveryoneMe! I was actually really impressed, this was better than I expected even after seeing other DR reports on various topics. And it’s the topic I know best. Where it makes mistakes, they’re interpretive mistakes, like treating Balsa’s founding as indicating activism on AI, when if anything it’s the opposite - a hope that one can still be usefully activist on things like the Jones Act or housing. The post places a lot of emphasis on my post about Gradual Disempowerment, which is a good thing to emphasize but this feels like too much emphasis. Or they’re DR missing things, but a lot of these were actually moments of realizing I was the problem - if it didn’t pick up on something, it was likely because I didn’t emphasize it enough. So this emphasizes a great reason to ask for this type of report. It’s now good enough that when it makes a mistake figuring out what you meant to say, there’s a good chance that’s your fault. Now you can fix it. The big thematic claim here is that I’ve been getting more gloomy, and shifting more into the doom camp, due to events accelerating and timelines moving up, and secondarily hope for ability to coordinate going down. And yeah, that’s actually exactly right, along with the inability to even seriously discuss real responses to the situation, and the failure to enact even minimal transparency regulations ‘when we had the chance.’ If anything I’m actually more hopeful that the underlying technical problems are tractable than I was before, but more clear-eyed that even if we do that, there’s a good chance we lose anyway. As previously noted, Paul Graham is worried (‘enslave’ here is rather sloppy and suggests some unclear thinking but I hope he understands that’s not actually the key dynamic there and if not someone please do talk to him about this, whether or not it’s Eliezer),
One should definitely expect a bunch of in-hindsight-obvious problems and other changes to happen once things smarter than us start showing up, along with others that were not so obvious - it’s hard to predict what smarter things than you will do. Here are some responses worth pondering.
Liv Boeree’s comments very much line up with the issue of On calculators, obviously the doomsayers were not fully right, but yes they were also kind of correct in the sense that people got much worse at the things calculators do better. The good news was that this didn’t hurt mathematical intuitions or learning much in that case, but a lot of learning isn’t always like that. My prediction is that AI’s ability to help you learn will dominate, but ‘life does not pose me incremental problems of the right type’ will definitely require adjustment. I didn’t want to include this in my post on the Summit in case it was distracting, but I do think a lot of this is a reasonable way to react to the JD Vance speech:
I’d offer four disagreements with Aella here. It isn’t over until it’s over. We still might not get to AGI/ASI soon, or things might work out. The odds are against us but the game is (probably) far from over. I would still mostly save for retirement, as I’ve noted before, although not as much as I would otherwise. Indeed do many things come to pass, we don’t know. I am not as worried about hastening the end as I am about preventing it. Obviously if the end is inevitable I would rather it happen later rather than sooner, but that’s relatively unimportant.
Indeed. The core reasons why ‘building things smarter, more capable and more competitive than humans might not turn out well for the humans’ aren’t boring, complicated or technical. They are deeply, deeply obvious. And yes, the reasons ordinary people find that compelling are highly correlated to the reasons it is actually compelling. Regular human reasoning is doing good work. What are technical and complicated (boring is a Skill Issue!) are the details. About why the problem is so much deeper, deadlier and harder to solve than it appears. About why various proposed solutions and rationalizations won’t work. There’s a ton of stuff that’s highly non-obvious, that requires lots of careful thinking. But there’s also the very basics. This isn’t hard. It takes some highly motivated reasoning to pretend otherwise. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing EveryoneThis is Not About AI, but it is about human extinction, and how willing some people are to be totally fine with it while caring instead about… other things. And how others remarkably often react when you point this out.
Any time you think about your coordination plan, remember that a large percentage of people think ‘humanity goes extinct’ is totally fine and a decent number of them are actively rooting for it. Straight up.
Remarkably many people are indeed saying, in effect: If humanity wants to not turn the future over to AI, we have to coordinate. Humanity coordinating would be worse than turning the future over to AI. So, future turned over to AI it is, then. Which means that must be a good thing that will work out. It’s logic. Or, if it isn’t good, at least we didn’t globally coordinate, that’s so much worse.
I wish I was kidding. I’m not.
A few years ago, I’d think the author of such a piece would have noticed and updated. The Lighter Side
You're currently a free subscriber to |