---
subject: "Who wants to be a billionaire?"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2020-10-11 03:34:12
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Last week, Netflix India aired its investigative docuseries called Bad Boy Billionaires. Greed, corruption, and the downfall of the mighty—a cocktail that appeals to everyone's senses. One of the episodes is about Sahara Group's Subrata Roy. And among everything else, what caught my attention was how, through money and influence, he 'managed' his and the group's image from negative press. Till it all came crumbling down.
This week, as The Ken turned four, we doubled down on our affection for deeply-reported stories. And asked questions that others often shy away from asking.
Critics of multi-billion dollar companies are being banished from social media. And that dirty work is being outsourced to 'reputation management' companies. On Tuesday, in a story that went viral, Olina laid bare the systematic silencing of online dissent by edtech behemoth, Byju's, and the company it acquired recently, Whitehat Jr. In India, households across economic categories spend over 18% of their income on higher education. And as the edtech space grows, that number could inch higher. To make decisions, users of products turn to social media for review. And if that is being 'managed', how do they get the right picture?
While we're still on the topic of billionaires, the world's sixth-richest person has a change in his business plan—from oil to clean energy. And a goal of becoming net zero-carbon by 2035. Ambitious, considering global peers have set themselves a timeline that's much further away. On Thursday, Seetharaman decided to do a little exploration of this
[new plan](https://the-ken.com/story/for-reliance-clean-energy-is-the-new-oil/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter). If there's one thing Reliance Industries knows how to do, it is market domination. But, as Seetha says, it won't be as easy as their telecom disruption.
On Wednesday, Pratap
[dived into](https://the-ken.com/story/sterlites-shaky-switch-from-fibre-first-to-5g-first/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) Sterlite Technologies, a part of the multi-billion-dollar mining conglomerate, Vedanta Group. The company has decided that it's going to become an upgraded version of itself, from being just a cable supplier to a tech partner. And it wants 5G to be its calling card. But even as it's trying to change the narrative of a patchy past, Pratap says, this new ambition is no guarantee of success.
Would you consent to surgery that has been recommended or explained to you by someone at a call centre? That's the ethical dilemma that's facing two-year-old healthcare startup, Pristyn Care. On Monday, Maitri
[told us](https://the-ken.com/story/pristyn-care-and-the-oyoisation-of-surgery/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) the story of how the company has conducted over 10,000 surgeries without owning a single hospital. Instead, it tied up with hospitals to utilise their spare capacity—operation theatres, hospital staff, and more. Its a highly optimisable approach, but also one that's fraught with issues.
On Friday, Shruti
[looked into](https://the-ken.com/story/naturals-lakme-urban-company-and-the-new-salon-normal/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) how big salon chains such as Naturals and Lakmé have to work to lure customers back into salons. After the lockdown was lifted, there haven't been many 'queues' in front of salons as expected. Instead, customers have rapidly turned to Urban Company (formerly UrbanClap), thanks to its home services model. With the asset-light model being the clear winner, salons are quickly making changes to their own business models.
On Saturday, in
The Nutgraf, we had Praveen
[connecting the dots](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/google-fights-between-two-walls/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) between what is probably Julius Caesar's greatest battle and... Google. Caesar fought a battle on two fronts in 52 BC and won. Caught between India and the US, the tech giant is facing a two-front battle of its own. It's not a great time to be Google, unfortunately.
Since we've been talking about billionaires, let me leave you with a book recommendation that questions the destructive obsession with financial success. In Enough by John Bogle, the pioneer of index mutual funds, he writes—"Central to the effective functioning of capitalism was the fundamental principle of trusting and being trusted". Are the companies of today forgetting that?
I hope you have a great Sunday. Rest, and introspect. And do remember that it is subscribers like you that allow us to write such exciting stories. So, thank you.