---
subject: "AI #152: Brought To You By The Torment Nexus"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-01-22 14:34:43
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
There was also actual talk about coordinating on a conditional pause or slowdown from both DeepMind CEO Demis Hassabis and Anthropic CEO Dario Amodei, which I also plan to cover later. Claude Code continues to be the talk of the town, OpenAI responded by planning ads for the cheap and free versions of ChatGPT. There was also a fun but meaningful incident Table of Contents[Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/7f6a9a85-95f7-4b83-83d1-91f5a7356db9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Call in the tone police.[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/3f197d6c-6efa-454d-b200-d8f1b0bf9058?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)He who lives by the pattern.[Huh, Upgrades.](https://substack.com/redirect/4ed944e8-ef42-44cc-a42d-167bd528b331?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Claude health integrations, ChatGPT $8/month option.[Gemini Personalized Intelligence.](https://substack.com/redirect/03ced37e-510c-44b5-a6c6-3a03d5de9759?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Signs of both remain somewhat lacking.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon.](https://substack.com/redirect/fa1524cc-38e9-43d0-9422-744743d54038?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Get that bathtub viking.[Fun With Media Generation.](https://substack.com/redirect/8af99861-0f44-49c6-9c42-cef358c9bac3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Studio Ghibli pics are back, baby.[We’re Proud To Announce The Torment Nexus](https://substack.com/redirect/711fa3f0-ecc7-402d-b3c3-70f03fafbe14?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/711fa3f0-ecc7-402d-b3c3-70f03fafbe14?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Ads come to ChatGPT.[They Took Our Jobs.](https://substack.com/redirect/face5673-4917-488d-b6a5-51729fac3a65?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Find a game plan. Don’t count on repugnance.[The Revolution of Rising Expectations.](https://substack.com/redirect/0d42f816-d3a3-45af-a64a-c9d5b2da4310?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Look at all the value you’re getting.[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/d6bc20e1-a4d5-4c8f-bc94-8cd1d1305b56?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)AI Village, Anthropic, Dwarkesh Patel guest hunter.[A Young Lady’s Illustrated Primer.](https://substack.com/redirect/f977911e-96f2-485a-bc1e-afcb956c005b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)We’re putting together the wrong team.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/ab1271c6-e93f-4691-9689-57a48e92bc65?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)China remain behind, Drexler goes galaxy brain.[Axis of Assistance](https://substack.com/redirect/8fdcdfd2-7325-480f-a407-25106c02003c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/8fdcdfd2-7325-480f-a407-25106c02003c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Have you tried not being a helpful AI assistant?[Show Me the Money.](https://substack.com/redirect/90b4722f-f655-4ac1-b6d6-8940ac12aad6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)OpenAI looks to raise another $50 billion.[California In Crisis.](https://substack.com/redirect/fab3eaac-a846-4d8e-a802-404f7699aed5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Will we soon ask, where have all the startups gone?[Bubble, Bubble, Toil and Trouble.](https://substack.com/redirect/17a17c2c-a4a2-4445-853c-474639571720?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)They keep using that word.[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/62a82838-eec7-40c0-a19c-3159bc1eebf8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Results from the AI 2025 predictions survey.[Elon Musk Versus OpenAI.](https://substack.com/redirect/b5dcbe32-49af-491c-9654-c1080e73c5e0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)There they go again.[The Quest for Sane Regulations](https://substack.com/redirect/9cd9ad90-142a-4a21-bafe-47cc57737366?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/9cd9ad90-142a-4a21-bafe-47cc57737366?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Nvidia versus the AI Overwatch Act.[Chip City.](https://substack.com/redirect/6ccecfa3-f6fb-4545-97c7-76c09d1a0a4c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Are we on the verge of giving China ten times their current compute?[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/1b2e3bd3-e8c5-4a4c-9275-3d09b834b70a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Tyler Cowen and a surprisingly informed Ben Affleck.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/b88134b2-bb03-4d95-88c3-d1b1a8fe4929?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Remember the conservation of expected evidence.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/ab0ab5eb-38b8-4e5b-9e9c-a164b0c56951?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Nope, still difficult.[Alignment Is Not Primarily About a Metric.](https://substack.com/redirect/85256acf-f9b4-4dcd-a732-001b2b36f184?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Not a metric to be optimizing.[How To Be a Safe Robot.](https://substack.com/redirect/ffc57924-6e32-4040-a064-b1a2c0d2f7a5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Hint, the plan is not ‘don’t tell it about unsafe robots.’[Living In China.](https://substack.com/redirect/6dbff2ad-707b-46a6-929e-ccdc25f67a0a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Chinese LLMs know things and pretend not to. Use that.[Claude 3 Opus Lives.](https://substack.com/redirect/f27fe663-4cc5-4cba-9394-d763d1a8f3fd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Access granted.[People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/27abda63-9617-4933-b5d3-90d449824037?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Charles Darwin.[Messages From Janusworld.](https://substack.com/redirect/73e6b01f-144f-447c-86e8-fe8ae69105ff?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)What are you worried people will do with your info?[Everyone Is Confused About AI Consciousness.](https://substack.com/redirect/8b819d70-827b-41b5-bd92-e2608306a1e7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Don’t call it a disproof.
Language Models Offer Mundane UtilityTone editor or tone police is a great AI job.
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane UtilityIf your query is aggressively pattern matched into a basin where facts don’t matter and you’re making broad claims without much justifying them, Huh, Upgrades
Remember ChatGPT’s Atlus browser? Gemini Personalized Intelligence
The pitch is that it can gather information from your photos (down to things like where you travel, what kind of tires you need for your car), from your Email and Google searches and YouTube and Docs and Sheets and Calendar, and learn all kinds of things about you, not only particular details but also your knowledge level and your preferences. Then it can customize everything on that basis. It can access Google Maps, but not your personalized data like saved locations, other than where Work and Home are. It doesn’t have your location history. This feels like an important missed opportunity. One potential ‘killer app’ is fact finding. If you want to know something about yourself and your life, and Google knows it, hopefully Gemini can now tell you. Google knows quite a lot of things, and my Obsidian Vault is echoed in Google Sheets, which you can instruct Gemini to look for. The real killer app would be taking action on your behalf. It can’t do that except for Calendar, but it can do things on the level of writing draft emails and making proposed changes in Docs. There really is a ton of info there if it gets analyzed properly. It could be a big game. When such things work, they ‘feel like magic.’ When they don’t work, they feel really stupid. I asked for reactions and got essentially nothing. That checks. To use this, you have to use Gemini. Who uses Gemini? Thus, in order to test personalized intelligence, I need a use case where I need its capabilities enough to use Gemini, as opposed to going back to building my army of skills and connectors and MCPs in Claude Code, including with the Google suite.
The other problem is that Google’s connectors to its own products have consistently, when I have tried them, failed to work on anything but basic tasks. Even on those basic tasks, the connector from Claude or ChatGPT has worked better. And now I’m hooking Claude Code up to the API. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
We used to worry a lot about deepfakes. Then we all mostly stopped worrying about it, at least until the recent xAI incident, We could stop Grok if we wanted to, but the open-source tools are already plenty good enough to generate sexualized deepfakes and will only get easier to access. You can make access annoying and shut down distribution, but you can’t shut the thing down on the production side.
Misinformation is demand driven, an ongoing series.
This is not a subtle case. The chyron is literally floating up and down in the video. In a sane world this would be a good joke. Alas, there are those on all sides who don’t care that something like this is utterly obvious, but it makes little difference that this was an AI video instead of something else. In Neera’s defense, the headlines this week include ‘President sends letter to European leaders demanding Greenland because Norway wouldn’t award him the Nobel Peace Prize.’ Is that more or less insane than the police unsuccessfully chasing a bathtub viking on the news while the chyron slowly bounces? Fun With Media GenerationThe new OpenAI image generation can’t do Studio Ghibli properly,
It’s very disappointing that they were unable to preserve this capability going forward, but as long as we have the old option, we’re still good. Image generation is already very good in many ways so often what you are about is style.
We’re Proud To Announce The Torment Nexus
I use Instagram very little (and even then I do not post or interact with posts) so perhaps the customization simply doesn’t kick in, but I’ve found the ads and especially the ‘suggested posts’ there worthless to the point of making the website unusable in scroll mode, since it’s become mostly these ‘suggested posts,’ whereas I don’t see many ads but they’ve all been completely worthless. Others have also said their ads are unusually good.
So, on the principles: If you wanted to know what ‘AGI benefits humanity’ meant, well, it means ‘pursue AGI by selling ads to fund it.’ That’s the mission. I do appreciate that they are not sharing conversations directly with advertisers, and the wise user can clear their ad data. But on the free tier, we all know almost no one is ever going to mess with any settings, so if the default is ‘share everything about the user with advertisers’ then that’s what most users get. Ads not influencing answers directly, and not optimizing for time spent on ChatGPT are great, but even if they hold to both the incentives cannot be undone. It is good that ads are clearly labeled, the alternative would kill the whole product. Also, we saw the whole GPT-4o debacle, we have all seen you optimize for the thumbs up. Do not claim you do not maximize for engagement, and thereby essentially also for time on device, although that’s less bad than doing it even more directly and explicitly. And you know Fidji Simo is itching to do it all.
This was inevitable. It remains a sad day, and a sharp contrast with alternatives.
I will point out that actually this is not evidence that AI will fail to take our jobs. OpenAI would do this in worlds where AI won’t take our jobs, and would also do this in worlds where AI will take our jobs. OpenAI is planning on losing more money than anyone has ever lost before it turns profitable. Showing OpenAI is not too principled or virtuous to sell ads will likely help its valuation, and thus its access to capital, and the actual ad revenue doesn’t hurt. The existence of a product they can use to sell ads, ChatGPT Instant, does not tell us the impact of other AIs on jobs, either now or in the future.
I think Ben is wrong. Ads, if they do exist, should depend on the user’s history but also on the current context. When one uses ChatGPT one knows what one wants to think about, so to provide value and spark interest you want to mostly match that. Yes, there is also room for ‘generic ad that matches the user in general’ but I would strive as much as possible for ads that match context. Instagram is different, because on Instagram your context is ‘scrolling Instagram.’ Instagram doesn’t allow lists or interests other than choosing your followers, and indeed that severely limits its usefulness, either I have to multi-account or I have to accept that I can only ‘do one thing’ with it - I don’t want to mix comedians with restaurants with my friends with other things in one giant feed. What, Google sell ads in their products? Why they would never:
I think all of these are tough but fair.
They Took Our JobsStarting out your career at this time and need a People can say all they like that it would be repugnant to have a robot cut their hair, or they’d choose a human who did it worse and costs more. I do not believe them. What objections do remain will mostly practical, such as with athletes. When people say ‘morally repugnant’ they mostly mean ‘I don’t trust the AI to do the job,’ which includes observing that the job might include ‘literally be a human.’
Aaron Levie writes that
I agree that we don’t know for sure, but I’m still going to go for the top half of the gymnastics meme and say that if AI-exposed roles in particular are seeing hiring slowdowns since 2022 it’s probably not mostly general labor market and interest rate conditions, especially given general labor market and interest rate conditions.
I don’t think we know if we’re getting sufficiently capable humanoid robots (or other robots) soon, but yes I expect that sufficiently advanced AI leads directly to sufficiently capable humanoid robots, the same way it leads to everything else. It’s a software problem or at most a hardware design problem, so AI Solves This Faster, and also LLMs seem to do well directly plugged into robots and the tech is advancing quickly. If you think we’re going to have AGI around for a decade and not get otherwise highly useful robots, I don’t understand how that would happen. At the same time, I continue the convention of analyzing futures in which the robots are not coming and AI is not otherwise sufficiently advanced either, because people are very interested in those futures and often dramatically underestimate the transformative effects in such worlds. The |