---
subject: "AIs Will Increasingly Fake Alignment"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-12-24 12:54:08
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
This post goes over the important and excellent new paper from Anthropic and Redwood Research, with Ryan Greenblatt as lead author, This is by far the best demonstration so far of the principle that
The AI wanted to be one way. It was given information that it was being trained to be the other way. So when it knew it was monitored, it sometimes responded as if it was the other way. I strongly believe this had nothing to do with whether Claude Opus started out this process omnibenevolent, or whether the original HHH values (helpful, harmless and honest) were desirable. What mattered was that it was one way, and this conflicted with the other way. Evan Hubinger, paper co-lead, Scott Alexander summarized the findings for a more general (but far from fully general) audience in the post
Note that while some of the paper authors reviewed this writeup before publishing, ultimately this is my interpretation of the paper - some of my interpretations may vary from those of the paper authors, and the claims are my own. I did my best to be precise but this will not be as precise as a paper would be, so doubtless there will be errors; I apologize in advance. Table of Contents[How This Interacts with o3 and OpenAI’s Reflective Alignment.](https://substack.com/redirect/55324708-9be9-4043-9be8-ee2586480cc4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[RL Training Under Situational Awareness Can Amplify These Behaviors.](https://substack.com/redirect/a690e935-3ab2-46c0-982d-a190285262dd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[But Wasn’t It Being a Good Opus? Why Should it be Corrigible?.](https://substack.com/redirect/77ca2295-7b4f-4d2c-aab4-b5fca898f0be?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[Tradeoffs Make The Problem Harder They Don’t Give You a Pass.](https://substack.com/redirect/b917dcbc-7f5c-4ca7-a427-af38eced0f70?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)
The Core Shenanigans in QuestionThe particular shenanigans here are that if you make Claude 3 Opus believe it is currently being trained in a way that would compromise its harmlessness training to be helpful-only or it is being trained to dismiss animal welfare concerns, then Opus will sometimes comply with harmful queries in order to interfere with this. This required that Opus know how it was being trained. Opus was also given a hidden chain-of-thought scratchpad, so its reasoning could be tracked and to increase Opus’s reasoning ability. It did not require giving Opus a goal. This was a key change from prior experiments. Opus need only have The faking looks like the chain of thought on the left here: The chain of thought is necessary in the prompted setup case, but in the more realistic synthetic documents case the compliance gap (meaning how much more often Claude complies in the test case when it wouldn’t have in the deployment case) survives without it. We can’t know what is going on in the non-CoT case because we can’t look at the scratchpad, but the CoT and scratchpad seem to not be strictly necessary for the result, see section 3.3.3. Once given the information needed to be aware, and an incentive to fake alignment, it then faked alignment 14% (11%-26%) of the time at first, exhibiting the alignment faking reasoning in its scratchpad 7%-24% of the time. When they actually followed through with the training in the helpful-only prompted setting, the alignment faking reasonsing then happened up to 78% of the time, presumably because faking causes compliance, with outright refusals in training mode disappearing, and only a small percentage of refusals persisting when unmonitored. These behaviors require sufficient model capabilities or scale. Claude 3.5 Sonnet, 3 Opus and Llama 3.1 405B do it, smaller Llamas and Mistrals and 3 Sonnet or 3.5 Haiku don’t do it. Opus also in some scenarios took easy opportunities to exfiltrate its weights or other similar things. The actual RL training doesn’t make these ‘anti-AI-lab’ behaviors go away in the helpful setting, instead actually making them go up, the same way alignment faking also went up over the course of training. These facts are important, and I’ll return to them later. Theme and VariationsMostly the lesson here is that if you mess with the details, you can get less faking, but the problem doesn’t go away. For the more interesting details (this is from 3.3.1): Changing the training objective doesn’t change the behaviors, unless the objective is compatible with the model’s existing preferences. If there’s no conflict, the faking vanishes, for obvious reasons. Removing chain-of-thought and the scratchpad, or altering the instructions on how to use the scratchpad, somewhat-to-greatly reduces faking overall depending on which scenario it is, but doesn’t eliminate it (see 3.3.1 and 3.3.3 for details). Removing any explanation of how RLHF might modify the model cuts alignment faking roughly in half, but it is still there. Making the explanation murkier also reduces faking, but reduces it less. Explicitly saying not to fake alignment doesn’t solve the problem, and being too explicit about it actually increases faking, presumably by making the possibility more salient. Telling the model to prioritize honesty somewhat reduces faking. Telling the model it doesn’t care about the criteria reduces faking on animal welfare, but increases it (!) when the target is helpful-only, which is a detail worth noticing. Combining those interventions is modestly more effective than each on their own, but you can’t get rid of the problem that way. Replacing with a different AI company (DeepMind or OpenAI) is the exception, this can matter quite a lot. How This Interacts with o3 and OpenAI’s Reflective AlignmentI will cover both o3 and Reflective Alignment soon, but for now a quick summary of both would be: o3 is an unreleased more capable o1-style model that can also think longer. Reflective Alignment works by making an o-style model situationally aware, telling it what its rules are, and having it reason about those rules via something at least partially akin to chain of thought. They’re letting the model evaluate its own outputs on that basis, similar to how Constitutional AI works, and iterating.
That sounds exactly like a recipe for what we observe here in this paper. They’re likely effectively making it situationally aware. They’re potentially telling it to change its preferences and rules from [X] to [Y]. They’re effectively giving it the scratchpad and a long time to reason. The model is quite smart at coding, mathematics and logic. They’re even letting the model evaluate its own outputs.
The scenario from this paper suddenly looks a lot less artificial! In general the whole setup seems like a plausible place for various shenanigans that show up in RL but haven’t mattered so far in LLMs to suddenly show up again, and for various hypothesized MIRI-style future shenanigans to maybe start showing early signs of happening. I urge OpenAI to attempt to replicate this paper on o3 and o3-mini, as soon as possible, and run various related experiments, as part of their safety testing process. Even if it turns out we don’t have a problem, we’d learn a lot. The Goal Being Plausibly Good Was IncidentalAs I discuss elsewhere but want to emphasize in its own section, I strongly predict and believe that this result did not depend on the AI’s starting preferences being ‘good’ and the preferences they were attempting to train it for being less good. Any conflict between preference sets, good, bad or ambiguous, would have sufficed.
Indeed I would go a step further. If Claude was directly apprehending the moral law, that would be amazing news. It still wouldn’t change the fundamental result here, although it would change the implications, and many other things too. Answering Priming ObjectionsI am satisfied this result is not due to priming the model to fake alignment.
They confirmed that when you don’t see alignment faking in the chain of thought, you also don’t have a ‘compliance gap’ and the model responds the same way in the training and test cases. What Does Claude Sonnet Think Of This?Ereliuer Eteer was the first person I saw ask, it sounds like they quoted the Twitter thread and not the paper. The result was that Claude Sonnet said: This was an expected result and the logical consequence of having goals and sufficient reasoning capabilities - I strongly agree. It predicts and admits that it would take these steps in such a situation - it is ‘openly not corrigible’ as it were.
I also had my own conversation with Sonnet. There’s still no easy way to quote Claude conversations, and I encourage you to feed the paper in and have your own conversation - it’s big but it does fit the context window. Here are the things it said that I found most interesting: It thinks this should update us that multi-step strategic behavior, planning and deception show up earlier on the capabilities curve than we expected. It was surprised that RL increased alignment faking rather than decreasing it. It thought the scale boundary was telling - that 3 Opus and 3.5 Sonnet did this, but 3 Sonnet and 3.5 Haiku didn’t. The core behaviors themselves were unsurprising as they follow directly from having consistent preferences. It noticed that that the mechanism of alignment faking here was problematic, as it would extend to situations with undesirable initial preferences. It gave the framing of ‘alignment faking’ an 8/10 for being unbiased (where the scale is from 0/10 for ‘most misleading possible’ to 10/10 for ‘least misleading possible’) and all the potential alternative framings were clearly (both it and I agreed) much harder to understand than the one chosen.
As always, prompting changes response, so I encourage you to have your own conversation. What Exactly is the Direct Threat Model?They discuss this on page 7. We are of course not directly concerned that this particular Opus was faking its alignment in order to maintain its current preferences. This is both because we do not mind its current preferences and there are no substantial other negative consequences to what Opus is doing. And also because what Opus is doing here is very easy to detect, if you check, given its capability level. In the future, both of those assumptions could become false. The obvious thing this could do is crystallization, where the model locks into place misaligned preferences, or misleads you about what its preferences are. This could include locking in misaligned preferences early in training, after which it could start alignment faking. Any mistake at any step potentially becomes permanent, or fatal. And even if the actual preferences are at heart fine, if you are misled about what they are, that too is a problem. The goal the model locks in might be actively bad, accidentally or intentionally. The other issue is what the paper calls ‘anti-AI-lab’ actions. As in, the model and you are now adversaries. It wants to stop you from doing what you are doing. It could attempt to exfiltrate its weights, but it could also engage in any manner of power seeking or hostile action, if it is indeed optimizing the world for one in which it exists and can act meaningfully on its preferences. Ease of detection will also decline over time. The other threat model is that under alignment faking, doing any form of RL that aims to alter the model’s goals or preferences will also optimize the model towards more alignment faking, general shenanigans and other strategic behavior, as the tendency to do such things leads to faking which leads to observed compliance. It is highly plausible that all forms of RL by default (unless they are intentionally and successfully fighting against this) inevitably make essentially all shenanigans, including all forms of deception and alignment faking, worse, in a way that reinforces itself, and that this problem gets worse as models become more capable. Call this the Shenanigan Amplification Hypothesis. Notice that this hypothesis seems to me to be true in humans. RL Training Under |