---
subject: "Myth, the Translation of Libido, & Luminous Action"
from: "\"River Kenna from In•Star\" <riverkenna@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-10-05 14:55:30
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "River Kenna", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3010718370428876194", "UNREAD"]
---
|
There's a dense little quote from James Hillman, an old favorite of mine:
"Myth is the metaphor that translates libido into configurations."
That last little bit has always struck me as underlying everything that matters in life: "translating libido into configurations." If we take libido in the Jungian sense, as the life-energy that drives our thoughts, words, actions, and imaginings, then translating libido into configurations is the foundational layer of life as a human. It's what sets the shape and force of our desires. In order to eat, we must first have our libido configured towards food as something worth desiring. In order to reproduce, our libido must be configured towards sex as something we want to do.
The word myth isn't always well understood. People use it to mean a lie, a story, a common misunderstanding...
The way I think about myths, they are embodied, deep-psyche patterns that guide the flow of our life energy, the way riverbanks guide the flow of water. No story is required on the conscious verbal level in order for the Story of the myth to be overwhelmingly present. All of the conscious, verbalized myth-making comes later; it's an ossified version of the real myth.
Having a crush is a good example of a myth that configures libido — of a story that patterns our desire and energy. We all know how the Story of a crush goes, how it feels, how it hits us; that limerant shimmer, that thrum in the belly, that nearly-physical pull towards this person's presence. It's not what we usually call a story — not a verbal or written narrative with characters and acts and themes. It's a real Story, one told in hormones and desires and nervous system activation and all the little compulsions that direct us to particular thoughts, feelings, and actions. A Story that makes interesting every little thing this person does, every quiver of their voice, every gesture of their eyes.
This is what I mean by myth. These embodied, sub-conscious grooves that shape energy. That make us want this rather than that. That make one course of action feel salient while others feel irrelevant.
Crushes are a good, strong, recognizable example of this kind of embodied myth, but there are countless more. We are always living some embodied narrative, most of them invisible to us precisely because they're just the world we live in, the obvious experiential truths of what is and isn't worth caring about, who's good and who's bad, what actions are worth taking or avoiding, what feelings and reactions happen in a given situation.
You might hold a myth that conflict is terrifying and must be avoided. That myth is woven into the way your chest seizes up when someone raises their voice at you, the way you hold back criticisms and don't stand up for yourself.
Or you might have a myth that says you are especially smart and special — that feeling of rightness in your gut when you talk in front of a group, the way that people praising and complimenting you feels like the natural order of things, the satisfaction when you form a particular idea into presentable shape.
When one of these myths finds you, it reshapes and fills the channels of your life-energy to make certain actions feel luminous, interesting, appetizing. Certain desires spring naturally from the way that myth shapes and channels our love and life energy.
Take a moment to look at your life, at the actions you take, at the values you hold. What are the things that seem so obviously good that they're barely worth inquiring into? Providing for your family? Following the artistic muse? Seeking enlightenment? Helping other people?
Whatever the specifics of your own life and desires, what you're feeling right now are the channels of your own myths. The fact that these things feel obviously, self-justifyingly good to you means that your libido is being directed towards them, driving your thoughts, your feelings, your actions into particular patterns. These are the deep strata of who you are. When you gave a 20 to that homeless man, when you quit your job to focus on self-expression, when you took the less exciting job because it allows you to take care of your children better — those choices are the result of your myths. The actions that feel luminous or obvious to you feel that way because that's where your life-energy is directed.
As for what myths are made of, how to work with them, and how to participate in their transformation — that's a much bigger topic that I'll probably keep working on for the rest of my life, and that definitely doesn't fit in a coda to a single short article. But for now, at least you know what me and people like me mean when we talk about myth, about mythopoetics, about the stories inside us.
If you are curious about working with myths and participating in their transformation, the best starting points are [my courses on embodiment and mythopoetic wayfinding](https://substack.com/redirect/b728c239-0ae6-4ebb-8cd4-0d56a4c1442c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).