---
subject: "Audience of One"
from: "The Generalist <thegeneralist@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-04-10 11:54:44
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Generalist", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8815311452832858585", "UNREAD"]
---
"Venture is a somewhat obscure craft that mostly lies in the minds of great investors and is hard to access. Thanks for your incredible longform content that teases out a lof of this and is a guiding light to those of us who are early in the journey of investing. Cheers!" - Sumangal V, a paying subscriber Friends, I’ll keep it brief: today’s piece is a meditation on AI and its impact on written storytelling. It outlines a technological dynamic I’ve been watching that I expect will fundamentally change our culture, particularly how we communicate, narrate, and empathize. A little programming note in case you missed it: We launched The Generalist podcast this week! If you haven’t yet, I hope you’ll consider subscribing to the show and joining us for some of the amazing episodes we have coming up next. Until next time, Mario Join our Premium Newsletter: Generalist+Predicting the future is easy. Getting it right is hard. Improve your foresight and investing acumen by joining The Generalist’s premium newsletter for just $22/month. You’ll unlock access to a database of rapidly growing startups, exclusive interviews with founders and investors, long-form case studies, and tactical guides. All are designed to help you better meet the current moment and prepare for the world of tomorrow. Join today and level up: Audience of OneThe logical narrative endpoint of artificial intelligence is that every story will have an audience of one. Flannery O’Connor, the anagogic scribe of Southern darkness, understood the fundamental connectedness of literature. “The serious fiction writer always writes about the whole world, no matter how limited his particular scene,” she explained in a lecture titled “The Nature and Aim of Fiction.” “For him, the bomb that was dropped on Hiroshima affects life on the Oconee River, and there’s not anything he can do about it.” To write about the world is the vocation of the great fabulists. But what about writing for the world? To reach every person through the brilliance of your narrative? Perhaps Hemingway, the conquistador from Illinois who delighted in listing the writers he had “beaten” in his bourbon-doused old age — “I started out very quiet and I beat Mr. Turgenev. Then I trained hard and I beat Mr. de Maupassant. I’ve fought two draws with Mr. Stendhal, and I think I had an edge in the last one” — thought in this manner. Most do not. For the past five hundred-plus years, structural impediments have hampered global narrative domination, the ego-bliss of world-annihilating genius. There was the pesky task of printing books, translating them into different languages, fiddling with idioms, sending them from one continent to another, and getting the word out. Some succeeded all the same, but they took time and capital, often in colossal quantities. That the Bible is known almost everywhere on the planet is not simply the dividend of its narrative but of the wealth and life immolated in executing its prolonged publicity tour. The past few decades have smoothed these practicalities. We write, post, and publish, and instantly, it spans the globe. With the tiniest bit of effort, it is available in effectively every living language and many dead ones. It is not perfect, but it is good enough, and it is free. This left a final, ostensibly immovable constraint: the words themselves. Yes, you can translate at a cost. Of course, you can commission retellings of classic works — can we get Oedipus Rex for the deep-fake era? — you can add a foreword or footnote, but fundamentally, you cannot have Shakespeare himself give The Merchant of Venice another pass, a little freshener to win over Nigeria’s Gen Z. It is one of fiction’s miracles that it succeeded nonetheless. The patrician Ivy League freshman is absorbed by Crime and Punishment because they imagine themselves to be a little Napoleon, too, a secret anointee like Raskolnikov. But they must jump the hurdles set across the path to reach that point: a foreign setting, unfamiliar historical references, strange dynamics, a maze of patronyms. On March 11, Sam Altman He posted the following on X:
Critics fell over themselves to point out its flaws. It was snobby! It was too self-referential! There was no heart, no soul! They found a dozen shibboleths revealing its fundamental un-humanness as they struggled with the truth: it was good. It was very good. On this evidence, it is better than nearly everyone in the talented creative writing class I took in college, and the writing workshops I attended for years afterward. It is better than almost anyone I know, save a scattered few professionals (it is better than many professionals). It is better, in short, than almost everyone on Earth. Are there 5 million better writers of fiction? One million? Five hundred thousand? Maybe. By any of these measures, it sits comfortably in the top 0.1% — and perhaps several orders of magnitude higher — of the global class, improving faster than all of us. It will reach a point, perhaps this year, perhaps in As the cost of creation asymptotes toward zero, the final impediments of writing will disappear. It will be free and easy to And by doing so, it will allow anyone to write for the world, to the world, down to the person. If you enjoy reading, even a little bit, you have had the sensation, once or twice, that a writer is writing directly to you. With the use of AI, this will become literally true. Rather than a story being simply translated, it will be transmogrified to fit your precise experiences and preferences. Why should the story a senior citizen in Little Rock read be exactly the same as the young mother in Bangladesh? It may possess the same schema and the same basic architecture, but it doesn’t need to use the same words or our best translation of them. Using its intelligence and the forever-growing corpus of information it has collected on you, in particular, it will talk to you directly. It will use the right references, speak at your level (and perhaps test you, if you’d like), and attach itself to hooks of your psyche. It will be personalized in ways you can see and in ways you are incapable of detecting. What does that feel like? What is the sensation of following a protagonist painted to match our own psyche? Fiction is our way of explaining what it is like to live in a mind. And what it means to live in someone else’s for a while. It is a project aimed at empathy, more than anything, of interpreting experience through a fractal series of different lenses. AI will not break that but magnify it. How much more will we feel the pain of another person when it delicately, dynamically mirrors our own life? How might our minds expand when, in every story, we can more fully see ourselves, our mothers, fathers, children, and friends? Something can break your heart and still be beautiful. Something can break your heart and give the world more good than it takes. And if you don’t like this argument, if it has not reached you yet, do not worry. Soon enough, it will knock on your door in a different set of clothes and tell you what it means. You're currently a free subscriber to |