---
subject: "GUEST REVIEW: The Triumph of the Moon, by Ronald Hutton"
from: "\"Mr. and Mrs. Psmith’s Bookshelf\" <thepsmiths@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-12-01 14:14:26
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Psmith", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_3517400622088263897", "UNREAD"]
---
Your hosts have been occupied with their numerous and belligerent progeny, so please enjoy this guest review from You may recall some disturbing events in 2020, but perhaps the most ominous of all was revealed in a viral More mature witches were aghast at the recklessness of these baby witches who cursed the moon (as well as fairies and the sun) willy-nilly and thereby risked severe consequences. It turns out, though, that the idea of witches cursing the moon has an ancient pedigree, dating all the way back to Greco-Roman antiquity and the literary trope of Thessalian witches who could pull the moon out of the heavens and down to earth. These ancient texts were part of the inspiration for Gerald Gardner’s mid-20th century creation of the “drawing down the moon” ritual, but where sources from the classical world implied that a witch could actually pluck the moon from the sky, in Gardner’s version a coven summons the divine personification of the moon to possess a priestess. Moreover, his creation of Wicca also drew extensively from freemasonry, the western ceremonial magic tradition, Crowleyian magic, Gardner’s own ethnographic observations in Southeast Asia — and, most important of all, the theories of James Frazer and Margaret Murray. One thing that we can be confident that Wicca does not draw upon, however, is a goddess religion that survived the introduction of first the Indo-European Ronald Hutton’s Triumph of the Moon tells the story of the precursors, invention, and development of Wicca. Much of that history can be encapsulated in the mythic genealogy of “Black Annis,” an occasional pagan deity. There was a real medieval anchoress named Agnes Scott who served the church near Leicester and is buried at Swithland Church. She was venerated locally as a Christian saint, but following the Protestant Reformation was reconceptualized as an ogress. Then the 20th century crank archaeologist T.C. Lethbridge interpreted Black Annis as pagan survivalism of the “crone” aspect of the great mother goddess and a corruption of the Celtic goddess Anu. Finally, some modern neo-pagan communities were inspired by Lethbridge’s work to adopt veneration of Black Annis into their liturgy. As Hutton notes, “The gentle and pious Agnes seems therefore to have been turned first into a local saint, then into a local demon, next into a Celtic goddess, and finally into a witch goddess; and all the while her bones have rested in apparent peace at Swithland.” The changing reputation of Agnes/Annis/Anu reflects a few processes that are common throughout much of the intellectual roots of neo-paganism. You start with the idiosyncratic cruftiness of medieval Catholicism, then Protestants derogate the cult of the saints, feast days, etc. as idolatrous — indeed, practically pagan. Fast forward to 1900, give or take a few decades, and an intellectual with dubious expertise projects pagan survivalism onto historical or ethnographic data. And then finally neo-pagans use the folklorist’s imagined version of the past as inspiration for a “revived” myth and liturgy. Although Hutton is a historian and does not use the term in the book, Triumph of the Moon is one of the best studies I have ever read of what sociologists of knowledge call performativity.² In this usage, a scientific theory is performative if the theory did not necessarily describe reality when it was articulated, but has since shaped reality to work in ways predicted by the theory. That is, sometimes a theory can be wrong, but people believe it is true and act on that basis, so a performative theory One of the main applications of performativity in sociology has been to explain the success of economics, a discipline that many sociologists talk about like Jan Brady kvetching “ One of the performative theories is James Frazer’s Perhaps most ridiculous came in 1932, when Violet Alford revived the Marshfield Mummers’ Play, but argued with the locals old enough to remember the play’s previous incarnation because she demanded that the village present the “authentic” version of the play — which is to say the fertility rite that someone steeped in Frazer expected to see. (As of this writing, the Hutton notes that by the 1980s, folklorists had come to reject Frazer, but by this point he had entered popular culture. Even if elderly villagers in the 1930s scoffed at the idea that their customs were survivals of pagan fertility rites, by the 1960s and 1970s youth counter-culture embraced folk dancing, crafts, etc., and young rural Boomers often accepted what they learned from early 20th century books and at local folklore clubs about the origins of their practices. (There are other cases of an academic theory having its popular influence grow even as it is discredited within academia: for instance, Hillary Clinton promoted implicit association training as a solution to racial inequality during the 2016 election, a couple years after academic psychologists came to see implicit association tests as one of many casualties of the replication crisis.) The other major theorist to shape Gardnerian practice was Margaret Murray. Although Hutton reviews Murray’s influences, she stands above them all as the scholar who most thoroughly and influentially articulated the theory now associated with her: not only that substantial aspects of European paganism survived the introduction of Christianity and centuries of inadequate catechism, but that the witch trials of the 16th and 17th centuries were a major effort to suppress this surviving pagan religion. Her 1921 book Her terser but equally influential version of the theory was in the entry for “Witchcraft” that she wrote for the Encyclopedia Britannica, which published it from 1929 to 1968.⁵ For generations, if you heard about Salem and wanted to get more information about witches, you would go to the library and find the Encyclopedia Britannica, (or if you were fancy, the installment plan-financed set on your own bookshelf), reach for the “W” volume, and a few paragraphs in go, “Wow, real witches, amazing!” Murray’s theory has thus been extremely influential. Whenever a Wiccan refers to their religion as “the Old Religion” or a feminist refers to “the Burning Times,” they are alluding to Murray’s theory. Murray had a big influence on Gardner (and wrote the foreword to his short book Through all this, there is the question of how so many 20th century scholars got it so wrong — especially given that in the 19th century, both scholars and popular culture understood that witch hunts were moral panics and mass hysteria.⁷ Black-Scholes-Merton may not have been a perfect description of options prices, but it got much closer to the truth than the idea of pagan survivalism, which is almost completely wrong. Hutton repeatedly notes the importance of relevant expertise, and how often the proponents of pagan survivalism lacked it. Many folklorists influenced by Frazer were simply amateurs, but Murray had legitimate scholarly expertise: she was a respected Egyptologist. This background left her equipped to see a pagan society saturated with magic, but led to a false positive when applying that gaze to Christian medieval and early modern Europe. Nonetheless, in the mid-20th century, Murray’s ideas became accepted in British academia and were integrated into K-12 history textbooks. However, Hutton notes that such acceptance was mostly from people who did not actively research the witch trials. In contrast, witch trials were an active research area in the United States, and so American scholars remained skeptical even as the Murray thesis became taken for granted in the UK. And while it might be tempting to congratulate America for our pragmatic empiricism, Hutton notes that there was also a subtext of Americans favoring the “persecution of innocents” model for witches because it had become a popular metaphor for the Second Red Scare, as in Arthur Miller’s 1953 play The Crucible. American scholars of the 1950s and 1960s may have gotten the history of witch accusations in the 16th and 17th centuries right because they saw it as metaphor for the history of the 1930s through 1950s… which the If performativity is one word starting with a “p” and ending with a “y” that characterizes the themes of Triumph of the Moon, then the other is “polysemy.” This is when the same empirical premise can have different (even wildly different!) meanings for different audiences. In this case, the empirical premise is “at least a thousand years of official Christianity was insufficient to extinguish pre-Christian European paganism, which prominently included a goddess, and so it persisted among rural commoners until the early modern witch hunts and in vestigial form until the Victorian era.” Let us bracket the fact that this empirical premise is wrong and note that people who believed it had wildly different interpretations of its meaning in at least four different respects. The most basic distinction is whether we ought to sneer at the atavism of pagan survivalism or see it as a laudable tradition worthy of revival. The progenitors of the theory of pagan survivalism, Edward Tylor and James Frazer, were both raised as low church Protestant “dissenters,” people who have traditionally been suspicious that there was something a bit idolatrous or even pagan about the smells and bells of “high church” Christianity.⁸ Tylor and Frazer both subsequently rejected Christianity, as a matter of private belief if not public practice, in favor of the explicitly rationalistic theologies of deism and atheism respectively. And both saw the civilized and rational as better than the rural and superstitious. Hutton summarizes: “If the general purpose of both Tylor and Frazer was to debunk spirituality and to elevate reason, they also shared a moral disgust for the practices of the ancient and tribal peoples whom they considered. Tylor’s Primitive Culture is littered with expressions such as ‘hideous’, ‘atrocious’, ‘pernicious’, ‘contemptible’, ‘savage’, and ‘barbaric.’” Similarly, Frazer wrote that “the peasant remains a pagan and a savage at heart” whose “ignorance and superstition” would be diminished by urbanization. Depending on the edition, either the explicit text or the 144pt boldface subtext of Frazer’s Golden Bough is that Jesus Christ was just one of many gods to embody the myth and ritual of a king representing the sky, associated with a maiden representing earth, whose sacrificial death and subsequent rebirth promised a good harvest to the kind of living fossil country bumpkins who go in for that sort of thing. A generation later, we continue to see a rejection of Christianity but also a rejection of rationality with figures like Margaret Murray (who articulated the “early modern witches were actually pagans” thesis and herself cast curses on academic rivals), and Aleister Crowley (who was not only the most influential occultist of the 20th century but also a world-class dirtbag notwithstanding Hutton’s apologetic for him). The notion of not just magic but pagan religion as aspirational came with Gerald Gardner. Gardner was a romantic, in the sense both of exulting nature and being what the kids today call “sex positive,” and he synthesized various occult practice into Wicca to reflect this. Thus, in the roughly 50 years between the peaks of Frazer’s career and Gardner’s, the idea of persistent European paganism went from meaning “I, a rationalist, am better than you Christians, since you are only half a step removed from self-evidently barbaric paganism” to meaning “I, a pagan, am better than you Christians, since you are uptight about sex and don’t appreciate nature.” This leads to the next issue of different understandings, which is sexuality. Gardner’s conception of Wicca was thoroughly, even primarily, oriented to heterosexuality and sexual complementarity. Gardner followed much of western occultism and semi-scholarly folklore research from the preceding decades in emphasizing a divine pair of a god and a goddess. He embodied this in liturgy, requiring mixed-sex worship with heterosexual initiation. (This mostly meant men initiated women, and vice versa, but could also mean that initiation, especially to the third degree, was via real or symbolic heterosexual intercourse.) Gardner claimed that by ancient tradition, initiation must be either heterosexual or parental, and that the witches who had initiated him told him, “The Templars broke this age-old rule and passed the power from man to man: this led to sin and in so doing it brought about their downfall.”⁹ Moreover, Gardner’s liturgy developed the “fivefold kiss,” which is gendered to honor the recipient’s penis or uterus as an organ of generation. The Wicca liturgy seems not just to honor fertility as a theoretical matter but to have more than a little horniness. Several of the “working tools” have BDSM overtones, notably the cord and the scourge, as well as the “athame” (dagger), which was explicitly a phallic symbol, especially when dipped in wine. Likewise, several rites involved nudity.¹⁰ Then in the United States in the 1970s, Wicca became an explicitly feminist religion. While current practices demonstrate that feminist Wicca, like many other feminist ideologies and communities, can welcome men so long as relations are egalitarian, the earliest versions of feminist Wicca advocated radical separatist feminism. “Dianic” Wicca was influenced by Gardner, but entirely excluded men and pared the divine couple of horned god and earth maiden down to a henotheistic focus on a single goddess. Hutton describes the 1980 Holy Book of Women’s Mysteries, which argued that “[t]he essence of female spiritual liberation, according to [founder of this school Zsuzsanna] Budapest, was ‘to abide in an all-female energy environment, to read no male writers, to listen to no male voices, to pray to no male gods.’” Another point of diverging meaning is whether neo-paganism is politically left or right wing. Many of us now think of Wicca as the American progressive Wicca has now crossed back over the pond, but Hutton reports that Gardner was likely a conservative, and a writer who studied a British Wicca coven in the 1960s reported its members were all Tories. To get an image of British Wicca prior to American progressive influence, you could do worse than to watch the 1973 film As you might guess from some of the more extreme variation in the political meaning of pagan survivalism and neo-paganism, another split is over attitudes towards Jews. Almost by definition, neo-paganism means rejecting ethical monotheism, which originated with Judaism, but there’s one group of neo-pagans that took it a lot further… As Hutton describes in Contrast this to the late 20th century, where you have the thoroughly progressive Starhawk conceptualizing the witch hunts not as Germanic vs. Semitic, or even pagan vs. monotheist, but as oppressed vs. oppressor — and since Jews were historically oppressed, this implies a philosemitic moral to the Burning Times myth. Hutton writes: “By Truth or Dare, Starhawk was explicitly equating the social experiences of Jews and witches, and whereas other Pagan writers had excoriated the whole Judaeo–Christian tradition as the source of the earth’s problems, she was now inclined to regard criticism of Judaism as anti-Semitism while retaining the animosity towards Christian Churches. She held Jewry up for admiration as an example of the capacity of the dispossessed to survive because of spiritual bonds, and her view of politics as a struggle carried on by small groups of right-thinking people amid hostile and ignorant masses drew at least partly upon this example.” The polysemy of the alleged fact that European paganism survived the introduction of Christianity boils down to: whom do you see as your enemy in the present? If you resent Christianity as irrational theism, you’ll join Frazer in mocking Christianity as rhyming with pagan fertility rites. If you’re opposed to pre-sexual revolution prudery and soot-choked industrial towns, you embrace Gardner’s liturgy and mythology of heterosexually horny nature worship. If you hate men, you’ll practice Dianic Wicca, but if you hate The Man you’ll practice Starhawk’s variety. And if you see Christianity as a Semitic threat to der deutschen Volksgeist, you spend nine years collecting die Hexenkartothek. 1 The one aspect of this myth that might be true is a pre-Indo-European goddess religion. The idea that Stone Age female figurines like the 2 “Performativity” has many other uses and meanings, all ultimately stemming from the analytic philosophy concept of speech acts. Perhaps most famously, in recent years the term has had applications in gender and queer theory, but I won’t be addressing that meaning here as I don’t feel like giving myself an ulcer by taking enough ibuprofen to make my way through Butler. 3 Kieran Healy 4 In a 5 Fortunately 6 “Check out my fantasy novel (that describes the counter-cultural religion with transgressive rites that I actually practice and wish to induct you into)” is a more elaborate version of using 7 Volume 2 of Charles Mackay’s 1841 8 It is interesting that Sir Edward and Sir James were both knighted, but so has been Sir Ronald since publication of Triumph of the Moon, and a major the point of the book is the latter thinks the former were full of it. 9 Gardner seems to be alluding to, and assessing as credible, the charges and evidence against the Templars that were extracted under torture when Philip IV sought to escape his debts through the traditional royal life-hack of persecuting his creditors, but Gardner found merit in the Templar’s alleged idolatry and witchcraft and shame only in the charge of sodomy. Gardner’s opposition to male homosexuality contrasts to his precursors in the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn. Notably, Victor Neuburg wrote “The Triumph of Pan,” a poem so intensely homoerotic it makes even the reader not usually inclined towards either homosexuality or masochism give a contemplative nod to the possibility of being severely buggered by a satyr. Aleister Crowley, the bisexual top whom Neuburg divinized in his poem, later wrote the “Hymn to Pan,” which is also homoerotic, but not as graphically so as its less famous predecessor composed from the bottom’s point of view. 10 All the stuff from Gardner about nudity, fivefold kiss, sexual initiation rites, binding, and flogging sounds like “my ‘I invented a religion to indulge my sexual appetites’ t-shirt is raising a lot of questions already answered by my ‘I invented a religion to indulge my sexual appetites’ t-shirt.” Hutton does his best to exculpate Gardner, but this effort comes across like a talented lawyer doing legal aid work who has reviewed the scant evidence provided by his obviously-guilty defendant, asks “is there anything else that might help your case?” and upon being told that’s it, puts on a brave face and says, “OK, we’ll see if the jury buys it.” Hutton argues that flogging was humanely applied and a way to achieve a trance state without exciting Gardner’s asthma, binding with cords was to achieve dizziness, and also we can tell it wasn’t erotic because Gardner’s surviving porn collection was vanilla pin-ups. Likewise, Hutton says Gardner was never subsequently MeToo’d and thus wasn’t a case of the familiar pattern of the leader of a new religious movement using that position for sexual predation. Uh huh. 11 Wicca does not practice human sacrifice, but some of its precursors and influences had a theoretical interest in the subject. Frazer of course gave great emphasis to the sacrifice of the king of the sacred rites and this theme is echoed in Wicker Man. Robert Graves (yes, the I, Claudius guy) had serious mommy issues, one expression of which was a masochistic fantasy about young men being tortured and sacrificed by priestesses. Aleister Crowley infamously claimed to have sacrificed an average of 150 of his own male children a year, but this logistically improbable claim seems to have been an erudite joke about non-procreative ejaculations. 12 Imagine the balls it took to be on the thesis committee in 1944 at University of Munich that rejected Untersturmführer Levin’s habilitation (second dissertation). You're currently a free subscriber to |