---
subject: "Weekly Dose of Optimism #100"
from: "Not Boring <notboring@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-06-28 12:40:30
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Not Boring"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2982495070691762429"]
---
Hi friends 👋, Happy Friday and welcome back to our 100th Weekly Dose of Optimism. The Big 1-0-0. Each week, Packy and I are share 5 stories that make us more optimistic about the future. We’ve done it 100 times now — which means 500+ examples of humans doing cool shit, pushing frontiers, and learning new things. There’s not been a slow week throughout the last 100 — we humans are prolific and, seemingly, have become even more prolific in just the last two years. Optimism compounds and progress steadily arcs up and to the right. We appreciate you all reading and sharing the Weekly Dose over these last 100 editions. We write it, in part, because doing so makes us keep our finger on the pulse of everything happening in science, energy, and technology. But we also write the Weekly Dose as a counterbalance to the pessimism that has permeated the mainstream media. Obviously we have much work to do on that front, but this is our little weekly contribution. If you’ve enjoyed reading the Weekly Dose of Optimism over the last 100 editions, we ask that you share it with a friend, family member, or colleague. Let’s get to it. Today’s Not Boring is brought to you by… I wouldn’t be writing this to you right now if it weren’t for David Perell and Whether you want to write full-time, or just get better at writing to sharpen your thoughts or communicate better at work, there’s no one better to learn from than David. He has a knack for deconstructing the work of history’s top writers, and of pulling secrets from modern greats. His podcast, David recently started a free weekly newsletter, I learned to be a better writer from David, and now you can too, for free. I can’t recommend subscribing to (1) Packy here. Watch that video. Can you feel the optimism? Not Boring favorite I spent Tuesday and Wednesday there, and moderated a panel on ENERGY. The whole conference was, if you’ll excuse the pun, electric. The timing was coincidental, but it was the perfect way to spend the Weekly Dose of Optimism’s 100th week. A little over two years ago, feeling the heavy deep mid-2022 pessimism, I wrote a post titled We’re more pessimistic than we should be. Optimism shapes reality. The downside to optimism is limited, the upside is uncapped.
Part of the reason for the pessimism was that the press serves up the most negative stories it can find, and takes the most negative angle on even the most positive stories. The view from my day job(s) — writing this newsletter and investing at Not Boring Capital — was completely different. Every day, I meet people doing things that seem straight out of the pages of utopian But you wouldn’t know it if you opened up a newspaper or a popular website. So a month later, Two years later, the world, or at least our little corner of it, feels a whole lot more optimistic. When people pull off incredible things, the roar of the cheers drowns out the snark and the boos. There’s a sense that every problem is solvable, even, and especially, if it’s going to take a lot of work to solve it. That spirit was on full display at Reindustrialize. Every speaker and panelist talked about the magnitude of the challenge ahead, and each one seemed to relish the struggle. As Dean Ball wrote in his
This combination of optimism and seriousness infused Reindustrialize. There’s a lot of work left to be done — we’re really just getting started — but I’ve never been more certain that the people we write about in the Weekly Dose every week, and many of you who read it, are going to get it done. Here’s to hundreds more weeks of their increasingly mind-blowing stories. Arc Institute
Researchers at For those less biologically inclined among us, like me, Stripe co-founder and Arc patron Patrick Collison asked Claude to summarize the importance of the papers, which you should
Essentially, instead of cutting DNA like CRISPR does, “bridge RNA” unzips the DNA, inserts new DNA, and zips it back up, making the process more precise and giving scientists “a word processor for DNA.” Some of the things we might be able to do with the technology include more precise gene therapies, using synthetic biology to give organisms new capabilities, watching evolution in real-time, creating more resilient crops, and designing genetic circuits like we design chips. (Separately, Elliot just tweeted about a preprint that points to The science itself is amazing, but what’s equally compelling is where it came from: Arc. Back in October 2022, Founded by Silvana Konermann, Patrick Hsu, and Patrick Collison after the three had worked on Fast Grants during COVID, Arc “gives scientists no-strings-attached, multi-year funding, so that they don’t have to apply for external grants, and invests in the rapid development of experimental and computational technological tools.” It’s an experiment in new ways of building institutions to advance science, and just three years in, it seems as if the experiment is working. Its success is a signal that we can build new institutions beyond startups. Creating a word processor for DNA is amazing; creating a machine that might produce many such advances is miraculous. (3) Kyle Wiggers for TechCrunch
Earlier this month, Nvidia briefly surpassed Microsoft as the most valuable company in the world with a market cap above $3T. The decades old company, as I’m sure you’re well aware, has fueled and been one of the main beneficiaries of the AI boom over the last couple of years. Given it’s size and importance, it should come at now surprise that a number of companies have popped up to take on Nvidia and gobble up some of that sweet, sweet AI chip spend. One such company is Etched’s founder and CEO, Gavin Uberti, went on Faster and cheaper chips —> more capable models —> more intelligence in the world —> civilizational progress. Very few companies have the chance to make such a direct and potentially profound impact on the world. Rooting for them. (4) OK, so we’ve established that is AI important and that building the chips that fuel the AI boom is lucrative. Well, actually, unless you’ve been living under a rock for the last couple of months, those two ideas have already been pounded into your head. Hard to turn on the TV or go online without seeing something about AI and/or chips. Yet still, very few people could simply explain how any of it actually works. The short answer is Transformers. Transformers is a neural network architecture that enables efficient processing of sequential data by using self-attention mechanisms, making it possible for AI to understand and generate complex language patterns and sequences. Sounds simple enough, but it’s obviously much more complex than that.
Rintamaki is a Stanford student who came onto our radar when he went deep on nanotech, which (5) Sammy Roth for The LA Times
Fervo’s Cape Station plant in Utah will provide continuous power to 350,000 homes in Southern California. Fervo makes geothermal commercially feasible by utilizing a number of horizontal drilling techniques. Horizontal drilling allows access to a larger area of underground heat from a single well, increasing the likelihood of hitting hot fluid and reducing costs compared to traditional vertical drilling. (We highly recommend Things are just starting to heat up in geothermal and Fervo’s leading the charge with partnerships with Microsoft and contracts with major California utilities. Geothermal is renewable, cost effective, resilient, and takes up less land than solar. The geothermal energy at the Earth’s core could theoretically power civilization for millions of years. If we figure out how to harness and transfer that energy effectively, we’ll be cooking with heat (literally). Since we started writing the Weekly Dose, solar has gotten cheaper and more abundant, The future is unbelievably bright. Bonus: Rockets Landing It feels appropriate that our 100th Weekly Dose is landing on Elon Musk’s birthday. There’s no one whose work — at SpaceX, Neuralink, and Tesla — we’ve covered more. So we’ll leave you with a video of not one, but two, SpaceX rockets landing back-to-back. Humans rock. Have a great weekend y’all. We’ll be back in your inbox on Tuesday. Thanks for reading, Packy + Dan |