---
subject: "The Passport Stamp Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-08-08 11:20:23
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
This originally appeared in my Colin here. A few weeks ago, I landed in Bali after a long trip from the States. I expected a scrum at the airport based on my past visits. But this time, no one wanted to see much from me. The e-gates blinked green and waved me through. It was efficient and painless, and it’s an experience coming soon to many other destinations. Biometric gates (already the default at most major airports) will quietly take over the world. Swipe your passport, stare into a camera, pass through. Progress, obviously. But it also marks the end of something tactile and oddly poetic: the humble passport stamp. I’m often obsessed with frictionless movement: cities with great transit, airport security checks – like in Portland, Oregon – that are incredibly well considered and flow nicely. But I also have to tip my hat to one of the last physical souvenirs of travel: proof of passage, memory in miniature, national bureaucracy as accidental art. I still keep my old passports in a drawer. They’re soft at the edges and veering on delaminated in some places. They are bulging with extra pages with stamped ink and laden with colorful security stickers on the back. A red entry from Denmark, precise as everything else there. The beautiful Arabic from Oman, stamped before I headed into the Empty Quarter to camp. A crisp Hong Kong imprint from when it still felt independent, before Chinese politics tightened. Rugged Zimbabwe ink, smudged by a friendly female border agent’s thumb on a hot afternoon near Buffalo Range. A full-page Tanzanian visa, glued in at a desk in Kilimanjaro after an arrival on KLM. Each one is a reminder that you went from here to there, and someone witnessed it. Stamps weren’t just functional: they were meditative. Palau stamps used to be a full-page environmental pledge into every visitor’s passport (they’ve since been made smaller). They’re a promise of stewardship you must sign, a stamp as a moral contract. One of the few places that asks not just where you’re coming from, but what kind of guest you plan to be. The use of passport stamps began in the 1800s, and became widespread in the early 20th century. Stamps tracked movement, yes, but they also became soft power made visible. What countries let you in easily? Which made you wait while they cross-referenced Cold War databases? The stamp was the state, condensed as tight as a bouillon cube. And like all analog signals, stamps contained beautiful accidents and personal touches. The European Union is phasing out physical passport stamps for travelers entering Schengen countries, and its e-gates promise none of these memories: just a scan and a silent swing. Maybe a barely audible click if you’re lucky. The new way is more secure. Given wait times and surges in travel, it is probably better for everyone’s sanity. But I miss the ceremony and the quiet ritual (and occasionally stressful moment) where your passport gets studied, the stamp gets pressed, and for a second you’re acknowledged. I used to really love the gentle accumulation of stamps over time. They told you who’d been where, and when. A passport was part document, part conversation starter. As the physical world goes ephemeral (signatures become biometrics, keys and cards become phones, stamps become scans), we decide which traces matter. Passport stamps never pinged or tracked or lit up. It was colored ink and the odd signature, layering upon other ink into a quiet little mosaic sitting in a book. And I am very happy I lived during a time to experience and collect them. (CJN) You're currently a free subscriber to |