---
subject: "Not Yet"
from: "\"River Kenna from In•Star\" <riverkenna@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-14 10:46:22
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "River Kenna", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3010718370428876194", "UNREAD"]
---
The past year, I’ve been reading Bill Plotkin’s Journey of Soul Initiation on and off. I always seem to pick it up, read a chapter or two, read exactly what I needed at that moment, and pick it up again exactly when the next chapter is what I need. It’s been pretty cool. Unlocked a lot for me. And also locked some stuff for me — but hopefully in a fruitful way. One idea that comes back again and again is that the period of soul initiation is emphatically not the time to be making big life decisions, planning far ahead, or trying to make your mark on the world. He especially emphasizes that in our modern culture, many people will undergo some kind of soul encounter experience… and then will immediately try to take it out into the world. They’ll try to tell people about it, to build up their Calling around it, to build a way to communicate it and share it with people. And this, Plotkin says, is exactly the wrong thing to do. After soul encounter, you need time. The encounter needs time. Your soul needs time. More particularly, your ego needs time to root itself into soul, rather than into its own wants and needs. An encounter with soul will break you down and rearrange you, it will digest the person you were and metabolize it into the person who is capable of doing all those other things you’re tempted to do right away — telling people, delivering your gift to the world, engaging with your Calling. But if you try to do all that before your ego has been transformed by soul, you interrupt the process. You allow tangles to form between ego and soul and the world and the mundane logistics of your month-to-month survival. It’s best, he says — actually, it’s necessary, he says — to give time, to give space, to give attention and experimentation and energy and rest to the process of allowing yourself to be uprooted and transplanted by what you’ve experienced. To be quiet and go about your life as best as you’re able while experimenting with ways of taking on this new identity, feeding and nurturing this new emerging self, acting as if this new self has arrived, in order to invite them to arrive. This is another part of why I haven’t been writing for a long time, and why I’m only doing half-assed writing now. I sense Plotkin’s right about something here. Every time I start in on some big project, some new piece of writing, some new offering or idea or thing I want to communicate — it always comes back to this in my mind. Now isn’t the time for outward-facing work, for establishing anything with a view to the future. Now is the time to shift, to change, to let the process be the process — and to keep fairly quiet about what exactly that process is, or what it feels like it’s doing. And if that makes parts of my day-to-day, month-to-month life more difficult, that’s just what it’s going to do. I have to trust that the process means something, that it’s going somewhere, and that it’s worth seeing it through the right way. If I can’t trust that, what am I doing here? Infra is free and will stay free, but if you get something out of my work, consider giving something back. Share my writing with friends & followers, pick up my |