---
subject: "America's $175 Trillion Problem"
from: "Balaji <balajis@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-07-25 19:19:10
labels: ["Balaji", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_3304713803370614215", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX"]
---
We're headed for something far worse than 2008. As Note: this post and the followups got 4M+ collective views on X. 1) More emergency loans than 2008First, did you know the Fed made Just look at this graph from the Fed. The blue bump below on the left is the lending from the global financial crisis of 2008 — you know, that little old thing! The purple bump is COVID. And the giant orange/aquamarine monster on the right is the 2023 banking crisis. See how much higher it is than even 2008?!? 2) More borrowing than COVIDSecond, did you know the US is 3) More interest than defenseThird, did you know that all this borrowing has made interest payments on the national debt the single largest government expense? And as you can see from the graph, the time to pay has come: 4) More devaluation of the dollarFourth, did you know that the dollar has Yet even 25% in four years is quite a lot: 5) More treasury dumping by ChinaNext, did you know that China (the single largest foreign buyer of US Treasuries) has been But now that outside demand is crashing: 6) More gold buying by BRICSBut isn’t the dollar a store of value? What are other countries saving in if not US Treasuries? Well, China is a bellwether for much of the non-US world. And those countries have begun Take a look: 7) More de-dollarization than everOk, what about the dollar as medium of exchange? Well, China — which is the 8) Less sanction efficiency than everOk, but can’t the dollar still be used as a sanctions weapon? Don’t countries need access to the US financial system? Actually, no. All the sanctions on Russia actually ended up hurting Europe more than Russia. Europe needed Russia’s oil and gas, but Russia had other customers. So according to the World Bank (not a Russian source!), 9) Peacetime debt approaching WW2All right, but what about the US military? Can’t it ultimately go to war to protect the dollar? Well, that’s a much longer conversation, but see the graph below. Today the US is ostensibly in “peacetime." And yet it has This means the US has neither the money nor the manufacturing base for a sustained military campaign against a peer rival like China. You can’t fight your factory — especially when you’re out of money. 10) True debt more than any empire in historyFinally, maybe the single most important number is the That $175.3T lines up with the ~ The entire fedguv only collected ~$2T last year That number is itself juiced by deficit spending The dollar is down ~25% in real terms since 2020 And the "177T" in asset value plummets if liquidated ...or if there is a financial crisis, or both
So, that 175T debt is unpayable. And the US government doesn't have nearly enough to pay for what it owes. It's made promises to everyone, from allies to retirees, that it simply can't keep. To hang on to power amidst that web of broken obligations, it is going to get nasty on a level beyond which most can really comprehend. See this post for more: The US dollar is needed less, just when the US needs to borrow moreI really haven’t even gotten started. There are many more graphs I could show, many more videos from investors around the world from China doesn’t need the dollar to trade because they are using CNY instead of USD. BRICS doesn’t need the dollar to save because they are buying gold instead of US bonds. Russia doesn’t need the dollar to live because they are the fourth largest economy after being shut out of the US economy. Yet the US needs as much of the world as possible to accept the dollar, as it’s borrowing at levels beyond COVID, beyond WW2, beyond any empire in history.
So, what comes next? I have some ideas, and you have some ideas. But first we need to align on what’s happening. BONUS: Will AI solve this?
I love the optimism. But let's do the math. As of late July 2024, here are the market caps of the top tech stocks: AAPL: 3.4T So, the combined market cap of the Magnificent is "only" $15.65T. That's less than 10% of the $175.3T owed by DC! So, even if AI produces another Magnificent 7, there's no way to grow out of this. And by the way, it takes years to grow a trillion dollar company, years during which the US will just accumulate more debt at an accelerating clip. Everyone isn’t going to get what they’re owed. A debt crisis is coming. Discuss this article with Balaji and your fellow subscribers at |