---
subject: "o3, Oh My"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-12-30 14:01:37
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
OpenAI presented o3 on the Friday before Thanksgiving, at the tail end of the 12 Days of Shipmas. I was very much expecting the announcement to be something like a price drop. What better way to say ‘Merry Christmas,’ no? They disagreed.
Up front, I want to offer my sincere thanks for this public safety testing phase, Table of ContentsGPQA Has FallenCodeforces Has Fallen
In the presentation, Altman jokingly mentions that one person at OpenAI is a competition programmer who is 3000+ on Codeforces, so ‘they have a few more months’ to enjoy their superiority. Except, he’s obviously not joking. Gulp. Arc Has Kinda of Fallen But For Now Only Kindao3 shows dramatically improved performance on the ARC-AGI challenge.
Is there a catch? There’s at least one big catch, which is that they vastly exceeded the compute limit for what counts as a full win for the ARC challenge. Those yellow dots represent quite a lot more money spent, o3 high is spending thousands of dollars. It is worth noting that $0.10 per problem is a lot cheaper than human level.
Beyond that, is there another catch? That’s a matter of some debate. Even with catches, the improvements are rather mind-blowing.
And this progress is quite a lot. It is not, however, a direct harbinger of AGI, one does not want to overreact.
Except, oh no! They Trained on the Train Set
Previous SotA on ARC involved training not only on the test set, but on a much larger synthetic test set. ARC was designed so the AI wouldn’t need to train for it, but it turns out ‘test that you can’t train for’ is a super hard trick to pull off. This was an excellent try and it still didn’t work. If anything, o3’s using only 300 training set problems, and using a very simple instruction, seems to be to its credit here. The true ASI might not need to do it, but why wouldn’t you train on the train set as a matter of course, even if you didn’t intend to test on ARC? That’s good data. And yes, humans will reliably do some version of ‘train on at least some of the train set’ if they want to do well on tasks. Is it true we will be a lot better off if we have AIs that can one-shot problems that are out of their training distributions, where they truly haven’t seen anything that resembles the problem? Well, sure. That would be more impressive. The real objection here, as I understand it, is the claim that OpenAI presented these results as more impressive than they are. The other objection is that this required quite a lot of compute. That is a practical problem. If you’re paying $20 a shot to solve ARC problems, or even $1m+ for the whole test at the high end, pretty soon you are talking real money. It also
The implication is that o3’s ability to handle the size of the grids might be producing a large threshold effect. Perhaps most of why o3 does so well is that it can hold the presented problem ‘in its head’ at once. That wouldn’t be as big a general leap.
AIME Has FallenI remember when AIME problems were hard. This one is not a surprise. AIME hasn’t quite fully fallen, in the sense that this does not solve AIME cheap. But it does solve AIME. Frontier of Frontier Math Shifting Rapidly
At the time, no model solved more than 2% of these questions. And then there’s o3.
It is indeed rather crazy how many people only weeks ago thought this level of Frontier Math was a year or more away. Therefore… FrontierMath 4: We’re Going To Need a Bigger Benchmark
Tier 5 could presumably be ‘ask a bunch of problems we have actual no idea how to solve and that might not have solutions but that would be super cool’ since anything on a benchmark inevitably gets solved. What is o3 Under the Hood?From the description here, Chollet and Masad are speculating. It’s certainly plausible, but we don’t know if this is on the right track. It’s also highly plausible, especially given how OpenAI usually works, that o3 is deeply similar to o1, only better, similarly to how the GPT line evolved.
Jessica Taylor sees this as vindicating Paul Christiano’s view that you can factor cognition and use that to scale up effective intelligence.
I agree with that somewhat. I’m confused how far to go with it. If we got o3 primarily because we trained on synthetic data that was generated by o1… then that is rather directly a form of slow takeoff and recursive self-improvement. (Again, I don’t know if that’s what happened or not.) Not So Fast!And I don’t simply mean that the full o3 is not so fast, which it indeed is not:
I am waiting for economists to discover various things, Noam Brown excluded.
Scary fast? Absolutely. However, I would caution (anti-caution?) that this is not a three month (~100 day) gap.
They are only now starting o3 safety testing, from the sound of it this includes o3-mini. Even the red teamers won’t get full o3 access for several weeks. Thus, we don’t know how long this later process will take, but I would put the gap closer to 4-5 months. That is still, again, scary fast. It is however also the low hanging fruit, on two counts. We went from o1 → o3 in large part by having it spend over $1,000 on tasks. You can’t pull that trick that many more times in a row. The price will come down over time, and o3 is clearly more efficient than o1, so yes we will still make progress here, but there aren’t that many tasks where you can efficiently spend $10k+ on a slow query, especially if it isn’t reliable. This is a new paradigm of how to set up an AI model, so it should be a lot easier to find various algorithmic improvements.
Thus, if o3 isn’t so good that it substantially accelerates AI R&D that goes towards o4, then I would expect an o4 that expresses a similar jump to take substantially longer. The question is, does o3 make up for that with its contribution to AI R&D? Are we looking at a slow takeoff situation? Even if not, it will still get faster and cheaper. And that alone is huge. Deep Thought
Douglas Adams had lots of great intuitions and ideas, he’s amazing, but also he had a lot of shots on goal. Our Price CheapRight now o3 is rather expensive, although o3-mini will be cheaper than o1. That doesn’t mean o3-level outputs will stay expensive, although presumably once they are people will try for o4-level or o5-level outputs, which will be even more expensive despite the discounts.
Most people will rarely even want an o3 query in the first place, they don’t have much use for that kind of intelligence in the day to day. Most queries are already pretty easy to handle with Claude Sonnet, or even Gemini Flash. You can’t use $1m to buy a superior iPhone. But suppose you could, and every time you paid 10x the price the iPhone got modestly better (e.g. you got an iPhone x+2 or something). My instinctive prediction is a bunch of rich people pay $10k or $100k and a few pay $1m or $10m but mostly no one cares. This is of course different, and relative access to intelligence is a key factor, but it’s miles less unequal than access to human expertise. To the extent that people do need that high level of artificial intelligence, it’s mostly a business expense, and as such it is actually remarkably cheap already. It definitely reduces ‘intelligence inequality’ in the sense that getting information or intelligence that you can’t provide yourself will get a lot cheaper and easier to access. Already this is a huge effect - I have lots of smart and knowledgeable friends but mostly I use the same tools everyone else could use, if they knew about them. Still, yes, some people don’t love this.
Musk cannot buy 100 times better medical or financial services. What he can do is pay 100 times more, and get something 10% better. Maybe 25% better. Or, quite possibly, 10% worse, especially for financial services. For legal he can pay 100 times more and get 100 times more legal services, but as we’ve actually seen it won’t go great. And yes, ‘pay a human to operate your consumer tech for you’ is the obvious way to get superior consumer tech. I can absolutely get a better Netflix or Spotify or search by paying infinitely more money, if I want that, via this vastly improved interface. And of course I could always get a vastly better computer. If you’re using a MacBook and you are literally Elon Musk that is pretty much on you. The ‘twas ever thus’ line raises the question of what type of product AI is supposed to be. If it’s a consumer technology, then for most purposes, I still think we end up using the same product. If it’s a professional service used in doing business, then it was already different. The same way I could hire expensive lawyers, I could have hired a prompt engineer or SWEs to build me agents or what not, if I wanted that. I find Altman’s framing interesting here, and important:
Exponentially more money for marginally more performance. Over time, massive cost reductions. In a sense, the extra money is buying you living in the future. Do you want to live in the future, before you get the cost reductions? In some cases, very obviously yes, you do. Has Software Engineering Fallen?I would not say it has fallen. I do know it will transform. If two years from now you are writing code line by line,
The question is, assuming the world ‘looks normal,’ will you still need taste? You’ll need some kind of taste. You still need to decide what to build. But the taste you need will presumably get continuously higher level and more abstract, even within design. Don’t Quit Your Day JobIf you’re in AI capabilities, pivot to AI safety. If you’re in software engineering, pivot to software architecting. If you’re in working purely for a living, pivot to building things and shipping them. But otherwise, don’t quit your day job.
They’ll still be (higher level) SWEs. Instead of coding, they’ll be telling the AI to code. And they will absolutely be competing with you. If you don’t join them, you are probably going to lose. Here’s some advice that I agree with in spirit, except that if you choose not to decide you still have made a choice, so you do the best you can,
Master of Your Domain
Note the date on that poll, it is prior to o3. I predict that o3 with reasonable tool use and other similar scaffolding, and a bunch of engineering work to get all that set up (but it would almost all be general work, it mostly wouldn’t need to be wedding specific work, and a lot of it could be done by o3!) would be great at planning ‘a’ wedding. It can give you one hell of a wedding. But you don’t want ‘a’ wedding. You want your wedding. The key is handling the humans. That would mean keeping the humans in the loop properly, ensuring they give the right feedback that allows o3 to stay on track and know what is actually desired. But it would also mean all the work a wedding planner does to manage the bride and sometimes groom, and to deal with issues on-site. If you give it an assistant (with assistant planner levels of skill) to navigate various physical issues and conversations and such, then the problem becomes trivial. Which in some sense also makes it not a good test, but also does mean your wedding planner is out of a job. So, good question, actually. As far as we know, no one has dared try. Safety ThirdThe bar for safety testing has gotten so low that I was genuinely happy to see When they tested the original GPT-4, under far less dangerous circumstances, for months. Whereas with o3, it could possibly have already been too late. Take Eliezer Yudkowsky’s warning here both seriously and literally:
Was it probably safe in practice to train o3 under these conditions? Sure. You definitely had at least one 9 of safety doing this (p(safe)>90%). It would be reasonable to claim you had two (p(safe)>99%) at the level we care about. Given both kinds of model uncertainty, I don’t think you had three. If humans are reading the outputs, or if o3 has meaningful outgoing internet access, and it turns out you are wrong about it being safe to train it under those conditions… the results could be catastrophically bad, or even existentially bad. You don’t do that because you expect we are in that world yet. We almost certainly aren’t. You do that because there is a small chance that we are, and we can’t afford to be wrong about this. That is still not the current baseline threat model. The current baseline threat model remains that a malicious user uses o3 to do something for them that we do not want o3 to do.
I agree that o3 seems relatively likely to be highly unsafe-by-default in existentially dangerous ways, including ways illustrated by the recent Redwood Research and Anthropic paper, Alignment Faking in Large Language Models. It builds in so many of the preconditions for such behaviors.
I am not convinced, at least for my own purposes, although obviously most people will be unable to come up with valuable insights here. I think salience of ideas is a big deal, people don’t do things, and yes often I get ideas that seem like they might not get discovered forever otherwise. Doubtless a lot of them are because ‘that doesn’t work, either because we tried it and it doesn’t or it obviously doesn’t you idiot’ but I’m fine with not knowing which ones are which. I do think that the rationalist or MIRI crowd made a critical mistake in the 2010s of thinking they should be loud about the dangers of AI in general, but keep their technical ideas remarkably secret even when it was expensive. It turned out it was the opposite, the technical ideas didn’t much matter in the long run (probably?) but the warnings drew a bunch of interest. So there’s that. Certainly now is not the time to keep our safety concerns or ideas to ourselves. The Safety Testing ProgramThus, you are invited to their
If early testing of the full o3 will require a delay of multiple weeks for setup, then that implies we are not seeing the full o3 in January. We probably see o3-mini relatively soon, then o3 follows up later. This seems wise in any case. Giving the public o3-mini is one of the best available tests of the full o3. This is the best form of iterative deployment. What the public does with o3-mini can inform what we look for with o3. One must carefully consider the ethical implications before assisting OpenAI, especially assisting with their attempts to push the capabilities frontier for coding in particular. There is an obvious argument against participation, including decision theoretic considerations. I think this loses in this case to the obvious argument for participation, which is that this is purely red teaming and safety work, and we all benefit from it being as robust as possible, and also you can do good safety research using your access. This type of work benefits us all, not only OpenAI. Thus, yes, I encourage you to apply to this program, and while doing so to be helpful in ensuring that o3 is safe. What Could Possibly Go Wrong?Pretty much all the things, at this point, although the worst ones aren’t likely… yet.
In many places the division is misleading, but for now and at this capability level, it seems reasonable to talk about three main categories of risk here: Misuse. Automated R&D and potential takeoffs or self-improvement. For-real loss of control problems that aren’t #2.
For all previous frontier models, there was always a jailbreak. If someone was determined to get your model to do [X], and your model had the underlying capability to do [X], you could get it to do [X]. In this case, [X] is likely to include substantially aiding a number of catastrophically dangerous things, in the class of cyberattacks or CBRN risks or other such dangers.
I don’t think ideological is the right term. You don’t make it for direct consumer use if your focus is on consumer utility. But you might well make it for big business, if you’re trying to sell a bunch of drop-in employees to big business at $20k/year a pop or something. That’s a pretty great business if you can get it (and the compute is only $10k, or $1k). And you definitely do it if your goal is to have that model help make your other models better. It’s weird to me to talk about wanting to make AGI and ASI and the most intelligent thing possible as if it were ideological. Of course you want to make those things… provided you (or we) can stay in control of the outcomes. Just think of the potential! It is only ideological in the sense that it represents a belief that we can handle doing that without getting ourselves killed. If anything, to me, it’s the opposite. Not wanting to go for ASI because you don’t see the upside is an ideological position. The two reasonable positions are ‘don’t go for ASI yet, slow down there cowboy, we’re not ready to handle this’ and ‘we totally can too handle this, just think of the potential.’ Or even ‘we have to build it before the other guy does,’ which makes me despair but at least I get it. The position ‘ And of course, if you don’t (as Aaron seems to imply) think Anthropic has its eyes on the prize, you’re not paying attention. DeepMind originally did, but Google doesn’t, so it’s unclear what the mix is at this point over there. What Could Possibly Go Right?I want to be clear here that the answer is: Quite a lot of things. Having access to next-level coding and math is great. Having the ability to spend more money to get better answers where it is valuable is great. Even if this all stays relatively mundane and o3 is ultimately disappointing, I am super excited for the upside, and to see what we all can discover, do, build and automate. Send in the SkepticGuess who. All right, that’s my fault, I made that way too easy.
First off it Your Periodic Reminder that progress is anything but slow even if you exclude the entire o-line. It has been a little over two years since there was a demo of GPT-4, with what was previously a two year product cycle. That’s very different from ‘two years of an imminent GPT-5 release.’ In the meantime, models have gotten better across the board. GPT-4o, Claude Sonnet 3.5 and Gemini 1206 all completely demolish the original GPT-4, to speak nothing of o1 or Perplexity or anything else. And we also have o1, and now o3. The practical experience of using LLMs is vastly better than it was two years ago. Also,
So no, not a good question. Is there now a pattern where ‘old school’ frontier model training runs whose primary plan was ‘add another zero or two’ are generating unimpressive results? Yeah, sure. Is o3 an actual AGI? No. I’m pretty sure it is not. But it seems plausible it is AGI-level specifically at coding. And that’s the important one. It’s the one that counts most. If you have that, overall AGI likely isn’t far behind. This is Almost Certainly Not AGI
If o3 was as good on most tasks as it is at coding or math, then it would be AGI. It is not. If it was, OpenAI would be communicating about this very differently. If it was, then that would not match what we saw from o1, or what we would predict from this style of architecture. We should expect o-style models to be relatively good at domains like math and coding where their kind of chain of thought is most useful and it is easiest to automatically evaluate outputs. That potentially is saying more about the definition of AGI than anything else. But it is certainly saying the useful thing that there are plenty of highly useful human-shaped cognitive things it cannot yet do so well. How long that lasts? That’s another question. What would be the most Robin Hanson take here, in response to the ARC score?
o1 listed 15 when I asked, oddly without any math evals, and Claude gave us 30. So yes, dozens of such cases. We might indeed see dozens more, depending on how we choose them. But in terms of things like ARC, where the test was designed to not be something you could do easily without general intelligence, not so many? It does not feel like we have ‘dozens more’ such things left. This has nothing to do with the ‘financial definition of AGI’ between OpenAI and Microsoft, of $100 billion in profits. This almost certainly is not that, either, but the two facts are not that related to each other. Does This Mean the Future is Open Models?
I agree that the compute shifting to inference relatively helps whoever can’t afford to be spending the most compute on training. That would shift things towards whoever has the most compute for inference. The same goes if inference is used to create data to train models.
Inference compute being the true cost also means that model quality and efficiency potentially matters quite a lot. Everything is on a log scale, so even if Meta’s M-5 is sort of okay and can scale like O-5, if it’s even modestly worse, it might cost 10x or 100x more compute to get similar performance. That leaves a hell of a lot of room for profit margins. Then there’s the assumption that when training your bespoke model, what matters is compute, and everything else is kind of fungible. I keep seeing this, and I don’t think this is right. I do think you can do ‘okay’ as a fast follower with only compute and ordinary skill in the art. Sure. But it seems to me like the top labs, particularly Anthropic and OpenAI, absolutely do have special sauce, and that this matters. There are a number of strong candidates, including algorithmic tricks and better data. It also matters whether you actually do the thing you need to do.
What this does mean is that open models will continue to make progress and will be harder to limit at anything like current levels, if one wanted to do that. If you have an open model Llama-N, it now seems like you can turn it into M(eta)-N, once it becomes known how to do that. It might not be very good, but it will be a progression. The thinking here by Evan at the link about the implications of takeoff seem deeply confused - if we’re in a takeoff situation then that changes everything and it’s not about ‘who can capture the value’ so much as who can capture the lightcone. I don’t understand how people can look these situations in the face and not only not think about existential risk but also think everything will ‘seem normal.’ He’s the one who said takeoff (and ‘fast’ takeoff, which classically means it’s all over in a matter of hours to weeks)! As a reminder, the traditional definition of ‘slow’ takeoff is remarkably fast, also best start believing in them, because it sure looks like you’re in one:
Not Priced InOne answer to ‘why didn’t Nvidia move more’ is of course ‘ Also, on Monday after a few days to think, Nvidia overperformed the Nasdaq by ~3%. And this was how the Wall Street Journal described that, even then: No, I didn’t buy more on Friday, I keep telling myself I have Nvidia at home. Indeed I do have Nvidia at home. I keep kicking myself, but that’s how every trade is - either you shouldn’t have done it, or you should have done more. I don’t know that there will be another moment like this one, but if there is another moment this obvious, I hereby pledge in public to at least top off a little bit, Nick is correct in his attitude here you do not need to do the research because you know this isn’t priced in but in expectation you can assume that everything you are not thinking about is priced in. And now, as I finish this up, Nvidia has given most of those gains back on no news that seems important to me. You could claim that means yes, priced in. I don’t agree. Our Media is Failing Us
The traditional media, instead, did not notice it. At all. And one can’t help but suspect this was highly intentional. Why else would you announce such a big thing on the Friday afternoon before Thanksgiving?
Well, then. In that crowd, it was all ‘software engineers are cooked’ and people filled with some mix of excitement and existential dread. But back in the world where everyone
It wasn’t only WSJ either, On Monday
Is it Cade Metz? Yep, it’s Cade Metz and also Tripp Mickle. To be fair to them, they do have Demis Hassabis quotes saying chatbot improvements would slow down. And then there’s this, love it:
That post also mentions both synthetic data and o1.
It works best there, yes, but that doesn’t mean it’s the only place that works.
True, you don’t want to make the opposite mistake either, and freak out a lot over something that is not available yet. But this was ridiculous. Not Covered Here: Deliberative AlignmentI realized I wanted to say more here and have this section available as its own post. So more on this later. The Lighter Side
You're currently a free subscriber to |