---
subject: "Apple ports Windows games 🎮, AI makes faster sort 🤖, self-healing code is the future 👨‍💻"
from: "TLDR <dan@tldrnewsletter.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-06-08 10:40:04
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "TLDR"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_795315172960844453"]
---
[DeepMind AI creates algorithms that sort data faster than those built by people (5 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.nature.com%2Farticles%2Fd41586-023-01883-4%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001889a9791c5-61c9fcf7-f420-4597-8209-7c887f2d8aaf-000000/nMW_-31XjsLVi3KVFFOEpy1VGNJ2ERIknkcLVrRq3lw=304)
AlphaDev, an AI system based on DeepMind's AlphaZero AI, can create algorithms that sort data up to three times as fast as human-generated algorithms. The system has created algorithms that are already part of two standard C++ coding libraries. AlphaDev was trained to compare values, move values between locations, and jump to different parts of the program. It was rewarded based on correctness and speed. The DeepMind team plans to apply AlphaZero-style algorithms to more kinds of problems, including hardware design. |
[Apple’s new Proton-like tool can run Windows games on a Mac (4 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.theverge.com%2F2023%2F6%2F7%2F23752164%2Fapple-mac-gaming-game-porting-toolkit-windows-games-macos%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001889a9791c5-61c9fcf7-f420-4597-8209-7c887f2d8aaf-000000/xykDO10bBCYGRs7jB0V4L8vlv7-GbrmKQwnkFxX7U9Y=304)
Apple's new Game Porting Toolkit will make it easier and quicker for developers to port Windows games to Mac. It uses a Proton-like environment that translates and runs the latest DirectX Windows games on macOS. Developers can use the tool to launch an unmodified version of a Windows game on a Mac to see how well it runs before fully porting the game. Most unoptimized games will likely run into performance issues and bugs. |
Science & Futuristic Technology
|
[NASA spends $45M to seed tech from hundreds of space businesses (2 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftechcrunch.com%2F2023%2F06%2F07%2Fnasa-spends-45m-to-seed-tech-from-hundreds-of-space-businesses%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001889a9791c5-61c9fcf7-f420-4597-8209-7c887f2d8aaf-000000/_HKqp0pqMIHtWhyp1tZM-wvxSG2zLJnN3QgMkQyPM4E=304)
NASA is granting funds to hundreds of small aerospace businesses as part of a wider government program to seed cutting-edge American enterprises. 249 small businesses and 39 research institutions received $150,000 for a total investment of $45 million. While the reward is a signal that NASA may be interested in purchasing technology from these companies in the future, there is no guarantee of a contract. Companies that are successful during the first phase of the program may apply for larger grants in subsequent phases. |
[Scientists Guide Lightning Bolts With Lasers for the First Time (3 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.smithsonianmag.com%2Fsmart-news%2Fscientists-guide-lightning-bolts-with-lasers-for-the-first-time-180981462%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001889a9791c5-61c9fcf7-f420-4597-8209-7c887f2d8aaf-000000/_bnlVbME8_sFKR8QgpcwTS38WQgt2iK_Vo2RWm_lieE=304)
A team of scientists diverted lightning by using lasers on a mountain in northeastern Switzerland. The technology could be used one day to protect infrastructure from lightning strikes. The scientists were only able to show 50 meters of guiding length. Most lighting channels are kilometers long, so the technology will need to be able to guide lightning for longer distances before it can be practically used. The laser is very expensive and won't be commercialized for at least a decade. |
Programming, Design & Data Science
|
[Self-healing code is the future of software development (11 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fstackoverflow.blog%2F2023%2F06%2F07%2Fself-healing-code-is-the-future-of-software-development%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001889a9791c5-61c9fcf7-f420-4597-8209-7c887f2d8aaf-000000/7bZsRNSFz5T8ZGJn7GwkPReaFxV5J7jsVa6zTzpMGb8=304)
This article looks at how several companies are using AI for software development. Large language models can improve their output through self-reflection. A growing body of research is showing that a more guided auto-regressive approach to using LLMs can lead to better outcomes. The ability of LLMs to quickly produce large amounts of code will mean that there will be a need for better quality control procedures. Some companies are already using AIs to check code for accuracy, security, and speed. |
[PyStack (GitHub Repo)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fbloomberg%2Fpystack%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001889a9791c5-61c9fcf7-f420-4597-8209-7c887f2d8aaf-000000/mSjraRmnG4CGncucbGnnmYe-ZYQwFHJZ5mpqJ9m7eaU=304)
PyStack is a tool that lets users inspect the stack frames of a running Python process or a Python core dump. It helps users quickly and easily see what is going on without having to interpret CPython internals. PyStack is super fast and it works with aggressively optimized Python interpreter binaries and Python interpreter libraries that don't have symbols or debug information. It can usually reconstruct stacks for processes that crash due to memory corruption. |
[Sequoia’s Split Sends Warning to Every Company Doing US-China Business (11 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Farchive.ph%2FGS9RH%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001889a9791c5-61c9fcf7-f420-4597-8209-7c887f2d8aaf-000000/iHtP8DSnvfSiNX2uobYcKIBQHC7g6wRrAfvlCSRe6D8=304)
Sequoia Capital's plan to split itself into three separate regional firms is a major shift for one of the world's leading venture capital firms. It highlights the impact of rising political tensions between the US and China. Sequoia has been criticized for its Chinese investments. US law could soon curtail US investments in foreign entities. Sequoia's split will be functionally complete by the end of the year, with names and branding updated by the end of next March. |
[Apple Vision Pro Hands-On: Way Ahead of Meta In Critical Ways (6 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.uploadvr.com%2Fapple-vision-pro%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001889a9791c5-61c9fcf7-f420-4597-8209-7c887f2d8aaf-000000/6SviuY7P7hU5J3JjVu_I0ruxcBHWOBBH31lVs0zq9fU=304)
This article describes what it is like to wear Apple's new Vision Pro headset. While Apple's Personas are slightly disappointing, the rest of the experience out-classed every other VR headset the author has tried. Its passthrough mode makes the wearer feel like they are looking through the headset. The eye tracking and pinching method of input works well and could be the new standard for AR and VR input. |
[TLDR is hiring a curator for TLDR Cybersecurity](http://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/jobs@tldr.tech/1/010001889a9791c5-61c9fcf7-f420-4597-8209-7c887f2d8aaf-000000/dTVgs5eGWLQD1AH27mQY5MxGIysM-o3kAcjY8Zi6i5A=304)
TLDR is hiring a part-time curator to join our TLDR Cybersecurity newsletter curation team. The newsletter already has over 200,000 subscribers pre-launch, it's a fun way to earn some side income and build a personal brand within the security community.
The ideal candidate would work in cybersecurity and enjoy keeping up with news, tools, and trends in the security ecosystem, and spend time reading Reddit, Twitter, Hacker News, and other news sources for security professionals.
Time commitment is roughly 6 hours/week (Sunday, Tuesday, Thursday), to apply please send your LinkedIn or resume to [jobs@tldr.tech](http://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/jobs@tldr.tech/2/010001889a9791c5-61c9fcf7-f420-4597-8209-7c887f2d8aaf-000000/9l2G5j4zwbsleyEc81omwe4eE7-PDQ8AU1cX1s5aToc=304) along with a couple sentences on why you'd be a good fit! |
[Daft (GitHub Repo)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fgithub.com%2FEventual-Inc%2FDaft%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001889a9791c5-61c9fcf7-f420-4597-8209-7c887f2d8aaf-000000/Tq8p3fJMFOWNMN08O84th7aGeIj5jEw2-n-oVFjByME=304)
Daft is a Pythonic and scalable dataframe library built for machine learning workloads that features columns that can contain any Python object. |
[Arroyo (GitHub Repo)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fgithub.com%2FArroyoSystems%2Farroyo%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001889a9791c5-61c9fcf7-f420-4597-8209-7c887f2d8aaf-000000/4toT-ysRZIWFoXq8cJilbFCzHCIiWG3u4KG-RAXQ9FU=304)
Arroyo is a distributed stream processing engine designed to efficiently perform stateful computations on streams of data. |
[qnm (GitHub Repo)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Franyitz%2Fqnm%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001889a9791c5-61c9fcf7-f420-4597-8209-7c887f2d8aaf-000000/VVt7cc9MC8ouGkhgDCWOBKjD4TJwDbqA4Gx4Jb2KI8A=304)
qnm is a simple command-line utility for querying the node_modules directory to provide fast and focused information about installed modules. |
[TLDR Talent](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fdanni763618.typeform.com%2Fto%2FrSL4lOH3/2/010001889a9791c5-61c9fcf7-f420-4597-8209-7c887f2d8aaf-000000/k9IS7aVcvtPuNuXUnXwSRYS8brOg6DTO2hEYpp4OfAk=304) is our exclusive community where we help world-class tech talent and get intros to companies of their choice, along with a number of exciting startups and tech companies curated by TLDR.
We give you full control of the process, you can specify if you’re actively searching or passively interested only if something amazing comes along. Set your preferred compensation, seniority/title/role, specific companies (or types of companies) you’d like to work for and more. [Click here to apply](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fdanni763618.typeform.com%2Fto%2FrSL4lOH3/3/010001889a9791c5-61c9fcf7-f420-4597-8209-7c887f2d8aaf-000000/i_Mcp5oIe0cl505zLMcJ8iNCOuZo3N5PtIT3TFnCoGA=304).
|
If your company is interested in reaching an audience of tech executives, decision-makers and engineers, you may want to [advertise with us](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fshare.hsforms.com%2F1OxvmrkcFS4qsxKpNXCi76wee466%3Futm_source=tldr%26utm_medium=newsletter/2/010001889a9791c5-61c9fcf7-f420-4597-8209-7c887f2d8aaf-000000/jhv8e1uwKqFbx3FpByqP7zM8i6HB2RkvX1b6VDPGLHA=304).
If you have any comments or feedback, just respond to this email!
Thanks for reading,
[Dan Ni](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2Ftldrdan/1/010001889a9791c5-61c9fcf7-f420-4597-8209-7c887f2d8aaf-000000/1xMtiv0xQK1x8kPb3qwqQpPUWG75N3ByEDxn6ZZCNbA=304) and [Stephen Flanders](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2FSteveFlanders22/1/010001889a9791c5-61c9fcf7-f420-4597-8209-7c887f2d8aaf-000000/QdA3yjiK31M0MjP-Dg8akQ5213dU-9RD-FZFAe4NaZ0=304)
|
|
|
|