---
subject: "AI #92: Behind the Curve"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-11-28 14:34:11
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
People don’t give thanks enough, and it’s actual Thanksgiving, so here goes. Thank you for continuing to take this journey with me every week. It’s a lot of words. Even if you pick and choose, and you probably should, it’s a lot of words. You don’t have many slots to spend on things like this. I appreciate it. Thanks in particular for those who are actually thinking about all this, and taking it seriously, and forming their own opinions. It is the only way. To everyone who is standing up, peacefully and honestly, for whatever they truly think will make the world better, even if I disagree with you. Thanks to all those working to ensure we all don’t die, and also those working to make the world a little richer, a little more full of joy and fun and health and wonder, in the meantime. Thanks for all the super cool toys, for they truly are super cool. And thanks to all the parts of reality that work to so often keep it light and interesting along the way, and for not losing touch with the rest of the world. This is heavy stuff. You cannot let it fully take over your head. One must imagine Buffy at the prom. Thanks of course to my health, my kids, all my family and friends, and all the friends I have that I don’t even know about yet. The world is really cool like that. Special thanks to those who help make my writing possible and sustainable. From this past week, I’ll also give thanks for those who organized The Curve, a conference I was able to attend last weekend, and those who help run Thanks to the universe, for allowing us to live in interesting times, and plausibly giving us paths to victory. What a time to be alive, huh? Oh, and I am so thankful I managed to actually stay out of the damn election, and that we are finally past it, that we’re mostly on a break from legislative sessions where I need to keep reading bills, and for the new College Football Playoff. Life can be good, ya know? Table of Contents[Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/6a365272-9b1d-4b8e-8512-9c74cb048de4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Finding a better way to code.[It’s a Poet Whether or Not You Know It.](https://substack.com/redirect/96e042cb-8c2b-434d-a32d-e48740b6564b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)No one said it was a good one.[Huh, Upgrades](https://substack.com/redirect/85c54280-fe16-42da-8837-7e2715daa6f4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/85c54280-fe16-42da-8837-7e2715daa6f4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The small new LLM features are coming fast and furious.[Thanks for the Memories.](https://substack.com/redirect/356d4194-e1a7-4d7f-9895-3a31ea4af293?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Memory is a great feature, if you can pull it off.[Curve Ball.](https://substack.com/redirect/fe5535d7-c540-47a0-888f-0da5524877d3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Reports from a conference.[ASI: A Scenario](https://substack.com/redirect/d63dccc4-fa27-4b0f-bcce-e0629c4c9d12?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/d63dccc4-fa27-4b0f-bcce-e0629c4c9d12?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Playing Daniel Kokotajlo’s tabletop wargame exercise.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon](https://substack.com/redirect/c8b1d62e-90ca-4f5f-b855-d330b78b76c4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/c8b1d62e-90ca-4f5f-b855-d330b78b76c4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)It’s almost like being in love.[They Took Our Jobs.](https://substack.com/redirect/1ad60045-ebcd-4af7-8aba-33d73aaa1e4f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Monitoring software can make you wonder if you even mind.[Fun With Image Generation.](https://substack.com/redirect/1a570aa9-00ba-4413-8ef1-ae6ff72c1d5f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Sora preview briefly available after artists leak it.[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/4a7751de-611b-49ec-86ca-91e1680ff62d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)METR is hiring.[Introducing.](https://substack.com/redirect/600ecfca-8ddc-41cc-9d2c-ee47cc8ac5a1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A few cool little trinkets.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/255e6c1f-e5c4-45b0-bd71-b26ef1b38724?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A golden age of discovery, and xAI’s promised game studio.[Normative Determinism.](https://substack.com/redirect/4a6e5aaa-f7d2-4781-a10b-8851199d1c8d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Sama versus Sama.[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/9960775a-c2cf-4062-ac3e-816301010115?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Voice keeps promising to hit critical Real Soon Now.[The Quest for Sane Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/9b0f33ad-fc78-4a0d-bae5-664cd8889f38?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Background rumblings during this respite.[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/28c601da-ac53-462f-b4bc-9ad6b5e56b5b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Yeah, fine, we can talk about that one.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/beca14e9-486a-4ca5-ab93-b89953e4e6b8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A parable, a cheat sheet, a time interval.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/eadf6f50-e26d-4e95-a634-8de38e081c77?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Thoughts about why.[Pick Up the Phone.](https://substack.com/redirect/abfda184-a45f-428a-8185-35762280ba5c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)It only takes one to race, but what if you didn’t have to?[Prepare for Takeoff](https://substack.com/redirect/289d10c9-21e2-4cf1-b8c8-a3a97e2e375a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/289d10c9-21e2-4cf1-b8c8-a3a97e2e375a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)AI looking scarily useful for AI R&D tasks.[Even Evaluating an Artificial Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/2577c758-07d5-4b18-88d4-b72e25eaf0f4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Proving negatives is hard.[People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/2a97c8a3-36f5-4509-a7f3-8f236fe5a97b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Outgoing Commerce Secretary.[The Lighter Side.](https://substack.com/redirect/2a456112-bd21-4df5-a0cf-ecca0bfd79d5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Nothing to see here, move along.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
It’s a Poet Whether or Not You Know It
I can see this both ways. I certainly believe that poetry experts can very easily still recognize that the human poems are human and the AI poems are AI, and will strongly prefer the human ones because of reasons, even if they don’t recognize the particular poems or poets. I can also believe that they are identifying something real and valuable by doing so. But it’s not something I expect I could identify, nor do I have any real understanding of what it is or why I should care? And it certainly is not the thing the AI was mostly training to predict or emulate. If you want the AI to create poetry that poetry obsessives will think is as good as Walt Whitman, then as Colin points out you’d use a very different set of training incentives. Huh, Upgrades
Anthropic introduces and open sources
Need help building with Gemini? Thanks for the MemoriesPersonalization of AIs is certainly the future in some ways, especially custom instructions. Don’t leave home without those. But ChatGPT’s memory feature is odd.
The weird thing about ChatGPT memory is how you have so little control over it. Sometimes it’ll decide ‘added to memory,’ which you can encourage but flat out asking isn’t even reliable. Then you can either delete them, or keep them, and that’s pretty much it. Why not allow us to add to or edit them directly? Curve BallI had the opportunity this past weekend to attend The Curve, a curated conference at the always excellent The good news is that it was a great conference, in the ways that The flip side is that this felt more like “a normal I did have a good talk with Dean Ball on several topics and spoke with Eli Dourado about economic growth expectations and spoke with Anton, but the takes that make me want to yell and throw things did not show up. Which was a shame in some ways, because it meant I didn’t get more information on how to convince such folks or allow me to find their best arguments, or seek common ground. There was still plenty of disagreements, but far more reasonable and friendly. One frustrating conversation was about persuasion. Somehow there continue to be some people who can at least somewhat feel the AGI, but also genuinely think humans are at or close to the persuasion possibilities frontier - that there is no room to greatly expand one’s ability to convince people of things, or at least of things against their interests. This is sufficiently absurd to me that I don’t really know where to start, which is one way humans are bad at persuasion. Obviously, to me, if you started with imitations of the best human persuaders (since we have an existence proof for that), and on top of that could correctly observe and interpret all the detailed signals, have limitless time to think, a repository of knowledge, the chance to do Monty Carlo tree search of the conversation against simulated humans, never make a stupid or emotional tactical decision, and so on, you’d be a persuasion monster. It’s a valid question ‘where on the tech tree’ that shows up how much versus other capabilities, but it has to be there. But my attempts to argue this proved, ironically, highly unpersuasive. Anton, by virtue of having much stronger disagreements with most people at such conferences, got to have more of the experience of ‘people walking around saying things I think are nuts’ and talks online as if he’s going to give us that maddening experience we crave…
…but then you meet him in person and he’s totally reasonable and great. Whoops? I was at the ‘everyone dies’ Q&A as well, which highlighted the places my model differs a lot from Eliezer’s, and made me wonder about how to optimize his messaging and explanations, which is confirmed to be an ongoing project. There was a panel on journalism and a small follow-up discussion about dealing with journalists. It seems ‘real journalists’ have very different ideas of their obligations than I, by implication not a ‘real journalist,’ think we should have, especially our obligations to sources and subjects. One highlight of the conference was a new paper that I look forward to talking about, but which is still under embargo. Watch this space. ASI: A ScenarioThe other highlight was playing Daniel Kokotajlo’s tabletop wargame exercise about a takeoff scenario in 2026. I highly recommend playing it (or other variations, such as Intelligence Rising) to anyone who gets the opportunity, and am very curious to watch more experienced people (as in NatSec types) play. I was told that the one time people kind of like that did play, it was rather hopeful in key ways, and I’d love to see if that replicates. There were two games played. I was in the first group that played outside. I was assigned the role of OpenAI, essentially role playing Sam Altman and what I thought he would do, since I presumed by then he’d be in full control of OpenAI, until he lost a power struggle over the newly combined US AI project (in the form of a die roll) and I was suddenly role playing Elon Musk. It was interesting, educational and fun throughout, illustrating how some things were highly contingent while others were highly convergent, and the pull of various actions. In the end, we had a good ending, but only because the AIs initial alignment die roll turned out to be aligned to almost ‘CEV by default’ (technically ‘true morality,’ more details below). If the AIs had been by default (after some alignment efforts but not extraordinary efforts) misaligned, which I believe is far more likely in such a scenario, things would have ended badly one way or another. We had a pause at the end, but it wasn’t sufficiently rigid to actually work at that point, and if it had been the AIs presumably would have prevented it. But the scenario could have still gone badly despite the good conditions, so at least that other part worked out.
Yes, they will all delegate to the AIs, with no manipulation required beyond ‘appear to be helpful and aligned,’ because the alternative is others do it anyway and You Lose, unless everyone can somehow agree collectively not to do it. I didn’t pay more attention to alignment, because I didn’t think my character would have done so. If anything I felt I was giving Altman the benefit of the doubt and basically gave the alignment team what they insisted upon and took their statements seriously when they expressed worry. At one point we attempted to go to the President with alignment concerns, but she (playing Trump) was distracted with geopolitics and didn’t respond, which is the kind of fun realism you get in a wargame. There were many takeaways from my game, but three stand out. The first was exactly the above point, and that at some point, ‘I or we decide to trust the AIs and accept that if they are misaligned everyone is utterly f***ed’ is an even stronger attractor than I realized. The second was that depending on what assumptions you make about how many worlds are wins if you don’t actively lose, ‘avoid turning wins into losses’ has to be a priority alongside ‘turn your losses into not losses, either by turning them around and winning (ideal!) or realizing you can’t win and halting the game.’ The third is that certain assumptions about how the technology progresses had a big impact on how things play out, especially the point at which some abilities (such as superhuman persuasiveness) emerge.
Playing the AIs definitely seems like the most challenging role, but there’s lots of fun and high impact decisions in a lot of places. Although not all - one of the running jokes in our game was the ‘NATO and US Allies’ player pointing out the ways in which those players have chosen to make themselves mostly irrelevant. Lots of other stuff happened at The Curve, too, such as the screening of Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse SoonI get wanting to talk to Claude, I do it too, but
I find a lot of the Claude affectation off putting, actually - I don’t want to be told ‘great idea’ all the time when I’m coding and all that, and it all feels forced and false, and often rather clingy and desperate in what was supposed to be a technical conversation, and that’s not my thing. Others like that better, I suppose, and it does adjust to context - and the fact that I am put off by the affectation implies that I care about the affectation. I still use Claude because it’s the best model for me in spite of that, but if it actually had affectations that I actively enjoyed? Wowsers.
I do not think such caution is warranted, and indeed it seems rather silly this early. And indeed, ceasing your in-person meetings in February 2020 would have also been a rather serious error. Yes, Davidad was making a correct prediction that Covid-19 was coming and we’d have to stop meeting. But if you stop your human contact too soon, then you didn’t actually reduce your risk by a non-trivial amount, and you spent a bunch of ‘distancing points’ you were going to need later. Janus of course thought the whole caution thing was hilarious.
I continue to be an optimist here, that talking to AIs can enhance human connection, and development of interpersonal skills.
This is such a vicious pattern. Once you fall behind, or can’t do the ‘normal’ things that enable one to skill up and build connections, everything gets much harder. As I’ve noted before, Claude and other AI tools offer a potential way out of this. You can ‘get reps’ and try things, iterate and learn, vastly faster and easier than you could otherwise. Indeed, it’s great for that even if you’re not in such a trap.
But fair warning, here They Took Our JobsThe AI monitoring does, as the Reddit post here was titled, seem out of control.
To state the obvious, using this kind of software has rapidly decreasing marginal returns that can easily turn highly negative. You are treating employees as the enemy and making them hate you, taking away all their slack, focusing them on the wrong things. People don’t do good work with no room to breathe or when they are worried about typing speed or number of emails sent, so if you actively need good work, or good employees? NGMI.
In related startup news,
I’m all for products like OpenClinic. And yes, for now humans will remain ‘in the loop,’ the AI cannot fully automate many jobs and especially not doctors. But that is, as they say, a skill issue. The time will come. The ‘early’ age of AI is about complements, where the AI replaces some aspects of what was previously the human job, or it introduces new options and tasks that couldn’t previously be done at reasonable cost. What happens when you compliment existing workers, such as automating 50% of a doctor’s workflow? It is possible for this to radically reduce demand, or for it to not do that, or even increase demand - people might want more of the higher quality and lower cost goods, offsetting the additional work speed, even within a specific task. It is still odd to call that ‘human in the loop’ when before only humans were the entire loop. Yes, ‘human out of the loop’ will be a big deal when it happens, and we mostly aren’t close to that yet, but it might not be all that long, especially if the human doesn’t have regulatory reasons to have to be there. Aidan Guo asks why YC seems to be funding so many startups that seem like they want to be features. I want to return to this another time, but since it came up at The Curve and it seems important: Often people claim much production is ‘O-Ring’ style, as in you need all components to work so you can move only at the speed of the slowest component - which means automating 9/10 tasks might not help you much. I’d say ‘it still cuts your labor costs by 90% even if it doesn’t cut your time costs' but beyond that, who is to say that you were currently using the best possible process? As in, there are plenty of tasks humans often don’t do because we suck at them, or can’t do them at all. We still have all our products, because we choose the products that we can still do, and because we work around our weaknesses. But if you introduce AI into the mix, you don’t only get to duplicate exactly the ‘AI shaped holes’ in the previous efforts.
Fun With Image Generation
Sora leaked and was available
I suppose that’s one way to respond to being given an entirely voluntary offer of free early access without even any expectation of feedback? I get protesting the tools themselves (although I disagree), but this complaint seems odd.
All this stuff has been improving in the background, but I notice I do not feel any urge to actually use any of it outside of some basic images for posts, or things that would flagrantly violate the terms of service (if there’s a really good one available for easy download these days where it wouldn’t violate the TOS, give me a HT, sure why not). Get Involved
Introducing
In Other AI News
Not exactly news, WSJ:
Normative Determinism
I am not concerned about ‘workers get $2 an hour’ in a country where the average wage is around $1.25 per hour, but there is definitely a story. If Sama (the company) was getting paid by Sama (the CEO) $12.50 per hour, and only $2 per hour of that went to the workers, then something is foul is afoot. At least one of these presumably needs to be true: This is corruption in the form of overpayments to Sama the company. This is corruption in the form of lying to OpenAI about what workers are paid. This is mismanagement and OpenAI allowed itself to be essentially defrauded. The overhead on this operation is vastly greater than we thought, in ways that I don’t understand.
Quiet Speculations
That’s not too dissimilar from the cybersecurity situation, where if I have an AI on defense of a particular target then it seems likely to be balanced or favor defense especially if the defenders have the most advanced tech, but if your AI gets to probe everything everywhere for what isn’t defended properly, then that is a big problem.
I think this might well be true of where the important impact of AI starts to be, because accelerating AI research (and also other research) will have immense societal impacts, whether or not it ends well. But in terms of where the bulk of the efforts and money are spent, I would presume it is still with the typical user and mundane use cases, and for that to be true unless we start to enter a full takeoff mode towards ASI. The user is still going to be most of the revenue and most of the queries, and I expect there to be a ton of headroom to improve the experience. No, I don’t think AI responses to most queries are close to ideal even for the best and largest models, and I don’t expect to get there soon.
The Quest for Sane Regulations
If enforced for real that would be quite obviously insane. Mistakenly share a fake photo on social media, get 5 years in jail? Going after posters for commonplace memes? Almost always such warnings from places like Reason prove not to come to pass, but part of them never coming to pass is having people like Reason shouting about the dangers. I continue to wish we had people who would yell if and only if there was an actual problem, but such is the issue with problems that look like ‘a lot of low-probability tail risks,’ anyone trying to warn you risks looking foolish. This is closely paralleled in many other places.
This is what happens with cheaters in Magic: the Gathering, too - you ‘get away with’ each step and it emboldens you to take more than one additional step, so eventually you get too bold and you get caught. You thought I was going to use AI existential risk there? Nah.
I buy that the requirements in question are exactly the kinds of things that run into this failure mode, and that The Week in AudioAll right, I suppose I have to talk about Marc Andreessen on Joe Rogan, keeping in mind to remember When I asked on Twitter, since those are rather bold claims, the best color or steelman I got was speculation that this is The other big thing he claimed was that the Biden administration had a campaign to debank those involved in crypto, which I strongly believe did extensively happen and was rather terrible. It is important to ensure debanking is never used as a weapon. But Marc then also claims Biden did this to ‘tech founders’ and more importantly ‘political enemies.’ If these are new claims rather than other ways of describing crypto founders, then Huge If True, and I would like to know the examples. If he is only saying that crypto founders are often tech founders and Biden political enemies, perhaps that is technically correct, but it is rather unfortunate rhetoric to say to 100 million people.
Inflame. What a nice word for it. No, I will not be listening to the full podcast.
Robin Hanson says some time in the next century Rhetorical Innovation
Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
Pick Up the Phone
The answer to ‘what do you do when you get AGI a year before they do’ is, presumably, build ASI a year before they do, plausibly before they get AGI at all, and then if everyone doesn’t die and you retain control over the situation (big ifs!) you use that for whatever you choose? Prepare for Takeoff
The AIs are still well behind human level over extended periods on ML tasks, but it takes four hours for the lines to cross, and even at the end they still score a substantial percentage of what humans score. Scores will doubtless improve over time, probably rather quickly.
I’m not sure that’s what this study means? Yes, they could improve their scores over more time, but there is a very easy way to improve score over time when you have access to a scoring metric as they did here - you keep sampling solution attempts, and you do best-of-k, which seems like it wouldn’t score that dissimilarly from the curves we see. And indeed, we see a lot of exactly this ‘trial and error’ approach, with 25-37 attempts per hour. Thus, I don’t think this paper indicates the ability to meaningfully work for hours at a time, in general. Yes, of course you can batch a bunch of attempts in various ways, or otherwise get more out of 8 hours than 1 hour, but I don’t think this was that scary on that front just yet? Still, overall, rather scary. The way AI benchmarks work, there isn’t usually that long a time gap from here to saturation of the benchmarks involved, in which case watch out. So the question is whether there’s some natural barrier that would stop that. It doesn’t seem impossible, but also seems like we shouldn’t have the right to expect one that would hold for that long. Even Evaluating an Artificial Intelligence is Difficult
OpenAI reported that o1-preview is at ‘medium’ CBRN risk, versus ‘low’ for previous models, but expresses confidence it does not rise to ‘high,’ which would have precluded release.
Righetti is correct that these tests on their own are inconclusive. It is easy to prove that an AI does have a capability. It is much harder to prove a negative, that an AI does not have a capability, especially on the basis of a test - you don’t know what ‘unhobbling’ options or additional scaffolding or better prompting could do. I certainly would have liked to have seen more tests here. In this particular case, having played with o1-preview, I think the decision was fine. Practical hands-on experience says it is rather unlikely to reach ‘high’ levels here, and the testing is suggestive of the same. I would have been comfortable with this particular threat mode here. In addition, this was a closed model release so if unhobbling was discovered or the Los Alamos test had gone poorly, the model could be withdrawn - my guess is it will take a bit of time before any malicious novices in practice do anything approaching the frontier of possibility. People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone
This was at the
Once again, Thomas Friedman, somehow.
They’re in that order, too. The Lighter Side
I am rather confident that In some ways that is a shame. If there’s anything you wouldn’t have been willing to say to a Chinese spy, you really shouldn’t have been willing to say it at the conference anyway. I would have been excited to talk to an actual Chinese spy, since I presume that’s a great way to get the Chinese key information we need them to have about AI alignment. (I do think the major AI labs need to greatly ramp up their counterintelligence and cybersecurity efforts, effective yesterday.)
You're currently a free subscriber to |