---
subject: "How Google’s Achilles Heel turned into its Midas Touch with Google Pay"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2019-09-16 02:36:16
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031"]
---
There’s a long list of things Google is good, even exceptional, at. This includes making sense of vast amounts of information; serving uncannily accurate ads; delivering millisecond responses for billions of users; and tracking every aspect of its users' lives.
The very short list of things Google does not do very well includes social networks; hugely successful financial or transactional products; and “do no evil”.
That short list got even shorter because Google Pay, its digital payments app, is killing it in India. Launched well over a year after many competitors, it has emerged the largest player in India’s hyper-competitive UPI payments space with a 36% market share. Google Pay’s success has unnerved the NPCI—the non-profit consortium of Indian banks that owns and operates UPI—so much that it is considering the drastic step of bringing in a market share cap next year. One that would force any company with over 50% market share to progressively be brought down to 40% and then 33% in two years.
It’s an unprecedented step, but one that (belatedly) takes into cognisance the runaway nature of digital monopolies. Morgan Stanley, in a report, estimated that Google and Facebook are likely to be the joint winners of India’s immense digital payments explosion that is expected to grow to the equivalent of 10% of its GDP by 2023.
That is now scaring NPCI, the organisation that only two years ago was aggressively wooing Google and Facebook to adopt UPI. India’s central bank, the RBI, even allowed an exception so Google could operate UPI payments through four banking partners even while everyone else was restricted to just one.
Indian product founders bemoaned how global giants were being courted to adopt UPI. In a story I wrote almost exactly two years ago, in September 2017, [a founder said](http://link.the-ken.com/uni/wf/click?upn=HQSq6eeRV1xAVaGuFOahuNCZVVXPeP-2FJpSqxhvIUDrl4xlK5wH8RCnnh49gqObqm7CzsfBeWF-2Fb-2B954tUzPlAd0gXTHF1NoSs-2FxH8qRQdoAU9w7-2FEXy6Fo8TDQShTjbZUKHEM2-2F41N1qULAeYobJLhoPp-2FfLZ7zRLROiZB2pBW-2BgevIbtDMLBmJhKDgVCNQ4X0gDyJXE5iFaW0-2BiLiSK4g-3D-3D_S4jLOsNx-2Fv6Jev2nvow8b7P9pBCWGd8KNZfb200gkZLQNlXQHio0noZzXtsWoloZmPWeyZsh7a4QCV9ufwCUKi00jlBT0uEdvwYDMuVuqcPcGtUc8Ys-2BZnG-2F6WXxpvRppBM8HbCxFXpPjZ6AZCew6n2FtZI51S4L5Uer8zSDKCYUqOZX89AhiVH-2BonxyfcnKIEB0cR3x-2FfhSHDgOxNFUWFh8JyorztDv28a2fH2jfRPF0aZv-2BTV-2FDUoXGUVfrEomQgxq145ayppBETAmYxu2AdpBQiCmYuoIerj4Imw3ZzXuVhnnbLEEscZBuKV3TbQQya781vIMGd852IWqJyRfXbgFBxWYB4TTinQyQMGw5qHiWNyVmeyPxBfXGMJm9xXo3KMd1yLQYGA3VFWf7VGcYoNguXRbbLj9pl-2B7oecLE0FFh-2BlnGxflYScPoo4WP8cC), “As product companies, we were the underdogs. Then how did we end up building a platform that would be used by the very entities we said we wouldn’t touch?” The “entities” he was referring to were the international tech giants.
Well, here we are in 2019. NPCI thinks any player having more than 33% UPI market share is a “concentration risk” even as the RBI thinks NPCI’s own ~50% market share of India’s digital payments is a “concentration risk”.
Sincerely,
Rohin Dharmakumar
[rohin@the-ken.com](#)
PS: A year ago, we analysed the UPI space—with Paytm, PhonePe, Google Tez (back then) and BHIM in the fray—with WhatsApp as the latest entrant. With WhatsApp's payments still in beta, we've decided to open up this story, [making it free](http://link.the-ken.com/uni/wf/click?upn=HQSq6eeRV1xAVaGuFOahuNCZVVXPeP-2FJpSqxhvIUDrkFczLYX60iWqBA4Gx-2FJysABywO-2BixZfpDUiJ25rKUVbFiTp9ovocERUeAoS-2BImukFw1wHocFgfFkKOWGMQqXO6uvVCYeYYxDlpLsyevCUd-2FO-2Fbn7jmAjkp0NZmPIURlqY-3D_S4jLOsNx-2Fv6Jev2nvow8b7P9pBCWGd8KNZfb200gkZLQNlXQHio0noZzXtsWoloZmPWeyZsh7a4QCV9ufwCUKi00jlBT0uEdvwYDMuVuqcPcGtUc8Ys-2BZnG-2F6WXxpvRppBM8HbCxFXpPjZ6AZCew6n2FtZI51S4L5Uer8zSDKCYUqOZX89AhiVH-2BonxyfcnKIEB0cR3x-2FfhSHDgOxNFUWHVfMsmMUwBc-2Bkvz7LEvLITCuCwDMZ9tPDuyB6zNVijDagzFsNKZFH2SWwG-2BH55xsryZD9DfGNtuo61aNXo-2B2zoTlzkptPS8WXqvxemg61I9bvkC7gfakmDn47UQgdXKiEewFdl7SjBgt5FQRYiQiTHBa5wixDjZYY2HVtENtTUMi0N6hHlB8rj3jFJ9yqsGntqJowC-2FSTP1Q-2B0Twi3JUOi8uuw8Dov3JkNRuWcwFtft) for all those who work at PhonePe, Google, Paytm, BharatPe, Amazon, and WhatsApp. For one day.
If you work at any of these companies, do read it, or share it with those who do.