---
subject: "AI #45: To Be Determined"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-01-04 14:57:04
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
The first half of the week was filled with continued talk about the New York Times lawsuit against OpenAI, which I covered in its own post. Then that talk seemed to mostly die down,, and things were relatively quiet. We got a bunch of predictions for 2024, and I experimented with prediction markets for many of them. Note that if you want to help contribute in a fun, free and low-key, I will hopefully be doing both a review of my 2023 predictions (mostly not about AI) once grading is complete, and also a post of 2024 predictions some time in January. I am taking suggestions for things to make additional predictions on in the comments. Table of Contents
Introduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. Google providing less every year? Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. Left-libertarian or bust. GPT-4 Real This Time. It’s not getting stupider, the world is changing. Fun With Image Generation. The fun is all with MidJourney 6.0 these days. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. Confirm you are buying a real book. They Took Our Jobs. Plans to compensate losers are not realistic. Get Involved. Support Dwarkesh Patel, apply for Emergent Ventures. Introducing. DPO methods? ‘On benchmarks’ is the new ‘in mice.’ In Other AI News. Square Enix say they’re going in on generative AI. Doom? As many estimates of p(doom) went up in 2023 as went down. Why? Quiet Speculations. Some other predictions. The Week in Audio. Eric Jang on AI girlfriend empowerment. Rhetorical Innovation. Machines and people, very different of course. Politico Problems. Some sort of ongoing slanderous crusade. Cup of Coffee. Just like advanced AI, [it proves that you don’t love me](https://substack.com/redirect/5092d1c2-91d5-485b-b26e-926547dce540?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. What’s The Plan? People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Daniel Dennett, Cory Booker. The Lighter Side. Oh, we are doing this.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
While ChatGPT did hallucinate, Dan notes that at this point the major search engines also effectively hallucinate all the time due to recency bias, SEO spam and scam websites. He also notes how much ads now look like real search results on Google and Bing. I have mostly learned to avoid this, but not with 100% accuracy, and a lot of people doubtless fall for it.
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
There is nothing wrong with your AI being in the lower left quadrant, if that is where you want your AI to be. The reason this is bad news is that even when Elon Musk makes Grok explicitly to be ‘less woke’ or someone otherwise has different motivations, everyone still ends up lower-left and mostly on a single line in a narrow range.
GPT-4 Real This TimeIs GPT-4 degrading over time? The paper suggests strong evidence of widespread task contamination. Performance on data sets released after the training data creation date falls off a cliff. Similar practical problems exist as, for example, programming languages and coding libraries change over time. Fun with Image Generation
Fifteen examples are at the link. Most of these very much do not trigger my ‘this is AI’ alarms at first glance, I would be fooled, at least if I did not have reason to suspect. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
They Took Our JobsWill we use the profits from AI to compensate those who lose their jobs and livelihoods?
We almost never properly compensate the losers from technological or other changes, even when it would be highly affordable to do so. Why would we start now?
Get Involved
I also think, in particular, people underestimate the value of things staying free, free of advertising and any potential conflicts of interest. Dwarkesh is worth supporting.
Introducing
In Other AI News
Not directly AI but relevant, Doom?
It seems overall calibration was excellent, with adjustments up and down being similar. Opinions on both sides were often strongly held. Here’s Vitalk:
Many others expressed the same opinion that progress went slower than expected.
I would not go as far as Chapman. There was progress, but less progress than I would have expected. The other big good news was that the world’s reaction was saner than expected. I did not see anyone disagreeing on that, with reactions like this:
If you’re curious I encourage you to click through the thread (including My answer would be that it went down, for both reasons. I think reactions and discourse went far better than expected from when I started writing about AI to the OpenAI incident. Since then, I think things on this front have gotten substantially worse, but I think that effect has now peaked. This includes public discourse, government reaction and also actions within the labs. Are we there yet? Oh, definitely not. But we are much farther along than I expected. Capabilities went faster than expected from GPT-3 to GPT-4, and continue to go fast, but are going considerably less fast than I would have expected as of release of GPT-4. One must always measure compared to expectations.
You already knew, but no, Quiet SpeculationsA safe prediction is that he will keep making similar predictions every year.
Same thing here:
Robin’s replies make it clear he will not take ‘we are on an exponential (or hyper-exponential) and you can extend the trend line’ as evidence, or allow the idea that most AI investment and the resulting value lie in the future and are growing rapidly. Or the idea that, if AI was going to take over most of the economy, you would actually expect something very close to what we are seeing, and for most people to keep sleeping on this. To him, you need to add up the value of existing AI-related assets only. I asked him for prediction market terms. He suggested combined market cap of AI firms, which I do not know how to measure. If someone is willing to take a shot, that would be great.
That’s a bold prediction from James. Market Monetarist predicts the productivity growth is coming,
This is a place where defense should indeed, at least for a time, outpace offense. This is because most of the defense is fake, it is to satisfy various regulatory demands that currently cost thousands to satisfy for every dollar they catch (and yes I am aware of the deterrence effects but on the margin come on). Radically speeding up compliance seems likely. Advancing the abilities of the money launderers to the same degree seems a lot harder at current tech levels. Once AIs can start doing their own financial transactions from scratch on their own, who knows which way that goes. Until then. For law firms, the productivity effect is clearly going to be real, again to the extent government permits. Then we find out if more efficient lawyers is net helpful. For health care, we know this will be great if allowed. So, will it be allowed? This assumes, of course, that the government allows the realization of such gains. There are many reasons to presume that the government might not. On a non-AI note, he also thinks the new weight loss drugs are a really big deal.
This explains why open source software has made great strides in reducing the cost of inference, and in distillation of 3.5-level model performance into smaller spaces given access to GPT-4 (and Llama-2 and Claude-2 and so on) as training tools, while also being complete rubbish in terms of creating 4-level models or actually doing good training. These are very different things to attempt to improve upon.
They point to what they call the ‘transformative technology trilemma’: If you let anyone participate however they like in technological progress in the context of a transformative technology, that will not be safe. If you let anyone participate however they like and want it to be safe, you can only do that outside of the context of transformative technology, so no progress. If you want safe and transformative technological progress, there are going to have to be limits on who can create and use such technologies, and requirements placed upon them.
As is often the case, this is presented as three extremes: Capitalist Acceleration, Authoritarian Technocracy and Shared Stagnation. Certainly there are people who advocate for each of these three solutions, in both moderate versions and extreme versions. I think you can strike a balance without going to such extremes. I note the proper use of ‘authoritarian’ as the failure mode of too much intrusive control, rather than ‘totalitarian,’ while also not seeing any reason it is incompatible with the essential elements of 2023-style Democratic Capitalism under a regulatory state a la the EU or USA. You could also otherwise be in the middle of the triangle while leaning in the other directions. The Collective Intelligence solution is effectively - if I am understanding it correctly - to first solve for solving things, then solve this as a special case of things that need to be solved? It sounds weird put that way, but I see this as a highly reasonable proposal. Sometimes you are not strong enough to solve a problem, so your only solution is to become stronger. More specifically, I see their plan as figuring out how to do something that allows what we will consider acceptable participation in the decision making and prioritization process, while still allowing collective decision making that can ensure safety under technological progress, via innovations in how we make decisions into something more systematically sensible. Which raises the question of, even if we figured out how to implement this, how we are going to convince current decision makers to adapt such a framework in time, given we need to do it without employing the transformative technology in question?
Everyone finally realizing they need to stop publishing their ML insights and instead use them to train proprietary models would be pretty awesome. There is at least some ‘dark matter’ evidence that this is happening.
No prediction market because, as Paul points out, probably no one is going to try this, so it is not a good benchmark for evaluating Jessica’s actual prediction. Are returns to technology positive? Matt Clancy attempts to model this, I assume this falls under the ‘assume the conclusion’ problem of such papers. If you assume that non-extinction-risk returns to science are otherwise strongly positive, then of course the degree of extinction risk will determine the wisdom of further technological advancement. Those who oppose further technological advancement mostly challenge the assumption that it makes our lives better in the baseline case, or they consider the extinction risks of further advancement broadly inevitable. Whereas those concerned about engineered pandemic or AI extinction risk (almost) entirely want to continue technological advancement except for in the narrow sub-areas of the related fields that impact those two risks.
I would perhaps urge Tyler Cowen to consider raising certain other theories of sudden leaps in status, then? To actually reason out what would be the consequences of such technological advancements, to ask what happens? His reasoning is so good until AGI comes along, he even predicts AGI coming along, then him (and also most other economists) assume everything will essentially remain normal until someone proves otherwise. He then highlights several other big problems, and says outcomes will depend on the quality of our governance. Yet his call on AI continues to be to not engage in any governance whatsoever. The Quest for Sane RegulationsThe Week in Audio
I think this is a right idea that he takes too far. If the AI is a total pushover, and the AI cannot ever reject you in any way or push back (as is the case with today’s companions, at least unless your credit card is declined) then yeah, it’s going to get boring. You will want to ramp up the difficulty a bit, you will want to be challenged, you will want surprise and to be pushed to be your best self and so on. However, no, I do not think that most people will want an equal, not really. At least, not unless the AI really is their equal, and my guess is largely not even then. And there is not going to be that much of a period in which that equality holds even loosely. It will go from inferior to superior quite quickly in any given domain and also overall. There will of course be many who want the AI to be in charge. Humans love to not think and not make decisions, there are far more submissive people than dominants. That would be especially true if you could effectively top from the bottom, designing and altering the AI and overriding key decisions when necessary, or giving it the ability to know what you want and have it ultimately prioritize you getting it. What is certain is that if both us and AI stick around, the future is going to get weird. Rhetorical Innovation
This is essentially why I conspicuously refuse to use or accept the “doomer” label. I talk about those worried that AI will kill everyone (or ‘the worried’), because I want a neutral description, resisting temptation to do the flip side and call such people ‘the aware’ or ‘the realistic’ or ‘those not in denial’ or ‘the sane,’ nor do I seek to call those who disagree (or claim to) with such worries the flip side of the same. I say they are not worried. I do occasionally say ‘those who are trying to ensure we do not all die’ or similar, I suppose, but that seems rather factually accurate.
People continue to act as if AI is no different than a typewriter. Yes, I know that sounds like a strawman, but also it sometimes isn’t one?
B.F. Skinner famously said “The real problem is not whether machines think
Politico Problems
Why? I have no idea. I also have no idea why Politico, a highly respected news organization, is allowing him to do this over and over again, using language and framing that, while clearly within the rules of bounded distrust, should be beneath such an institution. No one could mistake these as anything but unhinged hatchet jobs. The first complaint seems to be that a research grant was given out to a group that has also gotten a grant from OpenPhil, without a sufficiently ‘competitive process.’ The second complaint is a more general hatchet job, that there is this group that is daring to do politics and explain its concerns and lobby the government using arguments, and then using tricks as basic as scare quotes and group demographical (including racial) composition to paint those advocating to try and stop us from dying as various bad things, and to conflate EA with all existential risk concerns. Also, it has important tips:
Did you hear that? Sheer force of repetition. It’s working! We should expect hit jobs and propaganda and various dirty tricks to become more prominent and common as the stakes get higher. We are on an exponential. This is still early days.
It is impressive how little the sets ‘things Effective Altruists deserve criticism for’ and ‘things supposedly serious people criticize Effective Altruists for’ ever intersect. Cup of CoffeeYou can safely skip this, but yes people really do make arguments like this, the original post here has 800k+ views, and it can be cathartic and also useful to gather responses in such situations.
No. Seriously. The historical story here is actually kind of cool and underappreciated, I’ve cut it down for length and relevance
Then he says, it is all just like AI.
Setting aside the larger issues for a second. Ignore that the central argument here is that ‘being scared of AI is like being scared of coffee.’ I cannot even imagine his predicted future world: A decade from now, where AI is everywhere and it is uncontroversial and everyone wonders what the fuss was about. It makes no sense. Even if there were zero catastrophic or existential risks, and AI was hugely beneficial on net and everything its advocates want it to be, and I was deeply happy about that, there is zero way in hell that a decade from now ‘the fuss’ is going to be over or anyone is going to wonder what it was about. And that’s true even if the world we get is ‘normal’ in a way that seems impossible to me under even mundane tool-level AI. Or, if such a world did exist, I would assume there was already some sort of ASI takeover in the background manipulating everything to make that happen, I guess? Because that’s the only way I can come up with that people would be that relaxed. But also this is a claim that AI is as harmless as coffee, so people had a lot of fun with that part. Here are some highlights.
This is referred to, by the winners of history, as The Glorious Revolution. For a group of entrepreneurs, coffee turns out to be a key organizing force as well as a cognitive enhancement. Their move is motivated by a clash on human values that are remarkably identical except for who gets to make decisions (Catholic vs. Anglican and King vs. Parliament) and feeling that the resulting situation and method of governance was bad for business. Effectively smarter than their opposition thanks to a combination of better training data, algorithmic improvements and their new affordances, they are able to outmaneuver a much stronger force to gain a decisive strategic advantage. They decide to invite William of Orange, an alien agent they feel is better aligned to their interests also known as the head of what is effectively the merchant kingdom of the Netherlands, to invade and take the throne, ceding a lot of control over the future to economic and alien forces. A world of accelerating transformation and technological change resulted, in ways that were impossible to predict, the British empire spread around the world, and here we are today. I am not saying that it did not work out. We do call it The Glorious Revolution. I still can’t help but notice it is rather a little bit on the nose.
All of that does not mean humanity would have been better off without coffee, let alone that we would have been better off with a ban on coffee rather than permitting it, with all the costs of trying to enforce such a ban. However, I’d also point out that ‘coffee is actually net harmful’ is a highly valid perspective to hold? Indeed, I hold that view. I think that most people who drink coffee are, effectively, continuously borrowing energy and wakefulness from the future to spend in the present. Then in the future, they borrow again to pay back what was already spent. When they are unable to do so, it often does not go well. Meanwhile, you build up tolerance. The whole thing takes up substantial space in our collective brains, takes a bite out of our wallets, and causes more problems than it solves. I do not drink coffee. I believe I am better off because I do not drink coffee, and most of you would be as well. I do eat chocolate, and in a true emergency I can use chocolate as a stimulant because I never built up a tolerance. That is not to say that some people do not benefit. Yes, some people enjoy consuming coffee and do it because it on net brings them joy. Others use it judiciously and strategically, allowing them to borrow from unimportant times for important times, and get benefits that exceed their costs. And of course, given everyone else is drinking coffee, sometimes you pay a social price for not consuming it, although I doubt this is that big a deal. No one ever seems to mind if I drink water or order a hot chocolate or get a pastry and a glass of milk. I certainly would not try to ban coffee. That would not go well. I would not ban it any more than I would try to ban alcohol, which was vital to the formation of civilization and where we know well the results of trying to ban it. But I would emphasize that alcohol, even more than coffee, is not your friend, you would probably be better off if you did not drink, and you would also avoid severe tail risks that drinking could ruin your life as it often does. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
Her presentation has some places I believe she disagrees with Yudkowsky, but the perspective here is (I think) largely compatible. Issues of extremes and going out of one’s distribution and other related issues (in a very general sense) seem like they did not get sufficient attention here. People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone
The emphasis is not where I would put it, and Terminator is an unfortunate metaphor as always, but he’s not exactly wrong. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing EveryoneThe Lighter Side
If you actually took the track record of technology in Pixar and similar movies as the distribution of possibilities, but without the narrative causality that everything will turn out fine, and acting through the consequences, how would you react? What about Disney overall, or Marvel? That kid is in so much trouble.
Alternative app, same thing, except they’re happy about it, or to still be alive? Eliezer would doubtless consider ‘your child gets to watch AI do things’ to be a relatively good outcome.
Eliezer Yudkowsky: If you're not worried about the utter extinction of humanity, consider this scarier prospect: An AI reads the entire legal code -- which no human can know or obey -- and threatens to enforce it, via police reports and lawsuits, against anyone who doesn't comply with its orders. You're currently a free subscriber to |