---
subject: "Medical Roundup #6"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-01-19 21:13:51
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
The main thing to know this time around is that the whole crazy ‘what is causing the rise in autism?’ debacle is over actual nothing. There is no rise in autism. There is only a rise in the diagnosis of autism. Table of ContentsAutism SpeaksIt has not, however, risen in prevalence. The entire shift in the rate of diagnosis of autism is explained by expanding the criteria and diagnosing it more often. Nothing actually changed. We already knew that vaccines don’t cause autism, and that Tylenol doesn’t cause autism, but now we know such things on an entirely different level. I admit that this result confirms all of my priors and thus I might be insufficiently skeptical of it, but there are a lot of people with what we in 2026 call autism that are out there, they love picking apart such findings, and I’ve seen zero of them question the statistical result. Autism used to mean something severe enough to render a child non-functional. It now means someone capable of thinking clearly who insists words have meaning. It also still means the first thing, and everything in between. Using the same word for all these things, and calling it the autism spectrum, does not, overall, do those on either end of that spectrum any favors.
That is very, very obviously not what anyone centrally means by ‘autism’ in 2025, and we are going searching for it under every corner.
The expansion of the autism spectrum label is especially poor for those at either extreme. It destroys clarity. It causes large underreactions in severe cases. It causes large overreactions in mild cases, including treating such children in well-intended but highly unproductive ways. It also is, as Michael Vassar points out, effectively part of a war against caring about truth and whether words have meaning, as anyone who does so care is now labeled as having a disorder. To be ‘normal’ rather than ‘neurodivergent’ you have to essentially show you care deeply about and handle social dynamics and trivialities without having to work at this, and that you don’t care about accuracy, whether words have meaning or whether maps match their territories. Exercise Is AwesomeSeriously, one cannot write ‘most people need to exercise more’ often enough. I heard a discussion on NPR’s Wait Wait Don’t Tell Me where a study uncovered that as little as half an hour a week of light exercise can do a substantial amount of good. The response from everyone was to joke that this means they didn’t need to do any more than that and doing anything at all made them heroes. And yes, there’s big gains for ‘do anything at all’ rather than nothing, but there’s quite a lot left to gain.
This all came from an average of 5.7 additional gym visits per student, which isn’t that great a return on a gym membership at first glance. For the effect to be this big there have to be shifts beyond the exercise, something psychological or at least logistical. There still are very clear diminishing marginal returns. Thus here is your That’s Peanuts
An Age Of Wonders
GLP-1s In Particular
The Superheroes
Australia offers a strong pitch as a location for clinical trials,
The SupervillainsYour periodic reminder that today’s shortage of doctors
In terms of talking to internet weirdos who reach out, I can’t always engage, especially not at length, but I try to help when I can. I don’t see enough consideration of ‘goal factoring’ around the testing process and the FDA. As in, doing tests has two distinct purposes, that are less linked than you’d hope. Finding out if and in what ways the drug is safe and effective, or not. Providing the legal evidence to continue testing, and ultimately to sell your drug.
If you outright knew the answer to #1, that would cut your effective costs for #2 dramatically, because now you only have to test one drug to find one success, whereas right now most drugs we test fail. So the underrated thing to do, even though it is a bit slower, is to do #1 first. As in, you gather strong Bayesian evidence on whether your drug works, however necessary and likely with a lot of AI help, then only after you know this do you go through formal channels and tests in America. I will keep periodically pointing this out in the hopes people listen.
FDA Delenda Est
GLP-1s help you lose weight. The biggest downside is potential loss of muscle composition. But the FDA has decided that fixing this problem is not good enough, and they won’t approve a new drug that is strictly better on an important metric than an existing drug. Not that they won’t recommend it, that they won’t approve it. As in, it’s strictly better, but it’s not enough strictly better in the ways they think count, so that’s a banning. Which is all Obvious Nonsense and will make people’s lives much worse, as some lose muscle mass, others put in a lot more stress and effort to not lose it, and others don’t take the GLP-1 and thus lose the weight. The second best answer is that things like muscle loss prevention should count as superior endpoints. The first best answer is that ‘superiority’ is a deeply stupid requirement. If you have drug [A] that does [X], and then I have drug [B] that also does [X] about as well, the existence of [A] should not mean we ban [B]. That’s crazy.
It would be good not to have an FDA, or even better to have a much less restrictive FDA. But if we’re not going to relax the rules, incompetence only makes it all worse. Some good news: Hansonian Medicine
The discussion is frank that this doesn’t rule out that different regions might be providing similar care with different levels of efficiency. In that case, there’s a lot of money to be saved by improving efficiency, but it doesn’t mean care is wasted. There’s also potential selection effects on who moves. You would also want to consider other endpoints beyond mortality, but it’s hard to see those improving much if mortality doesn’t also improve. Robin Hanson links us Hospital Strategy 101
Mental Hospital Strategy 101
That doesn’t mean one should never do it. In sufficiently dire circumstances, where outcomes are going to be terrible no matter what you do, it is still superior to known alternatives. The question is, how dire must be the circumstances to make this true? Are we doing it too often, or not often enough?
Even with 7,150 hospitalization decisions, the study’s power is still not what we would like (the results are statistically significant, but not by that much considered individually), but the damage measured is dramatic: The chance of a marginal admit being charged with a violent crime within three months increases from 3.3% to 5.9% if they get admitted, the risk of suicide or death by drug overdose rises from 1.1% to 2.1%. This matches the associated incentives. If you don’t refer or admit someone at risk, and something goes wrong, you are now blameworthy, and you put yourself in legal jeopardy. If you do refer or admit them, then you wash your hands of the situation, and what happens next is not on you. Thus, you would expect marginal cases to be committed too often, which is what we find here. It seems reasonable to conclude that the bar for involuntary commitment should be much higher, and along the lines of ‘only do this if there is no doubt and no choice.’ Drugs Are Bad, Mmmkay?The Lighter Side
You're currently a free subscriber to |