---
subject: "Living in a bubble: Two scientists want you to relook at Google and Facebook"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2018-01-26 02:35:39
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
It is Republic Day in India. So, for our readers here, Happy Republic Day. This will be the 69th Republic Day of our country, a mighty milestone, and I guess we should all be proud of getting here. There’s this other thing I’m proud of. Today’s piece by my colleague Seema. There are some stories which stick with you, those which you read over and over again, so you understand them well. And appreciate the complex world we live in today. Elisa Celis and Nisheeth Vishnoi, professors at EPFL in Lausanne, Switzerland want you to do that.
Their point of view is simple. Once online, what we do, what we buy, what we see, all of that is shaped by algorithms. And for the longest time now, companies like Google and Facebook have been trying to, and they have become really good at it; personalising this algorithm. As Celis says in the interview, since she bought baby clothes online, it bothered her that she was being shown ads for baby clothing every time she went online. That the algorithm missed everything else Celis does just didn’t seem right to her. Blow this up, and you’ll notice. The bubble.
Celis and Vishnoi believe that as human beings, we must be in control. In control of what we are seeing. That’s how they have come up with a tool called ‘Balanced Search’. Where you can just toggle for balance. Like search with gender in mind. As Celis says: “At a broader level, more and more evidence is emerging that algorithms have a bias, particularly against women and minorities. If you look for jobs, men get showed ads of higher-paying jobs much more than women. It is unfair. Algorithms are reinforcing the existing societal biases and inequality and making them worse.”
You know, I could go on and on and on; there’s a significant level of depth in conversation in today’s interview. Plus, you also know that we do interviews very selectively. So, if you want to know about bias in algorithms, search, choice, fake news, whether companies can make algorithms lie, the data trail that we leave online, and what that says about us; today’s piece is a must-read. You can read it for FREE here: [https://the-ken.com/relook-](http://link.the-ken.com/wf/click?upn=HQSq6eeRV1xAVaGuFOahuHJoqfK-2FBF-2BU0x0zlPHJIExFOCJW16DDgf36YdydlGICV4UTf20lR43VE01zNg8uOBHRWDtf07SsEzHNeqO6gMDxTxMW2tUqCpPh8ESeoJ-2BaCsp7U-2FdTUG1vniV6srGbtMc6Vi8GHZ70XJBFhQnVB9T-2FKM0KKeePKXIX5NxrqhHPgZVBYfTprRzu5UJJXZNSHU-2FEa9EEVhOBqgoxYePCIGZA1HlXsuxng753Xc0GEK7onc4rtydUpiQOrtGYk6nI2Q-3D-3D_S4jLOsNx-2Fv6Jev2nvow8b7P9pBCWGd8KNZfb200gkZLQNlXQHio0noZzXtsWoloZmPWeyZsh7a4QCV9ufwCUKi00jlBT0uEdvwYDMuVuqcPFIAB3x7Mx-2BZgcLn6Je9-2BV3x7LU7Y3rryNuZwsv3prMLEKenRDPLGLBxpMYpIrx6uzWI8Q8WqjEIgyT8-2FO0Curi-2B36tK89UjnUMrO-2FNOzn3ziFV7-2FmrQvUJ4QssEav72kM5NZ-2FHUMXiOjYCBaRqS-2B-2BiGuJYiPS7sfTqdV0HGaLQR6D7KnPzMB7fn0-2BniUkTNvOj7UiofY131VPkEg-2F5eIDA-2BqAJAYzQ9mKI91DXbxB4Fmec9CYqgdJ09Ul6bu5-2BTyTV-2FMiNVZ-2BtsUsdk1sQs6QLQnyU2CGD8xjjvxlKkk8F32s94epz4fV4ODVlCEUeGRJWFfBdh1AyKezNUbUtdLN) google-facebook-algorithm/
Thanks for bearing with me for the longish email. I’ll see you on Monday. Enjoy your weekend.
This email was sent by: The Ken