---
subject: "Indian VCs’ newfound love for deep tech: a step change or in lockstep?"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-11-17 01:32:08
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
Make India Competitive Again
Mon, 17 Nov 25
What India is doing, will do, and should do—to not just survive but thrive in the chaos unleashed by Trump.
Good Morning Ishan,
Deep tech is the new sport in town, and venture capitalists are cross-training.
Earlier this month, Tiger Global fully exited Ather Energy with a nearly 16X return on the Rs 75 crore it invested in the electric-vehicle maker a decade ago. A few days later, the investor’s storied investment in Unacademy came to [naught](https://www.moneycontrol.com/news/business/startup/ronnie-screwvalas-upgrad-in-talks-to-acquire-unacademy-for-300-400-million-13657880.html) when Upgrad emerged as a rescuer, intending to acquire the beleaguered edtech for less than $400 million.
If Ather [epitomises](https://the-ken.com/story/ather-is-everything-ola-isnt-so-why-arent-investors-lapping-it-up/) a dogged deep-tech company, Unacademy stands for brash, valuation-driven consumer tech where investors and founders have run amok. The two outcomes, meanwhile, show what deep-tech patrons have known all along—there’s little that can trip up a late-stage venture in frontier technologies.
Even then, such ventures have remained boutique in India, backed by a plethora of government grants, soft loans, and focused early-stage VCs. But that spray-and-seed approach hasn’t built critical mass in any of the transformative technologies that will shape the world in this decade and beyond.
As deep tech increasingly becomes connected to national and regional sovereignty, its funding mechanism is going to change in India. Perhaps forever.
In July, the Indian cabinet approved a Rs 1 lakh crore ($12 billion) [Research, Development, and Innovation Fund](https://rdifund.anrf.gov.in/images/pdf/NIA_Web_Copy.pdf). This month, the government began inviting applications for “second-level fund managers”. Such managers would include alternative investment funds, development finance institutions, non-banking financial companies, and others.
Unsurprisingly, VCs of all stripes are now talking the deep-tech language. Some have formed an [alliance](https://www.idtalliance.org/), others are [counting](https://www.businesstoday.in/india/story/new-gold-rush-indian-vcs-set-their-sights-on-defence-innovation-and-deep-tech-502132-2025-11-13) on the government to be the biggest customer. Among other things, VCs understand that the phase of blitzscaling digital platforms, D2C, and consumer apps has run its course. Traditional software is waning, and AI is [high risk](https://joincolossus.com/article/ai-will-not-make-you-rich/) for most investors.
“All these VCs—Accel, Premji [Invest], and others—would not invest in us because we did not have a US strategy. Now that they see there’s money here, they are creating this [deep-tech] alliance,” says the founder of a deep-tech company in Bengaluru. “But [the RDI fund] cannot be a pot of money that VCs use to create fake deep-tech versions of themselves because a lot of US companies are now saying, ‘we should have been registered in India’…All that game is going on because the US has no money [for [non-AI companies](https://www.institutionalinvestor.com/article/problem-vc-its-all-going-ai)], but India has.”
It’s not just New Delhi; states are dipping into their deep pockets too. In November, Karnataka rolled out a Rs 660 crore deep-tech plan that’ll also seed ventures in smaller towns and colleges.
But the public money should not crowd out private investment in these areas. The reality that the RDI fund custodians will grapple with is that most VCs like to think of themselves as risktakers, but they are actually not.
“It’s part structural—their limited partners (LPs) will demand returns in six to seven years, so VCs have to start figuring out the exit after four years—and part operational because they follow their herd’s investment theme,” said a biotech founder. He’s benefitted from government grants and raised money from VCs.
If, unlike software, the barrier to entry for founders is high in deep tech, the barrier to entry for investors cannot be low.
“We are funding deep tech now, you’ll see some Flipkart-like successes in seven to eight years,” said a partner at a VC firm that funded the e-commerce company in its early stages. (This comment was a side note to his complaint that The Ken critiques old, mature startups but doesn’t write about what VCs like him are doing now in deep tech.)
As someone who’s written about the struggles of building such companies ([here](https://the-ken.com/story/why-these-two-founders-chose-nasdaq-over-a-red-hot-indian-stock-market/), [here](https://the-ken.com/story/flying-taxi-truck-and-ambulance-a-chennai-academics-holy-trinity-in-the-fight-against-uber-indigo/), [here](https://the-ken.com/story/do-we-need-a-tiger-global-to-back-indias-deep-tech-race-not-just-the-horse/), [here](https://the-ken.com/story/who-rocked-mitra-biotech-boat/)), I’d say even the Flipkart analogy, though well-intentioned, is flawed. Building deep-tech companies is primarily about creating defensible intellectual property rather than quick commercialisation, acquiring customers, or marketing. It takes time, not just to build but even to commercialise.
“Doing deep tech has always been simple to state and very hard to accomplish. The bedrock of deep tech in any field is to create a group of highly potent engineers and scientists working at the real forefront of a field. Universities, especially those that are government-funded, have a big role to play in the creation of such groups,” said a successful deep-tech company founder in Mumbai. He’s been building technologies for many years and doesn’t want to be identified because his company is at a crucial fundraising stage.
“VCs will go where their LPs’ money goes. And that is dictated by what top VCs in the US do,” he added with concern. Since AI, robotics, and quantum computing are seen as the future, the deep-tech wind is blowing there. “VCs have no affinity whatsoever to deep tech or any other sector. If the government is going to be an LP, VCs will take the money and parrot narratives that allow them to raise capital commitments.”
It’s sobering that in an agriculture-dominated economy like India, VCs (and by extension, founders) [ruined agritech](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lhEp9O9fGmo) ventures, reinforcing the stereotype that conventional VCs are rarely effective in solving hard problems sustainably.
Yet it’s time to get to hard problems.
“The political leadership is really scared that China has become technologically advanced and the world can no longer rely on the US. RDI has backing from the top, and the thinking is even if they don’t get it right in the initial rollout, they will be open to feedback and corrections,” said a deep-tech founder who has consulted for the central government.
The [25-page](https://rdifund.anrf.gov.in/images/pdf/NIA_Web_Copy.pdf) RDI call for proposal has laid out the detailed implementation plan, and entities have until 15 January 2026 to apply for “second-level fund managers”. If the government expects them to be what economist Adam Smith called “the invisible hand”, the metaphor for unseen forces of self-interest that impact society positively, then New Delhi needs to channel them appropriately.
“Any deep-tech backer, government included, should ultimately insist on a prototype and demonstration of a technology or a combination of technologies that is markedly superior. A good test of this is that it should produce a wow [effect] when an informed practitioner first looks at it. If that is in place, next steps and funding can be looked at,” said the Mumbai founder.
With several patents and a scaled-up business to his name, he believes the government funding should not go beyond supporting efforts that create the first “wow demonstrations”. “I think it isn’t the job of governments, especially resource-starved ones, to fund beyond this initial phase. And the government should, through some mechanism, give good financial rewards for investments that lead to commercial success.”
The VC cold shoulder is turning into a warm embrace. But founders who’ve been plodding for years are still wary. Some believe the government should have more control. “So far, the government has taken a hands-off approach. Bureaucrats don’t want control and accountability; they can pass the buck to VCs who are their knowledge partners. That must flip,” said one founder-CEO.
Another wants the government to hold VCs accountable. “There should be some structure where if a project or a venture fails, VCs get the larger share of the pain. They cannot just ride on the government’s back.”
Industrial houses and large corporations have historically been risk-averse. As The Ken [has written](https://the-ken.com/newsletter/make-india-competitive-again/dont-talk-rd-please-we-are-indian-industry/), the Indian industry has consistently shunned R&D, hiding behind trading or repurposing and repackaging borrowed technologies to build products. The RDI fund can call their bluff—take this money, come back in two to three years and show your progress.
That’s a wrap for this week. Write to [mic@the-ken.com](mailto:mic@the-ken.com) and let us know what you think, or leave a comment on our website.
Regards,
Seema