---
subject: "When They Hear Less Than You Say"
from: "Robin Hanson from Overcoming Bias <overcomingbias@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-08 17:19:13
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Overcoming Bias", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8616244883382228708", "UNREAD"]
---
The White House recently requested input on AI. I
Now I do in fact have AI-specific policy proposals that I think would improve on doing nothing, such as robots-take-jobs Society can be usefully As masses now have little understanding or experience of AI, I fear that the only message that will get through to masses now via political channels is the binary “Is there a problem here?”. If masses aren’t persuaded that there is a problem, little will happen, but if they are, then elites will fight over what to do. This fight won’t be much based on experience of AI problems, of which there is little, nor drawn from experts with proven effectiveness re such problems, which also doesn’t exist. In this sort of situation, I predict AI government interventions to be bad, worse than doing nothing. Government intervention, beyond doing nothing, tends to go best when ordinary folks and experts have lots of experience with the area, and the main value we get from it is directly and frequently visible to us. It tends to go badly, worse than doing nothing, in areas like nuclear energy, global warming, genetic engineering, zoning, education, and medicine, where experience is less or the main value is sacred or hard to see. There we mostly see elite grift, grabbing for power and money with little consideration of subtle policy tradeoffs. In a forum like a White House request for input, I expect whatever I say to be compressed into the binary “is there a problem here?”. Talking about special AI insurance and liability would be compressed into “yes”, which would then push us toward bad AI policy. Which is why I instead said “no.” When you expect the public to be unable to consider subtle options, and elites to be incompetent, you point the public toward the best of the simple options they will be able to consider. Which in this case is do nothing. You're currently a free subscriber to |