---
subject: "Founding vs Inheriting"
from: "1729 <support@1729.com>"
to: ""
date: 2021-05-06 19:24:18
labels: ["1729", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_1655087446004800712", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
|
You can found an institution or you can inherit it. The East Coast of the United States is about inheritance. That means Why call them inherited institutions? Well, the related term legacy institution is in One way to inherit an institution is to pass it from parent to child, along with the fortune. That's the model that the Wall Street Journal and the New York Times Company still follow, where the A more subtle way to inherit an institution is to win an election. Now, of course someone who attains political office through this route isn't always a familial heir, Read-Only CultureWhen an heir inherits an institution, it's like inheriting a factory. During normal times the factory continues to operate, the widgets keep coming out, and the career managers appointed by the original founder appear to have everything in hand. Nothing seems amiss. But something important has been silently lost, which is the founder's ability to invent the institution from scratch – or reinvent it in the face of a crisis, like COVID-19. We can also think of this as read-only culture, the ability to repeat what an ancestor has handed down – but not recreate it from first principles. Read-only culture is similar to partial bilingualism: the ability to understand a language, but not speak or write it, a phenomenon which is common among children of immigrants. If children can't write the scripts of their parents, if their access to ancestral culture is read-only, then that culture won't be replicated. This is a microeconomic explanation for how Idiocracy happens slowly. People think the cultural capacity remains because the artifacts surround them...but the culture producers are actually It's the difference between What this suggests is that the civilizational equivalent of being able to code from scratch is more important than realized. It's not enough to simply push a button; we need to be able to build from scratch simply to continue as a civilization, else maintenance – let alone innovation – is impossible. Now, it might seem like a high bar to ask for the kind of leader who is capable of organizing the Federal Reserve or US Military from scratch. But such people walk the earth. Satoshi Nakamoto created Bitcoin and Vitalik Buterin created Ethereum, developments that in the fullness of time will be seen on par with what Alexander Hamilton accomplished. As for the US Military, as the saying goes: That's what the West Coast of the United States was about: founding. We use the past tense because technology is now Heirs Failed, Founders SucceededThat older, institutional ideology is now failing. Over the course of 2020, Where heirs failed, founders succeeded. The internet stayed up. The state couldn't deliver checks, but Amazon could deliver packages. The legacy universities were closed but the MOOC platforms were open. The restaurants were shuttered but the delivery apps were shipping. The media corporations reported that In other words, the alternative to the East Coast model of simply inheriting institutions has been beta-tested on the West Coast for the last 25 years, and founders took over many of the functions of running American society while the East Coast floundered. Many of the functions – except those still heavily run or regulated by the state, like education, healthcare, police, fire, the management of the economy, and the physical control of a deadly disease. Now, founding writ large certainly helped in some of those areas, particularly in the form of new biotech companies that created diagnostics and The West Coast Forked the East to FoundOne clue comes from the fact that many of the most prominent people on the West Coast sought it out as an alternative to the culture of the East. For example, it's not a coincidence that both Bill Gates and Mark Zuckerberg dropped out of Harvard to go West and become tech founders. They are atypical in many other respects, but not this one. Many tech founders and investors would in another life have become (or remained) professors, jurists, or journalists. This set includes Paul Graham, Larry Page, Peter Thiel, Mike Moritz, Diane Greene, Daphne Koller, Andrew Ng, and many more. These people had the intellectual horsepower to compete with the best of the East. Yet they chose to found something rather than inherit it. And that's how tech became a cultural fork of the East Coast. It's the same root but different branches, like the United States and the United Kingdom. One reason that tech forked is that computer science collapsed the distinction between the word and the deed, and turned a generation of intellectuals into software CEOs. Another is that top professors and tech CEOs both tend to feel deeply that they should be in charge – and the low cost of registering a domain name gave every professor the opportunity to show just how "easy" it was to be a tech CEO, converting many of them into That was arguably the key to it all: that founding something became possible at relatively low cost.[ 📋 Task: Earn $100 in BTCWrite a review of this post.Write a review of this post on your social media page or (ideally) at your own domain. You can offer feedback, correct errors, or propose extensions; we ask only that you be constructive. We'll award up to ten $100 prizes to the best ten reviews.
|
|||||
|