---
subject: "OpenAI: The Battle of the Board: Ilya's Testimony"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-11-04 19:22:56
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
New Things Have Come To Light
This Really Was Primarily A Lying And Management Problem
Joshua Achiam spoke out recently about some of OpenAI’s unethical legal tactics, and this is about as full throated a defense as I’ve seen of Altman’s behaviors. As with anyone important, no matter how awful they are, some people are going to believe they’re even worse, or worse in particular false ways. And in many ways, as I have consistently said, I find Altman to be well ‘above replacement’ as someone to run OpenAI, and I would not want to swap him out for a generic replacement executive. I do still think he has a rather severe (even for his peer group) lying and manipulation problem, and a power problem, and that ‘no more flawed than anyone’ or ‘more virtuous than most’ seems clearly inaccurate, as is reinforced by the testimony here. As I said at the time, The Battle of the Board, as in the attempt to fire Altman, was mostly not a fight over AI safety and not motivated by safety. It was about ordinary business issues. Ilya Tells Us How It Went Down And Why He Tried To Do ItIlya had been looking to replace Altman for a year, the Witness here is Ilya, Here are some select quotes:
The other departures from the board, Ilya reports, made the math work where it didn’t before. Until then, the majority of the board had been friendly with Altman, which basically made moving against him a non-starter. So that’s why he tried when he did. Note that all the independent directors agreed on the firing.
And for fun:
If You Come At The KingBest not miss. What did Sutskever and Murati think firing Altman meant? Vibes, paper, essays? What happened here was, it seems, that Ilya Sutskever and Mira Murati came at the king for very good reasons one might come at a king, combined with Altman’s attempt to use lying to oust Helen Toner from the board. But those involved (including the rest of the board) didn’t execute well because of various fears, during the fight both Murati and Sutskever refused to explain to the employees or world what they were upset about, lost their nerve and folded. The combination of that plus the board’s refusal to explain, and especially Murati’s refusal to back them up after setting things in motion, was fatal. Do they regret coming at the king and missing? Yes they do, and did within a few days. That doesn’t mean they’d be regretting it if it had worked. And I continue to think if they’d been forthcoming about the reasons from the start, and otherwise executed well, it would have worked, and Mira Murati could have been OpenAI CEO. Now, of course, it’s too late, and it would take a ten times worse set of behaviors for Altman to get into this level of trouble again. Enter The ScapegoatsIt really was a brilliant response, to scapegoat Effective Altruism and the broader AI safety movement as the driving force and motivation for the change, thus with this one move burying Altman’s various misdeeds, remaking the board, purging the company and justifying the potentially greatest theft in human history while removing anyone who would oppose the path of commercialization. Well played. This scapegoating continues to this day. For the record, And In SummaryThe below is terrible writing, presumably from an AI, but yeah this sums it all up:
You're currently a free subscriber to |