---
subject: "Oxygen Monopolies"
from: "Rex Woodbury <digitalnative@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-01-26 10:39:16
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Rex Woodbury", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_7409788299609491647", "UNREAD"]
---
Weekly writing about how technology and people intersect. By day, I’m building If you haven’t subscribed, join 70,000+ weekly readers by subscribing here: Before this week’s piece, I want to emphasize: it feels strange to write about tech when our country feels so fractured. Topics like AI adoption and startup disruption are important and timely, yet they pale in comparison to human rights and human lives. This isn’t a political publication, but it is a publication about technology and humanity—and it feels important to say the latter comes first. Oxygen MonopoliesOne of my favorite charts every year is this one, which Axios puts out each December: This chart does a good job reminding us how fast news cycles move in today’s world. Other than inflation and (surprisingly?) Labubu, most stories spike then fade away. Take the capture of Maduro. The US extracted a world leader from his country in a covert night operation (!) and it dominated the news for, what, a week? Insane. I saw a tweet that wondered how long the OJ Simpson trial would stay in the headlines in today’s media environment. A week? A day? It’s an interesting question to ask. Andy Warhol is famous for saying that one day everyone would be famous for 15 minutes. The internet made that true, and if the internet is the vehicle, AI is the accelerator. The challenge for startups is: how do you stay top-of-mind in an oversaturated, fast-moving media environment? How do you build a cohesive brand that remains top-of-mind and communicates a clear and consistent value prop? If the world moves fast these days, startups move at warp speed. We’ve never seen anything like the pace of AI, and fast-moving news cycles and fast-forming opinions are dictating real startup outcomes. While When markets move faster than ever, narratives also take shape faster than ever. Companies become synonymous with nascent categories and winners are crowned even as a category remains in its infancy. This is an enormous challenge for founders, but it’s also an opportunity. There are a few things that founders can do: 1) Build incredibly simple brand association with your category—early.Savvy companies become synonymous with a category as early as possible. Probably the best example in applied AI is Harvey in legal AI. Harvey was early to the category: Gabe and Winston cold-emailed OpenAI, which led to them becoming one of OpenAI Startup Fund’s first investments. The founders saw where law was going, with excellent foresight. But they also pulled off a masterclass in marketing. Harvey became synonymous with legal AI when the category was barely born. Even though Legora is reportedly catching up, Harvey still sucks up most of the oxygen in the market. Great product is a pre-requisite for a strong brand (think of it as the foundation upon which GTM + brand get built) but savvy brand positioning can dictate how high a startup can rise from there. I envision it like bedrock + scaffolding. Here’s a nice visual, courtesy of Gemini: VCs, of course, play a key role in kingmaking, especially in a hot market where capital and talent fast-follow top VCs. Is this the ideal way venture should be done? No. But it’s a real phenomenon, and smart founders understand it and use it to their advantage. Marketing and brand are often dismissed, typically by engineering- and product-oriented teams. Marketing and brand are fluffy, abstract; eng and product are concrete. But in today’s AI landscape, savvy marketing and brand matter a lot. Look down on them at your own risk. A company should aim for a clear brand association. Companies that have done a good job:
At most law firms, chances are someone is saying, “Hey are we using Harvey? I keep hearing about them.” Buying Harvey becomes synonymous with buying innovation, with staying bleeding-edge. You’re buying peace-of-mind as much as you’re buying ROI-boosting software. This clear association, when paired with good product, becomes a winning formula. Other companies make the mistake of straying from a simple value prop. Side note: you don’t have to be the first-mover to do this well. Brex had a two-year head start on Ramp, but Ramp now does ~2x Brex’s total payments volume (TPV). Ramp had both (1) the better product, and (2) masterful marketing. The first is the pre-requisite, the bedrock, but the latter helped Ramp hit escape velocity. In our 2023 piece
The rest has been great execution. Ramp is now synonymous with its category. Case in point: Brex’s founders went on TBPN to talk about the Capital One acquisition…and TBPN is presented by Ramp: 2) Suck up oxygen in your category before someone else does. This typically means telling your own narrative.Sometimes you’ll hear founders say they don’t want to talk about their company because they’re worried about competition. I generally don’t believe in building in secrecy. For the 1% of companies with true proprietary tech or advantages, this might be the right approach. For the other 99%, the advantages of telling your story outweigh any advantages of secrecy. I also generally believe that ideas are commodities and success is determined by better execution. Google came after Altavista, Facebook came after Friendster, DoorDash came after GrubHub, Amazon came after Ebay, and so on. If you don’t position your company within your category, someone else will start sucking up all the oxygen. That’s a real risk. You don’t earn points for mystique when there’s a marketing knife fight happening in real time. I also like By this measure, it’s better to be early—so make this is a priority from the get-go. 3) Hire a growth marketer earlier than you think you should.More tactically: hire a growth marketer! In the past, the first dozen employees of a startup might be entirely engineers. Those days are gone, in my mind. Founders benefit from a growth marketer early, to think through and execute everything above. I also think that in today’s AI world, the founding DNA of a company (or at least the DNA of the early team) has changed. As technical barriers lower with coding agents, distribution, brand, and marketing matter more. You should probably have a growth / brand wizard among your first hires, particularly if that skillset is lacking on the founding team. We’re hiring at Daybreak! 🌄On that note: I should probably walk the walk here on my own advice. At I’ve been saying that 2026 is about turning from fund to firm. We’re growing up! We have a new partner joining next week on the investing side (more on that soon), and we’ll hire for a couple roles on the platform side. I want us to be very intentional with what the Daybreak brand stands for. In a recent memo to our LPs, I wrote the following:
I’m a huge movie buff, so I was proud of the A24 analogy :) It’s a good North Star. I think A24 probably has the clearest brand in the world right now, across every industry. They’ve done an incredible job. How do we replicate that in venture? The old playbooks are stale and the industry is more saturated than ever. We want to shake things up a bit. To that end, we’re hiring for two roles: 1) Head of EditorialThis person focuses on how we design and grow the Daybreak brand. This means content, marketing, and new creative initiatives. How do we build out Digital Native in interesting ways? Do we launch a new publication or two? Should we revamp our website? Maybe do a video series on our founders and their stories? We have a lot of ideas; we just need to refine them and execute on them. That’s what this person will be in charge of. The role is New York-based and will be multimedia (writing, audio, video, etc). To take our own advice from earlier, we need a crystal-clear brand association. Words we use a lot: artisanal, craftsmanship, company-building, people-centric, anti-scale, quality > quantity. How do we turn this word cloud into a cohesive brand? That task falls to this role. If you’re interested in this role, or know someone who would be great, we’d love for you to fill out this Google Form: To give a good example of A24’s creativity here: A24 offers short-form magazines 2) Head of ExperiencesIf Head of Editorial focuses on how Daybreak shows up online, this role focuses on how we show up offline. You’ll craft IRL meet-ups, events, and community. You’ll work in close concert with the Head of Editorial, but focus on translating our online identity into tangible IRL experiences. Example questions to answer: What should a Daybreak speaker series look like? What about Demo Nights or a Hackathon? How do we best cultivate and grow our networks? This person will be tasked with answering these. The right person is probably deeply persnickety with great attention to detail, and the ever-elusive “taste.” Here’s a Google Form for this role: What’s the A24 analogy here? Well, I’m not sure we need the full-on Marty Supreme blimp, but what’s our equivalent of the underground ping pong matches Both roles are NYC-based. Relevant experience is less important than creative thinking + high hustle. We’d rather someone come to venture with a fresh perspective and breathe new life into a tired, saturated industry with familiar playbooks. The cover of our Fund I deck showed an image of a man overlooking sunrise, which I made with Midjourney. I recently asked Gemini to update it by adding a few new people. Our team is (finally) growing! Hopefully putting the word out about these roles leads to some good serendipity and new members of the Daybreak team! 🙏 Final Thoughts: Tide Detergent and Staying Top-of-MindMy dad used to say a Woody Allen quote: “Eighty percent of success in life is showing up.” It’s directionally true. Applied to the startup world: eighty percent of success is getting people to think of you. When I think about oxygen monopolies—the companies that suck up the oxygen in their category—they accomplish just that: they make people think of them.
But post-internet, P&G needed to get that consumer to type the word “Tide” itself—otherwise, top hits for detergent might be for competitors or for Amazon private-label products. Brand recall, as opposed to brand awareness, is a much more difficult and expensive proposition. Although Tide dominates the U.S. laundry detergent market (41% market share, more than the next five brands combined), when I search “laundry detergent” on Amazon I don’t see Tide anywhere. Tide doesn’t show up until the 9th hit! This is a good example of how brand has shifted: you need to get people to proactively think of you. For Daybreak, this means making sure founders think Daybreak when they start their company. Brand is hard to measure, but one measure of success: in five years, when you poll founders on which VCs they’d most want to lead their Seed round, is Daybreak among the handful of names mentioned? There are 14 million venture firms out there, so it’s a formidable challenge. Same for startups. You want to replicate the lawyer saying “Are we using Harvey?” This is why Clear brand positioning matters: narratives form faster than ever, and they calcify. Once they’re hardened, they become hard to change. The illusion of success then begets real success. Thanks for reading! Subscribe here to receive Digital Native in your inbox each week: |