---
subject: "Ed Set Go: The edtech lowdown on 2024"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-12-23 01:32:27
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031"]
---
|
|
Ed Set Go
Mon, 23 Dec 24
The one stop to understand the biggest shifts in education, written by the best edtech journalist in the country..
Good Morning Ishan,
It’s that time of the year when we journalists feel absolutely compelled to ball up all our learnings from the past 12 months and present it to you in the form of yearend lists. It’s our way of looking back at our work, giving ourselves a little pat on the back, and trying to figure out if we really did have our finger on the pulse of the sector we cover. So, please indulge me.
As I looked up editions from the past year, though, I have to say 2024 was highly mid. Empires were made, empires combusted, but in extreme slow motion. The powers in edtech polarised, largely in favour of offline players. Tumultuous geopolitics continued to meddle with Indians’ study-abroad dreams. Edtechs raised more funding compared to 2023, but investments in new ideas are still far behind where they were during edtech’s peak.
So I decided to focus on the top three moments of the year, instead of trends, for this edition. Let me know if yours were different:
1. The Byju’s circus and its curious cast of Williams. We’ve talked extensively in this newsletter about the various lawsuits against Byju’s, both in India and abroad. In the US, the main charge against the company is that they’ve defaulted on their US$1.2 billion term loan and squirreled away funds that should’ve been used towards repayment. The highlight in this whole case, for me, was the lone picture of an IHOP which was the registered headquarters of Camshaft Capital, a “hedge fund” managed by its CEO William C Morton. Morton is a most interesting character, having claimed in a Youtube podcast that he made a high-flying deal while on a date with a woman. Don’t believe me? Here are the [receipts](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S6Z3u8Ka_TA). Anyway, Morton was summoned to testify in court about the US$533 million he was allegedly holding for Byju Raveendran. But he skipped town and refused to come back to testify until a judge ordered him to at the risk of arrest.
Almost a year apart, another William was compelled to come to court on account of the US$533 million that Byju’s has allegedly hidden from its investors. William Hailer, the CEO of a political consultancy firm called Rose Lake, was roped in by Byju’s to help buy back the American company EPIC that Byju’s had lost control of because of the court proceedings. Hailer’s testimony revealed some strange things about Byju Raveendran, who, according to Hailer, may have used ChatGPT to try and figure out “how to defend against corporate fraud allegations”. To me, these are the defining images of the Byju’s saga.
2. Kota’s factories are changing. 2024 was a year where we saw an unfortunate rise in student suicides, a rigorous competition to capture top exam ranks, and the consolidation of offline empires. Allen and Physics Wallah grew their footprints, even as Unacademy, reportedly, is in the market for a buyer. We wrote about how Kota’s coaching businesses were under pressure to change and behave more like regular schools—with the right mental and physical protections for students. There was a big push to handle the first, as students were burning out quickly, stuck in a rank-eat-rank world where even hostel admissions were based on how well you scored in the internal exams of each respective institute.
The big question, according to me, is how this might physically change these operations. If these institutes can now only admit students who are older, their sizes might shrink, they will have to hire and train mental health counsellors, and they’ll have to ease up on the competition for ranks, educators, and hostel availability. The new rules, though, are going to crash against a decades-long culture forged only through the lens of ruthless competition. Things won’t change overnight, mostly because this culture flows from the top.
Just last week, FIITJEE’s founder D K Goel was filmed abusing his employees on an online call. FIITJEE has also held back staff salaries, which, reportedly, is due to its poor financial position.
Older institutes like FIITJEE and Allen have always run their businesses like strongmen. But PW’s taken a different route—one that seems oriented towards elevating its founder, Alakh Pandey, to cult status. PW had to [retrench](https://www.moneycontrol.com/news/business/startup/physicswallah-lets-go-of-120-employees-after-performance-review-11768721.html) too, like everyone else, but the media fallout from that was managed by the popularity and lore of Pandey. The real mudslinging, though, came from a group of its own former employees, who claimed things weren’t as cohesive at PW as they seemed to be from the outside.
It will be interesting to see if newer institutes like PW can play a different game against traditional players like Allen in a market like Kota. Will the culture change PW or will PW change the culture?
3. We have to talk about AI. Google’s trying it. So is OpenAI. Microsoft’s made a soft launch too. Every tech company is thinking deeply about how generative AI will impact education—and at what floor can they get in with schools, tutoring companies, and even stand-alone families looking to educate their children. There’s been a lot of focus on AI tutors—an idea pushed most enthusiastically by Khan Academy—who can personalize instruction for students to a level never achieved before. While there are still kinks to iron out, AI tutors will give edtechs a run for all the money they’ve spent on building out content, nudge-based programmes, and characters to help students on their learning journey.
The quickest use case, though, may not involve students at all. And all the action seems to be in the southern Indian state of Kerala. Innovators in the state were the first to introduce Iris, a saree-clad, blonde robot teacher, powered by AI. But Kerala’s state government has taken this a step further:
“Kerala Infrastructure and Technology for Education (KITE), situated in the state’s education department, will train 80,000 secondary school teachers in “AI expertise”. The three-day training is aimed at making teachers familiar with AI content-generation techniques, including images, and prompt engineering to use AI tools effectively.
The idea is that once teachers know AI’s uses, they can create more personalised lessons for their students. Granular data on student achievement can also be used to target specific learning needs. Companies like Educational Initiatives and school-based edtechs like LEAP have already used AI to generate this feedback for teachers. But it’s an exciting thought that teachers, with this training, may directly gain the ability.”
From AI teachers to AI-trained teachers, Ed Set Go by The Ken
Teacher training, learning English, solving doubts—the adoption of AI in Indian education will be ground-up, and different from how western countries have tried to infuse it into classroom teaching.
These were my main takeaways from the year, folks! Thank you, again, for reading Ed Set Go, and sending your thoughts and comments to me. For two years now, you’ve inspired me to push new boundaries, just as the boundaries of edtech and education in India have expanded.
I hope you stay, I hope you read, and I hope you enjoy!
Regards,
Olina
Got a tip? If you have a lead for a great story that The Ken can pursue, please send it to tips@the-ken.com or share it through this [form](https://theken.typeform.com/got-a-tip). To find out more about how to do this securely, read [our blog post](https://the-ken.com/blog/help-the-ken-tell-the-next-big-story/) about sharing tips with The Ken.