---
subject: "[Important] Choose a subscription plan for The Palindrome"
from: "Tivadar from The Palindrome <thepalindrome@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-07-14 18:05:30
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tivadar Danka"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3571324877567057163"]
---
Hey, this is Tivadar, it’s great to have you here! In this newsletter, you’ll receive stories about how mathematics makes our world work. (Especially how it makes machine learning work.) Stories. Not textbook chapters, or boring technical exercises. From now on you’ll get every issue straight into your inbox. Currently, you are on the free plan, which gets you one post per week, packed with intuitive and visual explanations about mathematics and machine learning. If you want to get the full experience, consider Here’s everything you unlock when you join our inner circle:1. Premium postsUnlock my weekly deep-dives into machine learning and the mathematics behind it! Here’s a collection of my favorite posts: 2. Three guided learning tracksI’ve organized every issue of the newsletter so you can learn in a structured way without the hassle of searching the whole archive. These are the learning tracks you can dive into right now: 3. Full archive of all past and future postsRead every essay I’ve ever written and get instant access to all member-only posts from now on. Here are some of the premium articles you are missing out on: 4. Private community chatAsk questions, share insights, and join real-time conversations with other curious learners and with me directly. 5. Early access to upcoming coursesBe the first to join cohort-based courses launching in August and help shape how they’re built. +1. Join the democratizing of machine learningWe are breaking down the barriers of technology education, and with a paid subscription, you support the mission. If you are still not sure if The Palindrome is for you, here are some of our reader’s favorites so you can decide for yourself: Important note:To make sure you get my emails in your primary inbox, reply with a quick hello! Many thanks. Cheers, P.S. If you are interested in learning the Math of Machine Learning, then you might want to |