---
subject: "Taylor Sheridan's Extreme Productivity"
from: "Trung Phan <trungphan@workweek.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-12-07 05:57:13
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Trung Phan", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_7971156048460647958", "UNREAD"]
---
Taylor Sheridan is a machine.
Since selling the screenplay for the 2015 banger Sicario — a story about the American government’s war on drugs and Mexican cartels — the Texas native has gone on to write five other film scripts (including Academy Award-nominated Hell or High Water) and over 100 episodes of popular TV projects for Paramount (e.g. Yellowstone, 1883, Mayor of Kingstown, Tulsa King, 1923, Lioness, Landman). Sheridan has become such a linchpin for Paramount’s streaming business that the network spends an estimated $500m a year just on his shows.
This is an aspirational level of output that I hope to achieve myself (once life-extension technology matures and I can live until 975 years old).
Wildly, Sheridan didn’t start his writing career until he was 40 years old in 2010 and it has been turbo mode ever since.
Sheridan’s Hollywood journey began as an actor on the Chuck Norris (!!) show Walker, Texas Ranger in 1995. Over the next 15 years, Sheridan picked up small roles until getting decent work on Veronica Mars (2005-07) and Sons of Anarchy (2008-10).
How did he go from a small-time actor to leading Hollywood writer and mogul?
I think Sheridan’s story is an extreme example of Parkinson’s Law, the famous adage that work will expand to fill whatever time is allocated to the task no matter the complexity or scope (the canonical example is handing in a college term paper: no matter what day a paper is assigned, you will magically do 95% of the work the evening before it is due).
In 2010, Sheridan left Sons of Anarchy over a contract dispute and decided that acting wasn’t his calling. But his wife was pregnant and he desperately needed work to support a new family. One of the most pressing deadlines you can have is “make money for my future child”. Sheridan credits this obligation with motivating his career change and getting those first few film scripts out the door.
Following his film work, Sheridan developed the hit TV show Yellowstone and set himself up to cruise into semi-retirement. But he’s since made six other shows and a major reason is that he created new pressures and deadlines for himself. How? By buying the $350m Four Sixes (6666) ranch in Texas. To finance the purchase, he struck a $200 million multi-show deal with Paramount. That’s a lot more deadlines (and content for our eyeballs).
It’s an interesting journey and we’ll walk through it:
- From Acting to Writing
- Deals of a Lifetime (6666 Ranch, Paramount+)
-
Sheridan’s Insanely Locked-In Creative Process
***
From Acting to Writing
Taylor Sheridan began his Hollywood career in acting but he was never married to the idea of being an actor. He wanted to tell stories and — from a young age — was led to believe that acting was the best way to achieve this end.
From age 25 to 40, he spun his wheels as an actor before getting a wake-up call. While Sheridan had achieved his highest-profile gig on the show Sons of Anarchy, his contract came up for renewal and negotiations didn’t go well. Around 2010, the show’s producers low-balled him and Sheridan realized there probably wasn’t a future in acting, as he told [Deadline](https://link.workweek.com/click/37760415.51839/aHR0cHM6Ly9kZWFkbGluZS5jb20vMjAyMS8xMi8xODgzLXllbGxvd3N0b25lLW9yaWdpbi10YXlsb3Itc2hlcmlkYW4tdW5pdmVyc2UtdGltLW1jZ3Jhdy1mYWl0aC1oaWxsLXNhbS1lbGxpb3R0LWludGVydmlldy0xMjM0ODkyNzQxLz9oYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Be4933b99):
At that time, they were offering me what I thought was a very unfair wage. It was less than virtually every other person on the show, and not enough for me to quit my second job. So, the business affairs attorney — who I won’t name — here’s what he told my attorney who said, “Look, there’s kids on the Cartoon Network making more than you’re offering this guy.”
The [business affairs attorney for Sons of Anarchy] goes, “I know and you’re right that he probably deserves to make more, but we’re not going to pay him more because — guess what — he’s not worth more. That’s what he’s worth. There’s 50 of him. He is 11 on the call sheet. That’s what [Sheridan] is, and that’s all he’s ever going to be.”
And that’s really when I quit. It wasn’t so much over money. It was so much more than how the business saw me.
There’s a joke in TV production about how Shonda Rhimes killed off the character played by Patrick Dempsey in Grey’s Anatomy after a contract dispute. Specifically, Dempsey’s character dies in a “fuck you car crash”.
Sheridan wasn’t a major character in Sons of Anarchy, but — after the contract dispute — his character was written off the show in a van accident. He didn’t have any ill will, though. The failed actor realized that he couldn’t succeed as the “11th person on the call sheet” and his only way to stay in the business was to “tell the story [from] behind the camera”.
A line that I’ve heard Sheridan say many times about his career is that “Hollywood will tell you what you’re supposed to do if you listen.” He finally listened and was ready to try something new. In a 2016 interview, Sheridan explained how he [pivoted from acting to writing](https://link.workweek.com/click/37760415.51839/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cueW91dHViZS5jb20vd2F0Y2g_dj1RZXlTUEVjb3E0USZoYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B9a0defbd):
- His TV acting wasn’t storytelling: “When you’re acting on a TV show [like I was], I’m not getting to tell a [story]. I was selling ad space at the end of the day. I was moving plot. I wasn’t telling a story.”
-
The financial pressure of a newborn on the way: “I quit [Sons of Anarchy] to write. But it wasn’t that esoteric. I had a real motivation. I was having a kid. We were renegotiating my contract on the show and they were offering me not enough money to pay rent and I’m thinking of raising a baby in [a very small apartment]…So, I made a decision. How can I look [my future child] in the eye and say — in 7 or 8 years — ‘you can be anything you want to be but sorry I can’t see your baseball game at 5pm [because I have an acting audition for some random TV commercial I don’t want to do].”
-
How he got started: “My wife maxed out her credit card to give me the [screenwriting software] Final Draft. So, I sat down and opened it up and said, ‘I have absolutely no idea how to do this but I know exactly what not to do because I’ve worked on so many bad scripts in my life [as an actor]. Don’t do any of those [bad] things. Tell the story I want to tell. Be honest and it should probably work out. I write movies I want to see about things that interest me. I assume I’m not that unique and other people will like them too.”
The three films that catapulted Sheridan to fame — Sicario (2015), Hell or High Water (2016) and Wind River (2017) — were very much films based on stories he “wanted to tell”. He calls the trio of films a “thematic trilogy” about the “modern American frontier”. The stories are about how the settlement of frontier lands in America changed those geographies. And how the past from those areas affect the modern times. Sheridan also sprinkled in the theme of fatherhood for each film (a topic that was understandably on his mind).
Prior to the thematic trilogy, Sheridan’s first project that attracted attention from networks and agencies was his pilot script for Mayor of Kingstown. That show went live in 2021 as part of the massive Paramount deal. But he actually wrote it in 2011 and received offers to develop it.
Why did he turn down the money when he clearly needed it? According to [a fantastic profile by James Hibberd in the ](https://link.workweek.com/click/37760415.51839/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuaG9sbHl3b29kcmVwb3J0ZXIuY29tL3R2L3R2LWZlYXR1cmVzL3RheWxvci1zaGVyaWRhbi15ZWxsb3dzdG9uZS1pbnRlcnZpZXctMTIzNTUxOTI2MS8_aGFzaGVkX3VzZXI9MGViZWYxMmM0MjkxMTg0NTYyZGFjMDk5NjViY2U4MDg/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B2e13b0b9)[Hollywood Reporter ](https://link.workweek.com/click/37760415.51839/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuaG9sbHl3b29kcmVwb3J0ZXIuY29tL3R2L3R2LWZlYXR1cmVzL3RheWxvci1zaGVyaWRhbi15ZWxsb3dzdG9uZS1pbnRlcnZpZXctMTIzNTUxOTI2MS8_aGFzaGVkX3VzZXI9MGViZWYxMmM0MjkxMTg0NTYyZGFjMDk5NjViY2U4MDg/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97C2e13b0b9)[in 2023](https://link.workweek.com/click/37760415.51839/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuaG9sbHl3b29kcmVwb3J0ZXIuY29tL3R2L3R2LWZlYXR1cmVzL3RheWxvci1zaGVyaWRhbi15ZWxsb3dzdG9uZS1pbnRlcnZpZXctMTIzNTUxOTI2MS8_aGFzaGVkX3VzZXI9MGViZWYxMmM0MjkxMTg0NTYyZGFjMDk5NjViY2U4MDg/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97D2e13b0b9), Sheridan wanted full creative control — a theme that will come up often — and none of the studios would give it:
…Sheridan refused to sell [Mayor of Kingstown]. The studios, he says, wanted to hire a room of more experienced writers to tackle the project — you know, make TV the usual way. Sheridan felt that he knew exactly how to write the show himself. So even back then, getting his first taste of success as a writer, Sheridan was reluctant to let others adapt his material and demonstrated a willingness to walk away. Some might call that stubborn or impractical; Sheridan sees it as trusting his instincts and sticking to his creative guns. He put Mayor of Kingstown in a drawer.
Dude quit acting to take up a career with (maybe) better odds of paying the rent to house a new young family. Then, ices the first real offer because he needs it to be done his way. That’s some serious cojones.
Sheridan was on to something, though.
By 2013, he says he was down to his last $800 in savings before selling the screenplay for Sicario. Denis Villeneuve agreed to direct it with Emily Blunt, Benicio del Toro, and Josh Brolin signing on to act. The film came out in 2015 and made $85m on a budget of $30m (it’s a truly incredible flick).
With the first win in hand, Sheridan didn’t let up.
It took him only three weeks to crank out the script for his second film Hell or High Water.
“When you start writing a screenplay, you have a general awareness of themes you want to explore,” Sheridan says in that 2016 interview. “But you have to be quite malleable because the story will start telling itself…and you have to ride with it. If I’m really struggling with a scene and writing three scenes to justify [one story point], I know I’m not listening to the story. There’s a story that wants to be told. If you listen, it will tell itself really easily. I wrote Hell or High Water in three weeks. And they shot that draft with no re-writes. And it is because it’s a story I felt very close to. I knew exactly what I wanted to say and the way I wanted to say it…it was a very visceral writing experience. It was very instinctive. Not very structured, outlined [or] planned.”
Clearly, that “newborn is coming, gotta get a bigger place” motivation is no joke.
***
Deals of a Lifetime (6666 Ranch, Paramount+)
Having finally found critical and commercial success in film, Sheridan’s next project would be his biggest yet. In fact, it would be one of the biggest TV shows in recent memory: Yellowstone.
Sheridan had started working on the project in 2013. His original vision was for a film pitched as “The Godfather in Montana”. HBO passed on the idea with one exec remarking that it felt “too Middle America” (after Yellowstone went nuclear, the exec that passed on the show tried to pitch Sheridan a different project but Sheridan told him to kick rocks).
Ultimately, Paramount Network picked up the show in 2017. That was the same year that Wind River — the third film in Sheridan’s thematic trilogy — came out, which also marked his official directorial debut.
Sheridan only agreed to do Yellowstone if given full creative control (and a fat budget). Paramount wanted to make a big splash for its first scripted TV series. So, it gave him everything he wanted and backed up the Brinks truck (Sheridan was the writer, director, producer and show-runner). Kevin Costner signed on as the lead and a monster TV show was born.
Having grown up in Texas and Wyoming, the show’s ranch and rural Montana setting was exactly in Sheridan’s wheelhouse. The idea and execution couldn’t have come from a team of Harvard or University of Southern California (USC)-trained writers.
Coastal folk were quite flummoxed by the show’s success. They didn’t get the appeal. It didn’t matter. By the 4th season in 2021, Yellowstone was the most viewed TV show in the world. This was also the year I finally started watching (I really enjoyed the first three seasons but the 4th one lagged and I kind of stopped following the show; Costner also bounced for the final season, which premiered last month).
Yellowstone catapulted Sheridan into a new stratosphere. He never intended to be a media mogul, though. Even as a struggling actor, he owned a 1,200 acre ranch and that was his happy place, as he told [The Hollywood Reporter](https://link.workweek.com/click/37760415.51839/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuaG9sbHl3b29kcmVwb3J0ZXIuY29tL3R2L3R2LWZlYXR1cmVzL3RheWxvci1zaGVyaWRhbi15ZWxsb3dzdG9uZS1pbnRlcnZpZXctMTIzNTUxOTI2MS8_aGFzaGVkX3VzZXI9MGViZWYxMmM0MjkxMTg0NTYyZGFjMDk5NjViY2U4MDg/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97E2e13b0b9):
“That was my dream and I already had it. It was a great escape from the fact I was a failing actor living in West Hollywood. The plan was always to become a big movie star, then move back to a ranch and just do movies with Martin Scorsese when I felt like it.”
But a random sequence of events changed the trajectory of his life and career.
He went from the cusp of semi-retirement to buying one of the largest ranches in America for $350m (and then, signing a $200m deal with Paramount to pay for the ranch).
Here is the play-by-play:
-
A Texas icon: Sheridan is from North Texas and the Four Sixes (6666) Ranch — which has more land (266, 255 acres) than L.A. County — is “legendary” in the region. The property and its “horse-and-cattle operation were long controlled by a single dynastic family that battled for 150 years to protect their land and keep it largely intact”, which is basically the plot of Yellowstone.
-
Sheridan’s pitch: In 2019, Sheridan wanted to shoot parts of Yellowstone at 6666 Ranch and told its 81-year old owner Anne Marion that he would make it the “most famous ranch in America”.
-
The shock death: In early 2020, Marion died and the family put 6666 Ranch up for sale. If it was listed on the market, the property would likely have been carved up. The family that owned the ranch was interested in having a single buyer. So, their broker called Sheridan and asked if he was interested in buying the entire property (Sheridan recalls the negotiation: “I said, ‘How much?’ They said, ‘It’s $350 million.’ And I’m like, ‘I’m about 330 short. But please, you thought enough to call me, will you give me two weeks?’)
As a reminder: Sheridan had gone from a middling actor at 40 to successful Hollywood screenwriter at 45 to very very very successful TV show-runner at 50.
He could have achieved his life goal of buying a decent-sized ranch and working sporadically on passion projects.
But then a once-in-a-lifetime buying opportunity fell in his lap. To pay for it, another once-in-a-lifetime opportunity fell in his lap. In 2021, Paramount was launching its streaming service Paramount+. Every streaming service needs dope content but Paramount had previously licensed Yellowstone to Peacock and desperately needed new shows to attract subscribers.
Per The Hollywood Reporter article, Sheridan was sitting on a bunch of Yellowstone prequel ideas that could soak up that fresh Paramount+ money:
Sheridan says the [Four Sixes Ranch] opportunity changed his mind about expanding his overall deal with Paramount Global (then ViacomCBS). He valued his independence, preferring to be “a hired gun.” But to buy the ranch, he signed a new contract reportedly worth $200 million and wrangled some additional investors to bridge the gap.
“I was real rich for 45 minutes,” he says. “Then I was broke again. That was the trade.”
[The Hollywood Reporter writer James Hibberd gave] Sheridan a hypothetical: Your TV shows and your ranch are both hanging off a cliff. Which do you save?
“I do the shows for the ranch,” Sheridan says firmly. […]
“[The prequels are] time capsules of life in Montana as a microcosm of the world as a whole,” he says. “They’re big spectacles, and the more that you move into the modern era, the bigger that spectacle becomes. I know these are huge bets Paramount makes on me every time. I’m asking them to give me Game of Thrones season six money for what is essentially a pilot every year, and that’s a big ask. As long as I do my job well, and people don’t bore of the genre, I think there will be enough for many more.”
Hibberd writes that an “extraordinary burst of get-the-ranch productivity” ultimately led to the green light of six new series.
This is why Sheridan is everywhere right now.
The ranch created new pressure and deadlines.
Clearly, that “I need to pay the monthly mortgage on this $350m property” motivation is no joke.
***
Sheridan’s Insanely Locked-In Creative Process
Let’s take stock of the Sheridan Cinematic Universe with a handy table I whipped up.