---
subject: "The Deep State's Role in Firefly's Lunar Landing"
from: "Ashlee Vance from Core Memory  <ashleevance@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-03-02 19:39:39
labels: ["Ashlee Vance", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_4216359091400734623", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Firefly Aerospace did something amazing today. It stuck the landing with its Blue Ghost machine and plated that bad boy right on the lunar surface. As a result, a bunch of fantastic Moon science should take place over the next couple of weeks. To put some context around the moment, The New York Times
On the whole, this is a very positive happening for science, commercial space and Firefly. So please excuse us as we tell you the less inspiring story behind the story that you will not read anywhere else. The main figure who made Firefly possible is Max Polyakov. He’s the Ukrainian businessman who rescued the Texas-based rocket start-up from the perils of bankruptcy almost a decade ago. Polyakov put $250 million into Firefly, reinvigorating not only its rocket program but also its lunar aspirations. Polyakov kept Firefly humming until 2022 when the U.S. government forced him to sell his stake in the company. This was an odd and surprising turn of events. The U.S. loves capitalists, and the government really loves rich people spending excessive amounts of money on things the government desires like rockets. So why would it force Polyakov out of his own company just as Firefly had stood up its first rocket at a pad in Southern California? Well, in
Just so we’re clear here, the government contended that Polyakov was born in Ukraine, and Ukraine is near Russia and so possibly Polyakov Bad, if not now then in the future. Oh, and, there’s some classified stuff we can’t tell you that really backs up our case, so trust us on this one and let’s get this Firefly company in pureblood American hands. Polyakov making the rounds across his space empire Hindsight has not been kind to the Feds here. Not long after the Feds forced Polyakov to sell his stake in Firefly, Russia invaded Ukraine. In the years that followed, Polyakov has received a bunch of medals from the Ukrainian government for his essential work providing technology and means to the war effort. If he’s a Russian spy, he’s the worst Russian spy imaginable because he’s ended up as a Ukrainian hero. What’s more, the Feds If one were cynical, one might suggest that the traditional space contractors and some government bureaucrats helped engineer Polyakov’s ouster because Firefly had gone from a super risky venture to standing a rocket on a pad, and certain people wanted absolute control of that rocket on the pad and future rockets on the pad. Never mind the guy who risked his own money to make all of this happen. I’m not much of a political animal and often find my eyes rolling during much of the Deep State discourse. But this whole situation struck me as appalling. The obvious tragedy in all of this is that Polyakov left the U.S. as a result of his treatment and watched the lunar lander he helped fund make it to the Moon from afar. Unlike figures such as Elon Musk and Jeff Bezos, he did not get to revel in the moment he created, and he’s largely being written out of Firefly’s history. So, space buffs, as you celebrate Blue Ghost, go ahead and pour one out for Max. He deserves it. Hopefully, you enjoyed this story. If so, please share it and subscribe to Core Memory. We want to do more of this for you and need your help. Thanks! |