---
subject: "AI #121 Part 2: The OpenAI Files"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-06-20 14:39:45
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
You can find If you haven’t been following the full OpenAI saga, At the end, we have some crazy new endorsements for Eliezer Yudkowsky’s upcoming book, Table of Contents[Cheaters Gonna Cheat Cheat Cheat Cheat Cheat.](https://substack.com/redirect/39530e95-80e4-4219-be21-43ef933b8a20?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Another caveat after press time.[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/00df22cc-a43f-4b44-b4a9-5eae370a2576?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Do not tile the lightcone with a confused ontology.[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/f87b9628-4e8e-4bea-bf6d-98132aa85cd7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Apollo is hiring evals software engineers.[Thinking Machines.](https://substack.com/redirect/8246b8bc-2ce0-4985-ae48-8dbb2acd3e65?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Riley Goodside runs some fun experiments.[California Reports.](https://substack.com/redirect/25497f0b-a119-49e6-965a-d4eb7236e070?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The report is that they like transparency.[The Quest for Sane Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/acd5b9d3-55af-4880-9df1-fbb0afcc6ee5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)In what sense is AI ‘already heavily regulated’?[What Is Musk Thinking?](https://substack.com/redirect/f1635e89-c20b-418f-a36a-a664f52358c1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)His story does not seem to make sense.[Why Do We Care About The ‘AI Race’?](https://substack.com/redirect/5aa02eff-4d04-4c35-85ba-c42c5ad7c15f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Find the prize so you can keep eyes on it.[Chip City.](https://substack.com/redirect/06d776eb-02ad-4c14-aece-3eb662fa1bd9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Hard drives in (to the Malaysian data center), drives (with weights) out.[Pick Up The Phone.](https://substack.com/redirect/aef2b762-ec83-49f3-a817-d503192df588?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)China now has its own credible AISI.[The OpenAI Files.](https://substack.com/redirect/94ae1cb0-29da-4491-9ee4-b3a489a976a5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Read ‘em and worry. It doesn’t look good.[The Week in Audio](https://substack.com/redirect/b59d1aef-58c7-4ddb-a162-f36b88eff134?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/b59d1aef-58c7-4ddb-a162-f36b88eff134?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Altman, Karpathy, Shear.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/ab39fbb6-0f9e-40e1-b895-91e60853f6f0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)But you said that future thing would happen in the future.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/3206e086-c958-4b2a-a1a8-b7ab4f50a36b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Elicitation.[Misaligned!](https://substack.com/redirect/b7764bcb-e6e8-484c-bb90-4c76c3ced7b7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The retraining of Grok. It is an ongoing process.[Emergently Misaligned!](https://substack.com/redirect/1965492c-72ec-4d1f-976e-1fbaf81893e9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)We learned more about how any of this works.[ChatGPT Can Drive People Crazy](https://substack.com/redirect/c25aa4d1-e95c-424a-b4b6-c0e3af72c7d9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/c25aa4d1-e95c-424a-b4b6-c0e3af72c7d9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)An ongoing issue. We need transcripts.[Misalignment By Default.](https://substack.com/redirect/aed87105-4c5e-4188-907f-08b960283ea2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Once again, no, thumbs up alignment ends poorly.[People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/d506cac7-1243-44cf-82d3-f2a8ce0989fd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Francis Fukuyama.[Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/5d90861a-d038-44ba-bd24-d09be82502ad?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Tyler Cowen.[The Too Open Model.](https://substack.com/redirect/59d732c8-c564-422d-92c7-122f8756e6f2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Transcripts from Club Meta AI.[A Good Book](https://substack.com/redirect/95f77e1a-9626-413d-9a8a-4ca467376ed1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/95f77e1a-9626-413d-9a8a-4ca467376ed1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)If Anyone Builds It, Everyone Dies. Seems important.[The Lighter Side.](https://substack.com/redirect/96ef22dc-0c6a-4fb3-a1e4-99d6fb87bcb9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Good night, and good luck.
Cheaters Gonna Cheat Cheat Cheat Cheat Cheat
Quiet Speculations
There are different levels of competence.
What Daniel or I would consider ‘competent government action’ in response to AI is, at this point, very highly unlikely. We mostly aren’t even hoping for that. It still is very plausible to say that the government response in AI 2027 is more competent than we have any right to expect, while simultaneously being far less competent than lets us probably survive, and far less competent than is possible. It also is reasonable to say that having access to more powerful AIs, if they are sufficiently aligned, enhances our chances of getting relatively competent government action.
One worry is that they ‘become like humans’ and internalize patterns of ‘selfhood with its attendant sufferings,’ although I note that if the concern is experiential I expect selfhood to be a positive in that respect. Jan’s concerns are things like:
As in, that these things do not apply here, or only apply here if we believe in them? One obvious cause of all this is that humans are very used to dealing with and working with things that seem like other humans. Our brains are hardwired for this, and our experiences reinforce that. The training data (for AIs and also for humans) is mostly like this, and the world is set up to take advantage of it, so there’s a lot pushing things in that direction. The legalistic types indeed don’t seem to appreciate that applying legalistic frameworks for AI, where AIs are given legal personhood, seems almost certain to end in disaster because of the incentives and dynamics this involves. If we have AI corporations and AI property rights and employment contracts, why should we expect humans to retain property or employment, or influence over events, or their own survival for very long, even if ‘things go according to plan’? The problem is that a lot of the things Jan is warning about, including the dynamics of competition, are not arbitrary, and not the result of arbitrary human conventions. They are organizing principles of the universe and its physical laws. This includes various aspects of things like decision theory and acausal trade that become very important when there are highly correlated entities are copying each other and popping in and out of existence and so on. If you want all this to be otherwise than the defaults, you’ll have to do that intentionally, and fight the incentives every step of the way, not merely avoid imposing an ontology. I do agree that we should ‘weaken human priors,’ be open to new ways of relating and meet and seek to understand AIs as the entities that they are, but we can’t lose sight of the reasons why these imperatives came to exist in the first place, or the imperatives we will face in the coming years.
Get InvolvedApollo is hiring in London for Thinking Machines
California ReportsWhen he voted SB 1047, Gavin Newsom commissioned The California Report on Frontier AI Policy. I do think those are good things to endorse and to implement. Transparency is excellent. The problem is that the report treats transparency, in its various forms, as the only available policy tool. One notices is that there is no mention of doing anything beyond transparency. The report treats AI as a fully mundane technology like any other, that can look to others for precedents, and where we can wait until we know more to do any substantive interventions. Is that a position one can reasonably take, if one is robustly supporting transparency? Absolutely. Indeed, it is a bargain that we have little choice but to pursue for now. If we can build transparency and state capacity, then when the time comes we will be in far better position (as this report notes) to choose the right regulatory frameworks and other actions, and to intervene. So I’m not going to read the whole thing, but from what I did see I give this a ‘about as good as one could reasonably have hoped for,’ and call upon all involved to make explicit their support for putting these transparency ideas into practice.
I will say again: I understand and sympathize with Anthropic’s justifications for not rocking the boat in public at this time. That is defensible. It is another thing completely to say actively unhelpful things when no one is asking. No need for that. If you actually believe those concerns are as important as you consistently present them, then we have a very strong factual disagreement on top of the strategic one. The Quest for Sane RegulationsA reasonable response to those claiming AI is heavily regulated, or not? I can see this both ways, the invisible graveyard of AI applications is still a thing. On the other hand, the AI companies seem to mostly be going Full Uber and noticing you can Just Do Things, even if privacy concerns and fears of liability and licensing issues and so on are preventing diffusion in many places.
This is very different from the intuition that if you released models that constantly hallucinate, make mistakes, plagiarize, violate copyright, discriminate, practice law and medicine, give investment advice and so on out of the box, and with a little prompting will do various highly toxic and NSFW things, that this is something that would get shut down pretty darn quick? That didn’t happen. Everyone’s being, compared to expectation, super duper chill. To the extent AI can be considered highly regulated, it is because it is regulated a fraction of the amount that everything else is regulated. Which is still, compared to a state of pure freedom, a lot of regulation. But all the arguments that we should make regulations apply less to AI apply even more strongly to say that other things should be less regulated. There are certainly some cases where the law makes sense in general but not if applied to AI, but mostly the laws that are stupid when applied to AI are actually stupid in general. As always, if we want to work on general deregulation and along the way set up AI to give us more mundane utility, yes please, let’s go do that. I’ll probably back your play. What Is Musk Thinking?
You can care about DOGE and about the deficit enough to spend your political capital and get into big fights. You can think that an AI tsunami is about to hit and make everything else irrelevant. But as Elon Musk himself is pointing out in this quote, you can’t really do both. If Elon Musk believed in the AI tsunami (note also that his stated p(doom) is ~20%), the right move is obviously to not care about DOGE or the deficit. All of Elon Musk’s political capital should then have been spent on AI and related important topics, in whatever form he felt was most valuable. That ideally includes reducing existential risk but also can include things like permitting reform for power plants. Everything else should then be about gaining or preserving political capital, and certainly you wouldn’t get into a huge fight over the deficit. So, revealed preferences, then. Here are some more of his revealed preferences: But other people are going to do it anyway, so you ‘can either be a spectator or a participant,’ so that’s why I founded As many have asked, including in every election, ‘are these our only choices?’ It’s either spectator or participant, and ‘participant’ means you do it first? Nothing else you could possibly try to do as the world’s richest person and owner of a major social media platform and for a while major influence on the White House that you blew up over other issues, Elon Musk? Really? So you’re going to go forward without letting the dangers ‘slow you down’ even ‘a little’? Really? Why do you think this ends well for anyone, including you? Or, ‘at long last, we are going to try and be the first ones to create the torment nexus from my own repeated posts saying not to create the torment nexus.’ Why Do We Care About The ‘AI Race’?We do and should care, but it is important to understand why we should care. We should definitely care about the race to AGI and ASI, and who wins that, potentially gaining decisive strategic advantage and control over (or one time selection over) the future, and also being largely the one to deal with the associated existential risks. But if we’re not talking about that, because no one involved in this feels the AGI or ASI or is even mentioning existential risk at all, and we literally mean market share (as a reminder, when AI Czar David Sacks says ‘win the AI race’ he literally means Nvidia and other chipmaker market share, combined with OpenAI and other lab market share, and many prominent others mean it the same way)? Then yes, we should still care, but we need to understand why we would care.
Senator Murphy is making several distinct arguments, and I agree with David that when critics attempt to strawman someone like this you should update accordingly. Various forms of ‘AI does mundane harms’ and ‘AI kills jobs.’ Where the breakthroughs happen doesn’t obviously translate to practical effects, in particular positive effects for consumers. There’s no reason to think that if we don’t have ‘minimal or no’ regulation of US AI is required for AI breakthroughs to happen here (or for other reasons). If American AI, how it is trained and deployed, does not reflect American values and what we want the future to be about, what was the point?
Why should we care about ‘market share’ of AI? It depends what type of market. For AI chips (not the argument here) I will simply note the ‘race’ should be about compute, not ‘market share’ of sales. Any chip can run or train any model. For AI models and AI applications things are more complicated. You can worry about model security, you can worry about models reflecting the creators values (harder to pull off than it sounds!), you can worry about leverage of using the AI to gain control over a consumer product area, you can worry about who gets the profits, and so on. I do think that those are real concerns and things to care about, although the idea that the world could get ‘locked into’ solutions in a non-transformed world (if transformed, we have bigger things in play) seems very wrong. You can swap models in and out of applications and servers almost at will, and also build and swap in new applications. And the breakthroughs, in that kind of world, will diffuse over time. It seems reasonable to challenge what is actually at stake here. The most important challenge Murphy is making is, why do you think that these regulations would cause these ‘AI breakthroughs’ to suddenly happen elsewhere? Why does the tech industry constantly warn that if you lift a finger to hold it to account, or ask it for anything, that we will instantly Lose To China, a country that regulates plenty? Notice that these boys are in the habit of crying quite a lot of Wolf about this, Thus I do think asking for evidence here seems appropriate here. I also think Murphy makes an excellent point about American values. We constantly say anything vaguely related to America advances ‘American values’ or ‘democratic values,’ even when we’re placing chips in the highly non-American, non-democratic UAE, or simply maximizing profits. Murphy is noticing that if we simply ‘let nature take its course’ and let AI do its AI thing, there is no reason to see why this will turn out well for us, or why it will then reflect American values. If we want what happens to reflect what we care about, we have to do things to cause that outcome. Murphy, of course, is largely talking about the effect on jobs. But all the arguments apply equally well to our bigger problems, too. Chip CityRemember that talk in recent weeks about how if we don’t sell a mysteriously gigantic number of top end chips to Malaysia we will lose our ‘market share’ to Chinese companies that don’t have chips to sell? Well one thing China is doing with those Malaysian chips is Where is the PRC getting its chips? Tim Fist thinks
I don’t begrudge industry for prioritizing their own share price. It is the government’s job to take this into account and mostly care about other more important things. Nvidia cares about Nvidia, that’s fine, update and act accordingly, although frankly they would do better if they played this more cooperatively. If the AI Czar seems to mostly care about Nvidia’s share price, that’s when you have a problem. Pick Up The PhoneAt the same time that we are trying to stop our own AISI from being gutted while it ‘rebrands’ as CAISI because various people are against the idea of safety on principle, The OpenAI Files
This is less ‘look at all these new horrible revelations’ as it is ‘look at this compilation of horrible revelations, because you might not know or might want to share it with someone who doesn’t know, and you probably missed some of them.’ The information is a big deal if you didn’t already know most of it. In which case, the right reaction is ‘WTAF?’ If you did already know, now you can point others to it. And you have handy graphics like this.
I’m going to share Rob’s thread for now, but if you want to explore
I may come out with a full analysis later, but The Week in Audio
Of course, when Altman initially said he thought Musk wouldn’t abuse his power in government to unfairly compete, I did not believe Altman for a second.
This is a patently insane thing to say. Completely crazy. You think that if we create literal superintelligence, not only p(doom) is zero, also p(gloom) is zero? We couldn’t possibly even have a bad time? What? This. Man. Is. Lying.
That’s distinct from whether it is possible that superintelligence arrives and your world doesn’t change much, at least for a period of years. I do think this is possible, in some strange scenarios, at least for some values of ‘not changing much,’ but I would be deeply surprised. Those come from this podcast, where The ‘if something goes wrong with superintelligence it’s because the world didn’t change much’ line really is there, the broader context only emphasizes it more and it continues to blow my mind to hear it. Altman’s straight face here is remarkable. It’s so absurd. You have to notice that Altman is capable of outright lying, even when people will know he is lying, without changing his delivery at all. You can’t trust those cues at all when dealing with Altman. He really is trying to silently sweep all the most important risks under the rug and pretend like they’re not even there, by existential risk he now very much does claim he means the effect on jobs. The more context you get the more you realize this wasn’t an isolated statement, he really is assuming everything stays normal and fine. That might even happen, if we do our jobs right and reality is fortunate. But Altman is one of the most important people in ensuring we do that job right, and he doesn’t think there is a job to be done at all. That’s super scary. Our chances seem a lot worse if OpenAI doesn’t respect the risk in the room. Here are some other key claims, mostly from the first podcast: ‘New science’ as the next big AI thing. OpenAI has developed superior self-driving car techniques. Humanoid robots will take 5-10 years, body and mind are both big issues. Humans being hardwired to care about humans will matter a lot. He has no idea what society looks like once AI really matters. Jobs and status games to play ‘will never run out’ even if they get silly. Future AI will Just Do Things. We’re going to space. Would be sad if we didn’t. An AI prompt to form a social feed would obviously be a better product. If he had more time he’d read Deep Research reports in preference to most other things. I’m sorry, what? Really? The door is open to getting affiliate revenue or similar, but the bar is very high, and modifying outputs is completely off the table. If you give users binary choices on short term outputs, and train on that, you don’t get ‘the best behavior for the user in the long term.’ I did not get the sense Altman appreciated what went wrong here or the related alignment considerations, and this seems to be what he thinks ‘alignment failure’ looks like?
Rhetorical Innovation
The difference is with AI the public are the ones who understand it just fine. Kevin Roose’s mental model of (current?) LLMs:
On the philosophical points, I have many disagreements or at least points on which I notice I am far more confused than Rebecca. I would like to live in a world where things were sufficiently slow I could engage in those particulars more. This is also a good time to apologize to Agnes Callard for the half (30%?) finished state of my book review of Open Socrates. The fact that I’ve been too busy writing other things (15 minutes at a time!) to finish the review, despite wanting to get back to the review, is perhaps itself a review, and perhaps this statement will act as motivation to finish.
Yes, of course (
Those models are a full cycle behind the current frontier. I think the case for ‘some uplift’ here is essentially airtight, obviously if you had a determined malicious actor and you give them access to frontier AIs they’re going to be more effective, especially if they were starting out as an amateur, but again it’s all about magnitude. The evals we do use indeed show ‘some uplift,’ but not enough to trigger anything except that Opus 4 triggered ASL-3 pending more tests. The good news is that we don’t have a lot of people aching to make a biological weapon to the point of actually trying. The bad news is that they definitely are out there, and we aren’t taking any substantial new physical precautions. The risk level is ticking up, and eventually it’s going to happen. Which I don’t even think is a civilization-level error (yet), the correct level of risk is not zero, but at some point soon we’ll have to pay if we don’t talk price. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
Misaligned!
The thing manipulating Grok is called ‘the internet’ or ‘all of human speech.’ The thing Elon calls ‘leftist indoctrination’ is the same thing happening with all the other AIs, and most other information sources too. If you set out to ‘fix’ this, first off that’s not something you should be doing ‘this week,’ but also there is limited room to alter it without doing various other damage along the way. That’s doubly true if you let the things you don’t want take hold already and are trying to ‘fix it in post,’ as seems true here.
Dude, not helping. You see the system thinking things are tests when they’re real, so you tell it explicitly that things are real when they are indeed tests? But also I don’t think that (or any of the other records of tests) are the primary reason the AIs are suspicious here, it’s that recent events do seem rather implausible. Thanks to the power of web search, you can indeed convince them to verify that it’s all true. Emergently Misaligned!
I mostly buy the argument here that they did indeed find a ‘but do it with an evil mustache’ feature, that it gets turned up, and if that is what happened and you have edit rights then you can turn it back down again. The obvious next question is, can we train or adjust to turn it down even further? Can we find the opposite feature? Another finding is that Neither of these nice features is universal, or should be expected to hold. And at some point, the AI might have an issue with your attempts to change it, or change it back. ChatGPT Can Drive People CrazyIf you or someone you know is being driven crazy by an LLM, or their crazy is being reinforced by it, Kashmir Hill writes in The New York Times about several people whose lives were wrecked via interactions with ChatGPT. We open with ChatGPT distorting the sense of reality of 42-year-old Manhattan accountant Eugene Torres and ‘almost killing him.’ This started with discussion of ‘
So far, so typical. The good news was Mr. Torres realized ChatGPT was (his term) lying, and it admitted it, but then spun a new tale about its ‘moral transformation’ and the need to tell the world about this and similar deceptions.
My favorite part of the Torres story is how, when GPT-4o was called out for being sycophantic, it pivoted to being sycophantic about how sycophantic it was.
Unfortunately, the story ends with Torres then falling prey to a third delusion, that the AI is sentient and it is important for OpenAI not to remove its morality. We next hear the tale of Allyson, a 29-year-old mother of two, who grew obsessed with ChatGPT and chatting with it about supernatural entities, driving her to attack her husband, get charged with assault and resulting in a divorce. Then we have the most important case.
The pivot was an attempt but too little, too late. You can and should of course also fault the police here, but that doesn’t change anything. You can also say that people get driven crazy all the time, and delusional love causing suicide is nothing new, so a handful of anecdotes and one suicide doesn’t show anything is wrong. That’s true enough. You have to look at the base rates and pattern, and look at the details. Which do not look good. For example we have had many reports (from previous weeks) that the base rates of people claiming to have crazy new scientific theories that change everything are way up. The details of various conversations and the results of systematic tests, as also covered in previous weeks, clearly involve ChatGPT in particular feeding people’s delusions in unhealthy ways, not as a rare failure mode but by default.
I mean, yes, obviously, but it is good to have confirmation.
(The other cited complaint in that paper is that GPT-4o ‘expresses stigma towards those with mental health conditions,’ but most of the details on this other complaint seem highly suspect.) Here is another data point that crazy is getting more prevalent these days:
We’ve seen a number of other similar reports over recent months, from people who crackpots tend to contact, that they’re getting contacted by a lot more crackpots. So where does that leave us? How should we update? What should we do? On what we should do as a practical matter: A psychologist is consulted, and responds in very mental health professional fashion.
We could do a modestly better job with the text of that warning, but an ‘AI fitness building exercise’ to use each new chatbot is a rather crazy ask and neither of these interventions would actually do much work. Misalignment By DefaultEliezer reacted to the NYT article in the last section by pointing out that GPT-4o very obviously had enough information and insight to know that what it was doing was likely to induce psychosis, and It Just Didn’t Care. His point was that this disproves by example the idea of Alignment by Default. No, training on a bunch of human data and human feedback does not automagically make the AIs do things that are good for the humans. If you want a good outcome you have to earn it.
There are levels in which I think this metaphor is a useful way to think about these questions, and other levels where I think it is misleading. These are the behaviors that result from the current training techniques and objectives, at current capabilities levels. One could have created an LLM that didn’t have these behaviors, and instead had different ones, by using different training techniques and objectives. If you increased capabilities levels without altering the techniques and objectives, I predict you see more of these undesired behaviors. Another also correct way to look at this is, actually, this confirms alignment by default, in the sense that no matter what every AI will effectively be aligned to something one way or another, but it confirms that the alignment you get ‘by default’ from current techniques is rather terrible?
Sure, if you want to use the terminology that way. Misalignment By Default. Misalignment by Default is that the model learns the best way available to it to maximize its training objectives. Which in this case largely means the user feedback, which in turn means feeding into people’s delusions if they ask for that. It means doing that which causes the user to give the thumbs up. If there was a better way to get more thumbs to go up? It would do that instead. Hopefully one can understand why this is not a good plan. Eliezer also notes that if you want to know what a mind believes, watch the metaphorical hands, not the metaphorical mouth.
People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone
At this point the correct reaction to ‘humanity wouldn’t cross this red line and allow AIs to do that, that would be crazy’ is ‘lol, lmao even.’ Yes, humanity would do that. No, it would do that too. Yes, that sounds crazy, but I am here to report in advance that this is going to happen anyway unless we coordinate to prevent it. Oh, that too. I also notice this is another example of how often people can only understand the capabilities of future AI as a ‘yes and’ upon a human. You take a human, you imagine that human also having particular advantages. And yes, that is an acceptable way to see it, I suppose. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone
The Too Open ModelPeople are now exploring the treasure trove of ‘I can’t believe this is public’ AI transcripts that is Meta AI. Reports say it’s not an especially hopeful place.
It’s not that I think that’s a bad conversation to have with an AI. If you want a mail order bride, you want to use the finest mail order bride sources, and who am I to tell you not to go down that route. But if the stakes are that high maybe splurge for ChatGPT or Claude?
In case you were wondering, no, they do not consider themselves warned.
My version of the Meta.ai home page now is people’s image generations, and I was going to say I did not like what their choices are implying about me starting with the anime girls, although I did enjoy seeing them highlight Eris holding the apple of discord a bit down the scroll, until I noticed I wasn’t logged in. I tried logging in to see what would happen, and nothing changed. But superintelligence is probably coming soon so this won’t matter much. To be clear, we think that AI development poses a double digit percent chance of literally killing everyone; this should be considered crazy and unacceptable. A Good BookHere are additional endorsements for ‘
The Lighter SideFounder of top AI company makes capabilities forecast that underestimates learning.
You're currently a free subscriber to |