---
subject: "The Erratic Flight Patterns Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-09-06 10:55:00
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Ted (T.M.) Brown is a writer in Brooklyn for the New York Times, the New Yorker, and other places. He writes the weekly substack on visual culture Lately, my TikTok algorithm has been feeding me an unending reel of people fighting on airplanes. Why is this interesting? Some of them are the same fight caught from multiple angles, some are the same video lifted from the original source or lifted from another lifter. TikTok has really only sped up the social media machine’s ability to obscure primary sources. It started with jokes and memes and has now moved onto hard news. There are times when my little screen feels like a digital palimpsest, people reposting the same video on top of different accounts over and over again. WITI Classifieds: We are experimenting with running some weekly classifieds in WITI. If you’re interested in running an ad, Why Are Formats Interesting? Join Storythings & The Content Technologist to find out how to make great B2B formats, in NYC on 26th Sept Interpreting the internet for the tasteful reader. Join 23,000+ subscribers who rely on Dirt for their cultural alpha. But anyway, there have apparently been a lot of fights and insane shit happening on airplanes since we started traveling in earnest again a couple of years ago. Watching people get their phones out to start recording at even a whiff of conflict is something to behold. It feels like one of those scenes out of a Western where the hero draws a gun in a saloon and soon the entire place is pointing their six-shooters in his direction. And before you think I’m gonna talk about her: that “ There’s Man, COVID huh? I think we forget that a global existential crisis sort of drove everyone insane for a couple of years, and that no state or cultural body has said that, hey maybe we should investigate exactly what the aftermath of something like that does to a society’s mental and emotional wellbeing. Culturally, COVID was both a hyperlocal contextual event and had aspects of what So COVID is something we experienced on an individual and regional level, i.e. The perpetual sound of ambulance sirens and sense of doom in NYC were something that my friends in Miami and Denver couldn’t quite empathize with, just like the hardcore lockdowns my friends in London faced were unfamiliar to me. But then there was this simultaneous global sense that we were all succumbing to this disease as one, that life would just be one slow decline from here on out. The out of focus end to the crisis was also relative and disjointed, and only added to the personal and ambient anxiety we all felt. Some people were able to go back to their lives while others still languished. We’ve really only been back at this on a global scale for, what, 18 months? So if we can’t point to masks, then what is it? The podcast TrueAnon had a great episode on the phenomenon—it’s on Patreon but they’re the only The velocity and virality of these videos don’t exactly help, either. They’ve become such a surefire way to juice engagement that people are creating fake videos of people doing wild shit on airplanes. The most annoying—and so clearly staged to the point where I’m not sure I haven’t been overestimating people’s understanding of reality for the last decade—was the woman who That air travel has become the nexus of a bunch of different plagues—concentration of wealth, rapidly tearing social fabric, social media—and that we’re seeing the whole thing play out on video feels like watching society spiral in miniature. It’s become so bad that the original and the reflection are indistinguishable, one chasing the other like the most irritating feedback loop known to man. (TB) — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Ted (TB) — Why is this interesting? is a daily email from Noah Brier & Colin Nagy (and friends!) about interesting things. If you’ve enjoyed this edition, please consider forwarding it to a friend. If you’re reading it for the first time, consider subscribing. You're currently a free subscriber to |