---
subject: "The Case of the Ghostly Photographs"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-07-13 13:02:26
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
I’m on vacation this week, so I thought I would republish this piece from a couple of years ago that I liked but didn’t get a whole lot of traction. See you next week with a new post! At the very end of the Like his most famous creation, Sherlock Holmes, Doyle had assembled in this 1922 manifesto a significant pile of evidence in favor of his case. He had sifted through scientific data, solicited testimony from dozens of witnesses, and dismissed every possible argument against his theory. He concludes with a thundering summation:
That’s right, in 1923, the creator of the world’s most brilliantly rational detective stuck his neck out in public on behalf of psychic photography (also known as spirit photography)— the belief that cameras could capture ghosts on film. Doyle, you see, had long been an enthusiast for the paranormal. In the 1890s, between writing The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes and The Memoirs of Sherlock Holmes, he joined the Society for Psychical Research and spent some time hunting for poltergeists in the English countryside. By the time the First World War rolled around, he had joined the spiritualist movement, whose promises that one could contact spirits beyond the grave gave people great solace in a time of terrible loss. Doyle’s book, When it was invented in the middle of the 1800s, photography became an important tool for grieving people. Today, when we lose someone, we celebrate them, in large part, through photographs. We play a slideshow at the funeral home or pore quietly through old photo albums. Photography gives us a record of our lives, even when they’re over. When photography was invented, people almost immediately recognized its potential to keep memories alive beyond the grave. It became common in Victorian England, for example, for people to take But what about people who were already dead? Could they be photographed? In 1861, a Boston photographer named Mumler put on a good show — he claimed to channel the spirits, and said that he couldn’t do too many photos in a day because it was too taxing. People came to him from all over the country, asking him to capture them alongside the spirits of the dead. The most common versions of Mumler’s spirit photos featured a living person with a ghostly presence hovering behind or alongside them. We see a man named Bronson Murray with a woman gently touching his shoulders: And a Mrs. Sawyer, with a ghost perhaps lowering her dead child into her arms: Sometimes, Mumler pretended that a photograph could summon the spirits of the dead, as in this image: Or in this photo of the “spirit-wife” of a Mr. Tinkham: Mumler’s pictures weren’t always very well-executed, as in this woman with “spirit arms” superimposed over her head: Eventually, skeptics killed Mumler’s business. One of his customers realized that the “spirit” hovering behind him was a man he knew, who was very much still alive. Another man One of Mumler’s last clients, after the trial, was his most famous. He photographed Mary Todd Lincoln (a long-time believer in the spirit world who had held seances in the White House) in 1869, placing her assassinated husband behind her (Mumler, for his part, claimed that he had no idea who she was when he took the picture). It was the last photo of Mary Todd Lincoln ever taken, and she apparently cherished it until she died: William Mumler may have been the first spirit photographer, but he wasn’t the last. In Britain, a series of photographers started making images of supposed ghosts. Frederick Hudson of London introduced the art into London, publishing an album of spirit photographs: A Frenchman named Edouard Buguet claimed to have taken this image of the ghost of Napoleon III in the 1880s. Buguet would later be arrested for fraud; his confession was widely published. And Sybell Corbett took this infamous photo of the Combermere Abbey library, supposedly showing the recently deceased Lord Combermere (in reality, it probably shows somebody who briefly sat in the chair during the long-exposure photo process): Despite pretty clear evidence of charlatanism in the spirit-photography game, there was still interest in photos of ghosts into the twentieth century. The last major practitioner, William Hope, from Crewe, England, was a little more sophisticated than the sloppy hucksters that preceded him. Hope He was also closely connected to the spiritualist movement, which used his photos as proof that there was a spirit world. Hope’s photos, like the spirit photography that preceded them, duped grieving people who were eager to believe that their loved ones were out there somewhere. Hope’s images were, like the others, just double exposures. Here’s a “spirit photo” featuring the Crewe Circle of spiritualists, including Arthur Conan Doyle and his wife in the center of the group: Many of the spiritualists who bought into Hope’s photos were prominent, well-educated Englishmen. In addition to Doyle, a number of famous scientists promoted Hope’s pictures as the real thing. But they weren’t the real thing. Harry Price, a young magician, proved that Hope was a con man in 1922. He had Hope take this photo of him and a “spirit:” When Price came to the studio, Hope had gone through the same procedure he did with everyone, inviting him to inspect the camera and purporting to use Price’s sealed plates. But Price had brought plates that were marked with a manufacturer’s logo, and, using his magician’s sleight-of-hand skills, had marked Hope’s plates, too. When the resulting photos didn’t show either mark, he knew that Hope had somehow switched out the plates for older ones with the “ghostly” image on them. Price’s findings were But Doyle, the creator of literature’s greatest sleuth, wouldn’t have his faith shaken so easily. He was a true believer in spirit photography, having commissioned a number of them: The defense of spirit photography wasn’t Arthur Conan Doyle’s only public attempt to prove that the supernatural was real. Especially in the last decade of his life (he died in 1930), Doyle became one of the most prominent promoters of supernatural hoaxes. Among his spiritualist works are I guess it’s one thing to create the world’s most rational man, and another thing to be rational in one’s own life. This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are three ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: You can share the newsletter with others: You can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week! You're currently a free subscriber to |