---
subject: "Probably not"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-11-19 03:34:19
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
In the last two formal exams I wrote for Maths (in Class X and XII), I secured close to 97% marks. I think it would be fair to say I was good at the subject. But while I enjoyed solving complex equations, it was Probability—the branch of Maths that means possibilities and almost never produces a single answer—that I absolutely detested.
From being just on paper (in classrooms), these problems have become just as nightmarish to deal with in my real life. For instance, the odds of a railway ticket confirmation or the toddler getting admission in my alma mater.
Or when probability says there is a 70% chance of recovering from facial palsy in eight weeks. Which side of the 70 are you on when you’re in the eighth week with no sign of recovery? Did you miscalculate this one?
After the last few stints, I have refrained from thinking of events in terms of probabilities. But last week, the problem made a vicious comeback.
While I pick which probable outcome is most likely, here’s the recap of this week’s stories at The Ken.
On Monday, my colleague Anand did some mad math to show that the probability of someone achieving the coveted dream of FIRE (Financial Independence, Retire Early) in India is very low. He isn’t saying so himself; the topmost financial planners of the country are. Read [this](https://the-ken.com/story/you-can-retire-at-40-and-thats-a-lie/%20?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) blockbuster myth-breaking piece.
On Tuesday, Rounak delved into the problems plaguing Paytm. Between September 2022 and March 2023, the company doubled the issue of its personal loans, accounting for almost 12% of the company’s revenues. Why then is the fintech giant cutting off its dependence on personal loans that are meant to be its next big revenue generator? What is the alternative, and is it worthy? Rounak [reports](https://the-ken.com/story/paytm-cant-count-on-what-brought-on-its-turnaround/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter).
On Wednesday, I wrote about a recent decision by the National Medical Council (now put on hold) where it slashed the prospect of new medical colleges in certain states and capped existing seats. In a country where medical education costs have doubled in a decade and doctors are scarce to get in most non urban areas, restricting seats could create an artificial shortage and do some irrevocable damage, [argue](https://the-ken.com/story/100k-mbbs-seats-for-2-1m-aspirants-yet-indias-fix-is-the-opposite-of-what-youd-expect/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) medical experts.
Two public digital lending platforms—OCEN and ONDC—have a common goal: to get the country’s 64 million micro, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs) access to credit. But despite their synergies, they don’t want to join hands. Why are they not working together and what’s at stake if they don’t? Gaurav [reports](https://the-ken.com/story/same-borrowers-same-lenders-same-problems-but-indias-two-public-credit-platforms-wont-join-hands-to-fix-them/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter).
To wrap up the week, my youngest colleague and fellow Scrabbler, Abhirami, had an important update for readers. Healthcare costs are rising but health insurance premiums are skyrocketing. They have increased anywhere between 15% and 60% since 2021. And the most important bit here: a high probability of the cost escalating by 50% in the next few years. Read the how’s and why’s [here](https://the-ken.com/story/healthcare-costs-are-rising-but-health-insurance-premiums-are-skyrocketing/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter).
That’s it for this week folks. We will be back on Monday with more riveting deep dive stories.
Cheers,
Alifiya
[alifiya@the-ken.com](mailto:alifiya@the-ken.com)
What you just read is the personalised daily introduction to The Ken's story. Written by a different person each day. Often insightful, sometimes witty, and very rarely boring. Someone sent this to you? [Sign up for free](https://the-ken.com/?modal=register&utm_source=footer&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=morning_email_ind_recap). [Dont like these? You can unsubscribe](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/unsubscribe/?user_id=2349339&data=89c7ZaEbjxfzc-pqfQU7sak_u-m92cNeNCz5SW2D0VVoMDAwdTAwMB27D8OhMWsQTJ-etcrPYew9S5dqddugIbluZuRDJc4ipc2-bNYG2RCWB_ko7B_h9TdMWxmZdEYxl2tNcLsIyh5GFTrGTEtnJi4_w_KTxclhSLGcV_fWpRIvj3zP-zrP9CyNehyarWox2EKi9zTqqLJe80TY_Zwz3D3MemQJlEaa9r0o_xP7N7GPRUSJbw2IELWVGUYrZBW_29eCsVyqn8DfVT5qccEk7pvIaOG0_UiPXonL6zksJCz5I3gPAqcY5l5ZnfLCLMsgSd8yJAsYN-I0sQv9rPup1aZ4raZ_ui0oDCwCFfYd3NpljLB3KeSOHVQ57-tgrx52hP2U5x2F10M_kkxXjtkzV8aaU_87zMYbUs86ifaBbycWOwx9vEkU14BB_ukb0Sn0z0qc_h5K7-KWG4sdR4EK5uSTlEbMxCuE7lX8G_arGJiHBYUxJwpZZGHbEAgMKlS9RrXViwKU3kN05XP3cgIemROYjUDWa4jIbKT6xKyb9AVKgBl58iCoPQU1uTZNUvAO16QeszOrCNI=) Dont want to hear from us again? [ Unsubscribe from our emails here](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/?user_id=2349339&data=q3iL56I93AWcUnC-x9L9oFGQKoMB8QDgaIuBqB8cxFJoMDAwdTAwMCTCoQOOzZbWTY9Yu9zga6yTMSkLtNsojI-LNcuU0QNChdKyw0uPOyHLFd7p6sP-h-57143G6cpNTS7sVAergQRaXFHy3jIzfdoVrdq_ZjHq3fnE_6qK5snJep-mr_uGeDK-OENj076mKEGoqbTFwnMgAUj_kRmVIZNAI-HZ4niCHO6LagvkQHiLQYpn6_BSgBBvLBOAzj3zj6bqPtlSwgjDXFKmldXvY0YVlKwg79FeI4xgcqnMc-_j-qDB1q1Md50Hk-8hPUu93XvfebCVk3HF9QLHcGChBQet5JcVDyktir4ywbPnjdXzNxt1FL3eihWmygm64RY2gHLxD2VTRfkUADx0QA7zCEpwLy06LOpJ60KpBaHs-VHF5BdYHcYvV02QCWdvjBqMEz_fqn8QkJ0eDn7iWCz3i4_cnPU2WMi6Cwg9k14XAcQhn5kFZD4bu-eGBlSHjkmNr3gt3xQ-ILVPSDcjtznZjQR8ILfMvKRUU26i3TOe-sFYg62k772Jng==).
Something wrong? Tell us at [support@the-ken.com](mailto:support@the-ken.com)