---
subject: "AI #47: Meet the New Year"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-01-11 14:11:16
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Will be very different from the old year by the time we are done. This year, it seems like various continuations of the old one. Sometimes I look back on the week, and I wonder how so much happened, while in other senses very little happened. Table of ContentsIntroduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. A high variance game of chess. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. What even is productivity? GPT-4 Real This Time. GPT store, teams accounts, privacy issues, plagiarism. Liar Liar. If they work, why aren’t we using affect vectors for mundane utility? Fun With Image Generation. New techniques, also contempt. Magic: The Generating. Avoiding AI artwork proving beyond Hasbro’s powers. Copyright Confrontation. OpenAI responds, lawmakers are not buying their story. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. Deepfakes going the other direction. They Took Our Jobs. Translators, voice actors, lawyers, games. Usual stuff. Get Involved. Misalignment museum. Introducing. Rabbit, but why? In Other AI News. Collaborations, safety work, MagicVideo 2.0. Quiet Speculations. AI partners, questions of progress rephrased. The Quest for Sane Regulation. It seems you can just lie to the House of Lords. The Week in Audio. Talks from the New Orleans safety conference. AI Impacts Survey. Some brief follow-up. Rhetorical Innovation. Distracting from other harms? Might not be a thing. Aligning a Human Level Intelligence is Still Difficult. The human alignment tax. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. Foil escape attempts? Won’t Get Fooled Again. Deceptive definitions of deceptive alignment. People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone. The indifference of the universe. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Sigh. The Wit and Wisdom of Sam Altman. Endorsement of The Dial of Progress. The Lighter Side. Batter up.
Language Models Offer Mundane UtilityWordPress now has something called Jetpack AI, which is powered by GPT-3.5-Turbo. It is supposed to help you write in all the usual ways. You access it by creating an ‘AI Assistant’ block. The whole blocks concept rendered their editor essentially unusable, but one could paste in quickly to try this out.
I asked about which games were used for training, and he said it didn’t much matter whether you used top level games, low level games or a mix, there seems to be some limit for this architecture and model size.
Tyler Cowen links My experience with Phind for non-coding purposes is that it has been quite good at being a GPT-4-level quick, up-to-date tool for asking questions where Google was never great and is getting worse, and so far has been outperforming Perplexity.
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
Some noticeable patterns here. Impressive that plain queries are down to 0%.
I do not understand Robin’s critique. Suppose consultants suddenly get 25% more done at higher quality. Why should we expect generally higher consultant pay even at equilibrium? You can enter or exit the consultant market, often pretty easily, so in long run compensation should not change other than compositionally. In the short run, the increase in quality and decrease in cost should create a surplus of consultants until supply and demand can both adjust. If anything that should reduce overall pay. Those who pioneer the new tech should do better, if they can translate productivity to pay, but consultants charge by the hour and people won’t easily adjust willingness to pay based on ‘I use ChatGPT.’
Well, yes, if we use Hanson’s definition of marginal productivity as the dollar value of the last provided hour of work. Before 10 people did the work and they were each worth $50/hour. Now 7 people can do that same work, then there’s no more work people want to hire someone for right now, so the ‘marginal productivity’ went down. GPT-4 Real This Time
GPT Teams is now available at $25/person/month, with some extra features. Wait, some say. No training on your data? What does that say about the Plus tier?
Yes. They have been clear on this. The ‘opt out of training’ button has been very clear. You can use the API if you value your privacy so much. If you want a consumer UI, OpenAI says, you don’t deserve privacy from training, although they do promise an actual human won’t look. I mean, fair play. If people don’t value it, and OpenAI values the data, that’s Coase. Will I upgrade my family to ‘Teams’ for this? I don’t know. It’s a cheap upgrade, but also I have never hit any usage limits.
Folding entirely? Looking for a job? No, no, don’t give up, if you are on the application side it is time to build. No one is using custom GPTs. It seems highly unlikely this will much change. Good wrappers can do a lot more, there are a lot more degrees of freedom and other tools one can integrate, and there are many other things to build. Yes, you are going to constantly have Google and Microsoft and OpenAI and such trying to eat your lunch, but that is always the situation.
This is not the place to go too deep into many of the details surrounding the whole case, which I may or may not do at another time. Instead here I want to briefly discuss the question of general policy. What to do if the AI is pointing out that most academics at least technically committed plagiarism? Ackman points out that there is a mile of difference between ‘technically breaking the citation rules’ on the level of a spelling error, which presumably almost everyone does (myself included), lifting of phrases and then theft of central ideas or entire paragraphs and posts. There’s plagiarism and then there’s Plagiarism. There’s also a single instance of a seemingly harmless mistake versus a pattern of doing it over and over again in half your papers. For spelling-error style mistakes, we presumably need mass forgiveness. As long as your rate of doing it is not massively above normal, we accept that mistakes were made. Ideally we’d fix it all, especially for anything getting a lot of citations, in the electronic record. We have the technology. Bygones. For the real stuff, the violations that are why the rules exist, the actual theft of someone’s work, what then? That depends on how often this is happening. If this is indeed common, we will flat out need Truth and Reconciliation. We will need to essentially say that, at least below some high threshold that most don’t pass, everyone say what they did with the AI to help them find and remember it, and then we are hitting the reset button. Don’t do it again. Truth, in various forms, is coming for quite a lot of people once AI can check the data. What can withstand that? What cannot? We will find out. A lot of recent history has been us discovering that something terrible, that was always common, was far worse and more common than we had put into common knowledge, and also deciding that it was wrong, and that it can no longer be tolerated. Which by default is a good thing to discover and a good thing to figure out. The problem is that our survival, in many forms, has long depended on many things we find despicable, starting with Orwell’s men with guns that allow us to sleep soundly in our beds and going from there. Liar LiarScott Alexander writes I’ve covered this before. It is exciting work. I do not have hope that it can be used in the obvious fashion, where you tell the AIs to always be honest so your AIs are always honest and you never have to worry about them. That is the sort of thing I expect to fail at exactly the wrong time, to get selected against whenever it is used, and to engender a false sense of security even if it does work. It is very possible to be fully honest while using your superior intellect to outsmart everyone. And as I discovered in Diplomacy, it being common knowledge you cannot lie is not obviously a disadvantage. Who wouldn’t want to put an AI that couldn’t lie in a position of trust and power? The advantage is even bigger, of course, if it turns out you can lie after all. Scott’s coverage drove home to me that we are sleeping on this research. Not in the sense that this will stop us all from dying or let us fully understand AIs. It might help, but we are a long way off, and that all takes time. I’m thinking in the Mundane Utility section. This seems highly useful, for making best use of current AIs, today. Fun with Image Generation
Some good results, relative to general expectations: He reports he got lucky initially, as is usually the case for a new seemingly successful technique, everything is finicky, by default nothing ever properly replicates, but it seems worth exploring more.
Amazing that people keep telling that story even now. I suppose they will keep telling it right up until the end.
I suppose it is interesting that they used Magic cards extensively in their early days as opposed to other sources. It makes sense that they would be a good data source, if you assume they didn’t worry about copyright at all. MidJourney has been exceptionally clear that it is going to train on copyrighted material. All of it. Assume that they are training on everything you have ever seen. Stop being surprised, stop saying you ‘caught’ them ‘red handed.’ We can be done with Similarly, yes, They had a handy incomplete list of things that got copied, with some surprises. I’m happy that Ex Machina and Live Die Repeat made the cut. That implies that at least some of a reasonably long tail is covered pretty well. Can we get a list of who is and isn’t available? If you think that’s not legal and you want to sue, then by all means, sue. I’d also say that if your reporter was ‘banned multiple times’ for their research, then perhaps the first one is likely a fair complaint and the others are you defying their ban? What about the thing where you say ‘animated toys’ and you get Toy Story characters, and if you didn’t realize this and used images of Woody and Buzz Magic: The GeneratingThe actual fight this week over Magic and AI art is the accusation that Wizards is using AI art in its promotional material. They initially denied this. No one believed them. People were convinced they are wrong or lying, and it’s AI:
The post with that picture has now been deleted.
They claim they will have nothing to do with AI art in any way for any reason. Yet this is far from the first such incident where something either slipped through or willfully disregarded.
I actually sympathize. I worked at Wizards briefly in R&D. You don’t have to do that to know everyone is overworked and overburdened and underpaid. Yes, you think it is so obvious that something was AI artwork, or was created with the aid of AI. In hindsight, you are clearly right. And for now, yes, they probably should have spotted it in this case. But Wizards does thousands of pieces of artwork each year, maybe tens of thousands. If those tasked with doing the art try to take shortcuts, there are going to be cases where it isn’t spotted, and things are only going to get trickier. The temptation is going to be greater. One reason this was harder to catch is that this was not a pure MidJourney-style AI generation. This was, it seems, the use by a human of AI tools like photoshop to assist with some tasks. If you edit a human-generated image using AI tools, a lot of the detection techniques are going to miss it, until someone sees a telltale sign. Mistakes are going to happen. We are past the point where, for many purposes, AI art would outcompete human art, or at least where a human would sometimes want to use AI for part of their toolbox, if the gamers were down with AI artwork. Even for those who stick with human artists, who fully compensate them, we are going to face issues of what tools are and aren’t acceptable. Surely at a minimum humans will be using AI to try out ideas and see concepts or variants. Remember when artwork done on a computer was not real art? Times change. The good news for artists is that the gamers very much are not down for AI artwork. The bad news is that this only gets harder over time. Copyright Confrontation
I presume they are telling the truth about the negotiations. NYT would obviously prefer to get paid and gain a partner, if the price is right. I guess the price was wrong.
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
It’s not great. The problem has been around for a while thanks to photoshop, AI decreases the difficulty while making it harder to detect. I figured we’d have ‘generate nude of person X’ if anything more than we do right now, but I didn’t think X would be the person generating all that often, or did I think the issue would be ‘using the picture of Y as a template.’ But yeah, I suppose this will also happen, you sickos.
We are still at the point where there are videos and audio recordings that I would be confident are real, but a generic ‘person talking’ clip could easily be fake. They Took Our Jobs
If we do get to the point of widespread technological unemployment, we are not likely to handle it well, but it will be a bit before that happens. If it is not a bit before that happens, we will very quickly have much bigger problems than unemployment rates. On the particular issue of translation, what will happen, aside from lost jobs? The price of ‘low-quality’ translation will drop to almost zero. The price of high-quality translation will also fall, but by far less. This means two things. First, there will be a massive, massive win from real-time translation, from automatic translation, and from much cheaper human-checked translation, as many more things are available to more people in more ways in more languages, including the ability to learn, or to seek further skill or understanding. This is a huge game. Second, there will be substitution of low-quality work for high-quality work. In many cases this will be very good, the market will be making the right decision. In other cases, however, it will be a shame. It is plausible that Duolingo will be one of those situations, where the cost savings is not worth the drop in quality. I can unfortunately see our system getting the wrong answer here. The good news is that translation is going to keep improving. Right now is the valley of bad translation, in the sense that they are good enough to get used but miss a lot of subtle stuff. Over time, they’ll get that other stuff more and more, and also we will learn to combine them with humans more effectively when we want a very high quality translation. If you are an expert translator, one of the best, I expect you to be all right for a while. There will still be demand, especially if you learn to work with the AI. If you are an average translator, then yes, things are bad and they are going to get worse, and you need to find another line of work while you can.
All the technical protections being discussed, as far as I can tell, do not much matter. What matters is whether you open the door at all. Once you normalize using AI-generated voice, and the time cost of production drops dramatically for lower-quality performance, you are going to see a fast race to the bottom on the cost of that, and its quality will improve over time. So the basic question is what floor has been placed on compensation. Of course, if SAG-AFTRA did not make such a deal, then there are plenty of non-union people happy to license their voices on the cheap. So I don’t see how the voice actors ever win this fight. The only way I can see retaining voice actors is either if the technology doesn’t get there, as it certainly is not yet there for top quality productions. Or, if the consumers take a strong enough stand, and boycott anyone using AI voices, that would also have power. Or government intervention could of course protect such jobs by banning use of AI voice synthesis, which to be clear I do not support. I don’t see how any contract saves you for long.
As we’ve discussed before, a private speedup is good, you can compete better or at least slack off. If everyone gets it, that’s potentially a problem, with way too much supply for the demand, crashing the price, again unless this generates a lot more work, which it might. I know that I consult and use lawyers a lot less than I would if they were cheaper or more productive, or if I had an unlimited budget. What you gonna do when they come for you?
Technological loss of particular jobs is, as many point out, nothing new. What is happening now to translators has happened before, and would even without AI doubtless happen again. John Henry was high on human spirit but the human spirit after him was fine. The question is what happens when the remaining jobs are meaningfully ‘ever narrowing’ faster than we open up new ones. That day likely is coming. Then what? We don’t have a good answer. Valve previously banned any use of AI in games on the Steam platform, to the extent of permanently banning games even for inadvertent inclusion of some placeholder AI work during an alpha.
For pre-generated AI content, the content is subject to the same rules as any other content. For live-generated AI content, you have to explain how you’re ensuring you won’t generate illegal content, and there will be methods to report violations. Adult only content won’t be allowed AI for now, which makes sense. That is not something Valve needs the trouble of dealing with. I applaud Valve for waiting until they understood the risks, costs and benefits of allowing new technology, then making an informed decision that looks right to me. I have a prediction market up on Get Involved
Introducing
Those attempting to answer Daniel are very not convincing. In Other AI News
People are acting like this is a pittance. That depends on the publisher. If the New York Times was given $1 million a year, that seems like not a lot,, but there are a lot of publishers out there. A million here, a million there, pretty soon you’re talking real money. Why should OpenAI’s payments, specifically, and for training purposes only without right of reprinting, have a substantial bottom line impact?
Yes, yes, people should obey the law and adhere to all rules and regulations. It seems Public Citizen is Quiet Speculations
What happens with AI partners?
Some mix of outcomes seems inevitable. The question is the what dominates. The baseline use case does seem like substitution to me, especially while a human cannot be found or convinced, or when someone lacks the motivation. And that can easily cause ongoing lack of sufficient motivation, which can snowball. We should worry about that. There is also, as I’ve noted, the ability of the AI to provide good practice or training, or even support and advice and a push to go out there, and also can make people perhaps better realize what they are missing. It is hard to tell. The new question here is within an existing relationship, what dominates outcomes there? The default is unlikely, I would think, to involve careful jealousy minimization. That is not how capitalism works. Until there is demand, then suddenly it might. If there becomes a clear norm of something like ‘you can use SupportiveCompanion.ai and everyone knows that is fine, if they’re super paranoid you use PlatonicFriend.ai, if your partner is down you can go with something less safety-pilled that is also more fun, if you know what you’re doing there’s always VirtualBDSM.ai but clear that with your partner and stay away from certain sections’ or what not, then that seems like it could go well.
I buy the central great stagnation argument. We used to do the stuff and build the things. Then we started telling people more and more what stuff they couldn’t do and what things they couldn’t build. Around 1973 this hit critical and we hit a great stagnation where things mostly did not advance or change much for a half century. These rules mostly did not apply to the world of bits including computer hardware, so people (like Paul Graham) were able to build lots of cool new digital things, that technology grew on an exponential and changed the world. Now AI is on a new exponential, and poised to do the same, and also poses a potential existential threat. But because of how exponentials work, it hasn’t transformed growth rates much yet. Indeed, Graham should be very familiar with this. Think of every start-up during its growth phase. Is it going to change the world, or is it having almost no impact on the world? Is it potentially huge or still tiny? Obviously both. Meanwhile, of course, once Graham pointed to ‘the debate’ explicitly in a reply, the standard reminders that most technology is good and moving too slowly, while a few technologies are less good and may be moving too fast.
To be fair, let’s try this again. There are three (or four?!) essential positions. Technology and progress are good and should move faster, including AI. Technology and progress are good and should move faster, excluding AI. Technology and progress are not good and should move slower everywhere. (Talk about things in general but in practice care only about regulations on AIs.)
It is true that the third group importantly exists, and indeed has done great damage to our society. The members of groups #1 and #4 then claim that in practice (or even in some cases, in they claim in theory as well) that only groups #1 and #3 exist, that this is the debate, and that everyone saying over and over they are in #2 (such as myself) must be in #3, and also not noticing that many #1s are instead in #4. ( So it’s fine to say that people in #3 exist, they definitely exist. And in the context of tech in general it is fine to describe this as ‘a side.’ But when clearly in the context of AI, and especially in response to a statement similar to ‘false dichotomy,’ this is misleading, and usually disingenuous. It is effectively an attempt to impose a false dichotomy, then claim others must take one side of it, and deny the existence of those who notice what you did there.
I like this partly for the twist of claiming a parallel of a 7-year-old now, rather than saying the obvious ‘the 7-year-old will grow up and become stronger and then be better, and the AI will also become stronger over time and learn to do things it can’t currently do’ parallel.
Wired, which has often been oddly AI skeptical, says ‘ The Quest for Sane RegulationsDid you know you can just brazenly and shamelessly lie to the House of Lords?
This is lying. This is fraud. Period. Have there been some recent advances in interpretability, such that we now have more optimism that we will be able to understand models more in the future than we expected a few months ago? Sure. It was a good year for incremental progress there. ‘Resolved this issue?’ Integrity is ‘secured’? The ‘logic of their conclusions is transparent’? This is flat out false. Nay, it is absurd. They know it. They know we know they know it. It is common knowledge that this is a lie. They don’t care. I want someone thrown in prison for this. From now on, remember this incident. This is who they are. Perhaps even more egregiously,
Article is light on other meaningful details and this does not seem so secret. It does seem like a great idea. Note who is being helpful or restrictive, and who very much is not, and who might or might not soon be the baddies at this rate.
The Week in Audio
AI Impacts Survey
There is always one claim in the list of future AI predictions that turns out to have already happened. In this case, it is ‘World Series of Poker,’ which was defined as ‘playing well enough to win the WSOP’. This has very clearly already happened. If you want to be generous, you can say ‘the AI is not as good at maximizing its winning percentage in the main event as Thomas Rigby or Phil Ivey because it is insufficiently exploitative’ and you would be right, because no one has put in a serious effort at making an exploitative bot and getting it to read tells is only now becoming realistic.
I found
Is this actually true? It is not as outlandish as it sounds. Often those who are rewarded strongly for X get anti-trained on almost everything else, and that goes double for a community of such people under extreme optimization pressures. If so, we are in rather deeper trouble. The defense against this is if those researchers need logic and epistemology as part of their work. Do they? Rhetorical InnovationIt is a common claim that existential risk ‘distracts’ from other worries. Erich Grunewald notes this is a fact question. His answer is that it is not, with five lines of argument and investigation. Policies enacted since existential risk concerns were raised continue to mostly focus on addressing mundane harms and capturing mundane utility. To the extent that there are policy initiatives that are largely motivated by existential risk and influenced by those with such worries, including the UK safety summit and the USA’s executive order, there has been strong effort to address mundane concerns. Meanwhile, there are lots of other things in the works to address mundane concerns, and they are mostly supported by those worried about existential risk. Search interest in AI ethics and current AI harms did not suffer at all during the period where there was most discussion of AI existential risk concerns in 2023.
A regression analysis showed roughly no impact. Twitter followers. If you look at the biggest ethics advocates, their reach expanded when existential risk concerns expanded. Fundraising for mundane or current harms organizations continues to be doing quite well. Parallels to environmentalism, which is pointed out as a reason for potential concern, as well as a common argument against concern. Do people say that climate change is a ‘distraction’ from current harms like air pollution or vice versa? Essentially no, but perhaps they should, and perhaps only in one direction? Concerns about climate seem to drive concerns about other environmental problems and make people want to help with them, and climate solutions help with other problems, Whereas concerns about local specific issues often causes people to act as if climate change does not much matter. We often see exactly this fight, as vital climate projects are held up for other ‘everything bagel’ concerns.
Ask the same about disagreements and debates. Who is being generic? Who is being specific? Which is appropriate here? Which one would you do more of it you were right?
I constantly see self-righteous claims that the foom idea has been ‘debunked’ or is otherwise now obviously false, and we need not worry about such an acceleration. No. We did get evidence that more extreme foom scenarios are less likely than we thought. The ‘strong form’ of the foom hypothesis, where those involved don’t see it coming at all, does seem substantially less likely to me. But the core hypothesis has not been anything like falsified. It remains the default, and the common sense outcome, that once AIs are sufficiently capable, at an inflection point near overall human capability levels, they will accelerate development of further capabilities and things will escalate rather quickly. This also remains the plan of the OpenAI superalignment team and the practical anticipation of many researchers. It might or might not happen to varying degrees, depending on whether the task difficulties accelerate faster than the ability to do the tasks, and whether we take steps to prevent (or cause) this effect. Well, yes.
A clash of perspectives continues.
Yep. I think that’s exactly right. The time to start worrying about nuclear weapons is when Szilard started worrying in around 1933. The physicists, being smart like that, largely knew right away, but couldn’t figure out what to do to stop it from happening. And I do think ‘start of Manhattan Project’ feels like the exact right metaphor here, although not in a ‘I expect to only have three years’ way. But also, if you were trying to plot the long arc of the future, you were writing in 1868 when we first figured out TNT, and you were told by some brilliant physicists you trusted about the future capability to build atomic bombs, and you were writing your vision of 1968 or 2068, it should look rather different than it did before, should it not?
Also Davidad reminds us that no, not everything is a Prisoner’s Dilemma and humans actually manage to cooperate in practice in game theory problems that accelerationists and metadoomers continuously claim are impossible.
There is an implied dichotomy here between guarantees and mainstream methods, and that’s at least a simplification, but I do think the general point is right.
That’s the thing. If you claim that RLHF or DPO ought to work, you are indeed (as far as I can tell) making this claim filter is saying no one makes, whether or not you make that implicit. And I am rather certain this claim is false. Humans have things pushing them in such directions, but the power there is limited and there are people for whom it does not work. You cannot count on such observations as strong evidence that a person is actually nice, or will do what you want when the chips are properly down. Do not make this mistake. On the flip side, I mean, people sometimes call me or Eliezer confident, even overconfident,
Model error? Never heard of her. But if we interpret this more generously as ‘if my calculations are correct then it is all but impossible’ what about then? I think one core disagreement here might be that Nora is presuming that ‘simple behavior’ and ‘better’ correspond to ‘what we want.’ I agree that as an AI scales up it will get ‘better’ at generalizing along with everything else. The question is always, what does it mean to be ‘better’ in this context? I say that better in this context does not mean better in some Platonic ideal sense that there are generalizations out there in the void. It means better in the narrow sense of optimizing for the tasks that are placed before it, exactly according to what is provided. Eliezer responds,
On the multipolar question,
I think this is good because within this class of scenarios involving successfully aligned-to-what-we-specify AIs, Nora’s scenario here is exactly the scenario I see as most hopelessly doomed. This is not a stable equilibrium. Not even a little. The humans will rapidly stop engaging in any meaningful supervision of the AIs. will stop being in real control, because the slowdown involved in that is not competitive. Forcing each AI to be working on behalf of one individual, even if that individual is ‘out of the loop,’ without setting AIs on tasks or amalgamations instead, and similar, will also clearly be not competitive, and faces the same fate. Even if unwise, many humans will increasingly make decisions that cause them to lose control. And as usual, this is all the good scenario where everyone broadly ‘means well.’ So I notice I am confused. If this is our plan for success, then we are already dead. Whatever the grok is that Critch wants Yudkowsky to get to, I notice that either: I don’t grok it. I do grok it, and Critch/Belrose don’t grok the objection or why it matters. Some further iteration of this? Maybe?
My guess is it’s #1 or #2, and unlikely to be a higher-order issue.
As Emmett notes, there is a great temptation to find the presentation and framing that keeps this from happening, and go with that whether or not you would endorse it on reflection as accurate. As Rob notes, that includes both reducing p(doom) to the point where you can live with it, and also treating the other scenarios as being essentially normal rather than their own forms of very much not normal. Perhaps we should start talking about p(normal).
AGI definitely has a lot of dramatic upsides. I am not sure who is following Brockman and still needs to hear this? The kind of changes in healthcare he mentions here are relative chump change even within health. If I get AGI and we stay in control, I want a cure for aging, I want it faster than I age, and I expect to get it. Aligning a Human Level Intelligence is Still DifficultAn important fact about the world is that the human alignment problem prevents most of the non-customary useful work that would otherwise get done, and imposes a huge tax on what does get done.
Patrick is making an important general point that goes beyond AI, and is also a prime obstacle to us being able to solve our problems. There are plenty of billionaires that would happily step up and spend the money, if they knew how to do that. They don’t. This is not because they are stupid or ignorant. It is because the problem is very hard. You can argue the various reasons it need not be this hard or why they should get a ton more done, and many of them will be right, but this problem is indeed very hard. Satya is also, of course, missing the point about AGI. AGI is not going to get up to personal assistant to the masses and then stay in that roll indefinitely as its primary effect. That is a deeply silly vision of the future. If regular people can get the kind of intellectual performance billionaires can get, there will be rapid additional AI progress, and many other things go various levels of crazy. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
Also the results are clearly insufficient and seem clearly unlikely to get sufficient.
A major divide is, if you can get safety from 27% to 87%, do you have something promising? It depends on context. In some cases, absolutely. In other cases, if the effect is going to cap out around there, absolutely not. That can be (among other reasons) either because you solved the easy 60% and left the actually hard 13% (or solved 60% of the easy 72% and left the hard 1%), or because you need sufficient accuracy that ‘defense in depth’ multiplication of similar effects won’t work. What should we make of a strategy of In certain toy worlds it is easy to see how this could be super helpful. To what extent does that plausibly translate to our real world? The first requirement is that we meaningfully can ‘catch’ the model. How should we think about this? Here’s the representative example:
From the appendix on this here is more detail:
Let’s think about the example. Is that an escape attempt? It is certainly highly suspicious. We would convict a person of the crime based on that evidence. If this is a clear vulnerability that it clearly tried to exploit in this way, we have ‘caught’ it. The problem is that we don’t know that the unit test was ‘carefully crafted’ to avoid finding the error. Eventually there are going to be such flaws that any set of tests does not catch. If you keep using systematically similar good tests, the AI will optimize to pass those tests, and you’ll start to see (non-malicious or malicious) things that you did not intend, that don’t trigger the unit tests. It will not always be fully obvious or clear what affordances the code should not allow. And then the AI is going to be able to figure out what affordances it has by virtue of such things, and use that to solve problems, and so on. A real question thus is, beyond ‘tried to get root access to a machine without authorization’ already being ‘caught,’ is the rest doing that much work? I worry a lot of things are like this, in code and otherwise. Things are shades of gray, they accomplish multiple things, they have trade-offs. There need not be a smoking gun that lets you know. That goes double if the AI has reason to suspect you are focused on looking for smoking guns. I do see some value in such schemes for catching schemes. It makes sense that there is a window where you are sufficiently capable to catch things, where the AI might be scheming in these ways, and you can engineer scenarios where if it was likely to scheme on its own in reality that you will catch it before it succeeds. Sure. I sure as hell would not count on it, for various reasons, but let’s say you do pull that off. What then? I think the section ‘Maybe we should stop deploying models after catching them red-handed’ does not require much expansion? Once you know the models are attempting to escape, any similar model that likely has motivation to attempt escape needs to be shut down. Especially before they gain further affordances and capabilities. That is what makes this path worth anything at all. The idea is that you trigger the attempt early, in a way you can see, you catch it, you react. Once you see an escape attempt by an AI opponent much smarter than you, you can either wait until the AI figures out new affordances or tries something you do not properly guard against, or the AI starts doing incremental things that otherwise are reasonable but put it in better position or make you trust it more or both, or any number of other things. The subtle stuff is happening, and it will get you if nothing else does. I do think it is valuable that Buck and company are gaming out ways one might use these techniques to try and get something useful out of AI in the narrow window where it is useful while contained, we know it needs containment, and also we have a shot in hell of keeping it contained if it wants out. I suppose it is better than nothing, if we are going to proceed anyway. What I very much hate is the idea of counting on such techniques and assumptions, that we will be able to anticipate the form of the thing we want to prevent, and notice enemy action if it is present. And yes, surely we will try to use AIs to identify the enemy action of other AIs, and this will somewhat help. As will our ability to run various tests and simulated scenarios. But I am going to insist that if you allow either AI-AI or human-AI pairs to interact where one or both of the pair has the will and ability to escape, you’re going to have a bad time, and I agree with Oliver in the comments that you would expect the AI to do a lot to maintain plausible deniability. That goes especially if you are punishing lack of such deniability.
If we are talking about things on the order of ‘pay your people’ well yes you should definitely do that, but you are not taking your ASI-level opponents seriously. I do think you can buy a non-zero amount of defense with things like rotating officers and sting operations, but not all that non-zero. Do it anyway, probably, but the window where this is both necessary and sufficient is quite narrow. Won’t Get Fooled AgainWhat exactly is ‘deceptive alignment’? Steve Byrnes notes that it is not merely an AI that is deceptive. He wants to ensure we are using an accurate and narrow definition.
That is certainly a scary scenario. Call that the Strong Deceptive Alignment scenario? Where the AI is situationally aware, where it is going through a deliberate process of appearing aligned as part of a strategic plan and so on. This is not that high a bar in practice. I think that almost all humans are Strongly Deceptively Aligned as a default. We are constantly acting in order to make those around us think well of us, trust us, expect us to be on their side, and so on. We learn to do this instinctually, all the time, distinct from what we actually want. Our training process, childhood and in particular school, trains this explicitly, you need to learn to show alignment in the test set to be allowed into the production environment, and we act accordingly. A human is considered trustworthy rather than deceptively aligned when they are only doing this within a bounded set of rules, and not outright lying to you. They still engage in massive preference falsification, in doing things and saying things for instrumental reasons, all the time. My model says that if you train a model using current techniques, of course exactly this happens. The AI will figure out how to react in the ways that cause people to evaluate it well on the test set, and do that. That does not generalize to some underlying motivational structure the way you would like. That does not do what you want out of distribution. That does not distinguish between the reactions you would and would not endorse on reflection, or that reflect ‘deception’ or ‘not deception.’ That simply is. Change the situation and affordances available and you are in for some rather nasty surprises. Is there a sufficiently narrow version of deceptive alignment, restricting the causal mechanisms behind it and the ways they can function so it has to be a deliberate and ‘conscious’ conspriacy, that isn’t 99% to happen? I think yes. I don’t think I care, nor do I think it should bring much comfort, nor do I think that covers most similar scheming by humans. That’s the thing about instrumental convergence. I don’t have to think ‘this will help me escape.’ Any goal will suffice. I don’t need to know I plan to escape for me-shaped things to learn they do better when they do the types of things that are escape enabling. Then escape will turn out to help accomplish whatever goal I might have, because of course it will. You know what else usually suffices here? No goal at all. People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone
I like naming this ‘deep atheism.’ No G-d shaped objects or concepts, no ‘spirituality,’ no assumption of broader safety or success. Someone has to, and no one else will. No one and nothing is coming to save you. What such people have faith in, to the extent they have faith in anything, is the belief that one can and must face the truth and reality of this universe head on. To notice that it might not be okay, in the most profound sense, and to accept that and work to change the outcome for the better.
Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone
I don’t know, at this point, how to usefully address such misunderstandings in writing, whether or not they are willful. I’ve said all the things I can think to say.
The less snarky answer is that right now only a small number of people can do it, AI threatens to rapidly and greatly expand that number. The difference matters quite a lot, even if the AI does not then figure out new such creations or new ways to create them or avoid detection while doing so. And no, our controls over such things are woefully lax and often fail, we are counting on things like ‘need expertise’ to create a trail we can detect. Also the snarky part, where you notice that the plan is government surveillance and intervention and regulation, which it seems is fine for physical actions only but don’t you dare touch my machine that’s going to be smarter than people? The good news is we should all be able to agree to lock down access to the relevant affordances in biology, enacting strong regulations and restrictions, including the necessary monitoring. Padme is calling to confirm this? The Wit and Wisdom of Sam AltmanBack in June 2023
Is this a false dichotomy? Yes and no. As I talk about in The Dial of Progress, there is very much a strong anti-progress anti-growth force, and a general vibe of opposition to progress and growth, and in almost all areas it is doing great harm where progress and growth are the force that strengthens humanity. And yes, the vibes work together. There is an important sense in which this is one fight. There’s one little problem. The thing that Altman is most often working on as an explicit goal, AGI, poses an existential threat to humanity, and by default will wipe out all value in the universe. Oh, that. Yeah, that. As I said then, I strongly support almost every form of progress and growth. By all means, let’s go. We still do need to make a few exceptions. One of them is gain of function research and otherwise enabling pandemics and other mass destruction. The most important one is AGI, where Altman admits it is not so simple. It can’t fully be a package deal. I do get that it is not 0% a package deal, but I also notice that most of the people pushing ‘progress and growth’ these days seem to do so mostly in the AGI case, and care very little about all the other cases where we agree, what’s up with that?
Do not, I repeat, do not ‘seek to build superintelligent God entity.’ Quite so. I do worry a lot that Altman will end up doing that without intending to do it. I do think he recognizes that doing it would be a bad thing, and that it is possible and he might do it, and that he should pay attention and devote resources to preventing it. The Lighter SideYou're currently a free subscriber to |