---
subject: "The Life of a Crypto Founder, traveling and selling and more"
from: "a16z crypto <a16zcrypto@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-10-05 15:05:29
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "a16zcrypto"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_2535365729249697677"]
---
IN THIS EDITION: Why crypto startups need enterprise sales Going to market in Asia, with notes from Korea Blockchain Week Underrated ideas, following vs. deciding what’s interesting; from cultural deserts to finding what you’re looking for… on computers
THE ARGUMENT Crypto startups need enterprise sales, here’s why — and why nowJason Rosenthal “The best products sell themselves” has been a long-lived fallacy in tech. Even the most viral products can only get so far on their own before they need a boost to expand further. Large enterprises in particular are prone to roadblocks like internal organizational politics, existing tech to replace or integrate with, or trouble spreading beyond a few early adopter-types. The only way to break through and sell to large enterprises is to have a robust sales function that can navigate these organizations. While some founders might miss the insiders-only dynamic of early crypto sales, the current market shift — where traditional institutions are interested in crypto industry products (beyond THE INTERVIEW 5 questions on crypto and policy with Miles Jenningsfrom
How a16z crypto’s Arianna Simpson has navigated the ‘blockchain rollercoaster’(in
NEWS AND UPDATES ‘The best books of the year so far’These are “the most captivating, notable, brilliant, surprising, absorbing, weird, thought-provoking, and talked-about reads”, according to
We previously covered this book on our Around the world: Korea, Singapore, and beyondSome field notes from Korea Blockchain WeekJay Drain, Guy Wuollet, and Liz Harkavy Founders have a great opportunity to spend time in Korea, get to know the culture and consumers, and make their products available there. Since Korea is very supportive of Korean-native businesses (c.f. the ubiquity of Naver over Google Maps), having a presence on the ground and making an effort to align with the local ecosystem is important to successfully launch products there. There is currently also less talk about the technology behind the underlying protocols — and more focus on legitimacy coming from [partnerships](https://substack.com/redirect/4c2bc884-c908-485d-b037-a6eb4fe352dd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)and local product launches.Giveaways — swag, collectibles, tokens, etc. — are tremendously popular in Korea as well: Every booth at Korea Blockchain Week events was oriented around a giveaway or raffle, and attendees all very patiently queued for these. (Korean crypto users similarly expect [airdrops](https://substack.com/redirect/5b545ad8-b546-4920-ba29-4e941a6c8382?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).)
The intersection between the crypto industry and broader culture was reflected at Korea Blockchain Week as well, with k-pop stars, sports players, directors of KPop Demon Hunters, etc. attending events. Korea has the 2nd most-paid ChatGPT subs in the world behind only the U.S. — and more broadly culturally, has: the #1 YouTube video of all time, #1 boyband, #1 rated movie, #1 most viral soundtrack, and #1 show on Netflix. Going to market in Asia?
You’re receiving this newsletter because you signed up for it on our websites, at an event, or elsewhere (you can opt out any time using the ‘unsubscribe’ link below). This newsletter is provided for informational purposes only, and should NOT be relied upon as legal, business, investment, or tax advice. This newsletter may link to other websites or other information obtained from third-party sources — a16z has not independently verified nor makes any representations about the current or enduring accuracy of such information. Furthermore, the content is not directed at nor intended for use by any investors or prospective investors in any a16z funds. Please see a16z.com/disclosures for additional important details, including link to list of investments. subscribe to our podcast ' |