---
subject: "On Alpha School"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-07-07 15:08:19
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
One must always take such claims and reports with copious salt. But in terms of the core claims about what is happening and why it is happening, I find this mostly credible. I don’t know how far it can scale but I suspect quite far. None of this involves anything surprising, and none of it even involves much use of generative AI.
Table of ContentsWhat Is It?This is essentially In particular: Spaced repetition and mastery, require full learning without letting things drop. Immediate problem sets with immediate feedback and explanation. Tracking clicks and eye focus and providing feedback on that too. Gamified reward systems for atomic learning actions, paid prizes. 1-on-1 attention upon request, 5-to-1 overall student-teacher ratio. Short bursts with breaks. Flexibility on what kids do when within academics and freedom to push ahead. Not wasting time on things you don’t care about, getting rid of bad methods. Within that framework, find reasonable educational software, use it. Afternoon projects and tasks always involve concrete and measurable output. ‘Check charts’ give bigger missions to do that gate ability to advance grade levels, to get kids used to longer harder things and developing agency.
You get all the academics in during the morning, and advance much faster than normal. Then you have the afternoon left to do whatever you want, including filling in any ‘soft’ skills you decide were important. You don’t try to do it all in some sort of all-purpose Swiss-army-knife lecture classroom and pretend it’s not pre-Guttenberg. Most time is spent learning on a computer, watching videos and doing problems, but if you ever need help you can ask for a teacher, and if you ever struggle they bring one in for you. There’s still a lot of human attention going into all of this. Does it work for academics? This ia a very skin-in-the-game way to assert that it does, and reports all say that it does, regardless of exactly how well:
You can and should worry that they are effectively teaching to various tests or focusing narrowly on subsets of academics, but regular school does that a lot too, the entire afternoon is free for other things, and also there is a fixed amount that you can present good results via test optimization. You can’t get years worth of extra results. MAP Growth Speed findings work the same way, at some point it can’t be faked. Spaced repetition works wonders as does ensuring mastery, and being able to customize for what each individual child actually needs right now. A giant portion of time spent in school is obviously wasted by failure to reinforce or by teaching things that aren’t relevant or by simple boredom and so on. Immediate feedback is huge. Selection effects also are important here, on various levels, but I think these results are bigger than that can account for, by a lot. Is all of this optimal? Not even close, but it doesn’t have to be. The baseline it is up against is downright pathetic. This include most expensive private schools, like the horror story example that is the first section of this review. They work hard for the right to pay tens of thousands a year to get a peer group of others that did the same, and in exchange get a school entirely uninterested in teaching their student anything that can be verified or that the patents value. When they challenge the school, the school threatens to kick them out in return. That’s the standard you’re up against. So there is no reason that the core of this wouldn’t work, or wouldn’t scale, once a given student gets to the point they can participate. Performance would fall off somewhat as you lose other advantages, like selection and buy-in and the ability to bid higher for a mostly better distribution of teachers, but all of that seems easily survivable. The only part whose effectiveness seems non-obvious and the system might fail to scale is the incentive program, the gamified rewards, and the possibility that this would fail as motivation for a lot of or even most students. I’ll tackle that in a bit. What It Isn’tIt would work and scale even better if you incorporate generative AI. Certainly most of the time that one is ‘stuck’ in these situations, generative AI can help you a lot in becoming unstuck, or letting kids follow their curiosity in various ways. You can (if we can’t find a better answer) disable or monitor AI use during assessments. This isn’t a way to save money or hire fewer teachers, but I notice this is weird at least for the morning portion? Shouldn’t it be that, if they want that?
Thus, the remote teachers can’t possibly be that large a part of the 5:1 ratio, and presumably are not expensive. This also points to a potential improvement, since an in-person tutoring session would be more effective when possible. The physically present teacher should be able to handle a lot of kids at once during academic time if they are all on their computers. Thus the 5:1 ratio must be coming from the afternoon activities, which is cool but presumably optional. The system works without it. The actual marginal costs here for an additional student that matter should be quite low. It also What are you giving up from the ‘traditional’ school experience? From what I can tell you are mostly giving up ‘classes,’ meaning lectures where a group of kids sit in desks and listen to someone talk with some amount of interaction. Which, again, seems like an obvious terrible way to accomplish essentially anything? If you think that the interactions within that setting are somehow socially important or incidentally teach other skills other than how to sit still, obey and be bored for extended periods, in a way that can’t be made up for several times over with a free afternoon for other things, I notice I am confused why you would think this. If you do think the main goal of school is to learn to sit still and be bored and quiet and obey, well, okay then, Alpha School should not be your top choice, but I am confused why you would want that in 2025. It also is not a way to avoid screen time, since the academics are done on a device. If you think that this is intrinsically important, that is an issue. My model of ‘screen time’ is that it depends what it is for and how it works, at least once you’re into primary school, so it is not an issue. It also isn’t a way to ensure that all children learn ‘equally’ or ‘equitably,’ to prevent kids from learning too much too fast (oh no?!) or learn someone’s preferred ideological beliefs. Again, different goals. If those are your goals, then Alpha School is not for you. However, even if you did in theory want to ensure equal or equitable learning outcomes, as in you actively did not want kids to learn, then this is still great news. Because this lets everyone learn faster, ensuring everyone gets to the same target. Then, if some kids might learn too much, you can make them stop learning. Also, check your uniforms. I think there might be skulls on them. Intrinsic Versus Extrinsic MotivationThey sell a home school version of Alpha School for on the order of $10k/year. It does not work as well. The post attributes this difference mostly to the lack of AlphaBucks. As in, everything about this being at a school mostly doesn’t matter, except for there being an adult to watch the kid, and for the AlphaBucks. The secret ingredient is not crime. It is AlphaBucks, paid for good performance. Which is, for mostly bad reasons, less popular than crime.
The kids are then described as using various strategies. Some spend as they go. Others save up for big purchases, or save indefinitely. All reports are that it worked.
I believe the reports. My experience with my own children, and my own experience both now and as a child, and as a game designer, and everything else I have seen, lines up with this. I’ve seen it work with screen time. I’ve seen it work with ‘reasonable requests.’ I’ve seen it work with daily login bonuses, including when the prize is nothing except a message. I’ve seen it work with essentially anything, no matter how little objective value is involved. Gamification works when you set your variables correctly. Everyone loves a prize and recorded incremental progress. Another objection is that you need peer groups as part of motivation. Well, Alpha School still has that, you can absolutely compare what you are doing to others, talk to peers and so on. I don’t see the problem here. The better objection is the idea that extrinsic motivation will destroy intrinsic motivation. Once you pay them to learn, the theory goes, they won’t want to learn except to get paid. That is a highly reasonable theory. High Versus Low Structure LearnersI want to specifically address the objection that some learners are ‘high structure,’ and therefore need the very classrooms that bore the rest of us to tears and waste large portions of our childhood, but which somehow it would still supposedly be wrong to free the ‘low structure’ learners from too early. Alpha School very obviously provides a different but clearly very high structure. If what students need is structure, a firm hand, a particular thing to do next, and to be kept on track? Very obviously that is not going to be where this project falls apart.
|