---
subject: "Snake Oil, Then and Now"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-04-30 13:03:16
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Thanks for reading! This post took a lot of work. If you’re enjoying it, you can subscribe to the newsletter. If you want to help keep this project going, please consider purchasing a paid subscription. Paid subscribers — it’s only about 75 cents a week! — get access to the archives, the satisfaction of supporting work they enjoy, and my undying gratitude. To support my work, please click the button below: Sometimes a product is so well-marketed or ubiquitous that its name becomes a stand-in for an entire category: think Kleenex or Band-Aid. That’s often a good sign for the product, although sometimes it backfires — Bayer Pharmaceuticals, for example, lost the copyright on the name “aspirin” after too many other companies took it up. At the other end of the product-reputation spectrum, there lies another kind of product: one so disgraced that it represents an entire category of failure or fraud. The Ford Ineffective Here’s the thing, though: snake oil doesn’t quite deserve its bad reputation. Actual snake oil — derived from Chinese water snakes — has been used as medicine in Asia for centuries. People took it to relieve the symptoms of inflammatory diseases like arthritis. It worked fairly well, probably because it When Chinese immigrants came to the United States to work on the country’s railroads in the nineteenth century, they brought traditional medicines like snake oil with them. It was only in the hands of American hucksters that snake oil became a fraud. Snake oil was peddled by attention-getting influencers who took advantage of lax regulation to promise their followers wonder cures derived from ancient, exotic wisdom. In other words, the snake oil scam relied on many of the “wellness” marketing tactics we still see today. How did snake oil (the useful Chinese remedy) become “snake oil” (the scam)? For that, we can thank Clark Stanley. Stanley knew that, to sell your wares, you need one of two things: a quality product or an attention-getting gimmick. He chose the latter. He rolled up to the 1893 Columbian Exposition in Chicago dressed like an extravagant cowboy. After assembling a crowd, he got up on stage, Stanley was essentially a nineteenth-century health influencer, and his advice was about as scientifically sound as what you’d get from many of those selling supplements and fad diets today. He embellished his claims with an intriguing backstory, telling his crowds that, as a cowboy in the west, he had studied under a Hopi medicine man who had taught him the secrets of native medicine. It was an attention-getting presentation, the likes of which we still see today: a salesperson with a colorful personality drawing the audience in with his life story and promising to reveal exotic mystery cures to them. Had Stanley actually lived with the Hopi for two years? Unlikely. Did the Hopi really use snake oil to cure their ailments? Stanley’s audience didn’t much care about these particulars. They trusted Stanley, were intrigued by his exciting sales pitches, and wanted to try the stuff out. As you can see, Stanley wasn’t exactly shy about promising his consumers the moon; his advertisements promised to cure everything from snakebite to frostbite:
It was a winning formula: send an engaging spokesman out with an intriguing story of exotic, natural cures and let him promise the moon. Still works today. Enough people experienced the placebo effect with Stanley’s liniment that his company became big business. Other enterprising businesspeople also began selling “snake oil.” Many of them concocted other origin stories for their formulas. Some claimed that it was the product of ancient Chinese wisdom (a story closer to the truth), while others It wasn’t just snake oil — people made tons of money by marketing sketchy cures to desperate people. Makers of “patent medicines” took advantage of a complete lack of government regulation to push tonics, elixirs, and pills on the public. In a tradition going back to the 1700s in England, these marketers, like Clark Stanley, attached their names (or the name of a fictional character) to their medicines. You’d buy Bateman’s Pectoral Drops — “the most valuable medicine ever discovered for Colds, Coughs, Agues, Fevers, Rheumatism, Pains in the Breast, Limbs, and Joints…” Or you might pick up Dr. If that didn’t do the trick, you could get Dr. Morse’s Indian Root Pills, which promised a natural cure for “Dyspepsia, Giddiness, Headache, and… female disorders.” What about Brown’s Iron Bitters, which cured “indigestion, dyspepsia, intermittent fevers, want of appetite, loss of strength, lack of energy, malaria and malaria fevers?” In reality, the Indian root pills were laxatives, Dr. Hooper was selling abortifacients to women (his warning that women shouldn’t take the pills was really an inducement to those in the know), Brown’s Iron Bitters made people feel better with cocaine and alcohol, and Bateman’s Pectoral Drops contained flavored opium. Why did people fall for this stuff? Slick marketing is part of the story, but distrust of experts explains the rest of it. People in the late 19th century didn’t trust doctors, and for good reason. The medical profession was remarkably primitive back then. Many doctors had not received anything like the rigorous training that MDs get today. Some doctors still practiced “ Meanwhile, people understood that they were surrounded by health risks. The cities of the time were filled with pollution, disease, and death. People were breathing soot-filled air, drinking choleric water, and exposing themselves to all sorts of filth. Even In circumstances like this, why not take a shot at curing your ills with snake oil, female pills, Indian root, or iron bitters — especially when a charismatic and benevolent figure like Dr. Hooper or Clark Stanley endorsed it? In the early twentieth century, governments began to crack down on the worst of these “medicines” — many of them were, after all, selling bottles of ineffective liquid, while others were pushing hard drugs on children. The Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906 empowered the federal government to require accurate labeling of ingredients and to ban products that lied about their effects. The Food and Drug Administration, established in 1927, took responsibility for the safety and efficacy of the medicines Americans put in their bodies. This was obviously good. Americans began to trust doctors with actual expertise and stopped taking worthless or even harmful drugs. But, over time, we’ve drifted back toward a situation not all that different from what people experienced in the late 19th century. We live in a time of Meanwhile, many of us feel as if there are health dangers around every corner. Microplastics, unnatural processed foods, pollution, and other threats seem to be everywhere, and we hear about them all the time. People are looking for an extra layer of armor against the dangers to themselves and their kids. Add to this a social-media ecosystem that encourages parasocial relationships between influencers and their audiences. In order to maximize their income, influencers leverage these relationships to sell fads, diets, and supplements to their audiences. Under pressure to come up with a never-ending stream of content, health influencers are incentivized to peddle new “tips” to their followers all the time, likely straying farther from ideas with solid scientific backing. On top of all this, the government has allowed We may be entering a new golden age of health scams, in which influencers can prey on the fears of an uninformed public to sell them things that won’t help them, or may even hurt them. But I’m choosing to look on the bright side — I’ve been looking for something to cure my giddiness, palpitations, and dejected countenance anyway. Interested in patent-medicine advertising? I wrote a whole post about it a while back: This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are three ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: You can share the newsletter with others: You can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week! You're currently a free subscriber to |