---
subject: "A Chaotic Era"
from: "\"River Kenna from In•Star\" <riverkenna@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-06 07:42:43
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "River Kenna", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3010718370428876194", "UNREAD"]
---
I’ve kinda stopped putting out writing for awhile. The couple pieces I have released have been ones I had to force out and felt meh about. One of the pieces I do actually like… but I wrote it months ago, long before releasing it — and even that one now feels pretty bittersweet to me. I stopped writing, I realized a couple weeks ago, mostly because I’m embarrassed about my chaotic inner state over the past few months. I’ve been going through a dark night of the soul and a dark night of the body for several months, or I guess a bit over a year now, and my inner world has gotten unpredictable to say the least. It feels like my personality structure lost the equilibrium it had for a long time, and is now swinging all over the place as elements get subtracted, added, shifted, transformed, and subtracted again. It’s made it difficult to talk to friends, not knowing if the me that talks to them will say something that the me a day or two in the future doesn’t feel was true or resonant. It’s made it difficult to manage some of my closest relationships, keeping silent when I should say something, out of fear I’ll say something I’ll regret — and then getting sick of holding back my thoughts and feelings and saying things that I do regret later. It’s been similar with my writing. I’ve started a dozen pieces and dropped them over the past few weeks. In the moment, they feel quite alive, quite true, quite in need of saying. And then I come back a week later, a day later, sometimes an hour later, and I wonder why I bothered to write it down at all. It feels like I just gotta break the seal and accept that for the time being, I’m a person made up of chaotic swings, and that holding back so much seems to only make that harder. So I invite you to unsubscribe from In•Star if that sounds like a mess you don’t want to receive in your inbox, cuz I’m just gonna start treating this substack like a longer twitter and writing out what’s coming up day to day, in hope that starts moving my relationship to writing in some direction or other. (My other substack, Inner Wilds, will stay normal, I’ll only post more polished pieces there.) Soooooo yeah let’s get started. Infra is free and will stay free, but if you get something out of my work, consider giving something back. Share my writing with friends & followers, pick up my |