---
subject: "The Ben Franklin Effect, Perils of Majority, & More"
from: "\"Sahil Bloom's Curiosity Chronicle\" <sahil@sahilbloom.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-09-30 09:02:49
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Sahil Bloom"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_1989028747625928812"]
---
The Ben Franklin Effect, Artificial Intelligence, & MoreWelcome to the new members of the curiosity tribe who have joined us this week. Join the 121,000+ others who are receiving high-signal, curiosity-inducing content every single week.
Today at a Glance:- Quote: The perils of the majority.
- Framework: The Ben Franklin Effect.
- Tweet: AI essay writing.
- Article: Roger Federer as religious experience.
- Podcast: Is a recession bullish?
Today's newsletter is brought to you by Giving your business the tools it needs to deliver world-class customer support is essential - and that's where Help Scout comes in. They provide a simple, scalable platform that enables you to deliver email, live chat, self-service, and proactive support - all from a single tool. Unlike other support tools that are packed with ticket deflection features that often deter customers from getting help, Help Scout makes it easy for customer-centric companies to have conversations with their customers and deliver excellent support. Switching to Help Scout from other support tools typically saves business owners 30% per year on support tool costs. Plus, if you're in need of a team email collaboration tool, Help Scout reduces email volume by 30% compared to platforms like Gmail or Outlook. So if you're looking for an all-encompassing support tool that's easy to use, look no further than Help Scout. They're here to help your business build better relationships with its customers for an affordable, transparent price.
One Quote:"Whenever you find yourself on the side of the majority, it is time to pause and reflect." - Mark Twain Be wary of the *conventional* wisdom. Learn to question the underlying assumptions. Independent thinking is a rare superpower of the modern age. One Framework:The Ben Franklin Effect"He that has once done you a kindness will be more ready to do you another, than he whom you yourself have obliged." - Benjamin Franklin The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin is a legitimate treasure trove of insights and wisdom. In addition to providing a look into his daily routine, which I wrote about The Ben Franklin Effect is an observed behavioral phenomenon in which a person who has performed a favor is more likely to perform another favor for that person than if they had received a favor from that person. Put simply, we are more likely to do a favor for someone if we have previously done a favor for them—this previous favor trumps them doing a favor for us in our minds. Performing a favor is more powerful than receiving a favor. Franklin hypothesized this effect after observing how he converted a political foe to a friend through its use (or manipulation): "Having heard that he had in his library a certain very scarce and curious book, I wrote a note to him, expressing my desire of perusing that book, and requesting he would do me the favour of lending it to me for a few days. He sent it immediately, and I return'd it in about a week with another note, expressing strongly my sense of the favour. When we next met in the House, he spoke to me (which he had never done before), and with great civility; and he ever after manifested a readiness to serve me on all occasions, so that we became great friends, and our friendship continued to his death." By drawing out a small favor from the foe—the sharing of a book—he successfully converted him to a friend. Humans are inherently flawed, self-protectionist creatures. We like to believe that we make rational, sound decisions, even in the face of clear conflicting evidence. The Ben Franklin Effect is a play on that nature: The performance of a single favor for someone is often enough to convince us that we like or respect them (even if this is inconsistent with our experience with the person). "I took an action to benefit that person, so I must think well of them," we silently say to ourselves. Franklin observed that one way to convert someone from an enemy to a friend is to get them to perform a small favor for you. If they perform the favor, their internal dialogue will tell them they like you (else why would they have done the favor?!). How to Use ItIn the best-selling How to Win Friends & Influence People, Dale Carnegie refers to the request for a favor as a subtle form of flattery. This is a useful framing for life. The request is a compliment—a show that the person you are requesting from has something that you believe is valuable or otherwise want. Whether you are in sales (note: we are all in some form of sales!) or just looking to build and improve your network of relationships, the Ben Franklin Effect is a tool to be aware of. In addition to engaging in all of the small acts of kindness and general decency that we do in normal course, consider leveraging small requests for favors as a way to level up relationships or deepen connections. You may just find it works for you as well as it did for Old Ben! I'd love to hear from you: - What are some examples of when you have seen the Ben Franklin Effect in action in your own life?
- How has your awareness of this effect impacted your day-to-day?
Reply to this email or tweet at me @SahilBloom and I'll do my best to get back to everyone! One Tweet:
This is really interesting: Openly available AI technology is being used to complete homework assignments—and get straight As. I have a few thoughts (and questions): - In some ways, this just feels like the 2022 version of the shortcuts kids used to take when I was in school—mostly using Spark Notes (short summaries of books) or Wikipedia pages to complete schoolwork. In other ways, it feels different, because it completely removes the human from the process. I'm torn on whether I think this is savvy or immoral. If you find a better way to do [X], even if it defeats the purpose of [X], should you be rewarded?
- How are schools and colleges going to navigate this as the technology becomes increasingly mainstream? I imagine kids are already using AI to write award winning college entrance personal essays, right? Are we building a future where no one is capable of clear, independent thinking or writing because it is all managed by AIs?
- This also leads to an obvious question about how you can possibly stand out and win as a content creator in a future where written content is all created by AI. I've been thinking about that a lot for the last year given its implications for my own journey. My fundamental belief is that AI will continue to accelerate in its adoption curve, but that personality and human connection is impossible to replicate. I am going to be focusing on building real human connection with my audience—through more video, a community rollout for P2P engagement, personality and life sharing, and more.
What are your thoughts on this? What are the skills that our kids will need to learn if so much is going to be automated by AI over the coming years? One Article: In honor of Roger Federer's retirement from tennis, I feel compelled to share this brilliant 2006 article that is an ode to his early career dominance and elegance. It is one of the most beautifully-written articles I have ever read—which may not come as a surprise considering it was penned by the late David Foster Wallace, who is one of the best writers in history. A few of my favorite lines from the glorious piece: - "Given Agassi’s position and world-class quickness, Federer had to send that ball down a two-inch pipe of space in order to pass him, which he did, moving backwards, with no setup time and none of his weight behind the shot. It was impossible. It was like something out of “The Matrix.” I don’t know what-all sounds were involved, but my spouse says she hurried in and there was popcorn all over the couch and I was down on one knee and my eyeballs looked like novelty-shop eyeballs."
- "Beauty is not the goal of competitive sports, but high-level sports are a prime venue for the expression of human beauty. The relation is roughly that of courage to war. The human beauty we’re talking about here is beauty of a particular type; it might be called kinetic beauty. Its power and appeal are universal. It has nothing to do with sex or cultural norms. What it seems to have to do with, really, is human beings’ reconciliation with the fact of having a body."
- "Whether anything like a nascent Federer was here among these juniors can’t be known, of course. Genius is not replicable. Inspiration, though, is contagious, and multiform — and even just to see, close up, power and aggression made vulnerable to beauty is to feel inspired and (in a fleeting, mortal way) reconciled."
The entire article is painfully good and well worth your time. Roger Federer was the embodiment of the One Podcast:Is a Recession Bullish? This was a good (and entertaining) episode that covered a variety of market-related topics. This chart of returns data was particularly interesting: As we navigate through the exceedingly complex economic and geopolitical environment, the only advice I have is to think long-term and stay the course. It's never as bad (or as good) as the the prevailing sentiment suggests. It's really easy to get caught up in the various negative narratives that are out there—this generally leads to short-term, irrational decisions. If you ever feel compelled to do something rash, pause a moment and force yourself to zoom out. Ironically, my biggest investing mistakes have all been made when I was consuming the most news and information about the markets. Let that be a lesson—learn from my mistakes! Listen to it on Refer Friends, Earn Rewards!
If you enjoyed today's newsletter, please share it with your friends and family!
Where It Happens PodcastThe Laws of Community Building with Natalie Ellis Listen to it on This episode is Retool is the fast way to build your own custom internal tools for your business. With a complete library of 100+ fully-featured, accessible UI components that you can drag and drop into any interface, Retool’s platform lets you build the custom internal tools your team needs, 10x faster. Thousands of teams at companies like Amazon, DoorDash, and NBC collaborate around custom-built Retool apps to operate faster and better. Also, teams of up to five can build Retool apps for free. We're huge fans of the product! If you want to learn more, go to Sahil’s Hiring ZoneTalent Collective There have been a lot of layoffs lately. But my talent collective currently has 40+ companies across the tech landscape who are actively hiring. If you’re open to hearing about new opportunities, apply to my Talent Collective and get introduced to over 40 of my favorite companies. You can join publicly or anonymously, and leave anytime. Completely free for candidates. Use the link If you’re hiring, request access to start meeting world class candidates open to new opportunities. I send out a new drop every two weeks. Learn more or request access |