---
subject: "2023 Prediction Evaluations"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-01-08 14:37:16
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
It is that time of the year. One must ask not only whether predictions were right or wrong, whether one won or lost, but what one was and should have been thinking, whether or not good decisions were made, whether the market made sense. The main subject will be the 2023 ACX Predictions, Section 1: World Politics
I increased my position later, and won M179. The market had occasional spikes downward when Putin looked to potentially be in danger, and for a while it failed to decay properly. Looking back, there was clearly risk that events in Ukraine could have led to Putin’s ouster, and he also could have head health issues. It was clear that I could have gotten much better per diem odds later in the year. So even though I won this bet, I don’t think it was especially good, and Metaculus was overconfident.
I think this was a good bet. Certainly Russia could have completely collapsed, but even then holding onto Crimea was likely. I won M52 here and M50 in the other market. There wasn’t much decay until the second half of the year, but also things looked good for Ukraine for a while, so I think the market acted reasonably relative to itself.
I won M92. I think the assessment of 20% here sounds reasonable. It would not have been that shocking if Ukraine had made it to Luhansk, but it was never likely.
This resolved YES. I bought out on September 6 at 94%, losing M4 on net. I am not following closely enough to know what the right price would have been.
On reflection I think this was too high, should have been more like 15%, the two sides have irreconcilable differences and defense is highly favored. Should have bet NO for real. I won M3.
I think this was reliably trading too high, the sales in October at 17% seem crazy good. I bought more NO at several points in the year, and won M171.
There were a few scares, but I think I should have trusted my gut more on this and doubled down. My move stuck. I ended up winning M285, mostly on the initial move.
I ended up losing M160 on this, because I bought more later in the year. Metaculus vindicated the initial YES instinct by going higher for much of the year, and stayed above Manifold. I think we got lucky here, given the various states that could have done a test for various reasons, even if the chance Russia used one in the war was not so high.
Yep, M4, that was purely a case of things that expire in a year trading at interest rate. On reflection I still do not think 2% was clearly too low, which is pretty scary.
Link does not work here so presumably this ended up N/A, but presumably we can all agree this should have resolved NO. I continue to think 3% a year.
I won M24. My logic here is bad because I failed to ask the right question, which was whether Finland would be willing to join without Sweden. On reflection, yes, under the circumstances it made sense to bring them in, and given that backup scenario this should have traded closer to 90%. If we had been operating under the assumption that Finland wouldn’t join without Sweden, then this was overconfident. So either way, whoops.
I won M171. I continue to be confident that a policy of betting no in such situations will win over time. People think such things are more likely to happen than they are. By middle of the year this was down to 7%, half of which is ‘the interest rate.’
I ended up winning M50 because I made December investments when the market didn’t crash fast enough, M2 on the initial wager. This was largely a bet on how likely other wars were to get deadly, especially African wars that everyone ignores but often have depressingly high death counts. I agree that I didn’t know enough to bet here.
I ended up investing a total of M400 and won M941. This was a very, very good trade, I think this was a heavy favorite to resolve NO. One can imagine what the other side was thinking, but they were asking the wrong question. Section 2: Politics
This was at 92% by April, and I bought a bunch in the 90s late in the year after it was very clearly health issue or bust, winning M132. The calculation here looks good. The key question is whether we should have been far more than 62% confident he would get the nomination. I think clearly yes, and the prediction markets have been and remain to this day insane on this. Biden is trading at 76% right now at PredictIt. Has there ever been a more screaming buy? Nothing I ever say is investment advice, but that is completely bonkers low.
All right, buying the NO on Gavin Newsome right now is actually even better than buying the YES on Joe Biden. I have no idea what the markets are thinking on this. I got M15 for my trouble.
I only won M465 out of this market and I feel bad for not winning more. This was an easy game, a chance to combine two good bets. I gave the market way too much respect on these, forgetting how dumb political prediction markets can be.
I got M553 on this one after doubling down a bunch, as the market took way too long to realize it was over. As my notes indicate, I think this was a crazy good play, it’s insanity to think this should have been a favorite under the uncertainty at the time. I don’t think that is hindsight.
I dipped in a tiny bit more at 77% later, ended up winning M10. Given what happened with Dobbs it seems like we could have been more confident here.
That was good for M59, once more I’m a bit of a coward. The incidents with Thomas made it even clearer than usual that you’re going to have to carry these nine out of there.
We got exactly one and I lost M300 total, because even though I had this weighted towards later in the year there was pitifully little decay, and I continue to bet against Trump participating on Twitter.
Should have bought more. On reflection this was essentially a Can’t Happen, would have required radical change, at most should have been 10%. I ended up winning M222.
I lost M195. Given he got indicted a full four times, I have to assume I was incorrect, although one could view the decisions as highly correlated. Certainly various deals could have been struck, or orders given down to not move forward. I do think that as a reference class this type of thing is an easy NO, especially with Metaculus on my side. Oddly, it now feels hard to imagine how we could have ended up not indicting him, unless he stepped down from running.19
I won M120, doubling down as decay was too slow. Given historical data I am very confident this was too high. I’d put the 2024 line higher than the 2023 line ‘should’ have been, given potential tensions around the election.
I didn’t come back to this and only won M37. I think this was modestly low, but the next question on elections at all is most of the risk and I don’t understand the details there all that well.
Yep, M10 lost. I think this was a good bet if and only if hedged, but again I don’t really know. Section 3: Tech and Economics
Yeah, 90% seems fine on reflection, on the chance that things could have come apart completely in various ways, but he certainly had no intention of leaving. M11.
Whoops. That’s M200 I won’t see again, or would have been if I hadn’t realized my mistake later and hedged remarkably cheaply, so I only lost M10. Whatever one thinks of other metrics, revenue was clearly not a place you wanted to be bullish. Subscriptions were never going to make up for advertising. What I did not properly appreciate was the extent to which advertisers would be willing to ignore their own economic interest under the faintest public pressure. And yet, here we are, with no one stepping up. The whole ‘what if Disney had an add next to a fascist Tweet’ thing was always rather silly, but here we are.
This was at 68% as late as October, then data came out from various sources and people strongly felt that the number went down. I lost M330, because I kept seeing claims that this number was going up, only to have people say it was going down. Was Twitter lying? Can we trust the new numbers? Who knows. The real answer looks like it is remarkably close, I’m not that confident this was resolved to physical reality, and having it as a coin flip was probably fine. As opposed to the revenue question, where I was clearly wrong.
I lost M430 in total after doubling down. I think the 27% number was pretty bonkers, as was getting 13% in June. We got a fortunate result, but it was far from clear that was going to happen. I’m sure I could have hedged this in various ways if I’d cared to.
On reflection I was wrong. AI impact was pretty damn obvious for established firms, so I should have been basic math plus a few percent, not only 1%.
Same as the previous question.
I do think it was reasonable to think that wasn’t priced in, but there’s a reason I keep my opinions mostly anchored to the market in such places.
We closed above $40k. That indicates it was right to be short. If variance is that high, then you are much better off buying Bitcoin than you are betting that Bitcoin will go up. These markets consistently reflect that, I’d be tempted to do the (hedged) trade for size if I could. If you think Bitcoin is more likely than not to go up, it is a screaming buy, it can’t go below $0.
On reflection I should have bought this to 30%. This 23% and the 75% above do not live in the same universe. I bought a bit more later when it was even stupider, ended up making M101.
I ended up making M239 getting much better odds later due to time decay, and as the situation became visibly less risky. On reflection I don’t think I was aggressive enough, at least later on. By mid-February, it was already wildly profitable to be Tether. Even if they had previously bled a bunch of capital, they would recover, and everyone knows this, so the chances of a run on the bank sufficient to break the buck here seem very low. I am definitely in the ‘Tether likely did all the crimes’ camp and also the ‘Tether was insolvent and printing money it couldn’t redeem’ camp, but I think even by February 2023 it was clear they’d gotten away with it. And that they could probably print a metric ton without backing now, if they wanted, collect the interest forever, and no one would ever call them on it.
I won M266. It was close. A lot of economists remain confused how this happened while inflation remained under control. I continue to suspect AI. And also that there is a ‘bunch of ruin’ in the unemployment rate here before it would rise substantially, although we’ve likely eaten through a good portion of that. If this is ‘trading at friction’ then it’s going to be sticky.
There were some arguments but this did safely resolve NO and I won M539. This was an argument over grading, not over facts, everyone agreed no one was going to ‘really’ do this all that often, so ultimately not so interesting.
This was indeed a screaming buy, should have been >95%. Net of M58.
It did indeed go off as NO, I did a few other small additions to net M196. I don’t claim to be an expert but this sure does seem like people were overconfident on many levels, including that SpaceX would be allowed a second chance.
This is currently sitting at 62% as I write this, waiting for the judge. I generated two images for each with DALLE-3, got one that to me is a clear yes and one that could go either way, one that might get fixed with more sampling and two that seem like they won’t get fixed. My guess is that MidJourney 6.0 will get there, but again, know thy judge. Given that we got remarkably good AI detail prompting right on time and this was still trading ambiguously, this was definitely starting out too high.
This traded as if China’s death count was never that high, in which case the NO was clearly a strong favorite the whole way. As always, know how resolution works.
I ended up making M241 once it was clear this was going to be interpreted in a way that excluded all past events. Analysis seems like it aged well.
I bought out of the initial NO in the 20s for a nice profit, but then messed up because I didn’t realize about one that ultimately counted, so I ended up losing M182. A remarkably large percentage percentage of my substantial losses at Manifold are ‘I misread the question’ or ‘I missed something dumb’ rather than anything else. On reflection this was clearly in the works, but given what I knew I think I acted well early on before blowing it later.
People held out hope for a while, but nope, up M73. Things actually took a step backwards.
I ended up losing M187 after taking some buyout late. I am still mildly surprised this ended up not happening. Now we know the whole area has mostly been a bust.
I ended up losing M153. This stayed around 90% right until the end due to uncertainty over resolution. I’m still not entirely sure which article is considered to have counted, or what damage was inflicted. In spirit, I’m not convinced this actually happened. Who was harmed? I am not going to challenge the resolution on Manifold, but I am curious what people think was the case that mattered.
I got M20 on the side market and M219 on the main one. On reflection you normally get advance warning of a declaration, so I should have factored in more ‘time expired’ than I did, and also there will often be one potential source that is higher than usual but others will be lower. I think I was too conservative only going down to 42% and this should have been more like 30%.
No sign that this happened, despite AI being remarkably good at coding, so I ended up down M74 and also was clearly wrong. If AI didn’t do a coding task in 2023 and you predicted it would, that’s on you.
Another clear case of ‘know your judge and know the exact criteria.’ I find all the video generations we have highly disappointing and rather useless, but they definitely count, and we were definitely going to get something that counted here. Ended up winning M200. Overall ResultsDirectionally, I did well. In terms of logic, I think I did fine, but with some definite mistakes. Calibration is not something I calculate, once you anchor to the market it’s mostly about the market’s calibration rather than your own. Of 42 evaluated markets where I traded, I went 30-12, with an average win of +M185 and a coincidentally identical average loss of -M185, due to scaling up and down of various predictions. I did another pass to see what happens on fixed size. I found about a 58% expected win rate based on initial odds. There were a bunch of things over 80%, but I also did date some long shots. I ended up winning 71% of the time. The key differentiator was that when I said something the market said was unlikely (25% or less) was even more unlikely, and I laid the odds, the event did not happen, whichever way the market was worded. This extended to other markets I traded in throughout the year, especially ones with odds in the high 80s or in the 90s. It was almost or entirely a clean sweep. I’m not sure how much correlation was involved here, in the sense that the year lacked crazy events that we couldn’t have seen coming, which tend to cause other crazy events. Probably some. I assume I ran lucky. Can I do it again? Next up are the ACX predictions for 2024. Write up of that is coming up next. Whether we do an additional prediction post beyond that is to be determined.
You're currently a free subscriber to |