---
subject: "The I Ching Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-05-01 18:17:15
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Jason Boog (JB) leads editorial at Jason here. Sometimes when the first page of a new writing project feels especially blank, I pull out my copy of the Chinese masterpiece, the I Ching. To use this 3,000-year-old “Book of Changes,” I shake three pennies in my cupped hands and spill them on the table six times. Then Before starting this WITI newsletter, I threw Hexagram 28 with my pennies. According to my battered copy of I carried those dramatic images and ideas with me for the rest of the week, seeding my notebooks with thoughts about the ideals that brought me to the I Ching many years ago. “A writer’s mind swirls with trivia, images, and a torrent of story ideas,” wrote Jessica Page Morrell in Why is this interesting? The origins of the I Ching are literally mythical, attributed to a Chinese ruler named Fu Xi. This divine emperor is said to have created eight trigrams, each with its own unique balance of the yin and yang forces that flow beneath the universe: Earth, Fire, Heaven, Lake, Mountain, Thunder, Water, and Wind. Those original eight trigrams evolved into 64 hexagrams over the centuries, as generations of authors added spiritual and philosophical commentary like geologic strata in the text, including legendary contributions attributed to King Wen of Zhou and Confucius. (I’m not even remotely qualified as a scholar of Chinese literature, so I recommend reading Eliot Weinberger’s Western readers have sought meaning in this ancient text for centuries. Jesuit missionaries tried to give it a Christian spin in the 18th Century, scholars dissected it in the 19th Century, and generations of mystics, hippies, and New Agers argued about it throughout the 20th. Recent writers have found increasingly dubious uses for the text. There’s The I Ching of Management: An Age-Old Study for New Age Managers, The Golf Ching: Golf Guidance and Wisdom from the I Ching, and, predictably, The I Ching of the Stock Market. “Part of the book’s power is precisely that it has meant so many different things to so many different readers and commentators over the ages,” wrote John Minford in It’s interesting to read descriptions of the creative I Ching experience, but you can actually hear this interpretive process in Geoffrey Poole’s 3-minute song, “ With the pages of 2025 feeling especially blank these days, I turn to the I Ching to think about my own life as well. I don’t believe that there is some cosmic destiny charted for me in the stars, but I love reading what Minford calls the “numinous phrases” in my various translations of the I Ching. These “shards of old belief and myth” reframe my everyday uncertainty and disorganized thoughts with fragments of ancient stories. Change is always coming, whether or not I’m ready for it. There is no single correct way to proceed (in a WITI draft or life), but the I Ching illuminates my path with its numinous language. (JB) Quick Links: If you want to try the traditional yarrow stalk method of I Ching, you can [order a bundle online](https://substack.com/redirect/856adcdb-b658-43b7-b349-fcdacf2b8ded?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). (Apparently “hand-picked in northeast China and individually groomed by hand.”)Why yes, I do have a favorite [I Ching app](https://substack.com/redirect/e88289bd-991b-416b-be4a-d502d99937ff?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). It’s a simple way to try the coin method, and you can build your own digital library of I Ching translations.Philip K. Dick was obsessed with the I Ching, and it became a part of both the story and the construction of [The Man in the High Castle](https://substack.com/redirect/5751fe8b-c15a-4030-9ff3-5f1b3ad4c9e0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).
You're currently a free subscriber to |