---
subject: "The Paris AI Anti-Safety Summit"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-12 13:57:05
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
It doesn’t look good. What used to be the AI Safety Summits were perhaps the most promising thing happening towards international coordination for AI Safety. This one was centrally coordination against AI Safety.
The practical focus was on Responsible Scaling Policies (RSPs), where commitments were secured from the major labs, and laying the foundations for new institutions. The summit ended with And it ended with a commitment to a series of future summits to build upon success. It’s over. With the Paris AI ‘Action’ Summit, that dream seems to be dead. The French and Americans got together to dance on its grave, and to loudly proclaim their disdain for the idea that building machines that are smarter and more capable than humans might pose any sort of existential or catastrophic risks to the humans. They really do mean the effect of jobs, and they assure us it will be positive, and they will not tolerate anyone saying otherwise. It would be one thing if the issue was merely that the summit-ending declaration. That happens. This goes far beyond that. The EU is even walking backwards steps it has already planned, such as (Also, An Actively Terrible Summit Statement
The UK government is right, except this was even worse. The statement is not merely inadequate but actively harmful, and they were right not to sign it. That is the right reason to refuse. Unfortunately the USA not only did not refuse for the right reasons, our own delegation demanded the very cripplings Daniel is discussing here. Then we still didn’t sign on, because of the DEI-flavored talk.
This is where I previously tried to write that this doesn’t, on its own, mean the Summit dream is dead, that the ship can still be turned around. Based on everything we know now, I can’t hold onto that anymore. We shouldn’t entirely blame the French, though. Not only is the USA not standing up for the idea of existential risk, we’re demanding no one talk about it, it’s quite a week for Arson, Murder and Jaywalking it seems:
That’s right. Cartoon villainy. We are straight-up starring in Don’t Look Up. The Suicidal Accelerationist Speech by JD VanceJD Vance is very obviously a smart guy. And he’s shown that when the facts and the balance of power change, he is capable of changing his mind. Let’s hope he does again. But until then, if there’s one thing he clearly loves, it’s being mean in public, and twisting the knife.
After that, it gets worse.
His bold stance on trying to ensure humans survive? Instead he asserts there are too many regulations on AI already. To him, the important thing to do is to get rid of what checks still exist, and to browbeat other countries in case they try to not go quietly into the night.
And here’s the line everyone will be quoting for a long time.
He ends by doing the very on-brand Lafayette thing, and also going the full mile, implicitly claiming that AI isn’t dangerous at all, why would you say that building machines smarter and more capable than people might go wrong except if the wrong people got there first, what is wrong with you?
‘Could be conceived of’ as dangerous? Why think AI could be dangerous? This is madness. Absolute madness. He could not be more clear that he intends to go down the path that gets us all killed. Are there people inside the Trump administration who do not buy into this madness? I am highly confident that there are. But overwhelmingly, the message we get is clear. What is Vance concerned about instead, over and over? ‘Ideological bias.’ Censorship. ‘Controlling user’s thoughts.’ That ‘big tech’ might get an advantage over ‘little tech.’ He has been completely captured and owned, likely by exactly the worst possible person. As in: Marc Andreessen and company are seemingly puppeting the administration, repeating their zombie debunked absolutely false talking points.
He repeats here the known false claims that ‘Big Tech’ is calling for regulation to throttle competition. Whereas the truth is that all the relevant regulations have consistently been vehemently opposed in both public and private by all the biggest relevant tech companies: OpenAI, Microsoft, Google including DeepMind, Meta and Amazon. I am verifying once again, that based on everything I know, privately these companies are more opposed to regulations, not less. The idea that they ‘secretly welcome’ regulation is a lie (I’d use The Big Lie, but that’s taken), and Vance knows better. Period. Anthropic’s and Musk’s (not even xAI’s) regulatory support has been, at the best of times, lukewarm. They hardly count as Big Tech. What is going to happen, if we don’t stop the likes of Vance? He warns us.
Yes. It will transform your atoms. Into something else.
If we were hot on the trail of every other technology and build baby build was the watchword in every way and we also were racing to AGI, I would still want to maybe consider ensuring AGI didn’t kill everyone. But at least I would understand. Instead, somehow, this is somehow the one time so many want to boldly go. The same goes for policy. If the full attitude really was, we need to Win the Future and Beat China, and we are going to do whatever it takes, and we acted on that, then all right, we have some very important implementation details to discuss, but I get it. When I saw the initial permitting reform actions, I thought maybe that’s the way things would go. Instead, the central things the administration is doing are alienating our allies over less than nothing, including the Europeans, and damaging our economy in various ways getting nothing in return. Tariffs on intermediate goods like steel and aluminum, and threatening them on Canada, Mexico and literal GPUs? Banning solar and wind on federal land? Shutting down PEPFAR with zero warning? More restrictive immigration? The list goes on. Even when he does mean the effect on jobs, Vance only speaks of positives. Vance has blind faith that AI will never replace human beings, despite the fact that in some places it is already replacing human beings. Talk to any translators lately? Currently it probably is net creating jobs, but that is very much not a universal law or something to rely upon, nor does he propose any way to help ensure this continues.
This means JD Vance does not ‘feel the AGI’ but more than that it confirms his words do not have meaning and are not attempting to map to reality. It’s an article of faith, because to think otherwise would be inconvenient. Tap the sign.
What Did France Care About?
The French seem to have mostly used
France does have a lot of nuclear power plants, which does mean it makes sense to put some amount of hardware infrastructure in France if the regulatory landscape isn’t too toxic to it. That seems to be what they care about. Something To Remember You By: Get Your Safety FrameworksThe concrete legacy of the Summits is likely to be safety frameworks. All major Western labs (not DeepSeek) have now issued safety frameworks under various names (the ‘no two have exactly the same name’ schtick is a running gag, can’t stop now). All that we have left are these and other voluntary commitments. You can also track
I’ll cover the three new ones here in this section. Amazon’s is strong on security as its main focus but otherwise a worse stripped-down version of Google’s. You can see the contrast clearly. They know security like LeBron James knows ball, so they have lots of detail about how that works. They don’t know about catastrophic or existential risks so everything is vague and confused. See in particular their description of Automated AI R&D as a risk.
Classic I did appreciate that Amazon understands you need to test for dangers during training. Microsoft has some interesting innovations in theirs, overall I am pleasantly surprised. They explicitly use the 10^26 flops threshold, as well as a list of general capability benchmark areas, to trigger the framework, which also can happen if they simply expect frontier capabilities, and they run these tests throughout training. They note they will use available capability elicitation techniques to optimize performance, and extrapolate to take into account anticipated resources that will become available to bad actors. They call their ultimate risk assessment ‘holistic.’ This is unavoidable to some extent, we always must rely on the spirit of such documents. They relegate the definitions of their risk levels to the Appendix. They copy the rule of ‘meaningful uplift’ for CBRN and cybersecurity. For autotomy, they use this:
That is actually a pretty damn good definition. Their critical level is effectively ‘the Singularity is next Tuesday’ but the definition above for high-threat is where they won’t deploy. If Microsoft wanted to pretend sufficiently to go around their framework, or management decided to do this, I don’t see any practical barriers to that. We’re counting on them choosing not to do it. On security, their basic answer is that they are Microsoft and they too know security like James knows ball, and to trust them, and offer fewer details than Amazon. Their track record makes one wonder, but okay, sure. Their safety mitigations section does not instill confidence, but it does basically say ‘we will figure it out and won’t deploy until we do, and if things are bad enough we will stop development.’ I don’t love the governance section, which basically says ‘executives are in charge.’ Definitely needs improvement. But overall, this is better than I expected from Microsoft.
It spells out the particular benchmarks they plan to use: VCT, WMDP, LAB-Bench, BioLP-Bench and Cybench. Kudos for coming out and declaring exactly what will be used. They note current reference scores, but not yet what would trigger mitigations. I worry these benchmarks are too easy, and quite close to saturation? Nex they address the risk of loss of control. It’s nice that they do not want Grok to ‘have emergent value systems that are not aligned with humanity’s interests.’ And I give them props for outright saying ‘our evaluation and mitigation plans for loss of control are not fully developed, and we intend to remove them in the future.’ Much better to admit you don’t know, then to pretend. I also appreciated their discussion of the AI Agent Ecosystem, although the details of what they actually say doesn’t seem promising or coherent yet. Again, they emphasize benchmarks. I worry it’s an overemphasis, and an overreliance. While it’s good to have hard numbers to go on, I worry about xAI potentially relying on benchmarks alone without red teaming, holistic evaluations or otherwise looking to see what problems are out there. They mention external review of the framework, but not red teaming, and so on. Both the Amazon and Microsoft frameworks feel like attempts to actually sketch out a plan for checking if models would be deeply stupid to release and, if they find this is the case, not releasing them. Most of all, they take the process seriously, and act like the whole thing is a good idea, even if there is plenty of room for improvement. xAI’s is less complete, as is suggested by the fact that it says ‘DRAFT’ on every page. But they are clear about that, and their intention to make improvements and flesh it out over time. It also has other issues, and fits the Elon Musk pattern of trying to do everything in a minimalist way, which I don’t think works here, but I do sense that they are trying. Meta’s is different. As I noted before, Meta’s reeks with disdain for the whole process. It’s like the kid who says ‘mom is forcing me to apologize so I’m sorry,’ but who wants to be sure you know that they really, really don’t mean it. What Do We Think About Voluntary Commitments?They can be important, or not worth the paper they’re not printed on. Peter Wildeford notes that voluntary commitments have their advantages: This makes a lot of sense if (my list): There are a limited number of relevant actors, and can be held responsible. They are willing to play ball. We can keep an eye on what they are actually doing. We can and would intervene in time if things are about to get out hand, or if companies went dangerously back on their commitments, or completely broke the spirit of the whole thing, or action proved otherwise necessary.
We need all four. Right now, we kind of have #1. For #2, you can argue about the others but Meta has made it exceedingly clear they won’t play ball, so if they count as a frontier lab (honestly, at this point, potentially debatable, but yeah) then we have a serious problem. Without [the Biden Executive Order](https://substack.com/redirect/bb9f4685-d14a-4087-84a2-44d8ac62ac45?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)and without SB 1047 we don’t yet have the basic transparency for #3. And the Trump Administration keeps burning every bridge around the idea that they might want to know what is going on.I have less than no faith in this, at this point. You’re on your own, kid.
Then we get to Wildeford’s reasons for pessimism. [Voluntary commitments risk “safety washing” and backtracking](https://substack.com/redirect/7dc8adc9-54f1-4726-b1d9-25329852fd49?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).As in google said no AI for weapons, then did Project Nimbus, and now says never mind, they’re no longer opposed to AI for weapons.
[Companies face a lot of bad incentives and fall prey to a “Prisoner’s Dilemma](https://substack.com/redirect/7ef5b949-f96a-4fcf-b174-3d9ff71770ff?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)”(I would remind everyone once again, no, this is a Stag Hunt.) It does seem that DeepSeek Ruined It For Everyone, as they did such a good marketing job everyone panicked, said ‘oh look someone is defecting, guess it’s all over then, that means we’re so back’ and here we are. Once again, this is a reminder that DeepSeek cooked and was impressive with v3 and r1, but they did not fully ‘catch up’ to the major American labs, and they will be in an increasingly difficult position given their lack of good GPUs.
[There are limited opportunities for iteration when the risks are high-stakes.](https://substack.com/redirect/36bbc50c-e240-49b3-b9cb-335a716b0db3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Yep, I trust voluntary commitments and liability law to work when you can rely on error correction. At some point, we no longer can do that here. And rather than prepare to iterate, the current Administration seems determined to tear down even ordinary existing law, including around AI.
[AI might be moving too fast for voluntary commitments](https://substack.com/redirect/84ad75fa-c56a-4812-8b41-821e2c5b509b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).This seems quite likely to me. I’m not sure ‘time’s up’ yet, but it might be.
At minimum, we need to be in aggressive transparency and information gathering and state capacity building mode now, if we want the time to intervene later should we turn out to be in a short timelines world. This Is the End
There are those who need to summarize the outcomes politely:
Also in this category is
In between those, he repeats what he has said in other places recently. He attempts here to frame this as a ‘missed opportunity,’ which it is, but it was clearly far worse than that. Not only were we not building a foundation for future cooperation together, we were actively working to tear it down and also growing increasingly hostile.
Read that carefully. This is almost Japanese levels of very politely screaming that the house is on fire. You have to notice what he does not say. Shall we summarize more broadly?
Also see: That doesn’t mean everyone agreed to go quietly into the night. There was dissent.
What dissent was left mostly was largely about the ‘ethical’ risks.
That’s right, she means the effect on jobs. And ‘public infrastructure’ and ‘sustainability’ which does not mean what it really, really should in this context. Throw in the fact the Europeans now are cheering DeepSeek and ‘open source’ because they really, really don’t like the Americans right now, and want to pretend that the EU is still relevant here, without stopping to think any of it through whatsoever.
Which makes everything that much harder. To that, let’s add Sam Altman’s declaration this week in his Three Observations post that they know their intention to charge forward unsafely is going to be unpopular, but he’s going to do it anyway because otherwise authoritarians win, and also everything’s going to be great and you’ll all have infinite genius at your fingertips.
A “design choice”? And who gets to make this “design choice”? Is Altman going to take over the world and preclude anyone else from making an AI agent that can be a substitute? Also, what about the constant talk, including throughout OpenAI, of ‘drop-in workers’? Why do they think they can lie to us so brazenly? Why do we keep letting them get away with it? The Odds Are Against Us and the Situation is GrimAgain. It doesn’t look good.
All reports are that, in the wake of Trump and DeepSeek, we not only have a vibe shift, we have everyone involved that actually holds political power completely losing their minds. They are determined to go full speed ahead. Rhetorically, if you even mention the fact that this plan probably gets everyone killed, they respond that they cannot worry about that, they cannot lift a single finger to (for example) ask to be informed by major labs of their frontier model training runs, because if they do that then we will Lose to China. Everyone goes full jingoist and wraps themselves in the flag and ‘freedom,’ full ‘innovation’ and so on. Meanwhile, from what I hear, the Europeans think that Because DeepSeek they can compete with America too, so they’re going to go full speed on the zero-safeguards plan. Without any thought, of course, to how highly capable open AIs could be compatible with the European form of government, let alone human survival. I would note that this absolutely does vindicate the ‘get regulation done before the window closes’ strategy. The window may already be closed, fate already sealed, especially on the Federal level. If action does happen, it will probably be in the wake of some new crisis, and the reaction likely won’t be wise or considered or based on good information or armed with relevant state capacity or the foundations of international cooperation. Because we chose otherwise. What is important now is, okay, the situation is even worse than we thought. The Trump Administration has made its position very clear. It intends not only to not prevent, but to hasten along and make more likely our collective annihilation. Hopes for international coordination to mitigate existential risks are utterly collapsing. One could say that they are mostly pursuing a ‘vibes-based’ strategy. That one can mostly ignore the technical details, and certainly shouldn’t be parsing the logical meaning of statements. But if so, all the vibes are rather maximally terrible and are being weaponized. And also vibes-based decision making flat out won’t cut it here. We need extraordinarily good thinking, not to stop thinking entirely. It’s not only the United States. Even if we do heroically solve the technical problems, What the hell do we do about all this now? How do we, as they say, ‘play to our outs,’ and follow good decision theory? Don’t Panic But Also Face RealityActually panicking accomplishes nothing. So does denying that the house is on fire. The house is on fire, and those in charge are determined to fan the flames. We need to plan and act accordingly. We need to ask, what would it take to rhetorically change the game? What alternative pathways are available for action, both politically and otherwise? How do we limit the damage done here while we try to turn things around? If we truly are locked into the nightmare, where humanity’s most powerful players are determined to race (or even fight a ‘war’) to AGI and ASI as quickly as possible, that doesn’t mean give up. It does mean adjust your strategy, look for remaining paths to victory, apply proper decision theory and fight the good fight. Big adjustments will be needed. But also, we must be on the lookout against despair. Remember that the AI anarchists, and the successionists who want to see humans replaced, and those who care only about their investment portfolios, specialize in mobilizing vibes and being loud on the internet, in order to drive others into despair and incept that they’ve already won. Some amount of racing to AGI does look inevitable, at this point. But I do not think all future international cooperation dead, or anything like that, nor do we need this failure to forever dominate our destiny. There’s no reason this path can’t be revised in the future, potentially in quite a hurry, simply because Macron sold out humanity for thirty pieces of silver and the currently the Trump administration is in thrall to those determined to do the same. As capabilities advance, people will be forced to confront the situation, on various levels. There likely will be crises and disasters along the way. Don’t panic. Don’t despair. And don’t give up. You're currently a free subscriber to |