---
subject: "The Lotto Jackpot Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-08-08 10:12:04
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Zach Seward (ZS) is a journalist and media entrepreneur who co-founded the business news organization Quartz, where he worked until earlier this year. Now he’s Zach here. Lotteries are obviously a scam, but did you know the scam is getting worse? The jackpot for tomorrow’s Mega Millions drawing is advertised at $1.55 billion. Just last month, Powerball's top prize also This is not happening by chance. One factor is that players face longer odds of winning it all. In 2015, Powerball The other reason is that lotteries inflate the value of their jackpots, and current economic conditions are compounding the lie. WITI Classifieds: We are experimenting with running some weekly classifieds in WITI. If you’re interested in running an ad, Interpreting the internet for the tasteful reader. Join 23,000+ subscribers who rely on Dirt for their cultural alpha. Why is this interesting? You probably know that lottery jackpots are expressed two ways: the "cash value" and "advertised value." The cash value is based on revenue from ticket sales, after retailers and state lottery groups take their cut and other prizes are doled out. If nobody hits the jackpot, the prize pool carries over to the next drawing. In other words, the cash value is the actual amount of money waiting in the pot. Advertised values, on the other hand, are projections of how much money the winner could accumulate by allowing the lottery to conservatively invest the cash jackpot and pay out a little at a time, otherwise known as an The cash value is often presented as a "lump-sum option" for those impatient to collect their winnings at a discount. But it's the opposite: The lump sum is all there is, and the additional funds that get you to the advertised value are generated by investing the money, which the winner could do on their own. Of course, the advertised value is what gets, well, advertised—by the lotteries themselves and in This is a pretty grumpy take on my part, I know. But lotteries — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Zach (ZS) —
You're currently a free subscriber to |