---
subject: "Links For December 2024"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-12-17 04:56:21
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX"]
---
[I haven’t independently verified each link. On average, commenters will end up spotting evidence that around two or three of the links in each links post are wrong or misleading. I correct these as I see them, and will highlight important corrections later, but I can’t guarantee I will have caught them all by the time you read this.] 1: Action movie star 2: 3: 4: Rootclaim’s $1 million debate bet with Steve Kirsch over the costs vs. benefits of the COVID vaccine 5: 6: From 7: Study: women who are more prone to intrasexual competition 8: A Conservative rabbinical assembly has released 9: The guy who accidentally threw away a hard drive with $700 million in Bitcoin 10: Michael Moore, famous for being one of the few people who predicted Trump’s win in 2016, very confidently declared that Trump would not win again this year ( 12: 13: 14: 15: Lawrence Kesteloot has made 16: A politician who 17: Is it true that the taller candidate usually wins US presidential elections? 18: Zvi: 19: Good 20: Why does exercise help lose weight? Part of the reason is that the exercise itself burns calories, but another part is that athletes have higher resting metabolic rate. Why? Apparently a big part of this is that 21: 22: 23: Matt Yglesias on 24: 25: Heterodox Academy has a new magazine, 26: 27: In 2021, I gave Yoram Bauman an ACX Grant to lobby for carbon taxation at the state level. He’s been doing that, but recently he also 28: 29: 30: Related: we talked before 31: 32: Bentham’s Bulldog 33: Seen 34: 35: Ozy on 36: I think 37: 38: Freddie de Boer says he was 39: 40: Someone did an AI Turing Test on poetry and found that people preferred AI-generated to real ( 41: Congratulations to ACX reader Jerred Shepherd, who 42: There are increasingly many attempts to make crypto directly useful (ie without state-controlled onramps and offramps) for the average consumer. 43: Also related to crypto: Marc Andreesen went on Joe Rogan and made some explosive claims about the government debanking crypto founders for political reasons. These increasingly seem to be false. Patrick McKenzie has a good (albeit long and complicated) rundown I still think there’s a pro-crypto lesson here, albeit maybe not the one he intended. Banks are unaccountable amoral actors who have no qualms about cutting you out of the global financial system if an algorithm says people vaguely like you have posed a regulatory risk in the past, all banks are like this in a correlated way, and it would be nice to have some means of financial system access which isn’t like this. 44: Apropos of our recent conversation about policing, 45: New Substack, 46: Trump bends the knee H/T Richard Hanania, who also points out that Trump’s Labor Secretary pick 47: Byrne Hobart has a book out, Boom, arguing that economic bubbles are a productive force, then expanding that into a broader theory of history and stagnation. Review 48: Garrison Lovely published the 49: There’s been a Twitter spat over effective altruism. Back in 2019, Peter Singer published an article saying that rich donors gave $1 billion to rebuild Notre Dame after a fire, but that could have saved ~285,000 lives and maybe donors should take that equally seriously. This month, the NYT used “effective altruists are against restoring Notre Dame” as a jumping-off point for its real complaint (it would rather we have "a philanthropy network that gave specifically to social justice movements . . . racial justice groups, climate justice groups and transgender protection groups"). There were several good responses, most notably (my own opinion on Notre Dame: although you can come up with a model in which charitable dollars are zero-sum - each dollar I donate to the cathedral doesn’t go to Giving What We Can - this doesn’t really describe charity on the social level, where some donors are more excited about global health and others about national pride. To a first approximation, these things don’t funge, and attempting to capture the tiny bit of value from the ways they do funge isn’t worth making everyone in the world mad at us. Funding Notre Dame is in the top percentile of uses for money, and it feels mean-spirited to snipe at it and not at everything else in the world. People should consider donating a fixed fraction of their income that makes sense to them to effective charity, then feel free to use the rest for whatever they want, including other charity, without getting criticized.) I think the responses landed one clear hit - NYT accused EA of being “the dominant way to think about charity” and steamrolling other cause areas, but only about 0.18% of charitable giving is to EA causes and the NYT article should be considered a currently dominant paradigm trying to crush an underdog. But I also think that, overall, this is a story of us screwing up and taking the NYT’s bait. The world really wants to believe that effective altruists are evil humorless people who want to prevent every kind of good except raw life-saving and think you’re a moral monster for not agreeing. One thing I’ve learned in my time as a blogger is that if the world wants to think something that much, they will seize on anything at all in your writing that even faintly suggests it, and so you can’t afford to be even slightly edgy or ambiguous, and really you should insert “BY THE WAY, I'M NOT SAYING THE HORRIBLE THING YOU’RE DESPERATE TO ATTRIBUTE TO ME” every other sentence as a reminder. Not every response did this, so a lot of people seized on this as EA admitting that we hate cathedrals and human flourishing and probably you personally. This maybe isn’t entirely their fault? Utilitarianism doesn’t have a great theory of obligation, and it’s genuinely hard to assert “remember that your donation could save a life” without at least slightly implying “you are a moral monster for not donating more”. I would argue that effective altruists didn’t invent the fact that donations could save lives, it’s not our fault, and we’re at least working on the philosophical project of finding a balance between the Scylla of putting our fingers in our ears and denying that charity is possible, and the Charybdis of having everyone be infinitely condemned for not giving more to it. Relevant posts I’ve written are I also got in 50: Related: Sarah Constantin describes her new job at Renaissance Philanthropy, 51: Quantified Self ( 52: Nicholas Reville of Recursive Adaptation has published his 53: 54: There’s 55: The “fastest growing new religion in the world” is the cult of You're currently a free subscriber to |