---
subject: "First Principles: Hope IS a strategy"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-01-25 05:43:07
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
First Principles
Sun, 25 Jan 26
A community-powered Sunday newsletter on mental models, self-reflection, learning, growth, photos, books, and more.
Dear Ishan, winter is on its last legs. The skies are gray, the weather is dry, and the air is still. Everywhere you look, the trees are depressing shades of brown, brown-green, or dirty-green. Except the Indian almond tree, many of whose leaves have turned a bright and fiery red before they fall ahead of the impending spring. Another “almond” tree that has red tricks up its sleeve is the Java almond. You can see some of them around the Domlur flyover as you approach Indiranagar, laden with garish and suggestive red fruit that absolutely make your head turn.
As winter fades, cozying up is also on its last legs.
Yeah, that’s Gabru who decided to snuggle up against me as I was writing on Saturday morning. By evening, he was all fluffed up after his weekly bath, like Hobbes fresh from a rinse-and-spin in the washing machine!
Currently listening to: Work Energy Principle (The Chemical Brothers)
[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vtDV4Jxmmn0&list=RDvtDV4Jxmmn0&start_radio=1](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vtDV4Jxmmn0&list=RDvtDV4Jxmmn0&start_radio=1)
Currently reading: The Greatest Malayalam Stories Ever Told
[https://www.alephbookcompany.com/book/the-greatest-malayalam-stories-ever-told/](https://www.alephbookcompany.com/book/the-greatest-malayalam-stories-ever-told/)
Currently watching: Season 5, The Wire
[What rewatching ‘The Wire’ taught me about nostalgia for a lost America](https://www.ft.com/content/0e8676f0-6f16-40f7-ab17-f7c35fac7b84) – Kabir Chibber (FT)
Here’s everything we have for you in First Principles this week:
1. Hope IS a strategy
2. Breaking out of the mould 📚
3. Landscape mode: on 📸
[Pro tip: This email is a highly abbreviated version, since many email clients impose restrictions on the amount of material we can publish in a single email before intervention. In fact, it’s likely some email clients may even clip this truncated email.
The best way to experience this edition is to read it on our [website](https://the-ken.com/newsletter/first-principles/hope-is-a-strategy/) or [app](https://the-ken.com/newsletter/first-principles/hope-is-a-strategy/), where all sections are featured in full and unabridged form.
Also, if your default setting is to not show images within emails, please consider turning it off for this newsletter. Or else, you’ll miss many of the interesting images and photos we carry each Sunday.]
“We are in the midst of a rupture, not a transition,” said Canada’s PM, Mark Carney, earlier this week at Davos in what felt like a [speech for the ages](https://www.thenewworld.co.uk/mark-carneys-speech-we-cant-work-with-trump-so-build-a-new-world/). I couldn’t help parse it as a second avatar of the [Non-Aligned Movement](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/India_and_the_Non-Aligned_Movement) from the 1950s, with India’s then-PM Jawaharlal Nehru arguing for pretty much the same.
We are indeed in the midst of a rupture, not just in global geopolitics, but also in our careers and lives.
Careers can no longer be taken as a given. College was about education, then it became about jobs, and now it’s not about that either. You can have too much experience, too little experience, or be seen as useless in middle management. Homes look out of reach, as does having children. Between AI, venture capital, private equity, crypto, and, well, America, it’s hard to understand who’s using whom, who’s grifting whom, or who’s eating whom. And yesterday’s lovable, scrappy, and fun technology companies are today’s nation-size viruses, infecting, extracting, consuming, and eliminating every activity we know, whether work or leisure.
So, yes, we’re very much in the midst of a rupture.
This became starker to me when my colleague and the First Principles books editor, Tanim, asked about my favourite business books of 2025. I looked back through my reading list and realised I’d bought quite a few, read only some, but truly enjoyed only two.
And neither of those were “business books”.
One was Impro (I talked about it in a [recent edition](https://the-ken.com/newsletter/first-principles/why-we-join-companies-but-leave-teams/)) and the other, [Finite and Infinite Games](https://the-ken.com/newsletter/first-principles/the-infinite-game-and-the-player/).
I realise I’m no longer drawn to books that talk about specific companies or business concepts, because they are starting to feel irrelevant in this rupture we’re in. Can you imagine a Jeff Bezos starting out today with a similar intensity of vision? Do you feel like understanding how Facebook came to be? Do you believe that OKRs are a great way to run your company in order to thrive in this age of chaos? Do you want to understand the method behind making apps and services addictive? Or how to make yourself immune?
Me neither.
At one level, I find myself drawn away from the “surface” of business knowledge toward seemingly unrelated, but deeper concepts that feel more timeless.
Aren’t our entire lives and careers just “improv” performances, with us faking and making it as we go along? Aren’t they also games, many of which we suck at but are forced to play?
What dies inside us along the way? Hope.
In past editions we’ve talked about the importance of [“Beliefs”](https://the-ken.com/newsletter/first-principles/first-principles-horror-vacui/). We’ve talked about translating those beliefs to [“Actions”](https://the-ken.com/newsletter/first-principles/the-third-value/).
We haven’t talked about hope.
“Hope is not a strategy,” goes that old chestnut, usually repeated by either expensively salaried consultants and executives, or Linkedin’s AI-powered tech bros.
Except, it very much is.
If you’re optimistic, you believe that the future will turn out well. Optimists tend to be happy but complacent, waiting patiently for a bright tomorrow. Hopeful people, on the other hand, believe that things might turn out well—but they also believe that in that context of uncertainty, actions matter. Being hopeful doesn’t just involve imagining positive outcomes, in other words. It also involves willpower (a desire to bring about hoped for outcomes), and waypower (the charting of a clear path to achieve them).
Because hopeful people make plans for and work toward the future they want, they’re more effective than optimists. In [one study](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0092656611001139), hope, but not optimism, predicted performance among law students. In [another study](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/job.492), hopeful executives from Fortune 100 companies performed more effectively at work and produced more creative solutions to problems than less hopeful ones, even when accounting for their intelligence.
Hope ignites virtuous cycles at work.
Hopeful individuals work hard and think broadly. [A recent meta-study](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/17439760.2013.800903) of more than 11,000 employees found that hope was correlated with wellbeing and positive morale at work. Hope also encourages virtuous cycles among colleagues. In [a 2024 study](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0263237323000300), workers who felt supported—especially by their supervisors—experienced greater waypower and used that power for good. In doing so, they grew more committed to their organizations and helped their colleagues more frequently.
[The Strategic Power of Hope](https://hbr.org/2024/12/the-strategic-power-of-hope) by Jamil Zaki, Harvard Business Review
Hope isn’t just an emotion, but a complex system with feedback loops that simultaneously pulls us towards a future we imagine possible, while also helping us course-correct when we stumble.
Psychologist C R Snyder developed a wonderful conceptual [theory of hope](https://blogs.shu.ac.uk/growplus/files/2020/02/Hope-Synder-paper.pdf) which breaks it into three components: goals, “pathways thinking” (the way forward) and “agency thinking” (our will).
For a high-hope person pursuing a specific goal, this pathways thinking entails the production of one plausible route, with a concomitant sense of confidence in this route. As such, high- as compared to low-hope persons should be more decisive (and certain) about the pathways for their goals; this premise has been supported in regard to career goals. For a low-hope person, on the other hand, the pathways thinking is far more tenuous, and the resulting route is not well articulated. Using laboratory tasks involving listening preferences, memory (free recall and recognition), and self-report about typical self-talk, we have found consistent support for high- as compared to low-hope persons’ affirming and positive internal pathways messages (e.g., “I’ll find a way to get this done). Beyond the primary route, the high-hope person also should be very good at producing plausible alternate routes. The low-hope person, on the other hand, should be unlikely to produce alternate routes. High-hope people describe themselves as being flexible thinkers who are facile at finding alternate route whereas low-hope persons report that they are less flexible and do not produce these additional routes; moreover, high-hope people actually are very effective at producing alternative routes-especially during circumstances when they are impeded.
Hope Theory: Rainbows in the Mind by C R Snyder
Snyder’s theory holds that hope is a process through which some people (“high-hope” individuals) define ambitious goals, enjoy chasing them, perceive obstacles as challenges rather than failures, and are thus more resilient when things go awry.
And yes, hope is contagious and works for organisations too.
Through our research, we found that this organization shared a hopeful vision for the future as part of everyday conversation. When times looked bleak, employees turned to the vision and reminded themselves that their efforts could help heal those who had been trafficked. They believed their methods, which included therapeutic, psychological, legal, and social services, were effective. Finally, they kept their motivation alive by providing opportunities for employees to socialize and bond, and leaders regularly emphasized the importance of sticking together when times were tough.
At times, the hope culture brought this organization positive results – it was vibrant and full of life, and even decided to expand its goals beyond their initial scope. We found that [emotional contagion](https://hbr.org/2012/07/emotional-contagion-can-ta), which is the transfer of moods among group members, was a key driver in determining the impact of the hope culture on outcomes. When events suggested that the organization’s promises seemed within reach, hopeful stories spread throughout the team.
[Research: The Complicated Role of Hope in the Workplace](https://hbr.org/2022/10/research-the-complicated-role-of-hope-in-the-workplace) by Katina Sawyer and Judy Clair, Harvard Business Review
Hello Ishan, it’s Tanim with the books section. And like Rohin, many of us at The Ken don’t typically read what you’d call a traditional business book. When I asked my colleagues if they’d read any business books last year, almost everyone said no, until I stretched that definition. I didn’t do this just to find material for this edition, but because one of the primary purposes of a business book—to gain knowledge and inspiration for your business—can now be fulfilled by so many other types of books.
Consider the New York Time’s Bestsellers list for business books, only three/four are purely about business or finance. The rest focus on first-principles thinking. By contrast, if you look at recommendations from Harvard Business Review, Financial Times, or Forbes, you’ll find mostly traditional picks. What is different about the NYT list is that it isn’t an editorial selection; it reflects the sales data collected from vendors and updated weekly.
| Source: New York Times "Even in the top five, only two are exclusively business books" |
As for me, I did read a conventional business book called [The Thinking Machine](https://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/757558/the-thinking-machine-by-stephen-witt/). There was no rationale behind choosing it, except that I wanted to read a business book and it was one of the books that was recommended by my colleague Brady Ng.
The first half of the book reads like a history lesson with computer stuff mixed in. Early on, I had to ask Sakshi, who studied electrical engineering, to explain a particular concept to me.
I went in not knowing who Jensen Huang was, but this book serves as a crash course on his and Nvidia’s role in building AI, so I was quickly caught up. The author tries hard (and succeeds) to bring Huang to life, though Huang himself doesn’t like to reveal much, quipping that he “isn’t into therapy”. That’s why the history lesson after he joins Nvidia grows somewhat boring. Aside from Huang’s quirks and the occasional caricature of the important people in AI’s development, it’s mostly a rundown of Nvidia’s projects. In fact, if it weren’t for the final few chapters, the book might not have been written at all.
Those last few chapters explore the rise of AI and Nvidia’s relentless push to counter the negativity around it, which Huang is still skeptical of, as he’s complained about it even recently. We also get the author’s personal perspective on interacting with AI.
But even when I tried to embrace the upside of AI, I couldn’t shake my anxiety. The more I used the AI models, the more I questioned my own role. Not only would they soon be able to write better than I would; with time, even my interviews would be filtered by AI. I imagined video-chatting with some powerful executive and unwittingly interviewing his digital AI clone, never myself the wiser. It seemed to me that the end of my profession was approaching. It seemed to me that the end of reality was approaching. It seemed to me that the end of consciousness was approaching. Was Huang, seduced by the power of what he’d built, gambling with the future of our species? I had to know. I had to ask him one last time.
AI could never have written the above paragraph. And that is why Stephen Witt needn’t be as worried as he portrays here because this is one of my top five moments in the book. In an age of information overload, statements of fact are less compelling than a point of view. A thought. An opinion. And finally, I now relate to what a friend once told me about Pluribus, that the “hive mind” is a loose representation of AI.
Now, if you are a techie or enjoy computer stuff, you will appreciate the book’s many tech metaphors. Remember that concept Sakshi explained? She found it interesting because of her background. To me, it was just another line. A simple explanation. So it makes sense that I was surprised this was the FT Business Book of the Year for 2025. I lacked the context to fully enjoy the first half, but once the journalist brings more of himself into the narrative, I was hooked until the last page.
Now, before I close my section, I owe a public apology to my colleagues who took time from their busy schedules to talk about the business books they read. That will have to wait another week before I can share it with you.
In the meantime, if you have read a book related to business or your profession, share it with us [here](https://theken.typeform.com/FPBooks?typeform-source=the-ken.com). Let’s see if any titles match the recommendations I received from my colleagues. It would be so cool to see how two different people experience the same book. If you have read The Thinking Machine and want to share your thoughts with the community, please write to us at [fp@the-ken.com](mailto:fp@the-ken.com).
Good morning Ishan, this is Sakshi and welcome to Silent Sundays. If you’re new here, this column features photographs captured and shared by our community. If you have a unique image you’d like to contribute, you’re welcome to submit it [using this link](https://theken.typeform.com/fpsilentsundays).
While going through this week’s submissions, I realised how rarely I now photograph in landscape. In a world shaped by scrolling and portrait frames, my phone almost instinctively turns vertical, often with an Instagram post in mind. Seeing today’s collection was a gentle reminder of how expansive and immersive landscape images can be.
With that in mind, let’s take a moment and look a little wider.
From Vyom Gautam, The Gabba, Brisbane: “The charm of Test cricket is how it contrasts perfectly with our hectic day to day lives.”
| The Gabba, Brisbane (Vyom Gautam) |
From Arun K Kaul, Montmorency Falls:
| Montmorency Falls, Quebec City, Canada (Arun K Kaul) |
From Mayank Jain, Mumbai: “First morning of the year. Overnight rain helped in reducing the pollution for the time being. I clicked this during my walk at Dadar beach.”
| Mumbai (Mayank Jain) |
From our regular contributor Ashok Trivedi, Assam Tea Estate: “The early morning Sun brings out Nature’s colours and energies.”
| Assam Tea Estate: (Ashok Trivedi) |
From Sumeet Gupta, Kanchenjunga: “Where the land thins into silence and the wind learns discipline, the earth pauses to breathe. Near the quiet resolve of an army camp, hills roll like tired thoughts, brown and bare, holding stories in their ribs. And there— Kanchenjunga rises, not loud, not urgent, but eternal. Snow-lit, cloud-veiled, a reminder that some truths don’t need to move to command respect.”
| Kanchenjunga (Sumeet Gupta) |
From Chinmay Mehta, Pin Valley: “It’s one of the remotest locations on earth, only reachable if you trek the Pin Bhaba Pass. The nearest village from this point ‘Mudh’ is around 25km walking distance away.”
| Pin Valley, Himachal Pradesh (Chinmay Mehta) |
From Chinmaya Bharadwaj, Grand Canyon, USA:
| Grand Canyon, USA (Chinmaya Bharadwaj) |
That’s a wrap for this week. Before you go, if you know someone who might like this newsletter, forward us to them!
Please write to [fp@the-ken.com](mailto:fp@the-ken.com) if there’s anything you’d like to share with us. Or leave a comment on our on-site edition.
See you next Sunday!
Regards,
Rohin Dharmakumar