---
subject: "How We Got the Lithium-ion Battery"
from: "Construction Physics <constructionphysics@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-11-29 13:01:20
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Construction Physics", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8588207018748827248", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
The lithium-ion battery is, obviously, an extremely important technology. It helped make portable electronics possible, from laptops to smartphones to drones. It’s literally powering the transition to electric vehicles, and it’s increasingly finding a role in grid-scale But to get there, the lithium-ion battery took a long, winding road. It took decades of research, performed around the world, before a practical lithium-ion battery was possible. And then, not unlike solar PV, it took many more years of marching down the learning curve before it could find its place in electric vehicles and large-scale energy storage. Since the early ‘90s, the cost of a lithium-ion battery has fallen by more than 97% per kilowatt-hour, which has finally allowed electric vehicles to It’s perhaps more appropriate to think of the lithium-ion battery not as a single invention, but as a slow, steady accumulation of many inventions that were needed to both make a battery practical and to unlock its full potential. OriginsThe origins of the lithium-ion battery can be traced back to the 1960s, when researchers at At Stanford in 1970, researcher In 1972, Whittingham moved from Stanford to Exxon research. Exxon was concerned that oil supply might peak in the next few decades, and was funding research on a wide variety of alternative energy technologies that might replace it. Whittingham joined Exxon to research superconductivity, and began studying a compound called Whittingham’s battery used metallic lithium for the anode, and lithium salts within the liquid electrolyte to facilitate ion transport. When the battery discharged, positively-charged lithium ions would migrate from the metallic lithium anode through a non-conductive separator, and intercalate themselves between layers of titanium disulfide at the cathode. Because the lithium ions were positively charged, electrons would also need to flow from the anode to the cathode to balance the charge. Since they couldn’t flow through the non-conductive separator, they would be forced along a conductive pathway connecting the anode and the cathode, doing work in the process. Whittingham’s battery, the first battery to use intercalating lithium ions, had several attractive features. Not only was it rechargeable, but it was far more powerful than existing rechargeable batteries. Existing nickel cadmium batteries could produce on the order of 1.3 volts, but Whittingham’s titanium disulfide battery could produce around 2.4 volts. (The battery’s high voltage was in part due to Whittingham’s battery was not much more than a collection of chemicals in glass beakers, but before long Exxon had three research teams working on turning it into an actual product. One major effort was to reduce the battery’s risk of fire. Lithium is highly reactive (it reacts violently with, among other things, Exxon demonstrated that a rechargeable, lithium-based intercalating battery was technically possible, but the technology needed to make it practical only came together bit by bit. The next major advance came from Oxford in 1979, in the lab of At the time, Oxford had no interest in intellectual property, and so Goodenough turned to the UK’s Goodenough’s lithium cobalt oxide cathode was quickly followed by another cathode, developed by an associate of his, There were now two possible cathodes for a practical lithium-ion battery: Goodenough’s lithium cobalt oxide (LCO) and Thackeray’s lithium manganese oxide (LMO). But a material that could replace the hazardous lithium metal in a battery’s anode was still needed. One possibility was to substitute it with another intercalating compound. This concept, of two intercalating compounds that ions would move back and forth between, was proposed in 1978 by French researcher Michel Armand as a “ At Asahi, Akira Yoshino was researching a novel polymer anode that could intercalate lithium ions, While Asahi was developing its battery, a research team at Sony was also exploring new battery chemistries. Sony was releasing a steady stream of portable electronics — the walkman Over the next several years, Sony steadily, methodically, turned this chemistry into a practical battery. It figured out how to make the cathode materials in large volumes, and how best to heat treat the coke. It worked with suppliers to develop other key parts of the battery like the separator and the conductive electrolyte. Batteries began to roll off the assembly line in 1991, and by the end of the year Sony had produced more than 100,000. The next year, it would make more than a million. Asahi would shortly follow up with its own lithium-ion battery in partnership with Toshiba, and within a few years there were a half-dozen Japanese manufacturers competing for the market. Lithium rides the learning curveBut the invention and development of the lithium-ion battery is only half the story. Not unlike the solar photovoltaic cell, the lithium-ion battery was a novel energy technology that was incredibly expensive in terms of cost per unit of energy delivered. Its high energy density made it useful for many applications like portable electronics, but its full potential wouldn’t be unlocked until it could fall down the learning curve, and get orders of magnitude less expensive. Lithium-ion’s progress along the learning curve encompasses several different types of improvements. One major one has been continued improvements to the battery chemistry. Sony’s first lithium-ion battery used a soft carbon anode made from coke, and a lithium cobalt oxide cathode, but it soon replaced soft carbon with hard carbon, which could store more lithium ions between the layers. Hard carbon increased the energy density of the battery by about 50%. Hard carbon was then replaced by graphite, which allowed another 25% increase in energy density. Switching to graphite required finding a new electrolyte that wouldn’t produce undesirable “side reactions” with the graphite. This was eventually discovered by accident by Moli Energy in the form of ethylene carbonate, which reacts with graphite to form a passive solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) layer over the anode. The SEI layer blocks the flow of electrons and protects the anode from further reaction with the electrolyte, while allowing ions to flow through it. Graphite remains the primary anode material for lithium-ion batteries today, but manufacturers have gradually begun to add small amounts of silicon to it to further increase its performance. There have been similar improvements in the cathode material. The high cost of cobalt spurred a search for alternative cathodes made from cheaper materials, and in 1997 John Goodenough discovered another battery cathode made from iron phosphate, with assistance from Michel Armand who suggested a carbon coating for the material that would make it more conductive. While lithium iron phosphate (LFP) did not have the energy density of a cobalt cathode, its materials, iron and phosphorus, were far cheaper. LFP batteries also proved to be Around the same time, Michael Thackeray, who had moved to Argonne National Labs in the US, developed another new cathode, made from nickel, manganese, and cobalt (NMC). Thackeray’s NMC cathode was initially only a slight improvement over a cobalt cathode in terms of energy density, but it eliminated a large amount of expensive cobalt. Since then, NMC cathodes have continued to improve. Thackeray’s first NMC cathode used roughly equal proportions of nickel oxide, manganese oxide, and cobalt oxide (known as NMC111, for a 1/1/1 proportion of each), but more recent formulations have used much higher nickel fractions, such as NMC 811 (80% nickel, 10% manganese, 10% cobalt) and NMC 955 (90% nickel, 5% manganese, 5% cobalt), which offer even higher energy density and even smaller amounts of costly cobalt. NMC was followed by another nickel-based cathode (the origins of which are somewhat unclear), nickel cobalt aluminum (NCA). NCA would be used for Tesla’s In addition to the anode and the cathode material, there have also been improvements to the electrolyte solution that conducts the lithium ions. An electrolyte typically consists primarily of a solvent (like ethylene carbonate) and a lithium salt (like lithium hexafluoride, or LiF6), but manufacturers have also experimented with a In addition to chemistry improvements, there have also been substantial improvements in making batteries more materially efficient. A battery cell consists of a series of layers (current collector, anode, separator, cathode, current collector) stacked on top of each other and rolled or folded up, and over time many of those layers have gotten thinner. Copper current collectors, for instance, have over 20 years shrunk from around More generally, there have been steady efforts to make the active, electricity-generating part of the battery a large fraction of the overall weight. Electric vehicle battery packs have historically been made from thousands of small individual cells, with the cells bundled into modules and the modules bundled into entire packs. But there have recently been efforts to eliminate the separate modules (and the additional material they require) and simply go directly from cells to packs. Over the last four years the adoption of “cell to pack” has caused the price of EV battery packs to fall Effort has also gone into making individual cells bigger, to take advantage of surface-area-to-volume effects: all else being equal, a cell that's twice as large will require less than twice as much material to enclose it. These sorts of scaling efforts have been somewhat limited historically, due to (as far as I can tell) some combination of the economies of scale achieved by producing huge numbers of small battery cells, and the fact that reducing the risk of You can see the trends in battery improvement on a small scale in the In addition to improvements to the batteries themselves, there have been significant manufacturing improvements. Supply chains have gotten more robust, and production machinery has gotten far faster and higher volume. The speed of electrode coating machines (which spread the anode and cathode material over large sheets of foil) increased by nearly a factor of 10, reducing the amount of capital required per unit output by roughly 90%. In 2019 the author of “ Machines have also gotten much larger, producing wider sheets of material. And manufacturers have looked for ways to cut material not only out of the battery itself, but the process for producing it. Traditionally manufacturing electrodes has required mixing the anode or cathode material together with a solvent to form a slurry, spreading that slurry onto sheets of foil, and then evaporating that solvent in large These and other manufacturing improvements have allowed battery factories to greatly increase their production volume and take advantage of economies of scale. Factory-level production volumes increased from on the order of a few tenths of a gigawatt-hour per year to ConclusionOne notable thing about the evolution of the lithium-ion battery is how hard it is to predict the trajectory of research, and how important it is to allow researchers the flexibility to pursue what they feel is promising. Whittingham stumbled across an intercalation-based battery when researching fast-ion transport through a solid electrolyte, an entirely different phenomenon. And his invention of the first lithium-ion battery anodes was the result of a serendipitous discovery during work on superconductors. Thackeray discovered the manganese oxide cathode at Oxford, where he only was because his employer, South Africa’s Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), paid for a year’s sabbatical so he could pursue the battery ideas he found promising. (CSIR was developing an entirely different, This sort of trajectory, of course, makes it hard to capture the value of research, or to have anything like a reliable, predictable path by which scientific research gets turned into marketable products. Exxon’s efforts to develop a practical rechargeable battery ultimately failed, though its research would spawn a successful battery in the fullness of time, and Goodenough signed away the rights to his cathode patent because it didn’t appear especially valuable at the time. And while science is often conceived as a sort of straight path that leads from basic research, to applied research, to invention and product development, real paths are often much more circuitous. Charles Murray notes this in “The Long Hard Road," a history of the lithium-ion battery and the electric car:
Even the extensive applied research needed to put the pieces together and take the battery over the finish line doesn’t appear to have created much of a lasting advantage for the companies that did it (possibly because the key components had been patented by others and were available to license). Shortly after releasing its first lithium-ion battery as a product, Sony found itself in a cutthroat competition with many other Japanese battery manufacturers. And while it spent the next several years advancing the technology (going from soft carbon to hard carbon to graphite anodes), Sony nevertheless still The lithium-ion battery thus both shows why unrestricted research and novel technological development is so valuable, and why, in practice, companies might not be especially enthusiastic about funding it. Thanks to Austin Vernon for reading a draft of this, all errors are my own. 1 The 4680 doesn’t currently use an LFP chemistry, though there’s speculation that it might in the future. Construction Physics articles will always remain free, but if you find this work valuable, I encourage you to Construction Physics is produced in partnership with the Institute for Progress, a Washington, DC-based think tank. You can learn more about their work by visiting their You can also contact me on |