---
subject: "Weekly Dose of Optimism #96"
from: "Not Boring <notboring@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-05-31 12:40:38
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Not Boring", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2982495070691762429", "UNREAD"]
---
Hi friends 👋, Happy Friday and welcome back to our 96th Weekly Dose of Optimism. The verdict is in. The jury found us guilty on all 34 counts… 😔 … of being too optimistic about the dope stuff humans keep pulling off 😄 Lock us up! Anywho… the best thing about long weekends is short work weeks. This one went by quickly, but thankfully was still jammed packed with some optimistic news. Let’s get to it. (1) From the Economic Times
Well, well, well it appears as if diabetes’ days may be numbered. A While the potential cure has worldwide implications, it could have a particularly large impact in China. 140 million people in China have diabetes, and about 40 million rely on insulin injections. That’s a ton of people and assuming each patient gets one daily injection (which is a conservative estimate), that’s 14.6B insulin injections each year in China. And with an estimated production cost of $3-$6 per injection, China is spending $45-$90B each year on insulin injections. The new cell therapy could significantly reduce the need for insulin and, in the process, lower the cost burden and improve the quality of life for millions of patients. To be clear, this result was for one patient. It’s likely very expensive. The result will need to be replicated in more patients and cell therapies will need to become less expensive before we get too excited about diabetes being cured. But it’s a great example of why (2) Rachel Fairbank for Nature
Speaking of diabetes treatments, semaglutide can't stop, won’t stop. The drug, which was originally developed as a diabetes treatment, rose to fame as a weight loss drug, and has since been proven to treat a wide array of potential ailments, can now add kidney disease to its list. Earlier this week, researchers shared clinical trial data showing that semaglutide significantly reduces the risk of kidney failure and death for people with type 2 diabetes and chronic kidney disease…which as discussed above, impacts a ton of people globally. The shared data does not come as much of a surprise, as a kidney disease trial was halted early last year after the initial results were so positive that it didn’t make sense to continue the trial. Yet, this is the first look into just how positive those results are: 24% less major kidney disease events (including kidney failure) with semaglutide vs. placebo. 29% reduction in cardiovascular deaths and major incidents; 20% reduction in overall mortality. Significant benefits for patients with type 2 diabetes and chronic kidney disease.
It’s semaglutide’s world, we’re just living in it (thanks to semaglutide). Once again, GLP-won. (3) Park et al for Science
It’s a bird! It’s a plane! It’s an uncrewed aerial vehicle using bird-inspired vision systems! Researchers have developed an artificial vision system inspired by bird eyes. Bird eyes, which is news to me, have specialized regions for magnification and can see ultraviolet light. The new system uses a unique design to mimic the way birds focus and detect different colors without filters. It combines an artificial fovea, which acts like a zoom lens to magnify images, with vertically stacked photodetectors that capture red, green, blue, and ultraviolet light, allowing it to create detailed, multispectral images. But what to do with these bird-like systems…to start, drone surveillance and search-and-rescue operations, where precise object detection and tracking are critical. Its ability to capture a wide range of light spectra also makes it beneficial for environmental monitoring and scientific research, providing detailed visual information about objects and their surroundings. Let’s just hope one of these drones don’t come crashing into your sliding glass door. (4) Anonna Dutt for the Indian Express
Chalo! Indian space startup Agnikul Cosmos successfully launched its test vehicle, which sports the world’s first single-piece 3D-printed semi-cryogenic rocket engine. Semi-cryogenic means that the rocket uses both gas and liquid fuel. The event also marks only the second ever launch by a private company in India, and the first to blast off from a privately-owned launch pad….which from what I can tell from the pictures looks too be located on a lovely beach. Agnikul Cosmos aims to offer affordable launch services for nano and micro satellites…sound familiar? SpaceX wedged its way into the market with a similar strategy, using rocket reusability as a way to significantly lower costs and make it affordable to launch more things into space. Agnikul Cosmos is trying to lower its costs by using 3D-printed parts, like Agnikul’s rockets can be configured based on customer needs — remove an engine, add some engines. This one shows the configuration to launch 100kg to space. Then, strap it to a truck, carry it to your closest spaceport, and launch. Easy as that. (5) By Casey Handmer
This is not a This week, Casey dropped an essay on the history and potential of solar. His thesis: Solar energy's inevitable dominance will revolutionize global industries, creating unparalleled investment opportunities. The solar industrial revolution, according to Casey, is poised to become the biggest investment opportunity in history, as solar energy rapidly becomes the cheapest and most efficient energy source, surpassing fossil fuels. In his words:
Hell yeah. During this process, solar will disrupt big, important industries such as data centers, desalination, synthetic fuels, cement production, plastics, supersonic flight, chemicals… name an industry, and Casey argues, with data, that there’s an opportunity to use sunlight to reshape it. That is to say, solar will transform the physical world around us and create a ton of valuable new companies in the process. Casey argues what we’ve been trying to say: We’re quite bullish on solar as well. Its learning curve is both hard to ignore and fun to forecast off of…what will society, and the industries that power it, look like as solar continues to get cheaper and more efficient? How val will the companies that harness practically free solar energy become? Speaking of solar. We have a few sunny, perfect weather days in NYC coming up this weekend that we’d like to get to. So that’s all for this week — go out there and catch some rays. We’ll be back in your inbox on Tuesday. Thanks for reading, Packy + Dan |