---
subject: "The Tetragrammaton Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-06-30 10:44:13
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
We first met Emanuel Derman (ED) when wrote the excellent Emanuel here. From an early age in school, I was taught to pray in Hebrew, though no one ever took the trouble to tell me what the prayers meant. In kindergarten we learned to chant the
Nowhere in the Modeh does the Hebrew word for God actually appear. The prayer refers to him only metaphorically as the living and eternal king. But God in the bible actually has a name, יהוה, or for the sake of simplicity YHVH (four Hebrew consonants corresponding approximately to these English letters, pronounced Yahweh), and the If you are familiar with Hebrew prayer, you will recognize the awe that accompanies a glimpse of the Tetragrammaton. It is the letters that produce the awe, not their pronunciation. I have seen the word printed innumerable times in bibles and prayer books, yet I never once heard the word pronounced as Yahweh. Everyone I knew pronounced YHVH as though it were the entirely different Hebrew word אֲדֹנָי, or, transliterated, ADNY, pronounced Adonai and meaning roughly Milords, as though the letters YHVH were, in reality, the letters ADNY. The words ADNY and YHVH barely resemble each other. It was as though you were taught to say ‘HRM’ whenever you saw the printed name of the Queen of England, but never pronounce the word ‘Elizabeth’ itself. Why is this interesting? ADNY is one of God’s many aliases in the book of Genesis. The Bible sometimes also refers to God as ADNY ADNM, pronounced Adonai Adonim, a vocative My Lords of Lords, more wondrous than Adonai alone by virtue of its recursion. Surprisingly, God’s aliases in the Bible precede the appearance of his real name. God as Yahweh is absent throughout the first chapter of Genesis, whose first line reads “In the beginning Elohim created the skies and the earth ...” Elohim is the plural of El, a generic God, and means simply Gods in the sense of a royal pluralized divinity. The Tetragrammaton YHVH makes its first appearance in Genesis 2:4 only after God has perfected the Creation and can finally rest: “These are the generations of the heavens and of the earth when they were created, in the day that YHVH Elohim made earth and the skies.” It was not until late adulthood that it dawned on me that the letters YHVH did not literally spell ADNY. We were taught to pronounce Adonai whenever we saw the letters YHVH. No one ever mentioned that the actual pronunciation of YHVH was not ADNY. No observant Jew ever utters the word Yahweh. By custom rather than commandment, God’s name is not pronounced aloud or even under one’s breath. Being brought up customarily, my friends and I were never told not to say his name. We really didn’t know he had one. A few of my more observant school friends went a step further: not only did they avoid uttering the word, they also avoided uttering the alias ADNY. Instead, they pronounced Adonai as AdoShem, because the Y in ADNY is the first letter of YHVH, and so you shouldn’t even pronounce that letter. Shem instead means name itself. It’s as though HRM, when it refers to Queen Mary, is pronounced HRName. Orthodox Jews carry this to extremes, and avoid pronouncing anything reminiscent of the Tetragrammaton. Thus even the word Elohim is pronounced Elokim, so that the shared H of and EloHim and YHVH is replaced by the cognate but symbolically insignificant ‘K’. And even the number 15, which in the Hebrew alphabet would be written as YH = 10+5, because Y is the 10th letter and H is the 5th, is replaced by TV = 9+6. Some don't know where to stop, and write G-d rather than God, as though "God" were God's name. It isn't. We like to understand puzzling things by comparing them to things we already comprehend. How is this related to the idea of God? The following story in the Book of Exodus is concerned with absoluteness.
YHVH is the phenomenon that cannot be described or known by comparison. A bit like Popeye, He is what He is. (ED) Quick Links: [‘I accidentally invented trip-hop’ – how we made DJ Shadow’s Endtroducing](https://substack.com/redirect/ad749078-ba00-4223-9ff0-c4d35a1d1cfb?u=14563319)(NRB)[Alex Balk on the Bittersweetness of Encountering a Beloved Childhood Toy](https://substack.com/redirect/d0a4a967-53db-4de9-ae75-44e1c4ecb0c0?u=14563319)(NRB)[Calculated Risk: Five High Frequency Indicators for the Economy](https://substack.com/redirect/bfe732a4-f237-4cee-80e8-645a59b81f8d?u=14563319)(NRB)
— WITI x McKinsey: An ongoing partnership where we highlight interesting McKinsey research, writing, and data. Reality and myth in the metaverse. Are you ready to dive into the metaverse? Consumers will be the driving force in its evolution, so we asked more than 1,000 typical consumers what they about the metaverse, since their views could shape how brands may venture into this new space. Despite some skepticism, our findings indicate Americans of all ages are ready to embrace emerging, immersive digital spaces. Prepare for the future with — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Emanuel (ED) —
You’re a free subscriber to |