---
subject: "The Monday Media Diet with Scout Dixon West"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-04-01 12:51:06
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Scout Dixon West (SDW) is a perfume + scent obsessive that does amazing (and deep) reviews on Tell us about yourself. Describe your media diet. Lately, I am trying to consume less, or at least more intentionally. I recently made a ghost account on Instagram that I use only to follow select accounts that serve as a source of inspiration or reference, that way I don’t have to trudge though the traffic of my usual feed to get to the good stuff. I also use Twitter, which is usually how I find out what’s going on in the world, but it can quickly become overwhelming or frustrating — too much unbridled stupidity. At its best, it’ll give me a laugh or teach me something new. I listen to podcasts or music when doing chores, driving, or cooking. I watch TCM every night. On the odd occasion they’re playing something I’m not interested in, or have seen to many times, I will turn to the Criterion Channel. I keep an ever-growing list of movies I’m meaning to watch, and a lot of them tend to be on Criterion or in rotation on TCM. What’s the last great book you read? Prior to that, I read The Shards by Bret Easton Ellis, which I really enjoyed. It was totally absorbing. Ellis is such a hypnotic world-builder. When I wasn’t reading it, I wanted to be, and would ask myself I wonder what the boys are up to… What are you reading now? I’ll be reading the rest of the short stories in that Hemingway collection, and I need to pick a new novel, since I just finished Michele Houellebecq’s Serotonin. I like to have a few things in rotation at a time. One fiction, one anthology, one biography or non-fiction. It’s nice to toggle between books depending on the mood. What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication? I try to give every publication the courtesy of reading it start to finish. There’s often a lot of fat, so I don’t feel guilty if I have to skip a page, but I like to give everything a fighting chance. If I’m really excited about a particular feature, I’ll jump straight to it, and catch up on everything else after. I haven’t been purchasing magazines as frequently as I used to or maybe ought to, but I try to pick up copies of whatever catches my attention when I can; usually an art, interior design, fashion, or literary magazine. A few I usually enjoy are: Avant, Clutch Magazine, Apartamento, The New Criterion… Who should everyone be reading that they’re not? What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone? Plane or train? What is one place everyone should visit? Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into. Perfume is my perpetual rabbit hole. In my downtime, I am almost always thinking about, reading about, or smelling perfume. I can sit in my office and sniff through my cabinet all day. There are a handful of perfume blogs I dig through online, and I’m an avid Fragrantica user. I often use the “search by notes” function to dream up compositions I want to smell and see if they exist yet. I am deeply passionate about the art form and my desire to explore it is insatiable. (SDW) — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Scout (SDW) —
You're currently a free subscriber to |