---
subject: "MNCs’ easy access to payments from India units faces tax hurdles"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-07-11 02:38:48
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
In the last week of March, the government sneaked in some big-ticket surprises in the Budget 2023 amendments. Welcome or shocking? It depends on who you ask.
Hogging the headlines was the removal of tax breaks on debt mutual funds. But what went largely under the radar that day was as significant—the doubling in the withholding tax rate on royalties and fees from technical services earned by foreign companies to 20% from 10%.
Simply put, the government demanded a bigger pound of taxes from businesses in India that pay royalty or technical fees to a foreign company. Such payments—for using intellectual property, know-how, and services—are made mainly by the Indian subsidiaries of multinational companies to their foreign parent companies. Think Hindustan Unilever (HUL) making payments to Unilever, or Maruti Suzuki to Suzuki, or Nestle India to Nestle.
What prompted the government’s squeeze? An eye on higher tax revenue—plain and simple? Maybe. But more likely, the move was in response to a ball that was set rolling a couple of months earlier. In January, India’s largest consumer goods company, HUL, upped the royalty payable to its UK-based parent. The market saw red, as did proxy advisors and organisations such as the Swadeshi Jagran Manch, which is said to influence the policy corridors.
For years royalty payments have been a sensitive topic, and HUL’s move may have touched a raw nerve. The royalty hike by the company and the consequent tax hike for all companies will make its impact felt in the June quarter results that start trickling in this week. There’s an escape hatch though for some companies, including HUL.
But there’s no dodging the debate that rages on. Companies defend royalty payments as a business necessity while critics attack it as being disproportionate, minority-shareholder unfriendly and a drain on forex reserves.
The argument continues—but MNCs no longer have a carte blanche, writes Kaushal in his finely-analysed debut story. Read it here: [https://the-ken.com/story/mncs-easy-access-to-payments-from-india-units-faces-tax-hurdles/](https://the-ken.com/story/mncs-easy-access-to-payments-from-india-units-faces-tax-hurdles/?utm_source=daily_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=daily_newsletter) [9-minute read]
Regards,
Anand
[anand@the-ken.com](mailto:anand@the-ken.com)
PS: At Cost to Company, our podcast on careers and workplaces, we are producing an episode on working mothers who’ve mastered the art of balancing motherhood and their careers. And how workplaces can be encouraged to help them. Help us create a manifesto by sharing your thoughts in a [quick survey](https://theken.typeform.com/to/s33DVon8). It’ll only take 10 minutes.
What you just read is the personalised daily introduction to The Ken's story. Written by a different person each day. Often insightful, sometimes witty, and very rarely boring. Someone sent this to you? [Sign up for free](https://the-ken.com/?modal=register&utm_source=footer&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=morning_email_ind_shared). [Dont like these? You can unsubscribe](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/unsubscribe/?user_id=2349339&data=d2K7ns_g3kVckUK-bQQ-oejuWX_V_jkZPR2rSkCCIF9oMDAwdTAwMGK5U-tbDgdmNR16qLsktC9sTIPitMGeyDaYuymJZV9Vqz3_WkSjFmPZ6cW06GYb3ecnyfwu1gOZgJ5cEbVjibgLJsJZ9kMFYM8vspRXRalxUUlJYkG08E4kqPUZItd10XPyX9picKmVVuVSQc8hcBHQ2SsIq2FcmwpD6jkh0XsDHFHdUIFWiNRp5lbel94TTwJ48KHtWHhABOkEq3q_J-9SRJsmdh2JOqu99QHo9ipYGk4HgwyvgG8XOlUGRMPFEBvYE3r-7597hXQI9NaF4HINd4FV51LHIHYL98bf6-pPmrGx8wVb0Cac2ZIO22W0YP8mt4ZMpOqZulrnFKLkcTF11_kWabxd95WYiqBUlHV7G6frC6dNAh0jgqDXmLwkBq_u60g9eHRwDwjMvCQQ0VBbNQ6OV6NsILSEXPqkMe3oFWltgx5IQwMVmbEqrjh8Oab60eFY22tPAsfyoyTzsTJm2yo5nxvChEbA2tgbE5-W99lx1h4kZpzxhT6QqfAVRfVV0rMcORExh0NfooVUedw=) Dont want to hear from us again? [ Unsubscribe from our emails here](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/?user_id=2349339&data=cDcEpV09x4LsSgBeGajfij39pnL-8jHl4MjCmb58vcloMDAwdTAwMHCKv15wqhRlQbiVQ4lCJ6ycD87iAZp_3M6r3Gxn9-plKTrHKNSnG7zcA1WjhqdXHeJ5gEjyohIKsW277ZzLyClir3A3CZijSujxOTpo4PSFLIlR6JyUyP6TQZxJdvwxpecEUxnpA656kUhsV1BDJhW-BCPrJkbByiWybUO31DpGSFamJd51bnGwXRnHBUs229XX6UVmc_ZtbuWl46o8LBrTgCbNP51s1IEYQZGAVbyBMXa0X-8cWgLlhFu-w-n-7qXofE2_G7rEEi0VwU3aUoP5204nrQamLCX1yZHx-1hpWtJ9LbNoriOG-6uMzGXDcI17XOOMAajbd2h5d0nO3p3jvepE72Azfq2BC8G8JZEmOE55h7s_ZLfRMsMV3JRRspR8_-9quHMZF-wgcPuVGaI5l3WLFeN8lqk_-v0tWvL_fbg6cB2VrtDgzn6AlyDhxB9v0fDMVDI8i6wi187VHYjoxyZVh83XH536RQy_pCTq_qJf6UtExxHVC6fnADyrUQ==).
Something wrong? Tell us at [support@the-ken.com](mailto:support@the-ken.com)