---
subject: "Momentum, Intellectual Humility, and Missing Pieces of the Model"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <byrne@thediff.co>"
to: ""
date: 2024-01-22 14:47:57
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX"]
---
|
|
|
In this issue: - Momentum, Intellectual Humility, and Missing Pieces of the Model—One way to look at momentum is that it's an indicator of the real factors a model is missing. Momentum tells you that some assets have started to correlate with one another, and it doesn't tell you why, but often by looking at what's doing well in momentum terms, you can figure the why out. This general approach applies to real-world examples of momentum, from flow states to habits to elite formation.
- War Finance Meets Green Finance—Guyana has an increasingly oil-dependent economy, but is also selling emissions credits. A diversified portfolio of foreign investors is particularly important for countries worried about getting invaded.
- AI-Assisted Creativity—A novelist in Japan reveals that she used ChatGPT to help write a novel.
- Property Rights and Mortal Institutions—One advantage companies have in negotiating with unions is that the corporation is immortal but union leaders don't personally benefit from choices that make the union stronger in the long run. But when a union becomes a family enterprise, and operates in a jurisdiction with weak property rights, the relationship flips around.
- Complements—Shopify has a strategic interest in keeping the non-Amazon e-commerce ecosystem healthy and well-funded.
- Hedge Funds—Big hedge funds reported record profits, because changes in the structure of the industry more than offset a shrinking opportunity set.
Momentum, Intellectual Humility, and Missing Pieces of the ModelThe Diff frequently discusses systematic investing, and, in that context, often brings up - To the extent that you want to treat factor investing as codified common sense—take a pattern that sounds like it should make money, and study market history to show that it does make money—you'll probably use a factor like value or quality. Yes, buying statistically cheap stocks does tend to make more money than a broadly-representative strategy would. Investing in companies with high and stable margins has also worked out very well in the long run (though quality had
[such an amazing run in the last three decades](https://www.thediff.co/r/9a1feb6d?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)($, WSJ) that investors are now paying dearly for that specific kind of quality). - If you want factors to sound mysterious and counterintuitive instead, talk about momentum. "Buy high, sell higher" actually works over long periods, in different geographies and asset classes. (Most of them; it's
[mysteriously weak in Japan](https://www.thediff.co/r/45c5faa2?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99).) The two simplest explanations for momentum are opposite phenomena. One is that investors are excessively prone to irrationally over-extrapolating price movements, whether that's in the form of losing one's head and diving into a trend (I hear AI was a big topic at Davos!) or institutional investors wanting to show a portfolio with winners rather than losers when they report their top holdings. The other standard explanation is that investors are irrationally under-extrapolating from fundamental changes. A momentum portfolio will own lots of companies going through transformative turnarounds, and will end up short lots of frauds as they accelerate towards zero.
But there's another explanation for momentum, arguing both for how it works and how systematizers can avoid the trap of treating everything their model doesn't capture as some kind of unpredictable error term. In
Consider early March 2020: someone using a sophisticated risk model would have a way to see that there were some factor moves going on, like China weakness and worse performance for companies tied to economic growth. But they'd also see a weird grab-bag in the momentum set: the low momentum stocks were disproportionately travel-related, but also included in-person entertainment like movie theaters. Meanwhile, the early winners were companies like Zoom. So what the momentum factor's constituents illustrated around that time was that the Platonic ideal of a factor model would include, in addition to sensitivity to interest rates and oil prices, a factor for sensitivity to global respiratory pandemics. The 2020 election and vaccine announcement naturally had a market impact, with value rallying. One of the funny things about momentum as a factor is that it's hard to explain well in financial terms, but also seems to exist in the real world. That's not necessarily true for other factors; there's a lot more real-world adverse selection in being a "value" consumer than in being a value investor, for example. But momentum exists at many levels: - It's much easier to keep working on something than to start it; divide your day into five-minute slices and you'll see productivity feed on itself, and also see that even minor interruptions that break the flow of concentration can put a stop to it.
- Habits accumulate, especially when they get to the point that you're building them into your schedule. The transition from "it takes mental effort to do this" to "it takes mental effort to skip this" is surprisingly short.
- The concept of the "
[miracle year](https://www.thediff.co/r/bfcf2962?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)" might be overfitting, but it does imply something about people's production functions, especially[narrowing things down to science](https://www.thediff.co/r/3a6cd8f3?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99). It's very hard to predict extreme outlier accomplishments, so it's at least a bit funny that one of the best predictors of making an earth-shattering discovery is having already made one in the last year. - Selective institutions that limit applicants to people who have passed a different selective institution's filter are implicitly selecting for a high-momentum cohort. The emergent result is that among people in their late twenties, the highest earners in New York and San Francisco or the ones with the most influential jobs in DC and slightly different parts of New York and San Francisco have never had to make a big and difficult decision in their lives (they've always taken the highest-prestige track) and have never had to deal with failure (which, given how hard it is for standardized criteria to tease out meaningful differences within the 99th percentile, means they've been lucky).
These forms of momentum also make sense as latent factors. Procrastination, for example, is partly a form of uncertainty: if you're not sure what to work on, it's hard to start working. But intellectual work tends to produce ideas for the next project; very few people start out with a fifty-year study plan and work through it right on schedule, and it's common to average one new idea to pursue per idea thoroughly explored. Habits are basically a phenomenon coupled with its own explanation: persist in them long enough and there's a habit-shaped gap when you don't. But they usually don't involve figuring something out and then applying it (or, if they do, it's retrospective). What about miracle years? There are a few reasonable theories here. Some of these come about because someone unlocks a broadly applicable technique that unlocks other possibilities—it's not a coincidence that calculus and universal gravitation coincided. But the other factor is free time: a surprising number of big discoveries come from people getting their first unbroken stretch of free time to tackle a big question (in addition to the examples linked before, I'd add Stripe, Microsoft, and Facebook being founded during Harvard's reading period, and Jack Kilby developing integrated circuits because, during his first year working at Texas Instruments, he hadn't accumulated enough vacation days to take time off in the summer and thus had the office to himself). And one way these become serially correlated is that someone who, when left to their own devices, accomplishes something incredible will probably be left to their own devices more often. For people on elite tracks, momentum has grimmer implications. The organizations that hire them tend to be long momentum in their human resources decisions in the same way that investors with strict stop-losses will tend to be long momentum in their portfolios. Unless there's a deliberate effort to find people who were unlucky, it creates a brittle system where participants aren't used to handling adversity. This might be Disclosure: Long MSFT, META Imagine telling someone twenty years before that the first big beneficiaries of a Republican losing reelection would be oil and banking executives! [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/22eebce3?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
You're on the free list for The Diff! This week, paying subscribers got Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. See a sampling of current open roles below: - A company reinventing the way Americans build wealth for the long-run by enabling them to access "Universal Basic Capital" is looking for a product designer with fintech experience. (NYC)
- A fintech company using AI to craft new investment strategies seeks a portfolio management associate with 2+ years of experience in trading or operations for equities or crypto. This is a technical role—FIX proficiency required, as well as Python, C#, and SQL. (NYC)
- A well funded seed stage startup founded by former SpaceX engineers is building software tools for hardware engineering. They're looking for a full-stack engineer who enjoys working with customers to design and build software. (Los Angeles)
- A company that helps clients use alternative data to make better decisions is looking for a data scientist/analyst with experience in the finance sector and with alternative data. (Remote)
- A vertically integrated PE-backed cannabis company is looking for an Excel wizard with a background in supply chain. (Remote)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. ElsewhereWar Finance Meets Green FinanceGuyana's economy has a diversified portfolio of carbon-related activities: beautiful rainforests, but also the world's 17th-biggest oil reserves. The reserves have gotten the attention of Venezuela, which AI-Assisted CreativityRie Kudan, a Japanese novelist, Property Rights and Mortal InstitutionsLong ago, this publication argued that ComplementsFlexport is Disclosure: Long AMZN. Hedge FundsThe twenty most profitable hedge funds In general, the story with hedge funds since about the year 2000 is that absolute performance has declined, risk has declined faster, and they're increasingly selling pure alpha. That pure alpha has a high fixed cost, but the fixed cost means that they can capture more revenue per dollar of alpha generated by an individual portfolio manager or analyst. So what metrics like this really track is the maturity of the hedge fund ecosystem: the people who would have been running small independent funds are increasingly still working at large fund companies; it's harder to raise money for small funds, and easier to get paid at big ones. |
||
|
|
|
|||
|