---
subject: "New from Tim — Interview with Soman Chainani, \"No Biological Free Lunches,\" \"The Art of Parkour,\" and More"
from: "Tim Ferriss <tim@fourhourbody.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-02-13 11:09:29
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tim Ferris"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_7132466938079773548"]
---
New from Tim
The latest from author and investor |
|
Hi All, Please find your weekly roundup email below. The 5-Bullet Friday newsletter is coming on Friday, as always. ✍️ New blog post This short post will cover the essentials of how this principle applies to performance-enhancing drugs. Growth agents have a place in medicine, and some sports effectively require them at higher levels. That said, there are risks when you turn the volume to 11 within Physical optimization is fundamentally about trade-offs. It’s alarming how many folks now treat “T” or “TRT” (testosterone replacement therapy) as something akin to taking a multivitamin, when they never would have considered taking androgenic-anabolic steroids (AAS) a few years earlier. Like Patagonian toothfish has become Chilean sea bass on fashionable menus worldwide, it’s quite the rebrand story, but that doesn’t change the underlying biology. ✍️ New blog post Several of the better-known tech CEOs in San Francisco have asked me at different times for an identical favor: an index card with bullet-point instructions for losing abdominal fat. Each of them made it clear: “Just tell me exactly what to do and I’ll do it.” I gave them all of the necessary tactical advice on one 3×5 card, knowing in advance what the outcome would be. The success rate was impressive… 0%. People suck at following advice. Even the most effective people in the world are often terrible. There are at least two reasons: 1. Most people have an insufficient reason for action. The pain isn’t painful enough. It’s a nice-to-have, not a must-have. There has been no “Harajuku Moment.” 2. There are no reminders. No consistent tracking = no awareness = no behavioral change. Consistent tracking, even if you have no knowledge of fat-loss or exercise, will often beat advice from world-class trainers. But what is this all-important “Harajuku Moment”? 🎧 New podcast episode: Soman’s book of retold fairy tales, Soman has an A.B. in English and American Literature from Harvard University and an MFA in Film from Columbia University. He is a recipient of the Sun Valley Writers Fellowship, and he has been nominated for the Waterstone Prize for Children’s Literature and been named to the Out100. Soman has visited more than 800 schools around the world, sharing his message that reading is the path to a better life. Please enjoy! Listen to the episode on
Right now, you’ll get a 1-year supply of Vitamin D free with your first subscription purchase—a vital nutrient for a strong immune system and strong bones. Visit Conquer this winter season with the best in sleep tech and sleep at your perfect temperature. Many of my listeners in colder areas enjoy warming up their bed after a freezing day. Go to It takes just a few minutes to sign up, and then you’ll immediately start earning 5% interest on your savings. And when you open an account today, you’ll get |