---
subject: "AI #26: Fine Tuning Time"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-08-24 15:19:38
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
GPT-3.5 fine tuning is here. GPT-4 fine tuning is only a few months away. It is about to get a lot easier to get a powerful system that does what you want it to do, and knows what you want it to know, especially for the purposes of a business or a website. As an experiment, I am putting in bold the sections I think are worth highlighting, as unusually important or interesting versions of the thing than in a typical week. Table of ContentsIntroduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. Claude-2 versus GPT-4. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. No opinions, no agents. Fact Check: Misleading. AI fact checker makes people more confused not less. GPT-4 Real This Time. Fine tune GPT-3.5, soon GPT-4. Ask it if it’s sure. Fun With Image Generation. MidJourney inpainting ho. And oh no AI porn. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. Adversarial examples starting to emerge. They Took Our Jobs. New York Times joins copyright lawsuits against OpenAI. Introducing. Palisade Research will study potentially dangerous AI affordances. In Other AI News. Who is adapting fastest to AI? An attempt to measure that. Quiet Speculations. Jack Clark asks questions about what the future will bring. The Quest for Sane Regulation. FTC asks OpenAI a different sort of question. The Week in Audio. It’s win win. No One Would Be So Stupid As To. Make an AI conscious? Oh, come on. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. Evidence for IDA? People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Polling numbers are very clear. The Lighter Side. Only half there.
Language Models Offer Mundane UtilityWhich model is better, Claude-2 or GPT-4?
My verdict in practice is that by default I will use Claude-2. If I care about response quality I will use both and compare. When Claude-2 is clearly falling on its face, I’ll go to GPT-4. On reflection, ‘use both’ is most often the correct strategy.
He recommends Zapier for automating through trigger actions, ChatWithPDF (I use Claude 2 for this), Wolfram Alpha for real-time data and math, VoxScript for YouTube video transcripts and web browsing, WebPilot which seems duplicative, Website Performance although I’m not sure why you’d use an AI for that, ScholarAI for searching papers, Shownotes to summarize podcasts (why?), ChatSpot for marketing and sales data and Expedia for vacation planning. I just booked a trip, and went on two others recently, and it didn’t occur to me to use the Expedia plug-in rather than, among other websites, Expedia (my go-to plan is Orbitz for flights and Google Maps for hotels). Next time I should remember to try it. Study claims that
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane UtilityThat claim that an AI could predict hit songs 97% of the time? Which makes absolutely no sense, since even a perfect analysis of the song itself couldn’t possibly do that, the fate of songs is far too contingent on other things?
That’s one factor. The bigger one is that if you are creating something non-generic, the AI is not going to do a good job, and figuring out how to make it do a decent job is not easier than doing a decent job yourself. That does not mean there is never anything to do here. If your task becomes generic, then GPT-4 is in business, and you should absolutely do that - if your writing starts, as I saw on the plane, ‘dear concerned patient’ then that person was totally right to use GPT-4. That’s a different kind of task. And of course, there’s plenty of ways GPT-4 helps my writing indirectly.
I mean, it’s also to make fun of Meta, why miss a chance to do that. I didn’t register the prediction, but I expected Llama-2 to do more false refusals, because I expected Llama-2 to, in relative terms, suck. If you want to hit a given level of acceptable performance on positive refusals, your rate of negative refusals will depend on how well you can differentiate. As it turns out, the answer is not very well. Llama-2 is very, very bad at identifying harmful situations, and instead works by identifying dangerous words.
Startup
The discover new commands thing seems like the potential secret sauce. It is like generating your own text interface, or working to expand the menu to include a bunch of new macros. It does still in effect seem suspiciously like building in macros.
I strongly agree with Ozair’s timeline here. With GPT-4 and lacking the ability to fine-tune it, the agents are going to be at falling flat on their face a lot even if you do very good scaffolding. I would not expect bespoke scaffolding efforts to be able to salvage things enough to make the products viable for general purposes, although I also am not confident that ‘the obvious things’ as I see them have been tried. There is some chance that with fine tuning, you can get a GPT-4-level thing where you need it to go, but my guess is that you still can’t. Llama-2? Fuhgeddaboudit. With something akin to GPT-5, certainly with GPT-5 that you can fine tune, I expect it to be possible to build something far more useful. Does this or the latest announcements of Llama-2 and fine tuning raise my p(doom)? Not especially, because I had all that baked in already. Llama-2 was mostly implied by Llama-1, cost very little money, and If you want random drivel for your website, ChatGPT is here for you. If you are Microsoft and need something better,
Fact-Check: Misleading
Yes, if you ask a fact-checker about a false item and it does not say it is false, that is not good. Nor would it be good if you asked it about a true item, and it did not say it was true. Errors are bad. How accurate were the ChatGPT fact checks? For 20 true headlines, 3 were labeled true, 4 false and 13 unsure. For false headlines, 2 where labeled unsure and 18 were labeled false. That is clearly (1) better than nothing if you have no other information about the headlines and also have good context about what the labels mean, and (2) rather useless if one or both of those conditions does not hold. You cannot be labeling 20% of true headlines as false, and if you are going to mostly be unsure about true headlines then people have to learn that ‘unsure’ means ‘cannot confirm for sure’ rather than 50/50. It does not appear people in the study were briefed on this, and most people don’t know much about such things yet, so the overall results being non-useful tells us little. We need to at least break it down, which they do here: The mandatory fact checks made people say they were more willing to share all articles. It differentially impacted false items labeled unsure, and true items labeled true, but even true items labeled false got a boost. If you control for the increased sharing effect, we do see that there is a positive filtering effect, but it is small. Which makes sense, if people have no reason to trust the highly inexact findings. On belief, we see a slight increase even in belief on false fact checks of false items, but not of true items. How close were people here to following Bayes rule? Plausibly pretty close except for a false evaluation of a false claim driving belief slightly up. What’s up with that? My guess is that this represents the arguments being seen as unconvincing or condescending. I was curious to see the questions and fact check info, but they were not included, and I am not ‘reach out to the author’ curious. Did ChatGPT offer good or unknown arguments? Was a good prompt used or can we do a lot better, including with scaffolding and multiple steps? What types of claims are these? What I am more curious about is to see the human fact checkers included as an alternate condition, rather than the null action, and perhaps also Twitter’s community notes. That seems like an important comparison. Very much a place where more research is needed, and where the answer will change over time, and where proper use is a skill. Using an LLM as a fact checker requires knowing what it can and cannot help you with, and how to treat the answer you get. Via Gary Marcus we also have another of the ‘ The proposed solution is ‘bot shouldn’t have opinions’ as if that is a coherent statement. There is no way to in general answer questions and not have opinions. There is no fine line between opinion and not opinion, any more than there are well-defined classes of ‘evil’ things and people that we should all be able to agree upon and that thus should never be praised in any way. So are we asking for no opinions, or are we asking for only the right opinions? As in:
GPT-4 Real This Time
He tried asking five of the questions twenty times, there is some randomness in when it self-doubts. There was a dramatic change for GPT-4. If GPT-4 was right, it stuck to its guns almost all the time. When it was wrong, it caught the mistake roughly half the time. That’s pretty good, and presumably you can do better than that by refining the query and asking multiple times. This will also doubtless depend on the nature of the questions, if the answer is beyond the model’s grasp entirely it will presumably not be able to self-diagnose, whereas here it was asked questions it could plausibly answer. Fun with Image Generation
MidJourney also has some potential future competition,
The main services they talk about are CivitAI and Mage. CivitAI is for those who want to spin up Stable Diffusion (or simply browse existing images, or steal the description tags to use with other methods) and offers both celebrity templates and porn templates, and yes sometimes users will upload combinations of both in violation of the site’s policies. Mage lets you generate such images, won’t let you share them in public but will let other paid users browse everything you’ve ever created. This is the tame beginning. Right now all we’re talking about are images. Soon we will be talking videos, then we will be talking virtual reality simulations, including synthetic voices. Then increasingly high quality and realistic (except where desired to be otherwise) physical robots. We need to think carefully about how we want to deal with that. What is the harm model? Is this different from someone painting a picture? What is and is not acceptable, in what form, with what distribution? What needs what kind of consent? If we allow such models to exist in open source form, there is no stopping such applications, period. There is no natural category, from a tech standpoint, for the things we do not want here. Of course, even if we do clamp down on training data and consent across the board, and even if that is fully effective, we are still going to get increasingly realistic and high quality AI everything all the way up the chain. I am confident there are plenty of people who will gladly sell (or give away) their likeness for such purposes. A note from the comments is that Stable Diffusion interest seems to be declining: That was fast, if this isn’t an artifact of the exact search term. Image models will only get better, and it would be surprising if there wasn’t more interest over time in hosting one’s own to avoid prying eyes and censorship. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
So what exactly is this?
The source I found asked if this was cheating, and I think no, it is not cheating. It is also very much not okay, seriously what the hell. Not everything not okay is cheating.
I mean, no fair, right? Of course if I am looking for adversarial examples and you are not actively looking to guard against them you are going to be in a lot of trouble. Why should scale protect you from a threat that wasn’t in the training data and that you took no countermeasures against? Which the authors themselves highlight. You do need some amount of effort beyond scale, but how much? The first thing I would try is to check random permutations. Does the adversarial attack survive if it is evaluated with some amount of random scrambling? Also worth keeping in mind is that humans would not survive similarly optimized attacks against us, if we were unable to prepare for or expect them in any way. And that such attacks almost certainly exist to be found. They Took Our Jobs
As many said, ChatGPT and generative AI in general is a legal ticking time bomb on many fronts, one of which is copyright. The copyright laws come with penalties that are already rather absurd in their intended distributions. Outside of them, they go totally nuts. This becomes an existential threat to OpenAI. In theory these numbers, if they passed through somehow to Bing, would be an existential threat even to Microsoft.
OpenAI’s new web crawler offers an option to opt out. The previous versions very much did not. Nor do we have any sign OpenAI was trying to avoid copyright infringement, if training on works violates copyright. Even if they did avoid places they lacked permission, lots of works have pirate copies made on the internet, in whole or in part, and that could be a violation as well. We want sane regulations. In the meantime, what happens when we start actually enforcing current ones? Quite possibly the same thing that would have happened if cities had fined Uber for every illegal ride. So which way will this go?
If this is what the case hinges on, one’s instinct would be that The New York Times should lose, because ChatGPT is not a substitute for NYT. It doesn’t even know anything from the last year and a half, so how could it be substituting for a news site? But Bing also exists, and as a search engine enabler this becomes less implausible. However, I would then challenge that the part that substitutes for NYT is in no way relying on NYT’s data here, certainly less than Bing is when it reports real time search that incorporates NYT articles. If ‘be able to process information’ automatically competes with NYT, then that is a rather expansive definition of competition. If anything, Google Books seems like a much larger threat to actual books than this. However, that argument would then extend to anyone whose work was substituted by an AI model. So if this is the principle, and training runs are inherently copyright violations, then presumably they will be toast, even one lost case invalidates the entire training run. They can’t afford that and it is going to be damn hard to prevent. Google might have the chops, but it won’t be easy. Image models are going to be in a world of hurt, the competition effect is hard to deny there. It all seems so absurd. Am I violating copyright if I learn something from a book? If I then use that knowledge to say related things in the future? Why is this any different? And of course what makes search engines fine, but this not fine? Seems backwards. I can see the case for compensation, especially for items not made freely available. One person would pay a fee to use it, if your model is going to use it and then instantiate a million copies you should perhaps pay somewhat more than one person would. I can see the case against as well. Then again, the law is the law. Ultimately, we will have to see. We should not jump the gun. IntroducingPalisade Research.
I always worry with such efforts that they tie people’s perception of AI extinction risk to a particular scenario or class of threats, and thus make people think that they can invalidate the risk if they stop any point on the particular proposed chain. Or simply that they miss the central point, since hacking skills are unlikely to be a necessary component of the thing that kills us, even if they are sufficient or make things happen faster. In Other AI News
Quiet Speculations
This one seems relatively clear to me, although there are difficult corner cases. Development of frontier models and other dangerous frontier capabilities must be centralized for safety and to avoid proliferation and the wrong forms of competitive dynamics. Development of mundane utility applications should be decentralized.
The development of artificial general intelligence is an extinction risk to humanity. There is a substantial chance that we will develop such a system relatively soon. Jack Clark seems far less convinced, saying the much weaker ‘personally I think AI safety is a real issue,’ although this should still be sufficient.
I really, really do not think that there are. If all we need to do to solve this problem is make those kinds of sacrifices I will jump for joy, and once we get past the acute risk stage we can make up for them. Already Anthropic and even OpenAI are making compromises on these fronts to address the mundane risks of existing mundane systems, and many, perhaps most, other powerful technologies face similar trade-offs and challenges. (e.g. ‘surely we can make medical drugs safe without making profound sacrifices on access or inclusivity?’ Well, FDA Delenda Est, but not really, no. And that’s with a very limited and internalized set of highly non-existential dangers. Consider many other examples, including the techs that access to an AGI gives you access to, both new and existing.) Tradeoffs are a thing. We are going to have to make major sacrifices in potential utility, and in various forms of ‘access,’ if we are to have any hope of emerging alive from this transition. Again, this is nothing new. What one might call the ‘human alignment problem’ in all its forms collectively costs us the large majority of our potential productivity and utility, and when people try to cheat on those costs they find out why doing so is a poor idea. Question list resumes.
I worry about this as well. As Jack points out, fine tuning is extremely cheap and Lora is a very effective technique. Llama-2’s ‘safety’ features were disabled within days for those who did not want them. A system that is open source, or on which anyone can do arbitrary fine-tuning, is an unsafe system that cannot be made safe. If sufficiently capable, it is an extinction risk, and there are those who will intentionally attempt to make that risk manifest. Such sufficiently capable systems cannot be allowed to take such a form, period, and if that means a certain amount of monitoring and control, then that is an unfortunate reality. The worry is that, as Jack’s other links show, perhaps such dangerous systems will be trainable soon without cutting edge hardware and in a distributed fashion. This is one of the big questions, whether such efforts will have the juice to scale far and fast enough regardless, before we can get into a place where we can handle the results. My guess for now is that such efforts will be sufficiently far behind for now, but I wish I was more confident in that, and that edge only buys a limited amount of time.
Only one way to find out. I know a lot of people who are saying yes, drawing lines on graphs and speaking of bitter lessons. I know a lot of other people who are saying no, or at least are skeptical. I find both answers plausible. I do think the concern ‘what if we find a 5x more efficient architecture’ is not the real issue. That’s less than one order of magnitude, and less than two typical years of algorithmic improvement these days, moving the timeline forward only a year or so unless we would otherwise be stalled out. The big game we do not yet have would be in qualitatively new affordances, not in multipliers, unless the multipliers are large.
This seems like it is decreasingly true, as further advances require lots of engineering and cumulative skills and collaboration and experimentation, and the progress studies people quite reasonably suspect this is a key cause for the general lack of such progress recently. We are not seeing much in the way of lone wolf AI advances, we are more seeing companies full of experts like OpenAI and Anthropic that are doing the work and building up proprietary skill bundles. The costs to do such things going up in terms of compute and data and so on also contribute to this. Certainly it is possible that we will see big advances from unexpected places, but also that is where much of the hope comes from. If the advance and new approach has a fundamentally different architecture and design, perhaps it can be less doomed. So it does not seem like so bad a risk to such a plan.
That is up to society. I think AI developers have, like everyone else, a deep responsibility to consider the consequences of their actions, and not do things that make the world worse, and even to strive to make the world better, ideally as much better as possible. That is different from asking permission, and it is different from trusting either ordinary people or experts or those with power to make those decisions in your stead. You, as the agent of change, are tasked with figuring out whether or not your change is a good idea, and what rules and restrictions if any to either advocate for more broadly or to impose upon yourself. It is instead society’s job to decide what rules and restrictions it needs to impose upon those who would alter our world. Most of the time, we impose far too many such restrictions on doing things, and the tech philosophy of providing value and sorting things out later is right. Other times, there are real externalities and outside risks, and we need to ensure those are accounted for. When your new technology might kill everyone, that is one of those times. We need regulations on development of frontier models and other extinction-level threats. In practice that is likely going to have to extend to a form of compute governance in order to be effective. For deployments of AI that do not have this property, that are not at risk of getting everyone killed or causing loss of human control, we should treat them like any other technology. Keep an eye on externalities that are not priced in, especially risks to those who did not sign up for them, ensure key societal interests and that everyone is compensated fairly, but mostly let people do what they want.
I will definitely be taking him up on that offer when I get the time to do so, sad I didn’t see this before my recent trip so we’ll have to do it remotely.
The Quest for Sane Regulations
This is a pretty crazy request. So anyone who tries to get the model to do anything OpenAI doesn’t want it to do, the government wants the transcript of that? Yes, I can perhaps see some privacy concerns and some free speech concerns and so on. I also see this as the ultimate fishing expedition, the idea being that the FTC wants OpenAI to identify the few responses that look worst so the FTC can use them to string up OpenAI or at least fine them, on the theory that it is just awful when ‘misinformation’ occurs or what not. Whole thing definitely has a ‘ The Week in Audio
No One Would Be So Stupid As ToThat is the topic of this week’s
And yes, some people treat this as an aspiration.
I worry that there is a major looking-for-keys-under-the-streetlamp effect here?
This seems like a claim that we are using this theory because it can have a measurable opinion on which systems are or aren’t conscious. That does not make it true or false. Is it true? If true, is it huge? It seems inadequate here to merely say ‘I don’t know.’ It’s more like ‘hell if I have an idea what any of this actually means or how any of it works, let alone what to do with that information if I had it.’ I am slamming the big red ‘I notice I am confused’ button here, on every level. Are we using words we don’t understand in the hopes that it will cause us to understand concepts and preferences we also don’t understand? I fear we are offloading our ‘decide if we care about this’ responsibilities off on this confused word so that we can pretend that is resolving our confusions. What do we actually care about, or should we actually care about, anyway? I do not find the theories they offer on that chart convincing, but I don’t have better. In 4.1 they consider the dangers of getting the answer wrong. Which is essentially that we might choose to incorrectly care or not care about the AI and its experience, if we think we should care about conscious AIs but not non-conscious AIs. I also see this as a large danger of making AIs conscious. If people start assigning moral weight to the experiences of AIs, then a wide variety of people coming from a wide variety of moral and philosophical theories are going to make the whole everyone not dying business quite a lot harder. It can simultaneously be true that if we build certain AIs we have to give their experiences moral weight, and also that if we were to do that then this leads directly and quickly to human extinction. If we do not find aligning an AI to be morally acceptable, in whatever way and for whatever reason, or if the same goes for the ways we would in practice deploy them, then that is no different than if we do not know how to align that AI. We have to be wise enough to find a way not to build it in the first place. Meanwhile the paper explicitly says that many people, including some of its authors, have been deliberately attempting to imbue consciousness into machines in the hopes this will enhance their capabilities. Which, if it works, seems rather alarming. Indeed, the recommendation section starts out noticing that a lot of people are imploring us to try not making our AI systems conscious. Then they say:
One could say that there is the need to study consciousness so that one can avoid accidentally creating it. If we were capable of that approach, that would seem wise. That does not seem to be what is being advocated for here sufficiently clearly, but they do recognize the issue. They say building such a system ‘should not be done lightly,’ that such research could enable or do this, and call to mitigate this risk. I would suggest perhaps we should try to write an enforceable rule to head this off, but that seems hard given the whole lack of knowing what the damn thing actually is. Given that, how do we prevent it? Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
Arjun’s approach here makes sense for that particular problem. Using AI to create synthetic data via what is essentially translation seems like an excellent way to potentially enhance skills at alternative languages, both computer and human. It also seems like an excellent way to create statistical balance in a data set, getting rid of undesired correlations and adjusting base rates as desired. I am curious to see what this can do for debiasing efforts. I remain skeptical of IDA and do not think that this is sufficiently analogous to that, especially when hoping to do things like preserve sufficiently strong and accurate alignment, but going into details of that would be better as its own future post.
People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone
The Lighter Side
You're currently a free subscriber to |