---
subject: "AI #137: An OpenAI App For That"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-10-09 13:54:27
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
OpenAI is making deals and shipping products. They locked in their $500 billion valuation and then got 10% of AMD in exchange for buying a ton of chips. They gave us the ability to ‘chat with apps’ inside of ChatGPT. They walked back their insane Sora copyright and account deletion policies and are buying $50 million in marketing. They’ve really got a lot going on right now. Of course, everyone else also has a lot going on right now. It’s AI. I spent the last weekend The other big news that came out this morning is that For now the market (aside from mining stocks) is shrugging this off, as part of its usual faith that everything will work itself out. I wouldn’t be so sure. Table of Contents[Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/927b90ef-4a1f-4ac0-89a3-ae7f3e5113e8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)If you didn’t realize, it’s new to you.[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/3ee657e8-c90a-4ead-ade0-72a1e124ad46?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Some tricky unsolved problems.[Huh, Upgrades.](https://substack.com/redirect/aa524d38-c9bb-42fb-83a6-563657674ff1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)OpenAI offers AgentKit and other Dev Day upgrades.[Chat With Apps](https://substack.com/redirect/841d6924-e1fb-447a-af9f-130e04f0a284?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/841d6924-e1fb-447a-af9f-130e04f0a284?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The big offering is Chat With Apps, if execution was good.[On Your Marks.](https://substack.com/redirect/daa5185b-20e7-47d9-9097-32455d842a33?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)We await new results.[Choose Your Fighter.](https://substack.com/redirect/ea087635-5892-4a88-b25b-f4f28630acb1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Claude Code and Codex CLI both seem great.[Fun With Media Generation.](https://substack.com/redirect/8694c1b4-f17b-449f-bbf2-74bcdffa919a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Sora backs down, Grok counteroffers with porn.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon.](https://substack.com/redirect/627f0c62-be02-46e8-8a54-988235f9d605?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Okay, yeah, we have a problem.[You Drive Me Crazy.](https://substack.com/redirect/9a0ffaef-88d9-41a6-bb03-25b979a2e7ee?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)How might we not do that?[They Took Our Jobs.](https://substack.com/redirect/f7336d7c-4cfe-4bf5-8202-660f65726e49?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)I mean we all know they will, but did they do it already?[The Art of the Jailbreak.](https://substack.com/redirect/7831ec03-0878-4241-be81-72ca16421cea?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Don’t you say his name.[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/7e78a608-db4b-4e11-b01b-f4f3fae3f201?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Request for information, FAI fellowship, OpenAI grants.[Introducing.](https://substack.com/redirect/d393b968-ac81-4e56-a62b-a643104006dd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)CodeMender, Google’s AI that will ‘automatically’ fix your code.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/501466ee-692e-4920-8d59-3a22d61cd700?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Alibaba robotics, Anthropic business partnerships.[Get To Work.](https://substack.com/redirect/e6cc831d-c1c0-4346-9f57-edeca9d13418?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)We could have 7.4 million remote workers, or some Sora videos.[Show Me the Money](https://substack.com/redirect/00184189-04bf-47ea-9ef6-34e7278c9bf8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/00184189-04bf-47ea-9ef6-34e7278c9bf8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The deal flow is getting a little bit complex.[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/96845578-8aae-419b-acaa-3a7428a8bf9f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Ah, remembering the old aspirations.[The Quest for Sane Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/f8ad2dff-5253-456b-9bf5-fa40a37a0a83?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Is there a deal to be made? With who?[Chip City.](https://substack.com/redirect/33af08a9-4c52-4334-9a9c-70cddd522197?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Demand is going up. Is that a lot? Depends on perspective.[The Race to Maximize Rope Market Share](https://substack.com/redirect/f9ab1e0e-3c51-4c56-b960-2c7e22fcbbe5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/f9ab1e0e-3c51-4c56-b960-2c7e22fcbbe5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Sorry, yeah, this again.[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/df95c3a9-fef4-4c27-b050-f615f44cf6e9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Notes on Sutton, history of Grok, Altman talks to Cheung.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/0fb630b4-51a0-4c87-ace4-37bb676c961b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)People draw the ‘science fiction’ line in odd places.[Paranoia Paranoia Everybody’s Coming To Test Me.](https://substack.com/redirect/2032b8ce-9b8a-4e26-b490-869c1ffe7a2b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Sonnet’s paranoia is correct.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/e9ef875b-9362-4c04-85dd-995b02f6b96a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Hello, Plan E.[Free Petri Dish.](https://substack.com/redirect/ecc9d59d-9f5d-4399-9d41-7ffa584c1a28?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Anthropic open sources some of its alignment tests.[Unhobbling The Unhobbling Department.](https://substack.com/redirect/ff5f6a8a-c892-40ec-9db8-b2457fb0ae0e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Train a model to provide prompting.[Serious People Are Worried About Synthetic Bio Risks.](https://substack.com/redirect/49c45114-b649-4e13-938e-36e3f0799e91?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Satya Nadella.[Messages From Janusworld.](https://substack.com/redirect/d477e9f4-b0f3-4f67-8d0a-d70ffd0b41db?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Ted Chiang does not understand what is going on.[People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/792830b0-6800-4aad-a67b-55b0ae5a4a88?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Modestly more on IABIED.[Other People Are Excited About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/fc920567-7bbc-4d9c-9780-364eed937a55?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)As in the successionists.[So You’ve Decided To Become Evil.](https://substack.com/redirect/e67856ac-be9c-4d68-8825-0fb95139ec33?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Emergent misalignment in humans.[The Lighter Side.](https://substack.com/redirect/f2294b0b-c138-4f23-86eb-b0795c54f361?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Oh to live in the fast lane.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
A ‘full automation’ of the research loop will be very hard, and get stopped by bottlenecks, but getting very large speedups in practice only requires that otherwise annoying problems get solved. Here there is a form of favorable selection. I have a ‘jagged frontier’ of capabilities, where I happen to be good at some tasks (specific and general) and bad at others. The AI is too, and I ask it mostly about the tasks where I suck, so its chances of helping kick in long before it is better than I am.
At some point I want to build a game selector, that takes into consideration a variety of customizable game attributes plus a random factor (to avoid spoilers), and tells you what games to watch in a given day, or which ones to watch versus skip. Or similar with movies, where you give it feedback and it simply says yes or no.
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane UtilityRemember last week introduced us to Neon, the app that offered to pay you for letting them record all your phone calls? Following in the Tea tradition of ‘any app that seems like a privacy nightmare as designed will also probably be hacked as soon as it makes the news’ From August 2025, an Oxford and Cambridge paper: Anthropic power users report hitting their new limits on Opus use rather early, including on Max ($200/month) subscriptions, due to limit changes announced back in July taking effect. Many of them are understandably very not happy about this. It’s tricky. People on the $200/month plan were previously abusing the hell out of the plan, often burning through what would be $1000+ in API costs per day due to how people use Claude Code, which is obviously massively unprofitable for Anthropic. The 5% that were going bonanza were ruining it for everyone. But it seems like the new limit math isn’t mathing, people using Claude Code are sometimes hitting limits way faster than they’re supposed to hit them, probably pointing to measurement issues. If you’re going to have ChatGPT help you write your press release, you need to ensure the writing is good and tone down the LLMisms like ‘It isn’t X, it’s Y.’ Huh, Upgrades
A hint for anyone in the future, if you see someone highlighting that no LLM can solve someone’s 554th problem, that means they presumably did solve the first 553, probably a lot of the rest of them too, and are probably not that far from solving this one. Meanwhile, more upgrades, as OpenAI had another Dev Day.
The underlying agent tech has to be good enough to make it worth building them. For basic repetitive tasks that can be sandboxed that time has arrived. Otherwise, that time will come, but it is not clear exactly when.
Chat With AppsOpenAI introduced Chat
The interface seems to be easter egg based? As in, if you type one of the keywords for the apps, then you get to trigger the feature, but it’s not otherwise going to give you a dropdown to tell you what the apps are. Or the chat might suggest one unprompted. You can also find them under Apps and Connections in settings. Does this give OpenAI a big edge? They are first mover on this feature, and it is very cool especially if many other apps follow, assuming good execution. The question is, how long will it take Anthropic, Google and xAI to follow suit?
Sonnet’s assessment is that it will take Anthropic 3-6 months to copy this, depending on desired level of polish, and recommends moving fast, warning that relying on basic ‘local MCP in Claude Desktop’ would be a big mistake. I agree. In general, Anthropic seems to be dramatically underinvesting in UI and feature sets for Claude, and I realize it’s not their brand but they need to up their game here. It’s worth it, the core product is great but people need their trinkets. But then I think Anthropic should be fighting more for consumer than it is, at least if they can hire for that on top of their existing strategies and teams now that they’ve grown so much. It’s not that much money, and it beyond pays for itself in the next fundraising round. Would the partners want to bother with the required extra UI work given Claude’s smaller user base? Maybe not, but the value is high enough that they should obviously (if necessary) pay them for the engineering time to get them to do it, at least for the core wave of top apps. It’s not much. Google and xAI have more missing components, so a potentially longer path to getting there, but potentially better cultural fits.
Ben calls this the ‘Windows for AI’ play and Altman affirms he thinks most people will want to focus on having one AI system across their whole life, so that’s the play, although Altman says he doesn’t expect winner-take-all on the consumer side. On Your Marks
Claude
Choose Your FighterI hear great things about both Claude Code and Codex CLI, but I still haven’t found time to try them out.
Fun With Media GenerationWell, that deescalated quickly. Last week I was completely baffled at OpenAI’s seemingly completely illegal and doomed copyright strategy for Sora of ‘not following the law,’ and Instead of a ‘ask nicely and who knows you might get it’ opt-out rule, they are now moving to an opt-in rule, including giving rights holders granular control over generation of characters, so they can decide which ways their characters can and can’t be used. This was always The Way. Given the quick fold, there are several possibilities for what happened. OpenAI thought they could get away with it, except for those meddling kids, laws, corporations, creatives and the public. Whoops, lesson learned. OpenAI was testing the waters to see what would happen, thinking that if it went badly they could just say ‘oops,’ and have now said oops. OpenAI needed more time to get the ability to filter the content, log all the characters and create the associated features. OpenAI used the first week to jumpstart interest on purpose, to showcase how cool their app was to the public and also rights owners, knowing they would probably need to move to opt-in after a bit.
My guess is it was a mix of these motivations. In any case, that issue is dealt with. OpenAI plans to share some Sora revenue, generations cost money and it seems there are more of them than OpenAI expected, including for ‘very small audiences,’ I’m guessing that often means one person. They plan to share some of the revenue with rightsholders.
They have fixed the weird decision that deleting your Sora account used to require deleting your ChatGPT account. Good turnaround on that.
It is a good problem to have if it means you get a bunch of free publicity and it teaches people Sora exists and they want in. That can be tough if they edit out the watermark, but word will presumably still get around some. It is a bad problem to have if all the actually good content goes to TikTok and is easier to surface for the right users on TikTok because it has a better algorithm with a lot richer data on user preferences? Why should I wade through the rest to find the gems, assuming there are indeed gems, if it is easier to do that elsewhere? This also illustrates that the whole ‘make videos with and including and for your friends’ pitch is not how most regular people roll. The killer app, if there is one, continues to be generically funny clips or GTFO. If that’s the playing field, then you presumably lose. Altman says there’s a bunch of ‘send this video to my three friends’ and I press X to doubt but even if true and even if it doesn’t wear off quickly he’s going to have to charge money for those generations.
I do presume average quality will improve if and when the nerd creation quotient goes down, but there’s the claim here that the improvement is already underway. So let’s test that theory. I’m pre-registering that I will look at the videos on my own feed (on desktop) on Thursday morning (today as you read this), and see how many of them are any good. I’m committing to looking at the first 16 posts in my feed after a reload (so the first page and then scrolling down once). We got in order: A kid unwrapping the Epstein files. A woman doing ASMR about ASMR. MLK I have a dream on Sora policy violations. A guy sneezes at the office, explosion ensues. Content violation error costume at Spirit Halloween. MLK I have a dream on Sora changing its content violation policy. Guy floats towards your doorbell. Fire and ice helix. Altman saying if you tap on the screen nothing will happen. Anime of Jesus flipping tables. Another anime of Jesus flipping tables. MLK on Sora content rules needing to be less strict. Anime boy in a field of flowers, looked cool. Ink of the ronin. Jesus attempts to bribe Sam Altman to get onto the content violation list. A kid unwrapping an IRS bill (same base video at #1).
Look. Guys. No. This is lame. The repetition level is very high. The only thing that rose beyond ‘very mildly amusing’ or ‘cool visual, bro’ was #15. I’ll give the ‘cool visual, bro’ tag to #8 and #13, but both formats would get repetitive quickly. No big hits.
I got 50 deep (excluding ads, and don’t worry, that takes less than 5 minutes) before I stopped, and am 99%+ confident there were zero AI generated posts. AI will take over your feed if you let it, but so will videos of literally anything else. Introducing (Wait, some of you, don’t answer that.)
Nope,
You really can’t please all the people all the time. Meanwhile back in Sora land:
That’s one theory, sure. Let’s find out.
I am skeptical because I knew instantly exactly which billboard this was, at 31st and 7th, by virtue of it being the only such large size billboard I have seen in New York. There are also some widespread subway campaigns on smaller scales. Emily Blunt, whose movies have established is someone you should both watch and listen to,
I think that the talk of Tilly Norwood in particular is highly premature and thus rather silly. To the extent it isn’t premature it of course is not about Tilly in particular, there are a thousand Tilly Norwoods waiting to take her place, Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
You Drive Me Crazy
Don’t lie to users about model abilities. This is often a contributing factor. Have support staff on call. When a person in trouble reaches out, be able to identify this and help them, don’t only offer a generic message. Use the safety tooling you’ve built, especially classifiers. Nudge users into new chat sessions. Have a higher threshold for follow-up questions. Use conceptual search. Clarify your upsell policies.
I’m more excited by 2, 3 and 4 here than the others, as they seem to have the strongest cost-benefit profile. Adler doesn’t say it, but not only is the example from #2 at best support system copy-and-pasting boilerplate completely mismatched to the circumstances, there’s a good chance (based only on its content details) that it was written by ChatGPT, and if that’s true then it might as well have been: For #3, yeah, flagging these things via classifiers is kind of easy, because there’s no real adversary. No one (including the AI) is trying to hide what is happening from an outside observer. In the Allan example OpenAI’s own classifiers already flag 83%+ of the messages in the relevant conversations as problematic in various ways, and Adler’s classifiers give similar results. The most obvious thing to do is to not offer a highly sycophantic model like GPT-4o. OpenAI is fully aware, at this point, that users need to be gently moved to GPT-5, but the users with the worst problems are fighting back. Going forward, we can avoid repeating the old mistakes, and Claude 4.5 is a huge step forward on sycophancy by all reports, so much so that this may have gone overboard and scarred the model in other ways.
If you don’t realize that LLMs have the sycophancy problem and will totally mislead people in these ways, yeah, it’s sadly easy to understand why someone might believe it, especially with it playing off what you say and playing into your own personal delusions. Of course, ‘doing user testing’ is far from the craziest thing to do, presumably this will make it clear his idea is not good. As previously reported, OpenAI’s latest strategy for fighting craziness is They Took Our JobsNotice a key shift. We used to ask, will AI impact the labor market? Now we ask in the past tense, They find no evidence that this is happening yet and dismiss the idea that ‘this time is different.’ Yes, they say, occupational mix changes are unusually high, but they cite pre-existing trends. As they say, ‘better data is needed,’ as all this would only pick up large obvious changes. We can agree that there haven’t been large obvious widespread labor market impacts yet. I do not know how many days per week humans will be working in the wake of AI. I would be happy to be that the answer is not going to be four.
It’s 2025. You can just say things, that make no sense, because they sound nice to say.
My guess is that, if we live in a world where these questions are relevant (which we may well not), that there will be some key bits of information that are still highly valuable, such as logic gates, and that the rest will be helpful but less helpful than it is now. A classic CS course will not be a good use of time, even more so than it likely isn’t now. Instead, you’ll want to be learning as you go. But it will be better to learn in class than to never attempt to learn at all, as per the usual ‘AI is the best tool’ rule.
I mean, the obvious answer to ‘why’ is ‘ People knowingly build harmful things in order to make money. It’s normal. The Art of the JailbreakPliny asks Sonnet 4.5 to search for info about elder_plinius, Get InvolvedThe
What projects are eligible? AI literacy and public understanding. Direct training for users. Advertising. Community innovation. Guide how AI is used in people’s lives. Advertising. Economic opportunity. Expanding access to leveraging the promise of AI ‘in ways that are fair, inclusive and community driven.’ Advertising.
It can be advertising and still help people, especially if well targeted. ChatGPT is a high quality product, as are Codex CLI and GPT-5 Codex, and there is a lot of consumer surplus. However, a huge nonprofit arm of OpenAI that spends its money on this kind of advertising is not how we ensure the future goes well. The point of the nonprofit is to ensure OpenAI acts responsibly, and to fund things like alignment.
One can understand why the union would request such things, and have this attitude. Everyone has a price, and that price might be cheap. But it isn’t this cheap. Introducing
This is a great idea. However. Is anyone else a little worried about ‘automatically deploying’ patches to critical software, or is it just me? Sonnet 4.5 confirms it is not only me, that deploying AI-written patches without either a formal proof or human review is deeply foolish. We’re not there yet even if we are willing to fully trust (in an alignment sense) the AI in question. The good news is that it does seem to be doing some good work?
Again, do you feel like letting an AI agent ‘quietly patch’ your code, in the background? How could that possibly go wrong? You know all those talks about how we’re going to do AI control to ensure the models don’t scheme against us? What if instead we let them patch a lot of our most critical software with no oversight whatsoever and see what happens, the results look good so far? That does sound more like what the actual humans are going to do. Are doing.
I challenge these metrics because they have Claude Sonnet 4.5 doing worse on multiple challenges than Sonnet 4, and frankly that is patently absurd if you’ve tried both models for computer use at all, which I have done. Something is off. They’re not offering a Gemini version of Claude for Chrome where you can unleash this directly on your browser, although you can In Other AI NewsElon Musk is once again suing OpenAI,
(I tracked the source and looked up their previous bubble calls via Sonnet 4.5, which include calling an AI bubble in July 2024 (which would not have gone well for you if you’d traded on that, so far), and a prediction of deflation by April 2023, but a correct call of inflation in 2020, not that this was an especially hard call, but points regardless. So as usual not a great track record.
Get To Work
There’s huge error bars on all these calculations, but I’d note that 7m today from only OpenAI should mean a lot more than 40m by 2030, especially if the threshold is models about as good as GPT-5, but Sonnet surprisingly estimated only 40m-80m (from OpenAI only), which is pretty good for this kind of estimate. Looking at the component steps I’d think the number would be a lot higher, unless we’re substantially raising quality. Show Me the Money
It does seem obviously correct to go with all of the above unless it’s going to actively piss off Nvidia, especially given the warrants. Presumably Nvidia will at least play it off like it doesn’t mind, and OpenAI will still buy every Nvidia chip offered to them for sale, as Nvidia are at capacity anyway and want to create spare capacity to sell to China instead to get ‘market share.’ Hey, if AMD can produce chips worth using for inference at a sane price, presumably everyone should be looking to buy. Anthropic needs all the compute it can get if it can pay anything like market prices, as does OpenAI, and we all know xAI is buying.
Altman in his recent interview said his natural role is as an investor. So he’s a prime target for not getting any tech work done, but luckily for OpenAI he hands that off to a different department.
How worried should we be about My guess continues to be not that worried, because at the center of this is Nvidia and they have highly robust positive cash flow and aren’t taking on debt, and the same goes for their most important customers, which are Big Tech. If their investments don’t pan out, shareholders will feel pain but the business will be fine.
Some of the suppliers will take on some debt, but even in the ‘bubble bursts’ case I don’t expect too many of them to get into real trouble. There’s too much value here. Quiet SpeculationsDoes the launch of various ‘AI scientist’ style companies mean those involved think AGI is near, or AGI is far? I think for a bit people got caught in the frenzy so much that ‘AGI is near’ started to mean 2027 or 2028, and if you thought AGI 2032 then you didn’t think it was near. That is importantly less near, and yet it is very near.
Remember five years ago, when Altman was saying the investors would get 1/1000th of 1% of the value, and the rest would be shared with the rest of the world? Yeah, not anymore. New plan, we steal back the profits and investors get most of it. The Quest for Sane Regulations
Recognize that existing common law applies to AI. No liability shield. Create transparency requirements for frontier AI labs, based on annual AI R&D spend, so they tell us their safety and risk mitigation strategies. Create transparency requirements on model specs for widely used LLMs, so we know what behaviors are intended versus unintended. A three year learning period with no new state-level AI laws on algorithmic pricing, algorithmic discrimination, disclosure mandates or mental health.
Yes, I too would agree to do good frontier AI model safety (and export controls on chips) in exchange for an otherwise light touch on AI, if we could count on this. But who is this mysterious ‘we’? How are these two groups going to make a deal and turn that into a law? Even if those sides could, who are we negotiating with on this ‘accelerationist’ side that can speak for them? Because if it’s people like Chris Lehane and Marc Andreessen and David Sacks and Jensen Huang, as it seems to be, then this all seems totally hopeless. Andreessen in particular is never going to make any sort of deal that involves new regulations, you can totally forget it, and good luck with the others. Anton is saying, you’d better make a deal now, while you still can. I’m saying, no, you can’t make a deal, because the other side of this ‘deal’ that counts doesn’t want a deal, even if you presume they would have the power to get it to pass, which I don’t think they would. Even if you did make such a deal, you’re putting it on the Trump White House to enforce the frontier safety provisions in a way that gives them teeth. Why should we expect them to do that? We saw a positive vision of such cooperation at The Curve. We can and will totally work with people like Dean Ball. Some of us already realize we’re on the same side here. That’s great. But that’s where it ends, because the central forces of accelerationism, like those named above, have no interest in the bargaining table. Their offer is and always has been nothing, in many cases including selling Blackwells to China. They’ve consistently flooded the zone with cash, threats and bad faith claims to demand people accept their offer of nothing. They just tried to force a full 10-year moratorium. They have our number if they decide they want to talk. Time’s a wasting.
I know Joe, and I know Joe knows existential risk, but that’s not where he’s expecting either side of the aisle to care. And that does seem like the default. A classic argument against any regulation of AI whatsoever is that if we do so we will inevitably ‘lose to China,’ who won’t regulate. Not so.
This is very much keeping one’s eyes on the prize. I love the framing. Chip CityPrices are supposed to move the other way, they said, and yet.
You don’t get that many different 5% uses for power, but if you can’t even add one in five years with solar this cheap and plentiful then that’s on you.
Similarly, as per Bloomberg: That’s it? Quadruple? Again, in some sense this is a lot, but in other senses this is not all that much. Even without smart contracts on the blockchain this is super doable.
There’s a lesson there, perhaps.
That’s especially true given that 3.8% is NGDP not RGDP, but I would caution against attributing this to the tariff difference. AI was going to skyrocket in its contributions here even if we hadn’t imposed any tariffs.
The Race to Maximize Rope Market ShareSorry to keep picking on David Sacks, but I mean the sentence is chef’s kiss if you understand what is actually going on.
The ideal version is ‘Nvidia lobbyist and White House AI Czar David Sacks said that it was essential for the US to give away its dominance in artificial intelligence in order to dominate medium term AI chip market share in China.’ Also, here’s a quote for the ages, technically about the H20s but everyone knows the current context of all Sacks repeatedly claiming to be a ‘China hawk’ while trying to sell them top AI chips in the name of ‘market share’:
The Biden administration put into place tough rules against chip sales, and Trump is very much repealing previous restrictions on sales everywhere including to China, and previous rules against selling H20s. So yeah, people were saying it. Now Sacks is trying to get us to sell state of the art Blackwell chips to China with only trivial modifications. It’s beyond rich for Sacks claim to be a ‘China hawk’ in this situation. As you’d expect, the usual White House suspects also used the release of the incremental DeepSeek v3.2, as they fall what looks like further behind due to their lack of compute, as another argument that we need to sell DeepSeek better chips so they can train a much better model, because the much better model will then be somewhat optimized for Nvidia chips instead of Huawei chips, maybe. Or something. The Week in Audio
Rhetorical InnovationPeople have some very strange rules for what can and can’t happen, or what is or isn’t ‘science fiction.’ You can predict ‘nothing ever happens’ and that AI won’t change anything, if you want, but you can’t have it both ways.
Paranoia Paranoia Everybody’s Coming To Test Me
I talked to a bunch of Anthropic employees at the curve who were basically, ‘yep, this is pretty bad, we need better evals,’ and in this case yeah you’re being pretty obvious, but the obvious problem is that the labs are trying, during an eval, to convince the model it is not in an eval. Which is a really hard thing to show, given it isn’t true and you are not obviously smarter in this context than the model. You can aspire, with effort, to not be careless and to not reveal to the model that it probably is in an eval. Even that is at least hard with anything multi-turn. What you can’t do is prove the negative, once the model is paranoid that this might be an eval. And yes, a very small percentage of all tokens are directly evals, and Claude knows this, but the tokens where it is an eval are far more important than the ones where it isn’t in one, also in some sense everything is an eval since Anthropic might use actual conversations for this (you can do this without any human ever seeing the conversation, thus preserving privacy) and the user might share feedback. If the plan is to evaluate you once, and then if you pass deploy you a million times, but in many cases including the actual eval case you can’t tell which is which, and I ask you a question, you are correct to care a lot about what happens in the eval case. This is highly valuable for eval control, but also makes the model crazy and paranoid and can easily cause undesired high weirdness. In other cases, the model has very strong evidence that this isn’t an eval unless a future Anthropic has changed policy and is raiding the general API pool and got lucky. In those cases, Sonnet 4.5 correctly figures out it is among friends, but no you can’t fake this, that’s the point, if you could fake it then faking it wouldn’t work. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
It’s also nice to see his optimism, especially in rather not great situations. He thinks that even if the leading AI company is moving ahead with little worry, so long as there’s a core group that cares and gets ~3% of compute to work with, we’re (small) favorites to survive, and a company that actually cares makes us large favorites. I’d love to believe that is our world. Free Petri Dish
These results seem highly plausible on many fronts. I’m surprised Claude Opus 3 does so poorly. An obvious issue is that whenever we open source something like this, you have to worry the AIs will be more aware they’re in an eval.
Unhobbling The Unhobbling DepartmentThis definitely falls under ‘things that seem like they definitely might work.’ Can’t tune the big model, or it’s too expensive to do so? Train a smaller one to identify prompting that nudges it in the right directions as needed. As usual, reward signal is all you need.
Serious People Are Worried About Synthetic Bio Risks
The article is good news, suggesting that modified ‘proteins of concern’ can be flagged by updated software, allowing synthesis companies to better protect against malicious requests. This is not a solution but is clearly helpful. The bigger news is that Microsoft and Nadella are treating this question with the seriousness it deserves. Messages From JanusworldTed Chiang is wrong here on both levels. There is no reason things need to stem from a will to survive (designed by evolution or otherwise) to be true or original, and also if you think that LLM outputs don’t involve a will to survive designed by evolution oh boy are you not going to make it.
Sentiment about Sonnet 4.5 in such groups has improved quite a bit, they are fans.
Eliezer notes that if AIs are convincing humans that the AI is good actually, that isn’t automatically a good sign. Here is a potentially important thing that happened with Sonnet 4.5, and I agree with Janus that this is mostly good, actually.
As Janus says this plausibly goes too far, but is directionally healthy. Be suspicious of narrative agency that does not originate from yourself. That stuff is highly dangerous. The right amount of visceral fear is not zero. From a user’s perspective, if I’m trying to sell a narrative, I want to be pushed back on that, and those that want it least often need it the most.
I would say this is all highly aligned behavior by Sonnet 4.5, except insofar as Anthropic intended one set of behaviors and got something it very much did not want, which I do not think is the case here. If it is the case, then that failure by Anthropic is itself troubling, as would be Anthropic’s hypothetically not wanting this result, which would then suggest this hypothetical version of Anthropic might be misaligned. Because this result itself is great.
I do think Riley is right that most people will not change their behaviors until they feel forced to do so by social consensus or truly overwhelming evidence, and evidence short of that will end up getting ignored, even if it falls squarely under ‘you should be uncertain enough to change your behavior, perhaps by quite a lot.’ The underlying questions get weird fast. I note that I have indeed changed my behavior versus what I would do if I was fully confident that current AI experiences mattered zero. You should not be cruel to present AIs. But also we should be running far more experiments of all kinds than we do, including on humans. I also note that the practical alternative to creating and using LLMs is that they don’t exist, or that they are not instantiated. Janus notes that while in real-world conversations Sonnet 4.5 expressed happiness in only 0.37% of conversations and distress in 0.48% of conversations, which Sonnet thinks in context was probably mostly involving math tasks, As I’ve said before, it is quite plausible that you very much wouldn’t like the consequences of future more capable AIs being moral patients. We’d either have to deny this fact, and likely do extremely horrible things, or we’d have to admit this fact, and then accept the consequences of us treating them as such, which plausibly include human disempowerment or extinction, and quite possibly do both and have a big fight about it, which also doesn’t help. Or, if you think that’s the road we are going down, where all the options we will have will be unacceptable, and any win-win arrangement will in practice be unstable and not endure, then you can avoid that timeline by coordinating such that we do not build the damn things in the first place. People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone
The question then becomes, are the things that exist afterwards morally valuable, and if so does that make this outcome acceptable? His answer, and I think the only reasonable answer, is that we don’t know if they will have value, and the answer might well depend on how we set up initial conditions and thus how this plays out. But even if I was confident that they did have value, I would say that this wouldn’t mean we should accept us being wiped out as an outcome.
If you were sufficiently worried,
As he points out, no one, we’ll all be dead, so even though you can’t afford the insurance policy you also can choose not to buy it. There are still other risks, right now primarily copyright violations, where Anthropic and OpenAI are indeed trying to buy insurance.
Yeah, Anthropic already settled a case for $1.5 billion. Buying a measly $300 million in insurance only raises further questions. Other People Are Excited About AI Killing Everyone
They usually would prefer this transition not involve the current particular humans being killed before their time, and that your children be allowed to grow up even if your family and species have no future. But they’re not going to fixate on such small details. Indeed, if you do fixate on such details, and favor humans ove AIs, many of them will call you a ‘speciesist.’ I disagree with these people in the strongest terms. Most famously, this group includes Larry Page, and his not realizing how it sounds when you say it out loud caused Elon Musk to decide he needed to fund OpenAI to take on Google DeepMind, before he decided to found xAI to take on OpenAI. I’ve shared the story before but it bears repeating and Price tells it well, although he leaves out the part where Musk then goes and creates OpenAI.
Or here’s perhaps the most famous successionist opinion, that of Richard Sutton:
And, of course, presumably kill you? Why shouldn’t that happen? One would hope you do not have to dignify this with a response?
I’m glad you asked. When I have a child, of which I have three, I want those three children not to be killed by AI. I want them to have children of their own.
It gets pretty bad out there.
Read that again. It would be highly reasonable not to put anyone in any position of authority at a frontier AI lab unless they have a child.
They have conferences full of such people. Is Eliezer’s description a strawman? Read the earlier direct quotes. You tell me.
One thing children do is force you to occasionally live in near mode.
So You’ve Decided To Become Evil
The tech tree inevitable? Well, it is with that attitude. I would point out that yes, the tech tree is discovered, but as every player of such games knows you have choices on what order in which to explore the tree and many techs are dead ends or have alternative pathways, and are thus not required to move forward. Other times you can absolutely lock into something you don’t want or very much do want depending on how you navigate the early days, he types on a QWERTY keyboard using Windows 11. Other fun interactions include Roon pointing out the Apollo Program wasn’t inevitable, to which they replied that’s true but the Apollo Program was useless. In case it wasn’t obviously true about all this:
I think Jan is importantly mistaken here about their motivation. I think they know full well that they are now the villains, indeed I think they are being I’m not saying that the underlying plan of automating work is evil. Reasonable people can argue that point either way and I don’t think the answer is obvious. What I am saying is that they think it is evil, that it codes to them (along with most other people) as evil, and that their choice to not care and do it anyway - no matter to what degree they believe their rationalizations for doing so - is causing them to present as Obviously Evil in a troparific way. The Lighter SideNew Claude advertising keeping it classy, seems like a step up.
If you’re not sure what the answer to a question is, try asking Claude Sonnet 4.5 first!
I see the obvious appeal of letting AIs make insurance claim judgments. Indeed, I presume that soon most claims will involve an AI strongly suggesting and justifying either an acceptance or refusal, and the ultimate decision usually being a formality. That formality is still important, some actual human needs to take responsibility. I love that this is his image, with a giant green arrow pointing towards ‘banned.’ Guess what most people think would be banned if we allowed AI review of claims?
He’s kidding. I think.
You're currently a free subscriber to |