---
subject: "vgr: The Twitter Years (2007-22)"
from: "Contraptions <contraptions@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-02-15 21:40:14
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Contraptions", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_5493170773715678215", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
I just finished my most complex vibe-coding project yet: Converting my twitter archive into a book comprising 101 of my best threads plus a chapter with 396 of my best single tweets. The online version is free and live at
Read the whole Preface The book weighs in at 119,000 words (the future print version will be approximately 350-400 pages). This represents about 0.26% of my twitter data. I have plans to transform the rest of my archive into some sort of MCPified queryable oracle thingie on IPFS (probably merged with ribbonfarm archives), but right now, the site is already set up to be very LLM-friendly. Give the link to your LLM and you’ll be able to chat with it about the contents. This is a production beta. Please post comments with typos and other issues here. I will be doing further clean-up gradually, though this is already pretty clean. This online version is pretty snazzy. You can hover over the link emoji to the right of any included tweet or chapter title to copy it for sharing. I deliberately chose not to include likes/retweets data, in part because it made the presentation look cluttered, and in part because the data is obsolete anyway since this archive is from late 2022 when I stopped posting. But mainly because I think this new form factor allows the focus to be on the actual content of what I was posting rather than the stale social proof indicators attached to it. Print and ebook versions are next (make sure you’re subscribed to this email list to be alerted when those versions are available to buy). Conversational ContextThe hardest problem was deciding what to do about conversational context. Ultimately I decided not to include anyone else’s tweets, but instead link them in footnotes. Not just for copyright reasons, but because the information presentation problem suddenly gets very complex. Yes, this butchers the nonlinear conversational nature of twitter at its best, but on balance I figured this butchered serialization was the right way to do this. The full twitter experience is not really serializable into a book-like artifact, and I decided not to try. Maybe if enough users from the twitter years do what I’ve done (download their archives and host it in an LLM-friendly public-commons form), someone could do a larger project recreating a kind of time-capsule theme park version of at least pockets of old twitter, frozen around 2022 November before Musk took over. As far as I can tell, X is not going to be friendly or supportive for such a project, not just because it is politically hostile to old twitter, but because that historical data is now a competitive advantage for training Groq. But you have rights to your slice of it too, so you should do something like this if you think your archives are valuable for completing the larger picture of what old twitter was like. I think there are a few projects like this already underway. Somebody reached out at some point asking me to put my archives on their site, but I’m wary of that re-aggregation approach. I think it is best if we all individually put our archival digital selves online like this, and made it public. That way, we don’t trade one aggregation play for another. Archival SelvesMore broadly, this project was the opening battle in what I consider a longer campaign to craft an “Act 1” archival self of myself, based on my online activity, 2007-2024, up to when I retired ribbonfarm. Call it vgrAct1.ghost or something (is .ghost a tld? It should be). A conceit perhaps, but also fun. It’s going to include all of ribbonfarm content (the boss level), my book Tempo, this newsletter’s content until the Contraptions rebrand, plus perhaps also Quora content and other random stuff I have scattered around. It feels weirdly liberating to archive even a small slice of a past self this way. Also practically useful, since my memory has gone from exceptional to shitty in the last few years, and I’d like a version of myself with better memory to talk to as I get older. The online version of this book with its planned oracularized features is going to be more than just a bookified mirror of my twitter account. It’s going to be a personalized prosthetic memory for me. Production BackstoryThough the final outcome hopefully looks like a well-designed conventional book, the production process was anything but. It took a serious amount of wrangling with specialized scripts to extract and process my best threads (fortunately I’d made an index thread of threads towards the end which helped) and surface the best single tweets. There was also a lot of grimy data cleaning to do, handling images and links and so on. Plus broken threads to patch, quote-continuations, etc. Some things I had to give up on. I used to run a lot of really fun polls, but that data seems incomplete in my archives (the questions are there but not the voting data). I also gave up on the video-heavy threads I did around my robotics tinkering and a few other kinds of book-unfriendly content. There were two natural phases: A one-time extract/normalize/clean process to produce well-staged raw material and then an iterative build process that slowly constructed the book the way I wanted. If you want to do something like what I did, I suggest something similar. It’s the sort of technical work I’m good at managing but would hate to have to do myself. I started out in ChatGPT, having it generate code in the web chat interface and cutting and pasting the python scripts into my code editor and running the build processes myself in the shell. This was janky and error-prone, and also at some point the chat got so long, ChatGPT started choking and getting deeply confused. This week, I finally migrated the project over to Claude Code and the difference was night and day. I was able to finish the project smoothly over just 4-5 hours (and about $35 worth of tokens — less than I’d have paid a programmer for a single hour of time). You can look at This project was only one of several I got going this week. I was dragging my feet over jumping onto the Claude Code bandwagon because I knew I’d go hypomanic with it once I did. But I finally jumped in, and yes, I did go hypomanic as almost everyone who tries it seems to. I’ll post about my other projects in the coming weeks. This archival-self category of projects is fun, but the real fun is scaffolding my Act 2 self, to support my current and future projects, as well as figuring out things to do that weren’t possible at all before AI. Complex configurancies are cooking. Fire ze slop cannons! You're currently a free subscriber to |