---
subject: "The Spotlight Effect: Why No One Really Cares About You"
from: "\"Sahil Bloom's Curiosity Chronicle\" <sahil@sahilbloom.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-04-12 09:04:18
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Sahil Bloom", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_1989028747625928812", "UNREAD"]
---
The Spotlight Effectread and listen on read time 6 minutes Welcome to The Curiosity Chronicle, a weekly newsletter where I provide actionable ideas to help you build a high-performing, healthy, wealthy life. Today at a Glance:- The Spotlight Effect is a common psychological phenomenon where we overestimate the degree to which other people are noticing or observing our actions, behaviors, appearance, or results.
- Pre-conditioned fear of placing yourself in "spotlight situations" means you shrink yourself down from your true potential. This is a tremendous drag on growth.
- To fight back: (1) Develop an awareness of the Spotlight Effect and when it may hit, (2) Focus on being interested rather than interesting, and (3) Ask "So what?" to confront your fears.
Today's Newsletter is Brought to You by Who you surround yourself with matters. And if you’re looking to build relationships and learn from the best leaders in tech, then Round is the perfect place for you. Round members are accomplished leaders and technologists who are committed to leading with curiosity, empathy, and humility. Founded by serial entrepreneurs, Round counts senior executives from Amazon, Canva, Flexport, Roblox, Zapier (and basically any innovative tech company you can think of) among its members. The Round experience supports leaders who are building the best tech through curated private events, access to industry leaders, and a community of talented peers. The network and experience provides an invaluable opportunity for anyone interested in making a lasting impression through their work. Be part of something bigger—we’re better decision makers, builders, and leaders when surrounded by a community rooted in shared values! Apply today and mention Curiosity Chronicle to skip the waitlist.
The Spotlight EffectI have a recurring nightmare that I can trace back to my baseball playing days: I’m on the field in a big situation, with all eyes on me, and realize I've completely forgotten how to throw the ball. Rather than the quick movements necessary to perform, my body moves like it’s stuck in mud and I’m unable to help my team. The eyes of the entire stadium bear down on me and I'm paralyzed by fear. This dream, it turns out, is a rather common sensation experienced by humans. In fact, I'd be willing to bet you've experienced some variation of this dream at some point in your life. The paralyzing fear of this embarrassment—with the eyes of the masses staring through you—is enough to shoot a chill down anyone’s spine. All of this is the result of a very common—and very damning—cognitive bias: The Spotlight Effect. In today’s piece, I’ll cover what it is, why it’s dangerous, and how you can fight back. What is the Spotlight Effect?The Spotlight Effect is a common psychological phenomenon where we overestimate the degree to which other people are noticing or observing our actions, behaviors, appearance, or results. It's grounded in egocentric bias—the tendency to see everything through our "Player 1" lens and believe that our perspective is the only perspective. The phrase Spotlight Effect was coined by a group of psychologists in 2000, following In a similar study, students were asked to rate whether their classmates looked better or worse than average throughout a semester of classes. The results showed that the students had significantly less awareness of appearance variations in others than they perceived in themselves. Two simple takeaways: - We think everyone is staring and noticing us, but they aren't.
- Even if they are, they quickly forget about it.
The Spotlight Effect explains why we feel that there is a spotlight shining on us in public and social situations. This has a variety of negative consequences in our lives: - Pre-conditioned fear of placing yourself in "spotlight situations" means you shrink yourself down from your true potential. You don't take on the big opportunities for fear of the spotlight. You make yourself small in public situations by speaking quietly or avoiding eye contact.
- Memories of prior spotlight failures create anxiety in the present. The tail of anxiety from moments long forgotten by others can last weeks, months, or even years (as in the case of my baseball dream!).
- Self-consciousness can manifest as self-centeredness in certain scenarios. Your own concern that others are staring or noticing you may lead to asking others about your appearance, which can come across negatively, despite that not being the intention.
- Avoidance of doing things that increase your happiness (solo dinner dates, dancing at parties, etc.) due to fear of judgement from others.
We may never turn it off completely, but we could all benefit from dimming the spotlight... Dimming the SpotlightWhile it will feel more pronounced for some than others, the Spotlight Effect impacts everyone. No matter how socially comfortable and confident we are, the Spotlight Effect can creep into our lives. Three simple strategies to fight back: - Awareness: The first step to managing the impact of cognitive biases is always awareness. Understand that others are never as tuned into your actions, behaviors, or appearance as you are. Even if they do notice you, they quickly forget about it, as they're mostly just focused on themselves. We are biologically selfish creatures, after all!
- Be Interested, Not Interesting: Most people enter a public situation with a desire to be interesting—to impress people with interesting insights or stories. Instead of focusing on being interesting, focus on being interested. Ask questions, listen intently, and engage. This eases your own tension, gets others talking, and builds up your confidence in a new social situation.
- The "So What?" Approach: Whenever I think about a future (or present) spotlight situation, I try to confront my worst fears about what could go wrong. In the case of an upcoming public speaking appearance, I might think about my fear of stumbling over my words or forgetting my prepared remarks. I then ask, "So what?" about that worst fear becoming reality. So what if I forget my remarks? I'll stumble my way through, but I won't be dead. My family will still love me when I get home and life will move on. Usually the "So what?" isn't nearly as bad as we think. As Seneca famously wrote, "We suffer more in imagination than in reality."
These simple strategies will go a long way to helping you fight back against the negative impact of the Spotlight Effect in your life. Give them a shot and let me know what you think! The Two Big Mistakes in LifeThere are - Worrying about what other people think about you.
- Believing that other people think about you in the first place.
If you develop an awareness of the Spotlight Effect, you can defeat the latter in order to soften the blow of the former. When you stop worrying about what others think, a weight is lifted. You can simply be yourself and live according to your values. There’s so much hidden talent out there in the world that has yet to be revealed because of fear of judgement from others. Overcoming the Spotlight Effect is the way that this talent gets unlocked. I hope this article is the start of that journey for some of you! Sahil's Recommendation ZoneLooking for incredible design work for your company, startup, brand, or personal project with flat, reasonable, transparent pricing? We're taking on a few more projects in the coming months. If you're interested, check out their work and connect with them Refer Friends, Earn Rewards!
If you enjoyed today's newsletter, please share it with your friends and family! If this email was forwarded to you, consider |