---
subject: "Monthly Roundup #27: February 2025"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-17 14:07:45
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
I have been debating how to cover the non-AI aspects of the Trump administration, including the various machinations of DOGE. I felt it necessary to have an associated section this month, but I have attempted to keep such coverage to a minimum, and will continue to do so. There are too many other things going on, and plenty of others are covering the situation. Bad News
The full bad news is that the It seems Antisocial MediaYou love to see it?
The moment itself might seem trivial, but a lot goes into that moment happening. It’s about consistently being the type of person who gets and executes on opportunities like that, puts themselves in spots where good things can happen, or vice versa. The system is not as dumb as it might seem, especially in terms of the sign of the reaction. There are also various ways to go more viral, that encourage very bad habits and patterns, and that you need to fight against using. My experience has been different, largely because Substack is far more linear and gradual, whereas Twitter and true social media are all about power laws. I’ve had the ‘big hits’ but they are not that much bigger than my usual hits. In terms of the weight loss thing, as someone who has made that transition, this… simply never bothered me? It seemed like an entirely expected and reasonable thing for people to do? But also I got a lot less of it, because I had friends largely from the Magic: the Gathering community at the time, whose reactions changed an order of magnitude less than most others do, and I’d previously never attempted to date anyway so there was nothing to contrast to there. Variously Effective Altruism
I believe that this was a highly counterproductive argument. Scott was so busy saying this was a contradiction that he never asked why people could be outraged and say things like ‘maybe we should invade the UK’ even in jest, in response to this particular outrageous situation, but not care about ( Whereas I think there is are several perfectly coherent and reasonable positions that explains why one might care a lot about this particular scandal, without caring about the causes Scott implores people to embrace. And what do these people constantly yell at us, if we have ears to hear? That they, their preferences and causes get no respect. That they are constantly being gaslit and lied to and no one cares, that they are told they are bad people, told they are racists, told other people should get preference over them because they are ‘privileged’, told that other people should get what they think is rightfully theirs. They are sick and tired of exactly this kind of treatment, only this is if anything worse. I have a hard time believing they wouldn’t respond with a very clear ‘f*** you.’ Indeed, this seems like an excellent way to make those people hate Effective Altruism. Have I fallen into a similar trap in the past, to varying degrees, at various times, on other issues? Oh, absolutely. And that was stupid, and counterproductive, and also wrong, no matter what I think of the opposing positions involved. I am sorry about that and strive to not do it, or at least do as little of it as possible. Scott Alexander seems like he’s been on tilt lately dealing with all the people coming out and saying ‘effective altruism is bad’ or ‘altruism is bad’ or ‘helping other people is bad’ and then those people respond yes, they actually think you should let a child drown in the river in front of you, stop being such a cuck.
I (uncharitably, but I think accurately) interpret Marc Andreessen as saying either or both of: You shouldn’t save a child drowning in a river, because that means you don’t care enough about yourself and your family (or others closer to you). America should spend no dollars on even existing super efficient lifesaving foreign aid like PEPFAR, even though the price is absurdly low and it pays for itself many times over in goodwill alone.
I’ve always hated the ‘drowning child in a river’ argument, because it was trying to equate that scenario with giving away all your money and not caring about your family more than other people. That’s a magician’s trick, hopefully people can see why. But I never thought I’d see the response be ‘actually, that argument is wrong because you shouldn’t save the child.’
This is, in general, an equal opportunity motte-and-bailey situation. There are also those who occupy the equal and opposite bailey, and assert that you do not have special obligations to those close to you, there is no distinction. Those people can be quite assertive and obnoxious about this. Now we deal with the new version instead.
The Forbidden Art of FundraisingIf you run a charity and you want to raise money, but I repeat myself, you need to convince people their contribution is making a tangible marginal difference. This is most extreme in Effective Altruist circles, where the thought is fully explicit, but it’s also true everywhere else. The goal must be at risk, the project must be in danger, and the best goal at risk of all, by far,
I endorse essentially all of this. I do think there are some circles that have people more explicitly and intentionally ‘playing chicken’ or other adversarial CDT-agent games with each other. The times I was at SFF, I tried my best to mostly not do this, and instead mostly do what Oliver suggests - allocate the money where I thought organizations were doing the best work and not only funding on pain of death, although ‘you already have enough’ as to be a factor at some point. There Was Ziz ThingIf you’re not wondering what was up with that shootout with the border patrol in Vermont or a landlord in Vallejo, If you are wondering, probably skip it anyway. If you didn’t do that, well, here are some links with information.
This article was widely endorsed except for its sentence on decision theory, and provides facts:
Some reporters reached out to me to discuss this because I am on the board of CFAR. So I’m going to take this opportunity to tell everyone that I don’t have any firsthand knowledge of the events in question whatsoever. That’s Not Very Nice
Mostly I’m sick of people trying to use ‘vibe shifts’ to attack me with The Unbearable Weight Of Lacking Talent
Roko is correct as well, but the point stands. If you’re given a pile of money, and you are most people, you might live comfortably and enjoy nice things and raise a family. But if you lack talent and ambition, then no one will remember your name and you won’t change things. You will not do much of anything with the opportunity. Which has opportunity cost, but is also pretty much fine, it’s just a missed opportunity to do better? If you come into a billion dollars via crypto, and you invest in the stock market and enjoy life, that’s not the worst way to invest it and move around real resources. More people like Vitalik Buterin and Jaan Tallinn would be better, of course, but you don’t want to force it if it isn’t there, or the money will effectively get wasted or stolen. If you want to do better, and you should, you will need to seek more agency. How to Have More AgencyWarning: Requires sufficient agency to bootstrap. But if you’ve got even a little…
File this one under Figuring out what the high agency person would do requires a lot less agency than being that person or actually doing it. Once you know what it is you would do, and you have a procedure that implies you need to do it, that greatly reduces the agency required to do it.
That’s not the only trick to having more agency. But it’s a big help. Government Working: Trump Administration EditionI probably shouldn’t have written this section at all, but here we are.
A theory from Benjamin Hoffman on various Trump executive order fiascos: There is an endless stream of what sure look like ‘Control + F’ mistakes, where they fire people or cancel projects for containing a particular word or phrase, when in context the decision makes no sense. If they were to, let’s say, feed the relevant text into Grok 3, presumably it would have known better? They talk about the need for more power and say it’s time to build then shut down solar and wind projects on government land. Scott Alexander uses way too many words to support his obviously correct title that ‘
Meanwhile, I have to listen to Odd Lots podcasts where they’re worried DOGE will break our government’s payment systems, and watch various people proclaim they are going to ignore court orders or imply that they should, or that any judge who defies them should be removed from their post.
I very much do not like where any of this is going. There’s at least some good news:
Well I didn’t say anything before, I’ve been busy, but now that you mention it… Trump (and others in his administration, including Musk) are doing a lot of things. Most of them I won’t be covering. It’s not my department and it doesn’t fit my OODA loops and I don’t have the bandwidth. It probably would have been better to not mention any of this at all, really. Again, that doesn’t mean the other things happening are not important, or not awful, or even that they are less important or less awful (or that everything else is awful). Even with the stuff I did mention here, I’m only scratching the surface. Again, as the Daily Show used to put it, do not rely on us as your only source of news. Government Working
It’s so absurd. The Prime Minister wants them gone too. Of course, these trade barriers don’t actually make any more or less sense than trade barriers between the USA and Canada, but here it’s that much harder be confused about it. The Boolean IllusionThere is a general tendency, closely related to people’s failure to
That is certainly one way it could go, but it probably won’t. There’s lots of unprincipled situations like this where such behavior does not escalate. Civilization would not survive if every time someone successfully violated a norm or got away with something, the norm or law involved de facto went away. Also, in this particular case, Biden paid a steep price to his reputation. History, assuming we are around to tell it, will remember him in large part for the way he chose to leave, and this will for a while be a headwind for Democrats at the ballot box, and state law still exists. Similarly, there’s no reason that a certain amount of ignoring court orders has to mean that all court orders are meaningless, or various other ‘end of democracy’ scenarios. It can escalate very quickly, and may yet do so. Or it might not. The broader point is more important, though, which is that an exception weakens a rule but in no way must break it. It can lead to that, but often it doesn’t, without any ‘good reason’ why. Nobody Wants This
Yep, fake reasons are all over the place, including reasons we give to ourselves. They can be ‘good’ fake reasons, or even true partial reasons, that could plausibly have been the real reason or that even are real reasons but not full or sufficient explanations and thus not true objections and not cruxes. Or they can be ‘bad’ fake reasons, that are Obvious Nonsense or are straight up lies. Or anything in between. Here are the most important notes that come to mind on what to do about this: If you do not want to do [A], and cannot come up with a legible reason not to do [A], then that is indeed a rather strong reason to consider doing [A], but I agree it is not conclusive. You should look for illegible reasons, the real reasons you don’t want to do [A], and see if there’s something important there. Once you know why you have the desire not to do [A], then you can decide to ignore it if the reason is dumb. If someone says [B], [C], [D] in turn, the conclusion is not always that they want [~A] period. It means that there is some unknown [X] that is the actual reason. Sometimes [X] could be overcome. Sometimes it couldn’t. Sometimes they don’t know what [X] is and you have to figure it out. Sometimes they do know what [X] is, but for social reasons they can’t tell you. Sometimes they want you to figure it out but not tell them, and they will sometimes be dropping rather aggressive hints to tell you this. This can involve things you can’t say out loud, secret information, and so on. Sometimes they want you to figure it out and maybe tell them, but they can’t tell you first, whereas if you go first it makes it okay. Sometimes they want to essentially tell you ‘because of reasons’ and do not want you to figure it out. Sometimes they simply can’t even and don’t have the time to explain, or even to figure out what they’re thinking in the first place. Can be highly valid. They may also be trying to fool you, or they might not.
We’d indeed all be better off if we just said the real reason more often, people are way too afraid to do this. “I don’t want to do that” is, in my book, a highly valid reason. You can (literally!) say “I don’t want to do that because of reasons” to indicate that you do indeed have legible-to-you reasons to not do this, but that you are choosing not to share them for whatever reason. You can also (literally!) say “I just don’t want to do that,” or “I’m not feeling that” or if you’re among true friends “I don’t want to do that not because of reasons.”
It’s important to tell kids real reasons whenever possible, and when it’s not possible to give them minimally fake reasons, even if that means being vague AF. There are certain classes of reasons that are almost always fake. For example, when a VC says they won’t fund you, or a company does not hire you, unless they point to an actual obvious dealbreaker you should assume the reason is fake.
We Technically Didn’t Start the FireThere were recently some rather epic fires in Los Angeles. Many aspects of those fires don’t fall under this blog’s perview. Others do. So while these may not be the most important aspect of the fires, that’s also why the wise man does not rely on us as your only source of news. One fun aspect of these fires is that State Farm specifically declined to renew fire insurance coverage in exactly the most impacted areas, because the insurance company thought there was too much fire risk and they weren’t allowed to raise prices. That is some killer risk management, by a mutual insurance company that doesn’t have shareholders. For which of course various people are mad at State Farm rather than suddenly being very curious about the other areas where State Farm wasn’t interested in renewing coverage.
It is a good thing that I actively prefer not to be at the nicest parties. Please don’t make me go to those parties. Here’s why State Farm had to stop writing policies, because it turns out ‘because prices were capped and the expected value of the policies was negative’ isn’t quite a full explanation. Or rather, that was the short version, here’s the long one.
This sounds like State Farm got pushed well past what would be my breaking point. It was willing to write losing (minus expected value, or -EV) policies for a while, but when you’re already underwater and they say no rate increases at all? Okay. Bye.
So what does the state plan to do about the fires? Why, of course.
What will happen now after the fires?
People will try to rebuild their homes. I say try, not because they won’t have the money, or because we don’t know how to do that. I say try because there will be a shortage of Officially Approved Labor to rebuild with especially with crackdowns on immigration, and because building houses is not something taken kindly to in Los Angeles. I also say try because:
Oh, price gouging protections. So much for supply.
Well, at least we get rid of some of the extra stupid rules, that part will help. In other cases, of course,
Would it hold up in court? Maybe not, but you have to try.
Nah.
This is of course a great opportunity to upzone that area and build more. Not that they have any intention of taking advantage of that.
I did a fact check of
If you’d rather sell your home for what the market will bear right now?
I believe that technically, what you can’t do is make an offer that is too low. You can accept whatever offer you want? So the market can still function, it’s just weird. And indeed, I think it would be fine to say that you need to first get an IoI (indicator of interest) from the potential seller fully unprompted, to avoid what Kendric describes above. It’s somewhat tricky to get it right, but seems doable.
If we are playing the blame game, one thing to blame is that under CEQA, the California Bonus Double NEPA,
It should be mind numbingly obvious that wildfire mitigation projects should be immune from CEQA and NEPA review. But forget it, kid. It’s California.
Well, yes, obviously. There will be a non-zero number of places that are slightly above $10k, that will now rent for $10k plus bribes or similar. But then there are lots of places that were already well over $10k, which will sit idle during the emergency, which in turn drives up the prices of everything else during that time, and means a lot of people are forced out entirely. Oh well. Who could have seen that coming? Finally, here’s the ultimate Gavin Newsom Tweet, except for its lack of restrictions on prices.
Good News, Everyone
There are obvious issues with Picardian morality, for example it thinks it’s good that we age and die, it has big scope sensitivity issues and it doesn’t know how to handle realistic AGI or various other utility monsters or other inconvenient scenarios (obvious examples: The Borg, if you don’t have Q or plot armor on your side, but it’s a very broad category, and if they’d successfully figured out how to mass produce Data all philosophical and practical hell would have broken loose). One could say it doesn’t work out of distribution, and it also isn’t that competitive in a future universe where the Federation keeps getting almost wiped out, which doesn’t seem great. But yeah, pretty great.
That’s exactly right. You present a better face partly because it’s nice, partly because people adjust expectations for the fact that you are likely putting on a better face. The worst part about this is it leads to far too few gatherings. If you were to have friends over and act otherwise almost totally normally, that would be a clear win. But you think ‘if I did that I’d have to do all this work and clean up and so on.’ So you don’t invite them, and everyone loses.
Let’s say it is true. If that’s the price of eating unhealthy, I expect most people would say screw it, that’s really not very much time. If people thought like this, I bet they’d eat a lot more fast food burgers, not less. The reason that’s a mistake isn’t that people care that much about the 20 minutes. It’s that they also spend what time they still have in worse shape and feeling worse. That’s the pitch that will far more often work. On regret, I’ve found my instincts on ‘will I inherently regret not doing this’ are spot on and most people’s seem to be as well:
That’s distinct from predicting a good result or knowing what we will regret if we actually do it, which we are far less good at doing. But we’re very good at knowing when we’re in a ‘if I don’t try I’ll regret it’ situation, especially in scenarios where if you don’t do it, you never know how it would have gone. I do think you should give this a lot of weight when you get a strong ‘I will regret [X] or ~[X] but not the other one’ instinct, especially if you’ve trained your predictions of this on results. A similar lesson is to put substantial weight on ‘story value.’ The classic form of this mistake is to avoid taking a risk, but to actually then feel worse than if you’d taken the risk and failed. The fully classic version, of course, is asking someone out or saying yes to someone else, or applying for a job, where even if you get rejected it’s better than always wondering. And you never know.
A Well Deserved Break
The principle seems strongly correct. You don’t need generic ‘rest’ or ‘to relax’ or ‘a vacation.’ You need to address whatever your particular issue is, however you in particular address it. I don’t match up with every solution proposed here, but most of them make sense. Also, there’s a type #6, which is actual physical exhaustion? Where the solution is, as you would expect physical rest. And I think type #7 also exists, a mental exhaustion where you’re just out of thoughts. Your thoughts aren’t racing, the issue isn’t choices, it’s just you’re out of compute. For me #4 solutions or a walk work reasonably here, but so does TV or a movie. Walking in particular works well for me in many cases. It can help with #4, but I actually really like it for #2 or #5 or #7 too, you pick some music (or a podcast if you have a relaxing one available in context) and you go. And if it’s choice exhaustion or being out of thoughts, I have a standard ‘The Hits’ list of 400+ songs and I just randomly spin to some position in it. I have other random notes, but I’ll wrap up there. Opportunity Knocks
For Your Entertainment
My other observation for the month is that I clearly don’t rewatch movies often enough versus seeing new ones - when I do revisit the average experience is miles better. Thus there’s more 5-star ratings on my Letterboxd than the bell curve would suggest, but it’s all selection effects. That has diminishing returns, but I’m nowhere near them. Consider whether you are making the same mistake. I Was Promised |