---
subject: "Conquest and Liberation of Academia"
from: "Robin Hanson from Overcoming Bias <overcomingbias@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-12-10 17:20:44
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Overcoming Bias", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8616244883382228708", "UNREAD"]
---
During my graduate studies (’93-97), I Later, ~1900, tenure became common in academia. Then mid-20th century, peer review became common in grants and publications. Also about then, journalism switched from its usual mode of questioning and investigating claims made to it, to accepting whatever academics said and trying to “communicate” that to the public. In the 1980s, college rating systems became widely available to the US public, ratings which depended mainly how how elite academics rated those colleges. All of these changes were ways in which academic elites wrested control of academia from “outsiders” who previously could impose some degree of incentives and accountability. The elites of most any profession would love to fully control it, grabbing resources to spend at their discretion, with little need to accommodate demands of customers or investors or regulators or anyone else. But academic managed to achieve this ideal far more than have most, due to their peak prestige. Via elite schools, academic control prestige in many other areas of life. I review this to make clear just what academic reformers are up against. It is far from sufficient to enumerate academic failures; you’ll have to develop concrete alternatives that can win prestige fights against academia. History has been moving against you; you’ll have to somehow reverse that tide. In my 40+ years of thinking about how we might reform academia, I’ve considered many different parties as potential allies in this venture. First I and other hypertext publishing fans hoped to use backlinks to make criticism of claims easy to find from those claims, thus recruiting critics and honest readers into our reform venture. But we’ve now achieved that ease, without much impact; readers care far more about the prestige of publications than what criticisms are effective with those who read them with care. Second, I saw the public as an ally willing to bet lots on science and related policy questions. But if academics choose to ignore such bets, the public isn’t much interested in them either. Third, I saw research patrons as allies. Surely they’d want to fund research in the ways most likely to induce intellectual progress, if only they knew which ways were better. Like with prizes instead of grants. But then I learned about the history of academic that I summarize above. No, patrons used to use better methods, but caved when academic threatened to take away prestige from patrons. Patrons care more about prestige from associating with academics than they do about intellectual progress. Fourth, I hoped journal editors might be allies. But when we showed that polls and prediction markets could predict which papers wouldn’t replicate, and tried to get journal editors to publicly declare they’d look at such predictions as part of their article approval process, they all refused. Journals are happy to publish sexy papers that don’t replicate. Now my Just as we can sometimes now get auditors, judges, juries, and journalists to give honest independent appraisals of others’ acts and accomplishments, there’s a decent chance that we can find a way to fund “historians” (who might not be professional credentialed as such) to look back at particular areas of research, and rank past researchers in terms of who should have been listened to more. And the first order of business in this reform effort is to actually fund such efforts to rank researchers from centuries ago, to show that we can in fact robustly enough rank them now. Once we find that different approaches give correlated answers, we can search for approaches whose results are the most correlated with others. Once we have demonstrated such a capacity, we could create markets today on assets that pay off proportional to (some monotonic transform of) rankings of particular researchers today. (Such assets would be built on assets that accumulate long term value, such as stock index funds.) And we could make markets in such assets *conditional on such evaluation exercises being done centuries later on their areas of research. This approach would thus be robust to the fraction of such areas later evaluated. It might be most all, or just a few, depending on how much funding becomes available, and how far in the future evaluations were done. With market estimates of future rankings of current researchers, we could then highlight any contrast between those rankings and who academic elites today choose to celebrate, vis jobs, funding, publications, etc. Such elites would then have to either (a), dismiss such markets as ignorant, (b) change their choices to better align with market estimates, or (c) trade in these markets to move them to better fit their prices with their non-market choices. Results (b) or (c) would give academics stronger incentives for, and thus rates of, intellectual progress. Academic institutions could then use such market prices as outcomes for futarchy-governance methods to choose jobs, grants, publications, etc. To prevent (a), I’d start this approach in limited research areas, where I’d pick shorter term evaluation periods, and subsidize the markets enough to induce informative prices, which we’d then prove as informative at the end of those evaluation periods. Once prices were taken seriously in such areas, we’d switch to longer term evaluation periods. And then researcher efforts to manipulate their prices would provide sufficient subsidies, so extra subsidies could be moved to new areas, to repeat this process. And hopefully with success, we’d attract more sources of subsidies. And that’s my current best vision for reforming academia. Its one of the hardest social spheres to reform, given its peak prestige, and none of the groups you might hope would be allies can be counted on here. My best ally hope is future “historians” looking back to say who should have most been listened to for the intellectual progress that was actually achieved. You're currently a free subscriber to |