---
subject: "Useless"
from: "\"River Kenna from In•Star\" <riverkenna@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-05-25 13:41:21
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "River Kenna", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3010718370428876194", "UNREAD"]
---
There’s a story about a tree, a gnarled, twisted tree, an ugly tree, a tree that all the carpenters and woodcutters look at and go “Oof, how would we do anything at all with that? No use cutting it down.” Every other tree in the forest gets cut down, turned into planks and homes and utensils and carvings and whatever else wood gets turned into. But that gnarled, ugly tree gets to live out its life, unfurled under the endless sky. I’m starting to see the beauty of uselessness. And not only that, I’m starting to see the total functional necessity of uselessness. Ironically: I’m getting a view of why uselessness is so fully fucking useful. There’s nothing special about meditation, you know. Nothing special about art either. There’s nothing special about embodiment, nothing special about open awareness, nothing special about following the breath or visualizing waterfalls of golden light pouring into your heart chakra. The main special aspect of any of these is that they are useless. Or rather, that your habitual enculturated mind sees them as useless. And once you see them as useless, and decide to do them anyway, something inside of you shuts down. The part of you that wants to chase goals, be successful, be rich and powerful and hot and all the other things — it sees that you’re starting up something it knows is useless, so it just nopes out and steps away until you’re done. There’s a sketching exercise in Drawing on the Right Side of the Brain that has you put a picture upside down and then try to sketch it like that. The explanation is that when trying to do such an unintuitive task, your left hemisphere gives up and goes away — leaving your right hemisphere to do the job instead. And the right hemisphere is better at the clear seeing required for sketching, so the sketch tends to turn out better. A similar dynamic happens when you set a timer to focus on your breath for 45 minutes. What a useless, stupid thing. Everything in you will try to rebel and tell you to go do something else. Go for a run, cook dinner, do your taxes, something, anything, just knock this useless crap off. —When that part of you finally gives up and goes away… that’s when the system is free to move, to get some breathing room. Anything you can do to get the narrow, limited, goal-fixated part of yourself to give up and go away for a bit, it creates a bit more breathing room, and starts to train you in what it feels like to be outside of that part of yourself. The problem, you might be starting to see, comes when these activities become useful. When you start to orient towards them as an activity with goals and purposes that you can include on a spreadsheet and fit into your optimization schedule. Embodiment is useful when the rational mind sees the body as a distant, useless meat-sack it has to drive around in. You start focusing on tiny subtle sensations in your lower gut, and the controlling part of you goes “ugh, call me back when this is done,” and for a brief window, you’re free. But when your narrow, fixated, controlling part of yourself decides that embodiment is actually a wonderful and socially approved optimization strategy with many listicles to promote its mental and physical benefits… it’s over. For the purposes of The Path, it’s another lifeless strategy that’s not going to take you any closer to where you’re going. I’m being hyperbolic but not by much. Yes, there are still advantages that creep in to your life, even with such narrowly optimized strategies, that make an eventual opening more possible. It happens. It’s not a total loss. But good god it’s hard to overstate just how load-bearing the uselessness can be. Or the total unconcern with usefulness. And good god it’s hard to overstate just how destructive the instrumentalizing mind can be with this stuff. When a practice becomes the territory of the using mind, its value on the path starts to degrade — and the half-life is sometimes measured in seconds. Jung talked about Abraxas as the god of effectiveness. And if I’m remembering correctly, he said that unlike all other complementary pairs, Abraxas had no opposite, because the opposite would be ineffective and would have no effect and thus cease to exist. If my memory is serving, and Jung did in fact say this (Idk I have vivid dreams, he might not have said it), then I’d say it was a blind spot. It’s not that Abraxas has no opposite. It’s that we live so totally ensconced in Abraxas’s world that we can hardly even imagine his opposite; the very structure of our left-hemisphere reality stops us from perceiving her, the way the structure of our eyes stop us from perceiving light at frequencies outside of our visual range. It’s just not there. When something becomes useful, it comes into the Abraxas world. When we manage to wiggle our way into doing something that doesn’t fit into Abraxas-world… it gets bored and leaves us alone, just for a moment — and just for that moment, we might glimpse that Other place. And that Other place is a whole other half of reality where wholeness is waiting. And also it’s just like, honestly no big deal. It’s a very natural and open and complementary space. It’s only special the way a nutrient is special when your body is woefully deficient. I don’t really have a finish here. Um. I think I’ve just been noticing modes of embodiment exercise that feel like they’re missing what is, to me, the most important piece, and it kinda hit me in the sauna today what the shape of it was. This is just one of those articles where I write until I’m done and then drop it in the middle of a sente In•Star is free and will stay free, but if you get something out of my work, consider giving something back.- Share my writing with friends & followers,-pick up my |