---
subject: "The Nutgraf: The fall killed real-money gaming"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-08-23 04:43:42
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
On 20 March, 1897, the Bengal Legislative Council introduced a bill calling for the specific banning of a practice called “rain gambling”.
Rain gambling, also known as Barsat ka Satta, was a form of speculation where people would place bets over future rainfall, i.e., the quantity and duration of rain during a window of time, when the monsoon would arrive, and how long it would last. This form of betting was especially popular with the Marwari community, who brought it with them from Rajasthan as they emigrated to various parts of India… including Bengal.
You’d think that betting on rainfall would be a random pastime activity, but it was anything but. In fact, it got so popular that the British colonial government got quite concerned, going so far as to even amend laws to ban the practice in Bombay (now Mumbai).
And now, Bengal was in the crosshairs. In 1894, Sir John Lambert, the Police Commissioner, noted that rain gambling was one of the major activities in the Burra Bazaar area of Calcutta (now Kolkata). Lambert writes that the practice caused traffic jams and obstructions of the streets, which were filled with gamblers. Betting houses sprung up all over the city. Although the Marwari community were the ones who originally started it, according to him, “others have been attracted, and now crowds of all races collect: Europeans, Arabs, East Indians, West Indians, Native Christians, Jews, Hindus, Muhammadans, Arabs, native females, and even children”.
And betting on the rain wasn’t just a leisure activity.
People took it really seriously.
Tune in to The Ken’s premium audio experience
From original podcasts to writer-narrated versions of our subscriber newsletters, existing Premium subscribers can listen to all our premium audio, available exclusively via our subscriber apps. Discover them all at [the-ken.com/podcasts](https://the-ken.com/podcasts), including the [latest volume](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/the-nutgraf/the-fall-killed-real-money-gaming/) of this newsletter.
Not a Premium subscriber? You can subscribe to [The Ken Premium](https://podcasts.apple.com/in/channel/the-ken-premium/id6744577070) on Apple Podcasts for an easy monthly price (Rs 299 in India).
There’s a website called Dharohar, an initiative by the Securities and Exchange Commission of India (SEBI) that chronicles the history of trading in India. In it, I found an [article](https://mism.org/pointer/monsoon-bets-unraveling-the-history-1/) which described the frenzy of rain gambling back then. They shared an article from The Evening Times in 1906 which describes what the vibe was like inside the rain gambling den: “Many are the anxious faces which gaze up into the sky, for… some have staked their all, and comparative fortune or total loss and despair depends on the clouds above.”
The attempt to ban rain gambling in 1897 Bengal was met with stiff and interesting opposition from Indians. There were massive protest meetings. A petition was filed which claimed that rain gambling wasn’t just chance and speculation, but “demanded skill and even scientific knowledge” and linked it to meteorology. Over 900 prominent members of the Marwari community signed the petition. Several fierce op-eds were written and published in the newspapers, both vernacular and English.
All of it came to naught.
On 3 April, 1897, The Bengal Rain-Gambling Act was “hurriedly passed” to ensure the ban would be in place before monsoon arrived.
The viceroy signed the act on 10 May.
Rain gambling, deemed a speculative and perilous practice by the British colonial authorities, was ultimately banned.
And eventually, the practice faded away from the Indian public consciousness, and disappeared.
So why am I talking about rain gambling?
Well…
Top Indian startups in the real-money gaming space have begun shutting down operations after New Delhi effectively banned the sector through new legislation that’s now on the verge of becoming law.
On Thursday, the upper house of the Indian Parliament passed the Promotion and Regulation of Online Gaming Bill, 2025 — proposing to completely ban real-money gaming while aiming to promote casual online games and esports. The vote came just a day after the bill cleared the lower house, leaving only presidential assent before it becomes law — a formality expected to happen soon.
Shortly after the bill passed in Parliament, Indian unicorns Dream Sports and Mobile Premier League (MPL) — along with other startups like Gameskraft, Probo, and Zupee — began shutting down their real-money gaming operations. Some of these companies informed employees of their decision following the bill’s passage in the lower house on Wednesday, while others began notifying users directly through their apps.
As India bans real-money games, Dream Sports, MPL start pulling the plug, [Techcrunch](https://techcrunch.com/2025/08/21/as-india-bans-real-money-games-dream-sports-mpl-start-pulling-the-plug/)
If you set aside the merits of the ban itself, the most remarkable aspect is the speed and urgency with which the tide turned against real-money gaming. Until a few months ago, the conversation around real-money gaming was most concerned with how it would be taxed—which many companies interpreted as a form of legitimisation. Back in July 2023, when the decision to implement a 28% GST on real-money gaming was floated, I [wrote](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/its-not-clear-why-online-gaming-firms-are-upset/) that this may actually be a blessing for these firms: “What’s the price that online gaming companies are willing to pay to ensure that they’ll forever be safe, secure, and left alone to conduct their business without looking over their shoulders? To advertise freely? To sign up celebrities as brand ambassadors? And to really build on their vision of building product companies out of India (if that’s what they want) in a way that’s profitable? Some would argue that 28% tax is a small price to pay.”
Well, as it turns out, I was wrong about that, because in a couple of months, it became apparent that the authorities weren’t taxing the companies earnings in the future, they had plans to apply it retrospectively, which meant that the overall tax demand on real-gaming companies exceeded the size of the online gaming industry itself.
The retrospective tax question went all the way up to the Supreme Court, which coincidentally reserved its judgement just last week.
And while gaming companies were holding their collective breath awaiting the apex court’s decision on their collective futures, the hammer came crashing down on their head from an entirely different direction—a ban on real-money gaming, regardless of chance or skill, and passed as a law by the legislature.
I think it’s fair to say that this is truly the end of real-money gaming in India.
Even though I noted that the speed of the move was surprising, in some ways, the ban on real-money gaming isn’t arbitrary or unexpected when viewed through the larger context of how the government approaches consumption in India. From its perspective, certain patterns of spending are deemed fundamentally undesirable—and the state is determined to curb them swiftly.
Real-money gaming is just along the continuum of this story. In the last five years, India has banned lending apps, and more recently, OTTs the government deemed as pornographic. Sure, some of these are shady Chinese apps, but some of them are fairly large, and even successful businesses with a name and face to them. Last month, when the Ministry of Broadcasting released a list of 25 OTT platforms to be blocked, one of companies on the list was ALTT (formerly Alt Balaji), the digital streaming platform from Balaji Telefilms which was once valued at nearly Rs 1,200 crore. If it doesn’t fit the state’s blueprint for public consumption, no giant is too big to be brought down. Not ALTT. Not Dream11. Not MPL. Or Gameskraft.
In some ways, this may seem terrifying, but in some ways, it really isn’t. It’s hard to argue that real-money gaming produces a net positive to the economy. Sure, the companies can make arguments about the jobs they created, and how much GST they provide, but the counterview is far too powerful, i.e., these companies act as a magnet for a large segment of Indians to throw their life savings into, with seemingly arbitrary outcomes. You can slice and dice these apps and quibble between which ones are games of skill and which ones are chance, but it’s clear that the state no longer believes in this distinction.
Governments all over the world, and historically, even in India, have always made their judgements about these things. They may couch these with reasons like money laundering, obscenity, or even speculation, as the British colonial government did, but at the end of the day, the message is, “this form of consumption is not something we want right now.”
If you go back one hundred of thirty years, the clearest explanation of why the rain gambling ban was pursued with such enthusiasm by the British colonial government in India comes from Ritu Birla in her brilliant work Stages of Capital. The book explores much deeper themes about law, culture, and market governance in late colonial India, and she also has the best account of the rain gambling ban. While the entire book is worth a read, this excerpt is especially pertinent.
“In the subcontinent, the growing public anxiety over gambling as an economic crime reflected, first, India’s presence as an exporter of primary products in an increasingly integrated world market, and second, the greater standardisation of its domestic economy.
[…]
The question of gambling as a distortion of market practices resonated within a broader debate over Indian economic development. While the characterisation of indigenous commercial practices as high risk and unproductive dated back to the eighteenth century, only in this later period did the issue attract public attention and government regulation.”
Perhaps one of the biggest reasons for India to make this move right now, at this moment, is not too different from what drove the British colonial government back in 1897.
Regards,
Praveen Gopal Krishnan