---
subject: "The McLuhan Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-05-24 10:01:36
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Stephanie Balzer (SB) is a writer, coach, and founder of Stephanie here. Noah sent me a copy of Marshall McLuhan’s For others who are uninitiated, McLuhan’s style seemed matter-of-fact and his temperament, pragmatic. In short, he probably would have squashed a wayward spider with a tissue and flushed it down the toilet rather than gingerly relocating it to the backyard. But that’s not to say he was unemotional. He wrote with the urgency of the atomic age. His sentences read like the incessant ringing of a rotary phone that possibly no one will answer, his themes develop in bold graphics and with black-and-white images that emerged from the chemical baths of their darkrooms. Why is this interesting? All of this surfaced, several weeks ago, when Know that those superfans exist. In some tech circles, McLuhan is thought of as a prophet, a diviner of technology due to his ability to predict trends (
Imagine his university late one night. Buildings are empty and locked, library books are put away on shelves, mice snuggled up and asleep in their laboratory cages. There’s McLuhan in his office, smoking a cigarette and thinking, “Everything is changing and by force. Every aspect of our lives. Dramatically.” It is the language of the crusader and dissident alike, the way rhetoric from strongly opposing sides of an argument sometimes meets at the seams. Once, years ago, I stepped into an elevator in a bank building in downtown Phoenix. An old man, already in the elevator, with wild white hair and sandals, looked at me and said, “I can tell by the shape of your eyebrows that one day you will work in a field that hasn’t been invented yet.” I rarely think about that encounter, but it isn’t one you easily forget, either. It reminds me of the time a psychic at a street fair told me I had “owl eyes”—I desperately wanted that to be true, to believe this woman could know my essence. In that moment in the elevator, an entirely new sense of self whooshed through me and I envisioned a future I’d never dreamed of before. How is it that wanting to be in technology is like no other wanting? Then the elevator dinged. Its doors opened. I stepped out. Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Stephane (SB) —
|