---
subject: "The Dark Glow of Radium"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-09-21 11:02:39
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX"]
---
Eben Byers had it all. He was the son of a Gilded Age industrialist, raised in luxury and educated at the country’s finest schools. He was an excellent athlete; he’s a winner of the U.S. Amateur Golf Championship, on a list with Arnold Palmer, Jack Nicklaus, and Tiger Woods. He took over his dad’s iron factory and established himself on the New York social scene during the Roaring Twenties. He owned stables for his racehorses in both England and the United States. He had enough money to But one thing bothered this young man who had it all. In 1927, at age 47, he had been on a train home from the Harvard-Yale football game (Byers was a Yalie), drinking with some friends. He tumbled out of the sleeping berth in his private car and landed on his shoulder. The pain wouldn’t go away, and it began to get in the way of golf and the other pleasures in his life. So Byers started to look around for a cure. He ended up in the care of a Pittsburgh doctor who encouraged him to take a new miracle drug: Radithor, marketed as “perpetual sunshine.” Byers loved the stuff. It made him feel energetic and dulled the pain. He pushed the medicine on his friends, sending them cases of it, and had his racehorses drink it, too. He probably consumed over 1,000 bottles of it over a four-year period. Unfortunately, Byers was unaware of a few things about this new miracle medicine. He didn’t know that its creator was William Bailey, a serial scammer who had lied about his medical credentials (Bailey’s previous product, an impotence medication, had contained strychnine). He didn’t know that Bailey offered a kickback to the doctors who prescribed Radithor. And, worst of all, he didn’t know that the miracle ingredient, radium, was deadly. In the early days of his Radithor treatment, Byers felt hale and hearty, but that would soon change. He started to suffer terrible headaches. His teeth fell out. By 1931, when Robert Winn of the Federal Trade Commission interviewed him, he
Byers was carrying in his bones more than three times the fatal dose of radiation. He died, ravaged by cancer and missing half of his face, at age 51. Bailey, the “businessman” behind Radithor, would continue to claim that his tonic was good for patients (he would die of cancer 17 years later). When scientists exhumed the bodies of Radithor drinkers in the 1960s, their bodies were still The radium craze was relatively short-lived, but it did plenty of damage. Marie and Pierre Curie, having worked to isolate radium from uranium and shown that its radioactivity could damage cancerous tumors, won the 1903 Nobel Prize in Physics. Radium and the radioactivity it emitted seemed like a scientific wonder. It was the latest step in the march toward the mastery of nature, and the possibilities seemed limitless. Radium quickly became part of popular culture. There was a 1915 song called “My Radium Girl” with lyrics like “At night your mystical rays I see/I feel your wonderful gaze on me/You’re so mysterious that I must love you.” Or this German song, which claims that radium sets hearts on fire: People named all sorts of things after radium; it signified the future. There was a Radium Dance Group: And a Radium Cinema in Zurich: A French postcard imagined 21st-century people gathering around a radium-powered hearth: But, as in the case of Eben Byers, radium was often marketed as a health booster. In the tradition of William Bailey, the purveyor of the stuff that killed Eben Byers, marketed an array of radioactive products, including the Marketers of the radium fad especially targeted women. Many cosmetic products contained radium, including the Tho-Radia line of creams, lipsticks, and other products that were sold in France in the 1930s and 1940s. The company cleverly enlisted the endorsement of a Dr. Alfred Curie, who, though no relation to Marie and Pierre Curie, lent an air of scientific respectability to the products: A lady seeking that healthful glow could also pick up Radior cosmetics, which promised that “radium possesses an enormous power for human betterment” and that “rays of radium in fact energize and revivify any living matter with which they come in contact.” You could even get a radium perm: Many products used radium as part of their name while carefully avoiding telling the consumer whether they actually contained any: There was a “Radium Spray:” And Radium Boot Polish: There was even Radium butter: Even after it became clear that radium products meant illness or death, companies tried to sell (non-radium) radioactive products, making dubious health claims. You could get a radioactive lipstick that would cure your sciatica: Or brush your teeth with radioactive toothpaste: Eben Byers was the most famous victim of the early 20th-century enthusiasm for radioactivity, but he was far from the only one. Some companies started to use radium paint to make the hands of their watches glow in the dark — a nifty, if trivial, use of the stuff. The glow-in-the-dark properties of radium were seen as a solution to the problem of bumping around in the middle of the night: Tragically, the novelty of glow-in-the-dark timepieces and bedroom slippers killed dozens of women. The so-called “Radium Girls,” who painted radium on watch hands to make them glow in the dark, suffered terrible fates. Many of the workers licked the tips of their brushes to straighten them every few minutes. It was the fastest way to do it, and they were paid by the number of pieces they finished in a day. Not understanding the deadly nature of their paint — the women were told that the radium wasn’t dangerous — workers would sometimes paint their nails with the stuff as well. Many Though people eventually harnessed the power of radioactivity for good (and terrible) purposes, we first stumbled through a transition period during which scientists didn’t fully understand the forces they had unleashed and businesspeople tried to make a buck off of the trend, consequences be damned. The radium fad is an excellent reminder that scientific discovery is not the same as progress. Innovation doesn’t always make life better, and new technologies are often most dangerous in the years just after their discovery, when the incentives of capitalism combine with ignorance to put people in danger. This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are three ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: You can share the newsletter with others: You can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week! You're currently a free subscriber to |