---
subject: "Inventing Breakfast"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-12-03 13:02:25
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
And now a midweek break from our series on the Don’t forget… If you’ve been wanting to support this newsletter, I’m offering a discount right now: 35% off, which makes the price about $2 per month, or less than 50 cents a post. Becoming a paid subscriber gets you access to the archives and the self-satisfied feeling that Renaissance patrons of the arts must have had. If you value the work that goes into this newsletter, please consider signing up as a paid member by clicking this link: People in the past didn’t leave a lot of evidence about how they conducted the most mundane parts of their lives. For example, it took an impressive amount of detective work for historian Similarly, if you lived in a society where writing was rare and writing materials were costly, would you really waste resources on recording what you gulped down before heading out the door to work? You might want to make note of the exciting birthday dinner you made for your spouse or the delicious restaurant you visited, but would you really write down “I ate oatmeal for breakfast for the 47th day in a row?” So historians are grasping in the dark a bit when it comes to the origins of the morning meal. They tell us that the ancient The history of our most mundane meal has reflected our work habits, economic conditions, and morality. Whether you think that breakfast is the most important meal of the day or you skip it entirely, your morning habits are the result of historical forces. If breakfast was an unremarked-upon and inconsistently consumed meal for much of Western history, it started to become routine in the 1600s and 1700s. In fact, Dutch artists like Pieter and Willem Claesz created a number of breakfast-related still life paintings in the middle of the 1600s: You’ll notice that the second painting, with an abundance of oysters, doesn’t look like the breakfasts you may know and love today. Elaborate breakfasts for the wealthy didn’t resemble today’s combinations of eggs, breads, and perhaps a bit of meat. An 1847
It may be that the enthusiasm for breakfast among the wealthy and powerful started with beverages. As coffee, tea, and chocolate drinks entered Europe, people clamored for the caffeine they delivered in the morning. The Catholic Church, which had previously discouraged a morning meal and had other rules about fasting, declared that By the Ordinary people’s breakfasts emerged from a different set of needs. While people worked for themselves on farms, they tended not to eat much for breakfast. They’d work for a while in the morning, take a break for lunch, then work until dinner. But by the early modern period, urban workers were no longer in control of their own time. They didn’t get to decide when they ate, nor were they at home to fix a tasty lunch. It became necessary to fill one’s stomach before leaving for work. The need for breakfast only intensified as cities became industrialized. Factory workers had to rise early and work crushingly long hours. They had to count on Most of these people ate utilitarian breakfasts, be they a hunk of bread with cheese or some of the previous night’s leftovers. There might have been a So breakfast became, for some, a luxurious morning ritual and for others a grim necessity before a brutal day of work. But most breakfasters didn’t think that their choice of morning food was important to their health until the late 1800s. Breakfast became once again tangled up with ideas about morality when Dr. John Kellogg watched the Kellogg was a Seventh-Day Adventist whose religious ideas about health (plant-based foods, no alcohol) interlocked with his scientific ideas about “biologic living.” The result was that he pushed a breakfast free of the fatty sausages and eggs that characterized many people’s morning meals. Instead, he pushed bland whole grains. Kellogg started Cereal wasn’t just a cheap and convenient breakfast; it was supposedly healthier and futuristic. Scientists had deployed their expertise to create technologically advanced foods that would make people feel better and live longer. Quaker Oats As more and more companies began manufacturing cereals, they needed to distinguish their little flakes and O’s from one another. And that’s where marketing started to shape breakfast, especially in the United States. Breakfast became the “ Other parts of the “balanced breakfast” also emerged as a result of clever marketing campaigns. In the early 20th century, orange growers had a In the 1920s, the discovery of vitamins further revolutionized how people understood health. “Vitamania” allowed orange growers to market their juice as a vital source of vitamin C and the cure for “ The idea that a good breakfast full of nutritious food was the key to a productive day became ingrained in American culture, but we continue to revise our idea of what a good breakfast looks like. For a while, breakfast was supposed to be a hearty meal of eggs and meats. Then we decided that lighter, blander, sweeter foods like cereal were the way to go. After that, we turned against the sugary cereals and juices — a “good” breakfast centered on less-processed foods. Now, we seem to be obsessed with cramming as much Unless, of course, breakfast is bad for us again. The promoters of the There was, of course, a backlash to intermittent fasting, and now breakfast seems to be back. But one thing has remained the same throughout breakfast’s various incarnations: it’s a reflection of social, economic, and cultural forces as much as it is an actual necessity. This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are three ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: You can share the newsletter with others: You can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading! You're currently a free subscriber to |