---
subject: "AI #62: Too Soon to Tell"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-05-02 15:33:24
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
What is the mysterious impressive new ‘gpt2-chatbot’ from the Arena? Is it GPT-4.5? A refinement of GPT-4? A variation on GPT-2 somehow? A new architecture? Q-star? Someone else’s model? Could be anything. It is so weird that this is how someone chose to present that model. There was also a lot of additional talk this week about California’s proposed SB 1047.
As usual, lots of other things happened as well. Table of ContentsIntroduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. Do your paperwork for you. Sweet. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. Because it is not yet good at it. GPT-2 Soon to Tell. What is this mysterious new model? Fun With Image Generation. Certified made by humans. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. A located picture is a real picture. They Took Our Jobs. Because we wouldn’t let other humans take them first? Get Involved. It’s protest time. Against AI that is. In Other AI News. Incremental upgrades, benchmark concerns. Quiet Speculations. Misconceptions cause warnings of AI winter. The Quest for Sane Regulation. Big tech lobbies to avoid regulations, who knew? The Week in Audio. Lots of Sam Altman, plus some others. Rhetorical Innovation. The few people who weren’t focused on SB 1047. Open Weights Are Unsafe And Nothing Can Fix This. Tech for this got cheaper. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. Dot by dot thinking. The Lighter Side. There must be some mistake.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
As with self-driving cars, that is not obviously sufficient.
The first AI attempt listed only does ‘the easy part’ of putting all the final information together. Kiaran Ritchie then shows that yes, ChatGPT can figure out what questions to ask, solving the problem with eight requests over two steps, followed by a solution. There are still steps where the AI is getting extra information, but they do not seem like the ‘hard steps’ to me.
Brevity is also how LLMs often do not work. Ask a simple question, get a wall of text. Get all the ‘this is a complex issue’ caveats Churchill warned us to avoid.
Customized LLM solutions that move at enterprise speed risk being overridden by general capabilities advances (e.g. GPT-5) by the time they are ready. You need to move fast. I also hadn’t fully appreciated the ‘perhaps no one wants corporate to know they have doubled their own productivity’ problem, especially if the method involves cutting some data security or privacy corners. The problem with GPTs is that they are terrible. I rapidly decided to give up on trying to build or use them. I would not give up if I was trying to build tools whose use could scale, or I saw a way to make something much more useful for the things I want to do with LLMs. But neither of those seems true in my case or most other cases. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
GPT-2 Soon to TellA new challenger appears, called ‘gpt-2 chatbot.’ Then vanishes. What is going on? How good is it? Opinions vary.
Some vibes never change.
He also shows it failing the first-to-22 game. He also notes that What is it? But then it would claim that, wouldn’t it? Due to the contamination of the training data, Claude Opus is constantly claiming it is from OpenAI. So this is not strong evidence.
This again seems like it offers us little evidence. Altman would happily say this either way. Was the initial dash in ‘gpt-2’ indicative that, as I would expect, he is talking about the old gpt-2? Or is it an intentional misdirection? Or voice of habit? Who knows. Could be anything. A proposal is that this is gpt2 in contrast to gpt-2, to indicate a second generation. Well, OpenAI is definitely terrible with names. But are they that terrible?
Could be anything, really. We will have to wait and see. Exciting times. Fun with Image Generation
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
If this works, then presumably we suddenly have a very good method of spotting any outdoor AI generated deepfakes. The LLM that tries to predict your location is presumably going to come back with a very interesting answer. There is no way that MidJourney is getting Were people fooled?
It is a pretty picture. Perhaps people like looking at pretty AI-generated pictures? They Took Our Jobs
He sees this as a problem. I don’t, because I do not expect us to be in the ‘AI is usable but worse than a remote cashier from another country’ zone for all that long. Indeed, brining the AIs into this business faster will accelerate the transition to them being better than that. Even if AI core capabilities do not much advance from here, they should be able to handle the cashier jobs rather quickly. So we are not missing out on much productivity or employment here. Get Involved
IntroducingIn Other AI News
This seems to match who one would expect to be how careful about data contamination, versus who would be if anything happy about data contamination. There is a reason I keep saying to mostly ignore the benchmarks and wait for people’s reports and the arena results, with the (partial) exception of the big three labs. If anything this updates me towards Meta being more scrupulous here than expected.
ICYMI:
Quiet SpeculationsFast Company’s Mark Sullivan proposes, as shared by the usual skeptics, Current AI cannot do what they say future AI will do. Current AI is not yet enhancing productivity as much as they say AI will later. We have not had enough years of progress in AI within the last year. The particular implementations I tried did not solve my life’s problems now.
Arnold Kling says Until then, people are mostly going to try and slot AI into their existing workflows and set up policies to deal with the ways AI screw up existing systems. Which should still be highly valuable, but less so.
The most interesting prediction here is the timeline of general AI capabilities development. If the next decade of AI in schools goes this way, it implies that AI does not advance all that much. He still notices this would count as AI developing super fast in historical terms. Your periodic reminder that most tests top out at getting all the answers.
It is not a great sign for the adversarial collaborations that Phillip Tetlock made this mistake afterwards, although to his credit he responded well when it was pointed out. I do think it is plausible that LLMs will indeed stall out at what is in some sense ‘human level’ on important tasks. Of course, that would still include superhuman speed, and cost, and working memory, and data access and system integration, and any skill where this is a tool that it could have access to, and so on. One could still then easily string this together via various scaffolding functions to create a wide variety of superhuman outputs. Presumably you would then be able to use that to keep going. But yes, it is possible that things could stall out. This graph is not evidence of that happening. The Quest for Sane RegulationsThe big news this week in regulation was the talk about California’s proposed SB 1047. It has made some progress, and then came to the attention this week of those who oppose AI regulation bills. Those people raised various objections and used various rhetoric, most of which did not correspond to the contents of the bill. All around there are deep confusions on how this bill would work. Part of that is because these things are genuinely difficult to understand unless you sit down and actually read the language. Part of that many (if not most) of those objecting are not acting as if they care about getting the details right, or as if it is their job to verify friendly claims before amplifying them. There are also what appear to me to be some real issues with the bill. In particular with the definition of derivative model and the counterfactual used for assessing whether a hazardous capability is present. So while With that out of the way, we return to the usual quest action items. Who is lobbying Congress on AI? Mostly, though, by spending? Big tech companies. Did you believe otherwise, perhaps due to some Politico articles? You thought spooky giant OpenPhil and effective altruism were outspending everyone and had to be stopped?
And what are they lobbying for? Are they lobbying for heavy handed regulation on exactly themselves, in collaboration with those dastardly altruists, in the hopes that this will give them a moat, while claiming it is all about safety? Lol, no.
Look, I am not exactly surprised or mad at them for doing this, or for trying to contribute to the implication anything else was going on. Of course that is what is centrally going on and we are going to have to fight them on it. All I ask is, can we not pretend it is the other way?
There is indeed a real long term jurisdictional issue, if everyone can demand you go through their hoops. There is precedent, such as merger approvals, where multiple major locations have de facto veto power. Is the fear of the precedent like this a legitimate excuse, or a fake one? What about ‘waiting to see’ if the institutes can work together?
These things take time to set up and get right. I am not too worried yet about the failure to get widespread access. This still needs to happen soon. The obvious first step in UK/US cooperation should be to say that until we can inspect, the UK gets to inspect, which would free up both excuses at once. A new AI federal advisory board of mostly CEOs
The list of members:
This excludes ‘open source AI CEOs’ including Mark Zuckerberg and Elon Musk. Is not bipartisan. Less than half of them have any ‘real AI knowledge.’ Includes the CEOs of Occidental Petroleum and Delta Airlines.
I would confidently dismiss the third worry. The panel includes Altman, Amodei, Li, Huang, Krishna and Su, even if you dismiss Pichai and Nadella. That is more than enough to bring that expertise into the room. Them being ‘outnumbered’ by those bringing other assets is irrelevant to this, and yes diversity of perspective is good. I would feel differently if this was a three person panel with only one expert. This is at least six. I would outright push back on the fourth worry. This is a panel on AI and U.S. critical infrastructure. It should have experts on aspects of U.S. critical infrastructure, not only experts on AI. This is a bizarre objection. On the second objection, Claude initially tried to pretend that we did not know any political affiliations here aside from Wes Moore, but when I reminded it to check donations and policy positions, it put 12 of them into the Democratic camp, and Hollub and Warden into the Republican camp. I do think the second objection is legitimate. Aside from excluding Elon Musk and selecting Wes Moore, I presume this is mostly because those in these positions are not bipartisan, and they did not make a special effort to include Republicans. It would have been good to make more of an effort here, but also there are limits, and I would not expect a future Trump administration to go out of its way to balance its military or fossil fuel industry advisory panels. Quite the opposite. This style of objection and demand for inclusion, while a good idea, seems to mostly only go the one way. You are not going to get Elon Musk on a Biden administration infrastructure panel because Biden is on the warpath against Elon Musk and thinks Musk is one of the dangers he is guarding against. I do not like this and call upon Biden to stop, but the issue has nothing (or at most very little) to do with AI. As for Mark Zuckerberg, there are two obvious objections. One is why would the head of Meta be on a critical infrastructure panel? Is Meta critical infrastructure? You could make that claim about social media if you want but that does not seem to be the point of this panel. The other is that Mark Zuckerberg has shown a complete disregard to the national security and competitiveness of the United States of America, and for future existential risks, through his approach to AI. Why would you put him on the panel? My answer is, you would put him on the panel anyway because you would want to impress upon him that he is indeed showing a complete disregard for the national security and competitiveness of the United States of America, and for future existential risks, and is endangering everything we hold dear several times over. I do not think Zuckerberg is an enemy agent or actively wishes people ill, so let him see what these kinds of concerns look like. But I certainly understand why that wasn’t the way they chose to go. I also find this response bizarre:
This is an advisory board to Homeland Security on deploying AI in the context of our critical infrastructure. Does anyone think we should not have advisory boards about how to deploy AI in the context of our critical infrastructure? Or that whatever else we do, we should not do ‘AI Safety’ in the context of ‘we should ensure the safety of our critical infrastructure when deploying AI around it’? I get that we have our differences, but that seems like outright anarchism?
Note that this is more of a talk transcript than a paper.
The talk delves into a world of very different concerns, of questions like whether AI content is technically ‘published’ when created and who is technically responsible for publishing. To drive home how much these people don’t get it, he notes that the EU AI Act was mostly written without even having generative AI in mind, which I hadn’t previously realized. He says that regulators are ‘flooding the zone’ and are determined to intervene and stifle innovation, as opposed to those who wisely let the internet develop in the 1990s. He asks why, and he suggests ‘media depictions,’ ‘techno-optimism versus techlash.’ partisanship and incumbents. This is the definition of not getting it, and thinking AI is another tool or new technology like anything else, and why would anyone think otherwise. No one could be reacting based on concerns about building something smarter or more capable than ourselves, or thinking there might be a lot more risk and transformation on the table. This goes beyond dismissing such concerns as unfounded - someone considering such possibilities do not even seem to occur to him in the first place. What is he actually worried about that will ‘kill generative AI’? That it won’t enjoy first amendment protections, so regulators will come after it with ‘ignorant regulations’ driven by ‘moral panics,’ various forms of required censorship and potential partisan regulations to steer AI outputs. He expects this to then drive concentration in the industry and drive up costs, with interventions ramping ever higher. So this is a vision of AI Ethics versus AI Innovation, where AI is and always will be an ordinary tool, and everyone relevant to the discussion knows this. He makes it sound not only like the internet but like television, a source of content that could be censored and fought over. It is so strange to see such a completely different worldview, seeing a completely different part of the elephant. Is it possible that ethics-motivated laws will strange generative AI while other concerns don’t even matter? I suppose it is possible, but I do not see it. Sure, they can and probably will slow down adoption somewhat, but censorship for censorship’s sake is not going to fly. I do not think they would try, and if they try I do not think it would work.
This is definitely a very good answer. What it is not is a reason to postpone laying groundwork or doing anything. Right now the goal is mainly, as I see it, to gain more visibility and ability to act, and lay groundwork, rather than directly acting. The Week in AudioFrom two weeks ago: Sam’s biggest message is to build such that GPT-5 being better helps you, and avoid doing it such that GPT-5 kills your startup. Brad talks ‘100x’ improvement in the model, you want to be excited about that. Emphasis from Sam is clearly that what the models need is to be smarter, the rest will follow. I think Sam is right. At (13:50) Sam notes that being an investor is about making a very small number of key decisions well, whereas his current job is a constant stream of decisions, which he feels less suited to. I feel that. It is great when you do not have to worry about ‘doing micro.’ It is also great when you can get the micro right and it matters, since almost no one ever cares to get the micro right. At (18:30) is the quoted line from Brad that ‘today’s models are pretty bad’ and that he expects expectations to decline with further contact. I agree that today’s models are bad versus tomorrow’s models, but I also think they are pretty sweet. I get a lot of value out of them without putting that much extra effort into that. Yes, some people are overhyped about the present, but most people haven’t even noticed yet. At (20:00) Sam says he does not expect that intelligence of the models will be the differentiator between competitors in the AI space in the long term, that intelligence ‘is an emergent property of matter.’ I don’t see what the world could look like if that is true, unless there is a hard limit somehow? Solve for the equilibrium, etc. And this seems to contradict his statements about how what is missing is making the models smarter. Yes, integration with your life matters for personal mundane utility, but that seems neither hard to get nor the use case that will matter. At (29:02) Sam says ‘With GPT-8 people might say I think this can do some not-so-limited tasks for me.’ The choice of number here seems telling. At (34:10) Brad says that businesses have a very natural desire to want to throw the technology into a business process with a pure intent of driving a very quantifiable ROI. Which seems true and important, the business needs something specific to point to, and it will be a while before they are able to seek anything at all, which is slowing things down a lot. Sam says ‘I know what none of those words mean.’ Which is a great joke. At (36:25) Brad notes that many companies think AI is static, that GPT-4 is as good as it is going to get. Yes, exactly, and the same for investors and prognosticators. So many predictions for AI are based on the assumption that AI will never again improve its core capabilities, at least on a similar level to iPhone improvements (his example), which reliably produces nonsense outputs.
ICYMI: Rhetorical Innovation
I would steelman here. Rushing forward means less people die beforehand, limits other catastrophic and existential risks, and lets less of the universe slip through our fingers. Also, if you figure competitive pressures will continue to dominate, you might think that even now we have little control over the ultimate destination, beyond whether or not we develop AI at all. Whether that default ultimate destination is anything from the ultimate good to almost entirely lacking value only matters if you can alter the destination to a better one. Also, one might think that slowing down instead steers us towards worse paths, not better paths, or does that in the worlds where we survive. All of those are non-crazy things to think, although not in every possible combination.
Difficult choices that are metaphors for something but I can’t put my finger on it:
Open Weights Are Unsafe And Nothing Can Fix ThisI used to claim this was true because all safety training can be fine-tuned away at minimal cost. That is still true, but we can now do that one better.
How did they do it? Find the refusal direction. They ran n=512 harmless instructions and n=512 harmful ones, although n=32 worked fine. Compute the difference in means. Ablate all attempts to write that direction to the stream. Or add in motion in that direction to cause refusals as proof of concept. And… that’s it.
This seems to generalize pretty well beyond refusals?
When is the result of this unsafe? Only in some cases. Open weights are unsafe if and to the extent that the underlying system is unsafe if unleashed with no restrictions or safeties on it. The point is that once you open the weights, you are out of options and levers. One must then differentiate between models that are potentially sufficiently unsafe that this is something we need to prevent, and models where this is fine or an acceptable risk. We must talk price. I have been continuously frustrated and disappointed that a number of AI safety organizations, who make otherwise reasonable and constructive proposals,
I clarified my positions on price in One unfortunate impact of compute thresholds is that if you train a model highly inefficiently, as in Falcon-180B, you can trigger thresholds of potential danger, despite being harmless. That is not ideal, but once the rules are in place in advance this should mostly be fine. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
The Lighter SideYou're currently a free subscriber to |