---
subject: "Ed Set Go: Google’s AI plan to educate 5 million Indian students"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-10-14 01:32:15
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031"]
---
|
|
Ed Set Go
Mon, 14 Oct 24
Your weekly newsletter on the most critical pivots in edtech and education in India.
Good Morning Ishan,
Welcome to a brand-new week! I hope you’ve had a chance to catch your breath after last week’s festivities.
Google.org—Google’s philanthropic arm—recently [gave](https://indianexpress.com/article/technology/artificial-intelligence/ai-samarth-google-ai-literacy-across-india-9603547/) an Indian non-profit called Central Square Foundation (CSF) a US$4 million AI sandbox to play in. The money, the foundation said, would go towards an “AI literacy initiative” meant to train millions of Indian students and teachers on how AI really works. In a statement to the media, CSF’s leader Shaveta Sharma-Kukreja said Indians shouldn’t be “passive recipients” of AI.
The boat may have sailed on passive consumption in areas like consumer tech. Our whole experience of social media and delivery apps is based on the platforms using our data to customize a preference engine that endlessly feeds us options. But the meaningful, scaled-up use of AI in edtech still eludes us.
Partly, it’s in the nature of learning. An AI-tutor alone, despite its most advanced capabilities, won’t be completely in-charge of a student’s learning. We need to pair the potential of AI with human intervention—and it’s in this context that ‘AI Samarth’, the name coined by CSF for its AI project, makes sense.
To get to that copacetic point of intermingling between human and artificial intelligence, though, both parties need to be trained on how to work together. Which is why AI Samarth plans to introduce “AI-focused curricula” for students, teachers, and parents. It’s unclear, at this stage, what ‘AI curricula’ really means. Are we talking about training teachers on the use of AI? The dangers of AI? Or will students be trained to use AI chatbots to their advantage, including learning about all the nuances and biases that come with using generative AI?
In my opinion, the funds and expertise should go towards figuring out how to create any of these solutions at scale.
We already have a few references to work with. First up is “Alakh AI” created by (no prizes for guessing) Physics Wallah (PW). Alakh AI is a full suite of AI-driven services that claims to personalise test-prep for students. According to the company, an AI-based assistant has seen three times more engagement than a previous, plainer version of its chatbot. Even Byju’s, with its diminished resources, had a full suite of AI products called Byju’s WIZ in June 2023, before all the news about the edtech’s serious legal troubles overshadowed the announcement.
Of course, the original use of machine learning models—before ChatGPT hit the market—was to do a reverse image search of a math question, and fish out the answer from a vast pool of solutions. That’s what the early versions of Brainly and Doubtnut (acquired by test-prep giant Allen) did. Doubtnut had the right idea, but maybe slightly before its time. The edtech tried to automate a personalised learning experience for students where they could get their doubts solved almost instantly. It was an early version of the dedicated chatbot, minus the pleasantries that voicebots now awkwardly stumble through.
Doubtnut was [once valued](https://techcrunch.com/2023/12/04/doubtnut-once-offered-a-150m-deal-from-byjus-sells-for-10m/) at US$150 million by Byju’s, when the latter was on its acquisition spree. That deal didn’t go through, and much later, once the edtech bloodbath was done, Doubtnut was acquired by Allen for US$10 million. I would argue that Doubtnut’s potential to be India’s first scaled-up, economical AI solution was lost in the valuation bidding war. Oh well.
PW has somewhat picked up from where Doubtnut left off. But the use cases for AI in edtech are still largely focused on test-prep problem solving. What’s the public-sector use case for AI?
In most scenarios, when people talk about AI in the context of education, it sounds pretty futuristic, like a Star Wars character or the female voice from Her come to life. We think AI will transform what it means to learn, as if our brains will somehow change in response to the technology. We imagine a complete revamp. What we have instead are boring tech upgrades.
Don’t get me wrong. I’m not saying ChaptGPT and others like it aren’t a massive innovation. But their practical uses are just that—practical. Take, for instance, how an American non-profit edtech called ISTE has utilised its own AI [grant](https://blog.google/outreach-initiatives/google-org/google-ai-initiatives-funding-educators-students/) from Google. The organisation has created its own small language model to help educators locate resources that they need to teach—like an online, curated library. These grants will also go towards training teachers on how to use AI when giving homework or in classroom assignments. Efficient? Yes. Star Wars levels of support? No.
Building the infrastructure of edtech is just as important, though, when we talk of scale. In addition to CSF, Google.org has also extended US$1.5 million in grant funding to Rocket Learning, a non-profit that works on pre-school intervention with students from low-income backgrounds. Rocket Learning wants to create an AI tutor for this age group that can get them ready to join a school. The solution will be delivered through a web browser, the company said.
An AI tutor for pre-school kids can be cute. But who wields the device? Who types up the right web address? Who gets the conversation started?
There’s another use case that seems to have worked for Rocket Learning: assessments. The company has used an [AI/ML engine](https://www.edtechinnovationhub.com/news/rocket-learning-secures-googleorg-support) which “processes over 50,000 homework images daily with 90% accuracy”. The engine, through its feedback, has helped 80% of Rocket Learning’s students to become school-ready by the age of six.
The company is also keen to bring AI into the mix when it reaches out to parents, by giving them access to their kids’ personal learning plans. What parents do with them remains to be seen.
It would be cool if someone is collecting the many ways Indians are using, or can use, GenAI to better educational outcomes, beyond the mainstream test-prep use case. Maybe the developing world has solutions to address the bias and nuance problem that ChatGPT and the like suffer from.
That’s all for this week folks! See you next time. Do write to [edsetgo@the-ken.com](mailto:edsetgo@the-ken.com) with your ideas and feedback.
Regards,
Olina
Got a tip? If you have a lead for a great story that The Ken can pursue, please send it to tips@the-ken.com or share it through this [form](https://theken.typeform.com/got-a-tip). To find out more about how to do this securely, read [our blog post](https://the-ken.com/blog/help-the-ken-tell-the-next-big-story/) about sharing tips with The Ken.