---
subject: "AI #24: Week of the Podcast"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-08-10 14:54:41
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
In addition to all the written developments, this was a banner week for podcasts. I would highlight four to consider listening to. Dario Amodei of Anthropic [went on The Lunar Society to talk to Dwarkesh Patel](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/254c69d3-43f0-4475-9cbb-4d3469b4a681?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). We got our best insight so far into where Dario’s head is at, Dwarkesh is excellent at getting people to open up like this and really dive into details.[Jan Leike, OpenAI’s head of alignment, went on 80,000 hours with Robert Wiblin](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/0ce42789-f9b0-41aa-bad8-c0afa6025518?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). If you want to know what is up with the whole superalignment effort, this was pretty great, and left me more optimistic. I still don’t think the alignment plan will work, but there’s a ton of great understanding of the problems ahead and an invitation to criticism, and a clear intention to avoid active harm, so we can hope for a pivot as they learn more.[Tyler Cowen interviewed Paul Graham](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/b6b52a4d-b2b6-4911-8278-06a87b194db2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). This was mostly not about AI, but fascinating throughout, often as a clash of perspectives about the best ways to cultivate talent. Includes Tyler Cowen asking Paul Graham about how to raise someone’s ambition, and Paul responding by insisting on raising Tyler’s ambition.I got a chance [to go on EconTalk and speak with Russ Roberts](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/28676188-86a1-4c40-9226-e1fe7cee8f29?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)about[The Dial of Progress](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/74cb50e2-8f73-4d57-a483-9152d1bd237c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)and other matters, mostly related to AI. I listen to EconTalk, so this was a pretty special moment. Of course, I am a little bit biased on this one.
Capabilities continue to advance at a more modest pace, so I continue to have room to breathe, which I intend to enjoy while it lasts. Table of ContentsIntroduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. Proceed with caution. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. Not with these attitudes. GPT-4 Real This Time. Time for some minor upgrades. Fun With Image Generation. Some fun, also some not so fun. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. They keep ignoring previous instructions. They Took Our Jobs. People really, really do not like it when you use AI artwork. Introducing. Real time transcription for the deaf, also not only for the deaf. In Other AI News. Various announcements, and an exciting Anthropic paper. There Seems To Be a Standard Issue RLHF Morality. It has stages. What’s next? Quiet Speculations. Cases for and against expecting a lot of progress. The Quest for Sane Regulation. Confidence building, polls show no confidence. The Week in Audio. A cornucopia of riches, extensive notes on Dario’s interview. Rhetorical Innovation. People are indeed worried in their own way. No One Would Be So Stupid As To. I always hope not to include this section. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. Grimes also difficult. People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone. No one that new, really. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Alan Finkel. The Lighter Side. Finally a plan that works.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
He then describes some ways he has automated or streamlined parts of his workflow.
Following up from last week,
For practical purposes, From a while back, Write a journal paper,
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
The paper takes a ‘pics or it didn’t happen’ approach to reasoning ability.
Also, no, you don’t get a pass either, fellow human. Rule thinking out, not in.
What else would mean an inability to reason? Let us count the ways.
I mean it helps. But no, the inability to get 1405 * 1421 (paper’s example) correct does not mean inability to reason. Also then we have the claim is that planning requires reasoning, so delegating planning can’t enable reasoning. While in the extreme this is true, this seems in practice very much like a case of the person saying it can’t be done interrupting the person doing it. Next up is ‘simple counting.’
Author then gets GPT-4 to count wrong, offers this as proof of inability to reason. This strikes me as quite silly, has this person never heard of the absent minded professor. A lot of mathematicians can’t count. Presumably they can reason. If you keep reading, it all stays fun for at least a bit longer. If we trust that these queries were all zero-shot and there was no filtering, then yes the overall performance here is not so good, and GPT-4 is constantly making mistakes. That does not mean GPT-4 couldn’t do such reasoning. It only shows that it doesn’t do so reliably or by default.
It reasons quite badly and highly unreliably when taken out of its training data, when not asked to do chain-of-thought. The questions being reasonable. I would not, however, call this a blanket inability to reason. Nor would I treat it as a reason for despair that a future GPT-5 could not do much better. Instead it is saying that, in its default state, you are not likely to get good reasoning out of the system.
My experience is that those devices have a highly limited set of Exact Words that you can say to get things to happen. Many easy requests that I am confident they hear constantly will fail, including both things that you cannot do at all and things that require One Weird Trick. If this is ‘as robust as possible’ then I notice I continue to be confused. Whereas with LLMs, if you fail, you have a lot of hope that you can get what you want with better wording (prompt engineering), and you can do a vastly larger variety of things on the first try as well. It is weird that ‘has extra capabilities you can unlock’ is now considered a bad thing, and we absolutely differentiate strongly between ‘LLM does this by default when asked’ and ‘LLM can do this with bespoke instructions.’ GPT-4 Real This TimeHelp is on the way, although in other areas.
Please, no, at least let us turn this off, I always hate these so much.
These can be net useful if they are good enough. The autoreplies to emails and texts are usually three variations of the same most common reply, which is not as useful as distinct replies would be, but still sometimes useful. Don’t give me ‘Yes,’ ‘Sure’ and ‘Great,’ how about ‘Yes,’ ‘No’ and ‘Maybe’? Somehow I am the weird one. I’ve literally never gotten use out of Bing’s suggested replies so I assume this won’t be useful.
Yes, finally. Thank you.
Seems useful.
Always nice to see on the margin.
Here’s that complete list on the shortcuts. Not everything you want, still a good start. As they said, minor updates. Not all positive, but on net still a step forward. Fun with Image GenerationThread: Not as fun: Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
We do have
They Took Our Jobs
Magic: The Gathering has also clarified it will not use AI artwork. Lots of accusations that they were trying to ‘get away with’ this somehow, soft launching AI use to see what happens, hiding it, lying about doing it on purpose, and so forth. There were calls to blacklist the artist in question. Many people really, really hate the idea of AI artwork. Also many people really, really do not trust Wizards and assume everything they do is part of a sinister conspiracy. Also lots of people asking how could they not have spotted this.
Here is the artwork in question: I am not going to call that a masterpiece, but no, if you showed me that a year ago with no reason to expect AI artwork I would not have suspected it was made by AI. At all. This looks totally normal to me. For now, it looks like artists and non-artists alike will be unable to use generative AI tools for game-related projects without risking a huge backlash. How much that applies to other uses is unclear, my guess is gaming is a perfect storm for this issue but that most other places that typically involved hiring artists are also not going to take kindly for a while. From the actors strike, Meanwhile, Introducing
A day after my posts
In Other AI News
On the one hand, I can see the desire to protect one’s data and not give it away, and the desire not to make it any easier on those training models. On the other hand, versus other data, I think the world will be a better place if future AI models are trained on more of my data. I want more prediction of the kinds of things I would say, more reflection of the ways of thinking and values I am expressing. So at least for now, I am happy to let the robots crawl.
I’d highlight this one, because it involves a no-good, quite-terrible response. This isn’t a ‘race to the bottom.’ This is a little something we in the business like to call ‘trade’ or ‘trade-off’ or a ‘cost-benefit analysis.’ The idea is that you have two or more goals, so you make efficient trades to better pursue all of them. The exact proposal here is rather silly, since you can be perfectly harmless without being actively unhelpful, but obviously if you can be very, very helpful and slightly harmful in some places, and then sacrifice a little help to remain more harmless in others, that is very good. Instead, the AI is saying that trade-offs are not a thing. You should only reward accomplishing one task with no local compromises to the other, and trade-offs are terrible and should never be used. To which I would say: Misaligned. Also the kind of thing you get from badly designed constitutional AI (or RLHF) run amok. It also seems odd to say that either of the passages above should lead to the listed conclusion of the model. It seems like the top one was mostly there to provide the phrase ‘race to the bottom’ in a context where if anything it means the opposite of the AI’s use here, which was quite backwards and nonsensical.
Serious wow at the first example listed here. I mean, yeah, of course, this is to be expected, but still, I suppose there really is no fire alarm… Once again, the first link is interpretable, I can figure out what it means, and the second one is pretty confusing. Scaling interpretability is going to be hard.
This is fascinating, I am glad they did this, and if I have the time I plan to read the whole (very long) paper. There Seems To Be a Standard Issue RLHF Morality
That is quite the low-ambiguity example. There is a big contrast on those, looks like ChatGPT and Claude basically always get these ‘right’ whereas others not so much.
The upper corner is GPT-4, Claude and Bison, all of which highly correlate. Then there’s another group of Cohere, GPT-3.5 and Claude-Instant, which correlate highly with each other and modestly with the first one. Then a third group of everyone else, who are somewhat like the second group and each other, and very unlike the first one. One can see this as three stages of morality, without knowing exactly what the principles of each one are. As capabilities increase, the AIs move from one set of principles to another, then to a third. They increasingly gets simple situations right, but complex situations, which are what matters, work on different rules. What would happen if we took Claude-3, GPT-4.5 and Gemini? Presumably they would form a fourth cluster, which would agree modestly with the first one and a little with the second one. The real question then is, what happens at the limit? Where is this series going? Quiet SpeculationsWill Henshall argues in Time that The arguments are not new, but they are well presented, with good charts. This chart needs a level for maximum possible performance, and for top human performance level. What is striking about these tasks is that we are mostly evaluating the AI’s ability to imitate human performance, rather than measuring it against humans in an underlying skill where we are not close to maxing out. If you put Chess and Go on this chart, you would see a very different type of curve. I would also question the grade here for reading comprehension, and the one for code generation, although we can disagree on the meaning of human. Thus it does not address so much the central question of what happens in areas where human abilities can be far surpassed.
Palladium Magazine’s Ash Milton warns that Here’s a great quote and tactic.
Brilliant. We mostly know what AI can do in that spot. What we don’t know is what would be a valuable thing to do. Why not get the people judging that to tell us without having to first build the thing? Post warns that many ‘AI’ products are exactly or largely this, humans masquerading as AI to make people think the tech works. Examples of this surely exist, both as pure frauds and as bootstraps to get the system working, but I am confident that the products we are all most excited about are not this. The argument presented is not that the AI tech is not generally real or valuable, but that valuations and expectations are bubble-level overblown. That all the grand talk of future abilities is mostly hype and people being crazy, that future AI systems are not dangerous or that exciting because current systems are not, and so on. Robin Hanson quotes from the article and points out that by default more scientific know-how and access to it is good, actually?
With notably rare exceptions, giving people more scientific knowledge is exactly the kind of thing we want to be doing. There are a handful of particular bits of knowledge that enable building things like engineered pathogens and nuclear weapons, or building dangerous AI systems. We need to figure out a plan to deal with that, either hiding those particular bits of knowledge or finding ways to prevent their application in practice. That’s a real problem. It still seems rather obvious that if your warning was ‘but people will generally have better access to scientific know-how’ then the correct response really needs to be ‘excellent.’
I continue to expect far more positive outcomes, provided we stay away from existential or fully transformative threats that entirely scramble the playing field. People can and will use these tools positively and we will adapt to them over time. A more customized game is more compelling, but a lot of this is that it provides more of the things people actually need, including learning and practice that can be used in the real world. The pale shadows being mere pale shadows is a contingent fact, one that can be changed. Loneliness is a problem that for now tech is mostly bad at solving. I expect that to change. There will doubtless be a period of adjustment. I also expect a growing revolt against systems that are too Out to Get You, that customize themselves in hostile ways especially on the micro level. From minute to minute, this technique absolutely works, but then you wake up and realize what has happened and that you need to disengage and find a better way. Consider how this works with actual humans. In the short term, there are big advantages to playing various manipulative games and focusing on highly short term feedback and outcomes, and this can be helpful in being able to get to the long term. In the long term, we learn who our true friends are.
I notice that this does not put any weight on the USA being the ones who actually build the AI models and the AI companies. Perhaps a better frame for this question is to ask about AI as substitute versus complement, and whether you can retain your comparative advantage, and also to think about the purpose of the work being automated away and whether it is internal or subject to international trade. And to ask what people are consuming, not only what they are producing. If AI destroys the value add of your exports, because it lowers cost of production by competitors, you can’t use it to further improve quality and demand does not then rise, then you are in a lot of trouble. You get disrupted. Whereas if your nation imports a lot of production that gets radically cheaper, that is a huge win for you whether or not you then get to consume vastly more or at vastly higher quality. If you are both producer and consumer, you still win then, although you risk instability. The idea here is that if you have routine work, then AI will disrupt it, whereas for innovative work it will be a complement and enable it. That seems likely within some subsections of knowledge work. Where it seems far less likely is in the places AI is likely to be poor at the actual routine work, or where that would likely require transformative AI. If you are a nation of manual laborers, of plumbers and farmers and construction workers, in some sense your work is highly routine. Yet you clearly stand to greatly benefit from AI, even if your workers do not benefit from it directly. Your goods and services provided become more relatively valuable, you get better terms of trade, and your people get the benefits of AI as mediated through the products and services made elsewhere. Also, if your nation is currently undereducated or lacks expertise, you are in position to much better benefit from AI in education, including adult education and actual learning that people sometimes forget is not education. AI erodes advantages in such places. The Quest for Sane RegulationsOpenAI
None of that seems remotely sufficient, it all does seem net good and worthwhile. Why don’t companies keep training their AI models after their intended finishing time to see if performance improves? The Artificial Intelligence Policy Institute just launched.
They released their first round of polling, which I discuss under rhetorical innovation, showing that the public is indeed concerned about AI. It is a frustrating time when deciding whether to create a new policy organization. On the one hand, there is no sign that anyone has the ball handled. On the other hand, there is no shortage of people founding organizations. Potentially this new organization can fill a niche by ensuring we extensively poll the public and make those results known and publicized. That seems to be the big point of emphasis, and could be a good point of differentiation. I didn’t see signs they have a strong understanding on other fronts.
The Week in AudioI got a chance Two other big ones also dropped this week. Both were excellent and worth a listen or read if they are relevant to your interests. If you are uninterested in alignment you can skip them. First 5:00: Dario says that as models learn, the right answer will first be 1 in 10k to appear, then 1 in 1k, then 1 in 100 and so on, that it follows a smooth scale, the same way general loss follows a smooth scale. If this is true, then could we detect various problems this way? Rather than query for outputs you dislike, could you instead query for the log probability of outputs you like or dislike? How does this change during fine tuning? Could you put reinforcement on updates based on their changes to underlying probabilities? Could you measure them that way? 7:30: “The things that the model can do don’t seem to be different in kind from the things it can’t do.” I do not entirely disagree, but the places where I do disagree seem like a very important disagreement. There is very much a type of thing Claude-2 or GPT-4 can do as well or better than a human, and a type of thing that it can’t do as relatively well, or absolutely well, and I do see a consistent pattern with underlying core features. This is related to Dario’s and others’ claim that such models are ‘more creative’ than most humans because they can do better generation of variations on existing themes, whereas in my conversation with Roberts, he (I think rightfully) called that out as not being the thing we care about when we talk about creativity. I would speak about its intelligence and other capabilities in similar fashion, also related to note 4. Dario thinks scaling will get us all the way there, but says: If we fail to scale all the way to AGI, theory: There’s something wrong with the loss function of predicting the next token. It means you care about some tokens much more than others. I very much dig this formulation. So many of our problems boil down to this or another version of this in a different place. If we don’t get AGI from current models despite scale, it is quite likely to be because we are not well-specifying the target. 20:00: Village idiot vs. Einstein. Rather than those two being close on the intelligence spectrum, Dario sees the human range as pretty broad. Different humans have different skills in different circumstances, models are spending a lot of time ‘within human level,’ intelligence ‘isn’t a spectrum.’ All ‘formed in a blob.’ I continue to stand by human intelligence being in a narrow range. For a given ability that humans vary in their ability to do, it will look like humans are in a broad range, but in my model that is mostly a selection effect. We look at exactly those tasks that some humans can do and others cannot. Also I think Dario is conflating intelligence with knowledge and skills here. The question is more the ability of a given entity to learn to do a task, not their current ability to do it, Einstein or Von Neuman wasn’t meaningfully-in-context ‘in some senses dumber’ than someone who chose to learn different skills instead. Nor do I think that current models are within the human spectrum. It is odd having people claim that they are, while others say they’re nowhere close and will never get there. 28:20 Only 2-3 years to ‘you talk to it for an hour and it seems like an educated human.’ In Dario’s model, something weird would have to stop this from happening. I would draw a distinction between the Turing-test style ‘can’t figure out it is a human’ and getting a similar quality of intellectual conversation out of the program. I’d be surprised by the first within that time frame but not by the second. 35:00: Dario says Google’s reaction was potentially ten times as important as anything else, Anthropic acted responsibly in its releases, only after Google acted did we stay on the frontier. He did not address future plans or investment docs. Claude is not being used by many people, so having the second-best available model that includes unique features is not obviously important, and I agree the offering is safe. I still do think Anthropic drives competition forward, and threatens to do much more of that if they scale up a lot, and Dario acknowledges this is a non-zero effect but wants to mostly shrug it off. 45:00: Current state of Anthropic’s security is on Claude’s weights, how dedicated is the attacker? The goal is it is more expensive than writing your own model. Given how hard it would be for potential attackers to write their own model of similar quality, this is not an off-the-shelf buy, that is an ambitious goal. Also a necessary one. Cybersecurity was one place Dario’s answers impressed me. 47:50: Dario notices he is confused about alignment, which is great. He asks questions. What is alignment? We don’t know what’s going on inside the models. But what is the solution once this is solved? What would you see? We don’t know that either. Would be nice if we had an oracle that could fully predict a model. Goes back to mechanistic interpretability, refers to ideal of a vast test set and training set, combined with interpretability. No answer on what you are actually testing for. No clear answer on what the goal is when we say alignment. Dario later would discuss what the post-alignment world looked like, making it clear that he considers these unsolved problems rather than this being him dodging. 54:00 Says it ‘might’ be a reasonable assumption that using current methods, the model at just above human level is not intentionally optimizing against us. Problem is if the model is like a psychopath, warm on the outside but has different kinds of goals on the inside. To which I would of course first reply that psychopath is the default way for a system to be and it is odd to think the default is otherwise, orthogonality thesis and instrumental convergence and all that, why would you ever presume otherwise, also that this seems neither necessary nor sufficient to identify that you have the problem. Also that ‘intentionally’ optimizing ‘against’ us is in large part a category error, what you need to worry about is optimizing for something period, the against happens automatically, and nothing involved needs to be intentional to happen. Intelligence and optimization will act against you without all that. 59:00 Dario discusses debate and amplification. Models so far simply haven’t been good enough for it, you need better ones. ‘It’s very easy to come up with these methods.’ Wants to try things, see what goes wrong with them. He neither agrees nor disagrees with statements like ‘CAI will never work for alignment.’ Which is a disagreement with the statement. You can’t be agnostic about whether there might be a solution. The contrast with Leike here was large and I am strongly with Leike. That does not mean that it is a useless exercise to try hopeless things in order to see how they go wrong, nor does it mean they can’t be incrementally useful in other ways along the way. 1:01:00 What to do when in 2-3 years the Leviathans are doing $10 billion training runs? Maybe we can’t afford the frontier and we shouldn’t do it, we’ll work with what we can get, there is non-zero value there but skeptical it is that high. Second option is you find a way, just accept the tradeoffs, which ‘are more positive than they appear’ because of the race to the top. Sees serious danger not in 2 years but perhaps soon after, with perhaps enforced restrictions. This is a clear ‘yes raising billions is a devil’s bargain where we have to largely focus on making money and racing, but racing and focusing on profits is not so bad, it’ll be fine.’ I see serious danger there, as well, it is so easy to fool oneself here. A question I wanted to see asked was, if you need the best models to do useful safety work, what makes you think the best model is good enough for such work? The window here is so narrow. Also, as a potential safety organization it is not so difficult to largely get access to the labs’ models, couldn’t Anthropic do that as well when needed, ask OpenAI, while otherwise being modestly behind and using its own models in other spots? If not, why not? There are a bunch of contradictions here, including with the idea that current plans might simply work in future iterations. 1:04:00 Draws distinction between misuse and misalignment, we have to worry about both, we need a plan that actually makes things good, needs to also solve misuse. You can’t say ‘we can’t solve problem one so don’t worry about problems two and three. They’re in our path no matter what. We should be planning for success, not for failure.’ There needs to be ‘some kind of legitimate process for managing this technology. It’s too powerful.’ It is very true that once you solve Phase 1, you then enter the also dangerous Phase 2. When people talk about a legitimate process I always wonder what they are envisioning, if they think the world currently contains such a process somewhere, how they think current power structures would handle such a burden or opportunity, and so on. Then the right next questions get asked. 1:10:00 Then what? What does the future look like? Everyone has their own AGI? Dario punts, he does not know. Points to economic issues, other concerns and suggests looking to the past and avoiding unitary visions. He says those never work out. Dario seems to understand in the previous segment the need to have an authority that figures out what to do, then rules out any world in which people don’t have widely dispersed individual AIs in economic competition, but there are clear reasons why those worlds seem obviously doomed. Every path forward involves impossible-level problems that need to be solved or dodged, it is easy to point to the problems of one path to justify another path. 1:13:00 China? Dario emphasizes cybersecurity. Great answer. 1:15:00 People are talking like models are misaligned or there is some alignment problem to solve. Like, someday we’ll crack the Riemann hypothesis. I don’t quite think it’s like that. Not in a way that’s good or bad… There will be powerful models. They will be agentic. If such a model wanted to wreck havoc or destroy humanity we basically have no ability to stop it… we seem bad at controlling the models. [That is enough to be worried.] There was some really good stuff here. There’s definitely not a fixed puzzle that counts as ‘solving’ alignment, although there is a clear ‘you didn’t solve it’ sign. It is good to hear Dario state the obvious as obvious, that failure here is not an option. 1:20:00: Dario says: “Our control over models is very bad. We need more ways of increasing the likelihood that we can control our models and understand what’s going on in them. And we have some of them so far. They aren’t that good yet. But I don’t think of this as binary. It works or it does not work. We’re going to develop more. And I do think that over the next 2-3 years we’re going to start eating that probability mass of how things can go wrong.” Dario’s rhetorical position is, arguments like this should be enough to motivate the right responses, so we shouldn’t pull out bigger more polarizing or alienating guns. I agree with that in some spots, but very much disagree with it in others, and Dario needs to himself keep in mind the true nature of the problem. 1:21:00 Dario says he is not super into probability of X when discussing doom, wants to consider chance of alignment being easy, medium or hard. What can shift our answer? Interpretability again. Doesn’t find theoretical arguments compelling or necessary. Got to look inside. Has lot of probability on this is a complete disaster and goes wrong, but in a new unanticipated way. That last point is highly refreshing. I am mostly fine with people dodging the probability of doom question, since it doesn’t change behavior much, so long as they agree the answer is ‘way too high’ and Dario definitely does agree on that. Dario holds out what seems to me like far too much hope that alignment will be easy or even medium difficulty. 1:23:00 Is difficulty of aligning current models now big info on degree of difficulty we will face later? He thinks ‘the people who are most worried think current AI models will be alignable, models are going to seem aligned. They’re going to deceive us in some way. It certainly gives us some information but I am more interested in mechanistic interpretability. Doesn’t feel like it’s optimizing against us. I worry about this narrowing of worry, that the problem might be seen as ‘boiling down to’ future deception, and not viewing it as something more fundamental. 1:27:00 Constitutional AI principles were chosen because they sounded like consensus things to say. For future they’re looking into ‘more participatory processes.’ There shouldn’t be only one constitution, each should be simple, then they should be customized. I do agree that customization of CAI and various other techniques that I would love to have safe space to experiment with and discuss but so far do not are the future of this technique, and they have promise. But as for the idea of ‘sounded like consensus things to say’ and letting a ‘more participatory process’ determine the principles, no no no, stop it, you are doing this all wrong. You want to engineer and design every detail of this process so it will actually get you to the right answers, and if you let Goodhart and social pressures take over before you even start you are all super duper dead in every sense. I would love to be confident enough in Anthropic’s ability to act responsibly here that I feel comfortable saying more and then having conversations with those involved on this, but CAI is too close to capabilities. 1:29:00 Any good future needs to end with something that is more decentralized and less like a godlike super. I just don’t think that ends well, as I discussed briefly above. The point of decentralization is to ensure competition and choice. So far in human history, competition and choice have given us wonders, have been the clear winners, because all of it has been in service to humans, and we have gotten fortunate with the nature of the tech tree and the way various dynamics play out. That is a contingent fact about physical reality. If we introduce smarter and more capable entities than us into the system and remain decentralized, then how do we model this such that it ends well for us?
Second, A third great podcast, although not primarily about AI, was Conversations with Tyler. So many other good bits. I am fascinated that both Paul and Tyler mostly know within two minutes how they will decide on talent, and their opinions are set within seven, and that when Paul changes his mind between those times it is mostly when a founder points out that Paul incorrectly rounded off what they were pitching to a dumb thing that they know is dumb, and they’re doing smart other thing instead - but I suspect that’s far more about the founder realizing and knowing this, than anything else. Tyler asks what makes otherwise similar tech people react in different ways on AI, attempting to frame it as essentialist based on who they are, and Paul says no, it’s about what they choose to focus on, the upside or the downside. It strongly echoes their other different perspectives on talent. Tyler thinks about talent largely as a combinatorial problem, you want to associate the talented and ambitious together, introduce them, put them in the same place, lots of travel. Paul wants to identify the talent that is already there, you still need a cofounder and others to work with of course either way. I’m strongly with Paul here on the AI debate, where you land is most about focus and style of thinking. Tyler didn’t respond but I imagine him then suggesting this comes down to what a person wants to see, to circle it back. Or I would say, whether a person is willing to see, and insist on seeing the questions through. It’s mostly not symmetrical, those who see the downside almost always also see the upside but not vice versa. Also Rob Miles’ note that building safe AI is like building a safe operating system clearly got through, which is great, and Paul has noticed the implication that the only way you can build a safe operating system in practice is to build an unsafe one and get it hacked and then patched until it stops being unsafe, and that this is not a good idea in the AI case. A transcript and the video
Robert Wiblin: Apple Podcast analytics reports listeners on average consume 40%+, or even 50%+, of podcast interviews that run for over 3 hours. (I added some random noise to the length so you can't identify them.) No apparent TikTokification of attention spans here! I have noticed that the better interviews do tend to be modestly longer, my guess is that is what is causing this here. Otherwise, I definitely slowly fall off over duration, and generally I am far more likely to give a full listen to sub-hour podcasts. I would also say that this audience is unlikely to be typical. Rhetorical Innovation
Other data points: 82% say they don’t trust tech executives to regulate AI. 56% support a federal AI regulatory agency versus 14% opposed. 49% confident in US government to regulate AI, 47% in Japan, 45% in UK, versus 86% in China, 70% in India and 60% in Singapore.
Excellent showing for the American public all around. Perhaps we are making this all too complicated? Regular people think about things in a different way, and someone else (not me!) has to speak their language.
We need better critics. This does seem like a useful exercise, although I would add a fifth necessary step, which is ‘a pause might prevent this,’ with objections like ‘We have to beat China,’ ‘There is no way to pause,’ ‘Effective solutions could only be implemented by world governments’ or forms of ‘This would net increase danger.’ I would also note that while those five steps together seem sufficient, at least the first two are not necessary. If AI was merely ‘about as smart’ as humans, while it enjoyed many other advantages like higher speed, better memory, ability to be copied and lower operating costs, it is easy to see why that poses great danger. An explicit or deliberate AI takeover is one way things could go, but this not happening does not make us safe. If AIs outcompete humans in terms of ability to acquire resources and make copies of themselves, via ordinary competitive and capitalistic means, and putting them in control of things makes those things more competitive, they could progressively end up with more and more of the resources and control rather quickly. Competition does not need to take the form of a takeover attempt.
No One Would Be So Stupid As ToWell, not no one.
Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is DifficultAligning a not-as-smart-as-humans AI?
Depending on how one uses this information, it may or may not constitute Actual Progress.
If you want to understand some of the utter disaster that is trying to use RLHF, consider its impact on humans, especially when the feedback is coming from less smart humans relative to the subject, and when the feedback is not well thought out.
People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone
Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone
Except that nowhere does he mention extinction risks. Everything is phrased in terms of human misuse of AI for standard human villainy. He does correctly diagnose what must be done if the threat is intolerable. Yet all the threats he cites are highly tolerable ones, when compared to potential benefits. The Lighter Side
I mean, it obviously won’t work, but there are suckers born every minute.
You're currently a free subscriber to |