---
subject: "2 Good 2 Be 4 Gotten, Early Modern-Style"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-04-13 13:02:15
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Welcome to Looking Through the Past! Each week, I find a bunch of cool stuff and share it with you. If you’re new here, you can click the button below to subscribe. If you’re already a free subscriber who appreciates the many hours of work that go into this newsletter (and you want access to the archives, with more than 100 other deep dives), please consider a paid subscription — it’s less than $1 a week! If you’re interested in supporting the project in other ways, please scroll down to the bottom of the post. If you’re of a certain vintage, you probably have an old high school yearbook somewhere in the basement, and that yearbook is full of signatures. I remember yearbook day clearly. It came toward the end of the school year. We gathered in an un-air-conditioned gym, where the heat was rising along with our anticipation for summer. Teachers handed out the heavy hardcover books, and, once they were in our hands, we did one of two things: flip through the glossy pages to look for our own faces, hoping we wouldn’t find anything too mortifying, or seek our friends out for a signature. At the school where I now teach, students no longer sign each other’s yearbooks. They don’t hand out signed wallet-sized pictures of themselves on picture day, either. Why do any of this, when you’ve got Instagram? So, kids, if you’ve never signed a yearbook, here’s how it went down. The ritual of asking for a signature was a little like asking somebody to dance (another extinct practice; there are no slow songs at school dances anymore). Especially if the potential signer was someone you weren’t tight with, you’d approach them with a slight, unfounded fear of rejection: Will you sign my yearbook? When asked to sign someone else’s yearbook, you felt a bit of stress — you had to write something cool and fun that made it clear you saw your relationship with someone the same way they did. When historians someday study old yearbooks, they’ll find that the signature pages held all kinds of coded information. The sheer number of inscriptions in your yearbook served as a proxy of your general level of popularity. Individual signatures held clues to the nature of your relationship with various classmates. The guy you sat behind in math and spoke to four times might write something generic like “Have a good summer!” People would exaggerate the importance and intensity of shared memories (“English class was CRAZY!”). Lots of offers would be made to keep in touch and get together over the summer; many people making them would have no real intention of doing so. Closer friends might go on for paragraphs, dropping inside jokes or gushing about all you’d been through together. And, of course, someone would be sure to inscribe your book with the coolest math equation ever: 2 good + 2 be = 4 gotten! Yearbooks are an old idea. The first printed, bound yearbook seems to have been produced for Yale’s But the Yale class of 1806 wasn’t the first to collect signatures in a book. People have long wanted a keepsake of their memorable experiences and time with friends. Before the yearbook, people used something called an album amicorum — literally, an album of friends — to remember the places and people that were meaningful to them. This week, we’re going to look at one of the most interesting examples of this genre. Michael van Meer was a German army officer who lived in the Hague and Hamburg at various points in his life. He died in 1653. His father was from Antwerp, and he had a brother named John. That’s most of what we know about this guy! Though he seems to have lived a relatively interesting life, it was interesting in the way lots of lives are interesting. Most of the Michael van Meers in world history have disappeared over the centuries, fading from memory as the items and documents that identified them are destroyed or repurposed. Van Meer would have suffered this fate, too, if not for his album amicorum. The only other historical record of his existence is a notation of his death in the Hamburg archives. But, luckily for us and his legacy, his remarkable album survived. Historian
It’s certainly a step up from “Math class was WILD! Let’s hang out this summer!” Michael van Meer’s book is a cut above the rest. He seems to have had a flair for the original, illustrating his book with original watercolors (it’s unclear if he painted the pictures or hired somebody else to do it for him). He saw the album as an expression of his identity — it served as a travelogue, documenting his impressive travels, a who’s who of prominent people he came across, and an expression of his personality and interests. It seems that van Meer started his album in anticipation of a trip to London in 1614. Though he added to the book over the years, most of the pages come from his visit to England. They make up a charming and informative tour of the city. There are little slices of life, like this lovely agricultural scene: And a cockfight: Here a proud dog brings a bird to its owner: Humans hunt birds, too (there’s a lot of violence against birds in this book!): This looks like a fun way to spend an afternoon: We see famous landmarks, as well. Here’s London Bridge, viewed from the Thames: Windsor Castle, with hunters riding through its grounds: And Parliament in action: He also seems to have encountered people originally from Virginia: Van Meer’s illustrations also show us designs and ideas that were bouncing around in his head. This wouldn’t be out of place in a high school student’s sketchbook: While on this page, Virtue stands high above the sea: He includes, as was the fashion at the time, a reminder of the inevitability of death: All of these pictures are nifty, but, as any yearbook will tell us, the most important thing is the friends he made along the way. I find the signature pages of van Meer’s book even more affecting than the images, as each of them captures a relationship that meant something to the people involved that has been lost to history. The book contains signatures in several different formats. The collection is so extensive that it includes a register of names: Van Meer was a bit of an autograph hound; he made sure to collect signatures from all of the prominent people he encountered. Nobles get their own pages in the book, often decorated with their coats of arms: He even bagged the biggest prize of all, King James I, who signed the page “Jacobus R” and inscribed, in Latin, the slogan “To spare the humble and subdue the haughty:” As nifty as the famous signatures are, I like the other signature pages just as much. These pages wouldn’t look out of place in a modern yearbook (well, except for the Latin): This page might just be my favorite, decorated with a little song that van Meer must have enjoyed with the signer: I wonder how often, in his later years, Michael van Meer flipped back through his album, thinking about the time he met the king or the afternoon he witnessed people riding around on a weird windsurfing contraption. I wonder if he hummed that song to himself as he remembered enjoying it with his friend. It’s the nature of documents like this that we only get little hints about the events they reference. We can’t really know what Michael van Meer’s life was like, but his album can at least remind us that the sands of history have swallowed up billions of fascinating lives, full of meaningful moments and beautiful friendships. Luckily, we have a few items like van Meer’s little book of memories and signatures. They remind us of all the moments in the past that were 2 good 2 be 4 gotten. This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are three ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: You can share the newsletter with others: You can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week! You're currently a free subscriber to |