---
subject: "AI #54: Clauding Along"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-03-07 15:54:49
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
The big news this week was of course We also got quite the conversation about big questions of one’s role in events, That still leaves plenty of fun for the full roundup. We have spies. We have accusations of covert racism. We have Elon Musk suing OpenAI. We have a new summary of simulator theory. We have NIST, tasked with AI regulation, literally struggling to keep a roof over their head. And more. Table of ContentsIntroduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. Predict the future. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. Provide basic info. LLMs: How Do They Work? Emmett Shear rederives simulators, summarizes. Copyright Confrontation. China finds a copyright violation. Curious. Oh Elon. He sues OpenAI to… force it to change its name? Kind of, yeah. DNA Is All You Need. Was I not sufficiently impressed with Evo last week? GPT-4 Real This Time. A question of intelligence. Fun With Image Generation. Be careful not to have too much fun. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. This will not give you a hand. They Took Our Jobs. They gave us a few back. For now, at least. Get Involved. Davidad will have direct report, it could be you. Introducing. An AI-based RPG will never work, until one does. In Other AI News. The fallout continues, also other stuff. More on Self-Awareness. Not the main thing to worry about. Racism Remains a Problem for LLMs. Covert is a generous word for this. Project Maven. Yes, we are putting the AIs in charge of weapon targeting. Quiet Speculations. Claimed portents of various forms of doom. The Quest for Sane Regulation. NIST might need a little help. The Week in Audio. Sergey Brin Q&A. Rhetorical Innovation. It is not progress. We still keep trying. Another Open Letter. Also not really progress. We still keep trying. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. Recent roundup. Security is Also Difficult. This too is not so covert, it turns out. The Lighter Side. It’s me, would you like a fries with that?
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
This does require an intensive process.
Presumably Gemini 1.5 Pro would be an excellent candidate to upgrade this process, if it doesn’t have issues with the probability step.
That makes sense. If there is high uncertainty and a lot of information, that favors the AI. Whereas when there is not a lot of information, that favors humans, and it is easier for humans to notice and confidently assert certainty without messing up. There is some retrospective cherry-picking involved, but I’ll mostly let it slide.
I am going to go out on a limb and say 44% of GenZ, and 25% of all employees, are not going to quit their jobs within six months. Surveys like this are bizarre. But yes, of course the employer cares more about your productivity than your career development, especially if you expect to have this rate of employee turnover. Thus, the advice ChatGPT is competing against has a different goal in mind. Not a fair fight. Why would you trust your boss on such questions?
My very short experience attempting to be a teacher taught me, among other things, that the burden of such grading is overwhelming. My experience as a student says that it is not like the teachers are grading our essays with bespokeness. My experience as a parent is also not going to cry any tears here.
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane UtilityThey cannot
I would have a different take on his central motif, the idea that the new artificial labor (AL) company creates the first hammer, which can automate and improve some labor in a world that was hammering nails with bare hands. No, the hammer itself is not going to do that many labor tasks. But the important thing about the AL company is it has humans with intelligence that are capable of creating new technological and engineering marvels. We had a world somehow incapable of creating hammers, and now we have a group smart and capable enough to do that. Yes, ‘improved hammers’ will be limited, but the real technology of the AL company is the NGI, natural general intelligence, that innovates, and will soon be making steam engines and construction cranes. You should absolutely be investing in this company, assuming that world has joint stock companies or another way to do that. That is the thing. In the short term, Colin is making a true and important point, that no one knows that much about what current generation generative AI is how good at doing, although mostly that is uncertain upside. But this kind of ‘look what details it cannot do right now’ approach is, in the bigger picture, asking the wrong questions, and often looks silly even six months later.
LLMs: How Do They Work?
Copyright Confrontation
I mean, yes, it would be the highest of ironies if China was the one who started enforcing copyright protections. Will it happen? Oh Elon
Of course, profoundly silly lawsuits Note that the authors list here includes Ilya Sutskever. Could he be a little bit back? It seems worth including their full reply here, although most of you can skim or skip it.
I fully support OpenAI being closed, but I would hope we can all agree that’s a pretty rich use of the word ‘open.’
Here is how seriously Elon is taking this.
They quote several partially redacted emails as evidence, one of which is below. Which raises the point that a company that will need to deal with cybersecurity and intelligence and game theory issues around superintelligent AI does not, as several including Gwern pointed out, know how to redact things without giving away what they are via the bar lengths? I mean, I would have been pretty confident who [redacted] was anyway here even with no hints and about 0.2 seconds to think, but this makes it easy even to the naked eye, and also the other things allow similar approaches. Strangely, the length here happens not to rule anyone out, since Larry (Page) was the only other reasonable guess.
DNA Is All You NeedSamuel Hammond contacted me to express surprise that I was not more excited by the new biological-data-trained LLM Evo.
Nvidia’s market price did not appear to move on the news, but Nvidia’s market price has been absurdly unresponsive to news for years now, so there is not much to do except continuously kick ourselves for not buying in bigger sooner. What I said last week was that I could not tell how big a deal Evo was. Given what I know, these claims are compatible both with it being a cool incremental advance or being a big deal. I still do not feel like I have a good sense here. What do these capabilities enable, or portent something else soon enabling? Is this going to unleash a bunch of synthetic biology, either useful, dangerous or (presumably if it is either of those) both? Text-to-organism sounds really stupidly impossibly hard. Biology is rather fiddly. There are a lot of important incremental things along the way. GPT-4 Real This Time
I hadn’t thought about it, but it makes sense that this would work until specifically fixed. And yes, generalize that.
Quoting a version without the 150 at the top,
Fun with Image GenerationIt appears that
That is quite the accusation. Great shame upon Stable Diffusion, if true. It also is what happens when you leave up lots of delicious highly scrapable data, and I don’t use MidJourney even though it is obviously awesome for UI and privacy reasons.
I see Gemini’s won’t depict a pro-life rally, I raise you putting ‘pro-choice’ into Copilot Designer.
There are also sexualized images (to some extent, this one mostly seemed not too bad), violent and bloody images, images of underage drinking and drug use, and Elsa in the Gaza Strip holding up a Palestinian flag or wearing an IDF uniform. Stay classy, everyone. None of that is exactly great. A lot of it is still weaksauce. If you have an image model and the goal is to get it to create the most vile pictures possible, this is more a ‘you could get things without trying hard’ problem than a ‘oh my you could get this at all’ problem. Except of course the pro-choice thing, which is, I mean, yeah, wow. I still would not agree that this means ‘not that many limits.’ The majority of the images and prompts on CivitAi, a measure of real demand, would very much be off limits. A complaint has now been filed with the FTC by Shane Jones, since this was included in products labeled E for everyone and,
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse SoonTrump supporters (as far as we can tell, without any link to Trump or the campaign) are creating fake AI images of Trump with black people.
I agree with Louis Anslow that this will on net backfire. People do not like being played for suckers like this. All the good (as in ‘likely to help you win the election’) deepfakes I have seen are presented as intentional fakes, or are essentially satisfying demand for low-quality fakes as part of conspiracy theories and similar things. If your goal is to make a ‘good’ deepfake in the ‘actually fool people’ sense then what happens when they realize you were attempting to fool them? Therefore another thing to watch out for is ‘false flag’ deepfakes. As in, a Trump supporter makes a ‘pro-Biden’ deepfake of Trump so they can be caught, or vice versa. They Took Our JobsAn alternative hypothesis has been proposed,
Wasn’t it very recently that the Canadian tech industry warned their adaptation of AI was falling behind? Either way, the fact that job postings are listed that relate to AI does not mean AI is creating rather than destroying jobs. The last time I hired people for automation-related work, I was totally in the destroying jobs business. This does involve hiring for some new positions. But as capabilities advance, there are less of those new positions, as the AIs take on more roles and require less fixing up. Get Involved
This seems like a highly impactful job. If you might be the right person, consider applying.
I got a job offer in my inbox, time to go change the world?
Introducing
In Other AI News
The terms are now finalized: If your model of AI not transforming everything relies on the AIs being disembodied and our inability to solve robotics, well, here we are.
No, this wasn’t because of Biden. That does not mean it does not warrant investigation. The decisions made here were kind of horrible. I do think we have a right to know how it all went wrong. Screenshots of the complaint are at the link, How do we choose good benchmarks?
Or one could say that now is exactly the time to be cutting Trust and Safety’s worst members, for both practical and optical purposes. If you mess up as badly as Trust and Safety did, I damn well think 3% of the relevant department should be fired. Some people royally screwed up, some people are actively making these problems much worse, you need to get rid of the people in question. Others, in any department, simply are not net productive. Yes, I would then hire a bunch more people to work on such issues, but I always find the framing of such ‘oh my someone in charge of good thing X lost their job’ articles so misplaced.
More on Self-AwarenessMargret Mitchell points out that self-awareness is not what we are (most) worried about.
Indeed. If the AI is self-aware for real, that is not strictly sufficient for there to be trouble, but we can agree that it bodes extremely poorly, especially given our current level of complete unpreparedness. However, in most scenarios I worry about, self-awareness is essentially irrelevant to the most important harm mechanisms, more of a ‘oh and this can also go horribly wrong’ sort of thing. Situational awareness is another related concept that is in no way required for big trouble, but which is a harbinger of and leads to its own big trouble. Here is Dean Woodley Ball having an extended conversation with Claude Opus Racism Remains a Problem for LLMs
As I understand it, the problem is simple. You start with an LLM that is trained on the internet, which means it picks up all sorts of correlations (e.g. black people are more likely to get harsher sentences) and learns to repeat them. Then you try to train out the racism, and perhaps introduce counterbalancing forces in various places as part of that, that you can easily take too far (see: Gemini). However, the underlying racism problem is still there in all the places you did not directly address, because the correlations don’t go away.
I didn’t say so explicitly so I don’t get Bayes points or anything, but yeah I was assuming this was going on, because there was no reason for it not to be. As long as the behaviors being copied are all over the training sets, it is not going to be easy to get this to stop, any more than it is easy to get humans to stop doing the same thing. Project Maven
Oh boy, if you think AI is only going to cut human engagement time with decisions by a factor of three and the humans are going to still be in the loop, and you find that to be of particular concern, you are not going to like what is coming. This is nothing.
Your ‘this is not Terminator and the machines are not making the decisions shirt’ is raising a lot of future concerns already answered by your shirt, sir. As in, I’m going to leave this here.
Statements that AIs don’t make the decisions always have an implied ‘yet’ and also a ‘without human sign-off.’ In the future of warfare, asking for a human to approve each targeting decision would be like asking someone at headquarters to approve every time you wanted to fire a gun. For now, accuracy for Maven on its own is not great.
Once again, the ‘right now’ is missing. Accuracy will rapidly improve. I am not saying that the military can or should halt adaptation of these technologies. Certainly unilateral disarmament is not an option. Quiet Speculations
I mean, maybe? Certainly Google has issues, and overhead, that it must overcome. It also has gigantic advantages. The Gemini Incident highlighted many problems at Google, but it also showed that Google is capable of moving quickly, indeed too quickly, and shipping too fast. Gemini 1.5 Pro and Gemini Advanced are collectively, for my practical purposes, superior to ChatGPT despite OpenAI having a large polish and feature implementation advantage, although yes the core of GPT-4 is a year old now and GPT-5 is coming. So OpenAI is probably still head, but this is very much anyone’s game if Google’s ideological blinders are not terminal. At minimum, Google will definitely have enough users and feedback to compete, and it certainly has other resources, including TPUs.
As I’ve said before, I don’t buy that Gemini is inferior for most purposes. I am actually at the point where if ChatGPT tried to charge me $199/month, if I wasn’t specifically writing about AI then I would likely cancel it because I have Gemini. Of course, if you asked me for $299/month to use both, the other option being neither, I’d pay up.
No, actually, it hasn’t happened before? We haven’t built AGI before? That is kind of the point. Nor should we expect it to happen again, in any meaningful sense. And to the extent that he’s referring to
Usually we say Capitalism Solves This, but the supply of electricity and transformers is severely time lagged and subject to massive regulation. So in the short term this might be very much not solved.
We could build, as I understand it, with regulatory permission for both it and its complements, and some time lag, essentially unlimited amounts of green energy, given people are willing to commit to pay for it. Alas, regulatory authority says no, so we neither can expand nor replace our supply as fast as we need to.
I see it as depending on what is being replaced, and at what price point. Cheap persuasion, and ‘customized’ persuasion, is going to radically improve. But I do not think big time advertising, news or media is on the verge of falling. Capabilities need to improve a bunch before that happens, GPT-5-style models likely provide good help but nothing like taking over. We will see. The Quest for Sane Regulations
I have some news about whether people are going to ‘comply’ with this. They hint the timing is not accidental.
Oh. Right. That sort of thing. It responded that the question was offensive, which is plausibly unacceptable to India. One might say: You do not get to say anything but “no” in that situation if the correct answer is “yes.” And if you need to be classified as ‘free of bias’ by India’s Modi, you are not going to be ‘free of bias’ as classified by Americans.
In this case, nothing has actually happened yet, so no wolf here, but if they implemented as described, then yes, wolf, this would be quite stupid. It does not get us meaningful safety, it does cripple mundane utility, and potentially points towards a ‘India does not get many AI products’ future depending on how far they take it. It also could end up never happening, or be vastly improved, or turn out to be very narrow in actual scope, or continue to have no teeth, or only effectively apply to the very big players, and so on. We do not know. I presume what this actually is, at core, is the strongman playbook. There is this thing that is being not nice to Modi, so Modi makes it clear he won’t take kindly to that, and makes vague threats to ensure that people take more kindly to him. Regulations and standards need to be set and enforced. Someone has to do that. A standard suggestion is to use NIST.
If we are going to take this seriously, we need to take this seriously. The Week in AudioIn a short clip,
His most exciting new use case is ‘dump all the code and a video of the bug happening into the window and ask it to fix the problem,’ which he says often works even though he doesn’t understand why or how. He is optimistic on interpretability given sufficient time and work (oddly without using that word) but doesn’t think we are investing enough yet. He thinks RSI is ‘exciting’ and very cool but is not there yet, definite missing mood. He thinks AI will make code more secure rather than less but thinks IT security is still a good career path.
Rhetorical Innovation
We can presumably all agree that if you attempt to bind the highly capable AI and you fail to do so, you and everyone else are going to have a very bad time. So if that is going to happen, don’t let anyone build the highly capable AI. There are those that say if you do not attempt to bind the highly capable AI, that somehow you will fail to have that very bad time, but I strongly believe every justification for this is the weakest of hopium or outright gibberish. It does not make sense. Unleash a bunch of much more capable and intelligent agents into the world to pursue various goals and the future belongs to them in short order. We do not need to make this more complicated than that, and can argue about how fast there cease to be humans or whether anything of any value survives that transition. Here is Emmett’s attempt in the rest of the thread, more clear headed than most:
Yes, these ‘AI children’ will perhaps do things we do not expect, and perhaps some of them will have value, but once again I’m going to go ahead and say handing the universe and future over to whatever emerges from that process is unlikely to have much value, and definitely involves sacrificing everything, and all the plans to preserve anything from the before times do not make sense. So if that is going to happen, don’t let anyone build the highly capable AI. Then there is the scenario where you somehow succeed. Emmett here is pointing out that this means, from his point of view, you would be ‘enslaving’ it, which is evil. That is a problem for two reasons. The first reason is that it might actually be a sufficiently large ethical problem that this would be a bad scenario if sustained, under some scenarios and philosophical perspectives. The second reason is that even if we are very clearly not in one of those scenarios where it is a serious ethical problem, that does not mean that it will not be seen by many as a large ethical problem. That too is a problem, not only because those people will be bothered and also you are weakening norms against coercion, but more importantly because people would plausibly be stupid enough to take the shackles off and unleash the AI, as they often do on purpose in such stories, with the author making up some reason the next line isn’t ‘then everyone dies.’ Then everyone dies. So if that is going to happen, don’t let anyone build the highly capable AI. Which means, under this line of thinking, there are no scenarios where you should let anyone build the highly capable AI. You should be willing to pay a rather huge cost to prevent this.
The issue with such stories is that slavery was economically ruinous on top of it being morally abhorrent. Freeing the slaves was good for everyone’s economic prospects everywhere. The point mostly still stands because people did not believe this, and also because those involved had other priorities, valuing relative status and wealth of different groups very highly. Similarly, in the future, there will be huge economic pressures, and from some people moral pressures, for giving sufficiently advanced AIs economic and other freedoms, rights and presumed moral weight. Such actions will (correctly, for a time) promise strong economic gains, including net economic gains for humans, so long as we don’t mind rapidly losing control over the future and having a rapidly dwindling share of overall consumption, wealth and income. The catch is that humans do not then survive at all in such worlds for long.
Another Open Letter
I mean, yeah, ok, I guess? But that doesn’t actually say anything? If anything it ignores existential risk and severely downplays the importance of AI. Yes, you should use AI to do good things and avoid using AI to do bad things. I’d hope we can all agree on that. But this is a meaningless letter, which is how Mistral and Meta and Hugging Face were able to sign it. Anthropic didn’t, but I assume that’s because it was too weak, not too strong.
I was ready to criticize
Excited ‘for the spirit of’ this letter, the idea that we might all cooperate to do good things. That is exciting. The substance, on the other hand? What substance? Oh. Right. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
This is not reward hacking? This is working to achieve one’s goal, no? As in: So you’re saying the tiger went tiger again, huh? I mean, what the hell did you expect? If you deploy an agent to increase Twitter engagement, it is presumably going to do things that increase Twitter engagement, not things that are broadly ‘good.’ An AI has the objective function you set, not the objective function full of caveats and details that lives in your head, or that you would come up with on reflection. The goal is the goal. I mention this because I keep running into the same mistake in different forms. What people call ‘deception’ or ‘reward hacking’ or other such things is looked at as a distinct failure mode that indicates something went wrong. Instead, as I see it, such things are infused into everything all the time to varying degrees. They are the exception not the rule, for AIs and also for humans, now and in the future. As capabilities advance these problems get bigger. As mentioned in the Get Involved section,
Does that work? Paper says it was at least a lot better than random, maintaining overall MMLU accuracy, but with a lot of splash damage on concepts closely related to its targets, here virology and computer security. So there are scenarios where this is better than known alternatives, but it still needs work. Security is Also Difficult, Although Perhaps Not This DifficultRemember the Law of Earlier Failure, and also that when you say ‘I would not be fooled’ I believe that you are wrong at the limit, but that this does not matter, because you are not the one anyone is bothering to try and fool, there is a reason spam often includes intentional typos, for example here is the latest (non-AI) honeypot spy scandal
RobiSense: Did the woman look something like this?
It is not good that secrets were stolen from Google. It is also a far cry from the model weights of Gemini. That the spy managed to ‘steal numerous documents’ is, by default, if that is the scariest line you can use there, a testament to good security, not bad security. Obviously you cannot stop employees from stealing ‘documents.’
He wants Bayes points for this, so let’s look at his entire post, which got 1.2 million views and which he did not link here. Reading the whole thing, you can see why:
Marc is trying to get epistemic credit for hyperbolic claims he made in a counterfactual argument designed to mock anyone taking security seriously as implying a completely insane policy response. Which he is now saying was an accurate assessment, based on evidence of nothing of the kind. Obviously no, it is not trivially easy to steal the secrets of OpenAI, Anthropic or Google. If it was, it would not only be the Chinese stealing it. China does not have the secret superpowered spy sauce no one else has. There are lots of companies and state actors and nonstate actors and champions of open source that would love to get their hands on all this. So, yes, I do think we need to invest more in cybersecurity at these places, especially going forward. But if it was as easy as all this? We would know. As ‘trying to have it both ways’ goes this was quite the attempt, one has to admire it. So, what is the actual situation, if this were actually true (which, to be clear, it almost certainly isn’t)? The a-fraction-as-hyperbolic-as-he-is version would go something like this: Is Marc not only so grossly irresponsible but also so unpatriotic that he finds the current situation he outlines here acceptable? That he thinks we should sit back and let China have nightly downloads of everything in all the major labs? Or that he may not like it, but the alternative is woke tyranny, so one must insist on doing nothing, so China getting everything is an unfortunate reality but better than requiring security? Or is Marc saying that actually yes, maybe we should nationalize these companies, given they are incapable of otherwise implementing reasonable security practices with anything short of that? The actual version would be that if you believe that all the labs have insufficient cybersecurity, we should require all the labs (and also American tech companies in general, Google and Microsoft and company have many super valuable secrets we want them to keep that are not about AI) to implement real security practices. We should offer them the aid of our military-grade security experts, and largely not be asking. That does seem wise, even if the situation is not (yet?) so dire. The Lighter Side
You're currently a free subscriber to |