---
subject: "The Spy Travel Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-03-07 11:47:18
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Steve Bryant (SB) is the author of several WITIs ( Much is written in the press about the link between Why is this interesting? Eugene Fodor, publisher of one of the most successful guide book series of all time, was an officer for the Office of Strategic Services (predecessor to the CIA) during WWII. He specialized in psychological warfare, interrogated prisoners, and wrote propaganda leaflets that were airdropped into the Neapolitan territories. After the war he founded his eponymous company where he employed not only traditional stringers to write copy but also, at the behest of the CIA, spies—“travel writer” being, at the time, a good cover for an agent sent into enemy territory. "But I told them to make sure and send me real writers, not civil engineers,” Fodor later told The New York Times “I wanted to get some writing out of them. And I did, too.” Fodor maintained that the CIA never funded his company. He kept his espial activities a secret until theTimes revealed them
It so happens that one of Fodor’s biggest competitors at the time was also a spy. Temple Fielding, a fellow OSS officer, was a character seemingly out of an Ian Fleming novel who drove a convertible Cadillac around his adopted isle of Majorca, referred to himself by codename (“Ole Simon”), and carried his own vermouth. Fielding, too, was a best-selling guide book author. His niche was to focus on creature comforts, rather than on the sights. Quite ahead of his time, this one: ''The fact is that most travelers don't give a damn for the sights, except for the very famous ones,'' Fielding was also—how to say this?—the wide-tied, oversized lapel of voice, writing as though he were compiling an intelligence report for
Fielding and Fodor were followed by yet another enlisted F’er, Arthur Frommer. Frommer was not a spy. He did, however, serve during The Korean War in Germany, where he wrote the smash hit Guide books have since left their CIA roots behind, having speciated into travel recommendations for any lifestyle. Accordingly, today we’ve got guides for the budget conscious (Lonely Planet) and guides for European vacationers (Rick Steve’s), guides for progressives ( — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Steve (SB) —
Invite your friends and earn rewardsIf you enjoy Why is this interesting?, share it with your friends and earn rewards when they subscribe. |