---
subject: "Demis Hassabis - Scaling, Superhuman AIs, AlphaZero atop LLMs, Rogue Nations Threat"
from: "Dwarkesh Patel from Dwarkesh Podcast <dwarkesh@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-02-28 16:14:57
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Dwarkesh Patel", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_1252705944156122219", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
Here is my episode with Demis Hassabis, CEO of Google DeepMind
We discuss:
Why scaling is an artform
Adding search, planning, & AlphaZero type training atop LLMs
Making sure rogue nations can't steal weights
The right way to align superhuman AIs and do an intelligence explosion
Watch on [YouTube](https://substack.com/redirect/d3582ab9-624f-4f7c-ae66-f34ccc89da44?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Listen on [Apple Podcasts](https://substack.com/redirect/2f339eee-ea62-41b2-a57c-14f1f57de1e9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), [Spotify](https://substack.com/redirect/29ca153d-6f4f-4423-b778-28cbe4980549?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), or any other podcast platform. Read the full transcript [here](https://substack.com/redirect/cd5dfbb1-a68e-4392-bba7-add32306c578?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).
Demis Hassabis - Scaling, Superhuman AIs, AlphaZero atop LLMs, Rogue Nations Threat Dwarkesh Patel |
(0:00:00) - Nature of intelligence
(0:05:56) - RL atop LLMs
(0:16:31) - Scaling and alignment
(0:24:13) - Timelines and intelligence explosion
(0:28:42) - Gemini training
(0:35:30) - Governance of superhuman AIs
(0:40:42) - Safety, open source, and security of weights
(0:47:00) - Multimodal and further progress
(0:54:18) - Inside Google DeepMind
This transcript was made using a script I wrote where an LLM corrects an autogenerated transcript. So heads up that it might contain hallucinations.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:00:44
Okay. Today, it is a true honor to speak with Demis Hassabis, who is the CEO of DeepMind. Demis, welcome to the podcast.
Demis Hassabis 00:00:51
Thanks for having me.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:00:52
First question, given your neuroscience background, how do you think about intelligence? Specifically, do you think it’s one higher-level general reasoning circuit, or do you think it’s thousands of independent subskills and heuristics?
Demis Hassabis 00:01:05
Well, it’s interesting because intelligence is so broad, and what we use it for is so generally applicable. I think that suggests there must be some high-level common things, common kind of algorithmic themes, around how the brain processes the world around us. So, of course, then there are specialized parts of the brain that do specific things, but I think there are probably some underlying principles that underpin all of that.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:01:37
Yeah. How do you make sense of the fact that in these LLMs, though, when you give them a lot of data in any specific domain, they tend to get asymmetrically better in that domain. Wouldn’t we expect a sort of general improvement across all the different areas?
Demis Hassabis 00:01:51
First of all, I think you do actually sometimes get surprising improvement in other domains when you improve in a specific domain. So, for example, when these large models improve at coding, that can actually improve their general reasoning. So there is some evidence of some transfer. But also, that’s how the human brain learns, too. If we experience and practice a lot of things like chess or writing, creative writing, or whatever that is, we also tend to specialize and get better at that specific thing, even though we’re using sort of general learning techniques and general learning systems in order to get good at that domain.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:02:31
Yeah. What’s been the most surprising example of this kind of transfer for you? Like, you see language and code or images and text?
Demis Hassabis 00:02:37
Yeah, I think probably. I mean, I’m hoping we’re going to see a lot more of this chain transfer, but I think things like getting better at coding and math, then generally improving your reasoning. That is how it works with us as human learners. But I think it’s interesting seeing that in these artificial systems.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:02:55
And can you see the sort of mechanistic way in which, let’s say, in the language and code example, there’s, I found the place in a neural network that’s getting better with both the language and the code? Or is it too far down the weed?
Demis Hassabis 00:03:07
Yeah, well, I don’t think our analysis techniques are quite sophisticated enough to be able to hone in on that. I think that’s actually one of the areas that a lot more research needs to be done on kind of mechanistic analysis of the representations that these systems build up. And I sometimes like to call it virtual brain analytics. In a way, it’s a bit like doing fMRI, or single-cell recording from a real brain. What’s the analogous sort of analysis techniques for these artificial minds? And there’s a lot of great work going on on this sort of stuff. People like Chris Olah, I really like his work. And a lot of computational neuroscience techniques, I think, can be brought to bear on analyzing these current systems we’re building. In fact, I try to encourage a lot of my computational neuroscience friends to start thinking in that direction and applying their know-how to the large models.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:03:58
Yeah. What do other AI researchers not understand about human intelligence that you have some sort of insight on, given your neuroscience background?
Demis Hassabis 00:04:06
I think neuroscience has added a lot. If you look at the last sort of 10-20 years that we’ve been at it, at least, and I’ve been thinking about this for 30 plus years. I think in the earlier days of the sort of new wave of AI, I think neuroscience was providing a lot of interesting directional clues. So things like reinforcement learning, combining that with deep learning. Some of our pioneering work we did there, things like experience replay, even the notion of attention, which has become super important. A lot of those original inspirations come from some understanding about how the brain works, not the exact specifics, of course. One’s an engineered system, the other one’s a natural system. So it’s not so much about a one-to-one mapping of a specific algorithm, it’s more kind of inspirational direction, maybe some ideas for architecture, or algorithmic ideas or representational ideas. And because, you know, the brain is an existence proof that general intelligence is possible at all. I think the history of human endeavors has been that once you know something’s possible, it’s easier to push hard in that direction because you know it’s a question of effort then, and sort of a question of when, not if. And that allows you to, I think, make progress a lot more quickly. So I think neuroscience has inspired a lot of the thinking, at least in a soft way, behind where we are today. But as for going forwards, I think there’s still a lot of interesting things to be resolved around planning. And how does the brain construct the right world models? I studied, for example, how the brain does imagination, or you can think of it as mental simulation. So how do we create very rich visual spatial simulations of the world in order for us to plan better?
Dwarkesh Patel 00:05:56
Yeah, actually, I’m curious how you think that will sort of interface with LLMs. So, obviously, DeepMind is at the frontier, and has been for many years, with systems like AlphaZero and so forth, of having these agents who can think through different steps to get to an end. Is there a path for LLMs to have this sort of tree search kind of thing on top of them? How do you think about this?
Demis Hassabis 00:06:15
I think that’s a super promising direction, in my opinion. So we’ve got to carry on improving the large models, and we’ve got to carry on making them more and more accurate predictors of the world. So, in effect, making them more and more reliable world models. That’s clearly a necessary, but I would say probably not sufficient component of an AGI system. And then on top of that, we’re working on things like AlphaZero-like planning mechanisms on top that make use of that model in order to make concrete plans to achieve certain goals in the world, and perhaps sort of chain thought together, or lines of reasoning together, and maybe use search to kind of explore massive spaces of possibility. I think that’s kind of missing from our current large models.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:07:01
How do you get past the sort of immense amount of compute that these approaches tend to require? So even the AlphaGo system was a pretty expensive system because you had to do this sort of running an LLM on each node of the tree. How do you anticipate that’ll get made more efficient?
Demis Hassabis 00:07:18
Well, one thing is Moore’s law tends to help. Over every year, of course, more computation comes in, but we focus a lot on efficient, sample-efficient methods and reusing existing data, things like experience replay, and also just looking at more efficient ways. I mean, the better your world model is, the more efficient your search can be. So, one example I always give with AlphaGo, our system to play Go and chess, and any game, is that it’s stronger than world champion level, human world champion level, in all these games, and it uses a lot less search than a brute force method like Deep Blue, say, to play chess. Deep Blue, one of these traditional stockfish or Deep Blue systems, would maybe look at millions of possible moves for every decision it’s going to make. AlphaGo looked at around tens of thousands of possible positions in order to make a decision about what to move next. But a human grandmaster, a human world champion, probably only looks at a few hundreds of moves, even the top ones, in order to make their very good decision about what to play next. So that suggests that obviously, the brute force systems don’t have any real model other than the heuristics about the game. AlphaGo has quite a decent model, but the top human players have a much richer, much more accurate model than of Go or chess. So that allows them to make world-class decisions on a very small amount of search. So I think there’s a sort of trade-off there. If you improve the models, then I think your search can be more efficient and therefore you can get further with your search.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:09:00
Yeah, I have two questions based on that. The first being with AlphaGo, you had a very concrete win condition of, at the end of the day, do I win this game of Go or not? And you can reinforce on that. When you’re just thinking of an LLM, putting out a thought, do you think there will be this kind of ability to discriminate in the end, whether that was like a good thing to reward or not?
Demis Hassabis 00:09:19
Well, of course, that’s why we pioneered, and DeepMind is sort of famous for using games as a proving ground, partly because obviously, it’s efficient to research in that domain. But the other reason is, obviously, it’s extremely easy to specify a reward function, winning the game or improving the score, something like that sort of built into most games. So that is one of the challenges of real-world systems, is how does one define the right objective function, the right reward function, and the right goals, and specify them in a general way, but that’s specific enough and actually points the system in the right direction. And for real-world problems, that can be a lot harder. But actually, if you think about it, in even scientific problems, there are usually ways that you can specify the goal that you’re after.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:10:07
And then when you think about human intelligence, you were just saying, well, humans thinking about these thoughts are just super sample-efficient. Einstein coming up with relativity, right? There’s just like thousands of possible permutations of the equations. Do you think it’s also this sort of sense of different heuristics of, like, I’m going to try out this approach instead of this? Or is it a totally different way of approaching, coming up with that solution than what AlphaGo does to plan the next move?
Demis Hassabis 00:10:29
Yeah, well, look, I think it’s different because our brains are not built for doing Monte Carlo tree search, right? It’s just not the way our organic brains would work. So I think that in order to compensate for that, people like Einstein have come up, their brains have used their intuition, and we maybe come to what intuition is, but they use their sort of knowledge and their experience to build extremely, in Einstein’s case, extremely accurate models of physics, including these sort of mental simulations. I think if you read about Einstein and how he came up with things, he used to visualize and sort of really kind of feel what these physical systems should be like, not just the mathematics of it, but have a really intuitive feel for what they would be like in reality. And that allowed him to think these sort of very outlandish thoughts at the time. So I think that it’s the sophistication of the world models that we’re building, which then, if you imagine your world model can get you to a certain node in a tree that you’re searching, and then you just do a little bit of search around that node, that leaf node, and that gets you to these original places. But obviously, if your model and your judgment on that model is very, very good, then you can pick which leaf nodes you should sort of expand with search much more accurately. So therefore, overall, you do a lot less search. I mean, there’s no way that any human could do a kind of brute force search over any kind of significant space.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:11:54
Yeah. A big sort of open question right now is whether RL will allow these models to use the self-play synthetic data to get over data bottlenecks. It sounds like you’re optimistic about this.
Demis Hassabis 00:12:04
Yeah, I’m very optimistic about that. Well, first of all, there’s still a lot more data, I think, that can be used, especially if one views like multimodal and video and these kinds of things. And obviously, society is adding more data all the time. But I think that there’s a lot of scope for creating synthetic data. We’re looking at that in different ways, partly through simulation, using very realistic games environments, for example, to generate realistic data, but also self-play. So that’s where systems interact with each other or converse with each other, and in the sense, work very well for us with AlphaGo and AlphaZero, where we got the systems to play against each other and actually learn from each other’s mistakes and build up a knowledge base that way. And I think there are some good analogies for that. It’s a little bit more complicated, but to build a general kind of world.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:12:58
Data, how do you get to the point where these models, the sort of synthetic data they’re outputting on their self-play they’re doing is not just more of what they’ve already got in their data set, but is something they haven’t seen before, you know what I mean? To actually improve the abilities.
Demis Hassabis 00:13:12
Yeah. So there, I think there’s a whole science needed, and I think we’re still in the nascent stage of this, of data curation and data analysis. So, actually analyzing the holes that you have in your data distribution, and this is important for things like fairness and bias and other stuff. To remove that from the system is to try and really make sure that your data set is representative of the distribution you’re trying to learn. And there are many tricks there one can use, like overweighting or replaying certain parts of the data. Or you could imagine, if you identify some gap in your data set, that’s where you put your synthetic generation capabilities to work on.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:13:47
Yeah. So nowadays, people are paying attention to the RL stuff that’s DeepMind did many years before. What are the sort of either early research directions or something that was done way back in the past, but people just haven’t been paying attention to that you think will be a big deal?
Demis Hassabis 00:14:02
Right?
Dwarkesh Patel 00:14:03
Like there’s a time where people weren’t paying attention to scaling. What’s the thing now where it’s like totally underrated?
Demis Hassabis 00:14:07
Well, actually, I think that the history of the last couple of decades has been things coming in and out of fashion, right? And I do feel like a while ago, maybe five-plus years ago when we were pioneering with AlphaGo, and before that, DQN, where it was the first system that worked on Atari, our first big system, really, more than ten years ago now, that scaled up Q learning and reinforcement learning techniques to deal. Combine that with deep learning to create deep reinforcement learning, and then use that to scale up to complete some master some pretty complex tasks, like playing Atari games just from the pixels. And I do actually think a lot of those ideas need to come back in again. And as we talked about earlier, combine it with the new advances in large models and large multimodal models, which is obviously very exciting as well. So I do think there’s a lot of potential for combining some of those older ideas together with the newer ones.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:15:00
Is there any potential for something to come, the AGI, to eventually come from? Just a pure RL approach. The way we’re talking about it, it sounds like the LLM will form the right prior, and then this sort of tree search will go on top of that. Or is it a possibility to just, completely out of.
Demis Hassabis 00:15:15
Theoretically, I think there’s no reason why you couldn’t go full alpha zero. And there are some people here at Google, DeepMind, and in the RL community who work on that, right, fully assuming no priors, no data, and just build all knowledge from scratch. And I think that’s valuable, because, of course, those ideas and those algorithms should also work when you have some knowledge, too. But having said that, I think by far, probably my betting would be the quickest way to get to AGI, and the most likely plausible way is to use all the knowledge that’s existing in the world right now on things like the web and that we’ve collected, and we have these scalable algorithms, like transformers, that are capable of ingesting all of that information. And I don’t see why you wouldn’t start with a model as a kind of prior, or to build on and to make predictions that help bootstrap your learning. I just think it doesn’t make sense not to make use of that. So my betting would be is that the final AGI system will have these large multimodal models as part of the overall solution, but probably won’t be enough on their own. You’ll need this additional planning search on top.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:16:31
Okay, this sounds like the answer to the question I’m about to ask, which is, as somebody who’s been in this field for a long time and seen different trends come and go, do you think that strong version of the scaling hypothesis gets it right, and what does it get wrong? Just the idea that you just throw enough compute at a wide enough distribution of data, and you get intelligence.
Demis Hassabis 00:16:47
Yeah. Look, my view is, this is kind of an empirical question right now. So I think it was pretty surprising to almost everyone, including the people who first worked on the scaling hypotheses, that how far it’s gone. In a way, I sort of look at the large models today, and I think they’re almost unreasonably effective for what they are. I think it’s pretty surprising some of the properties that emerge, things like, it’s clearly, in my opinion, got some form of concepts and abstractions and some things like that. And I think if we were talking five plus years ago, I would have said to you, maybe we need an additional algorithmic breakthrough in order to do that. Maybe more like the brain works. And I think that’s still true if we want explicit abstract concepts, neat concepts, but it seems that these systems can implicitly learn that. Another really interesting, I think, unexpected thing was that these systems have some sort of grounding, even though they don’t experience the world multimodal, or at least until more recently, when we have the multimodal models. And that’s surprising that the amount of information and models that can be built up just from language. And I think that I’d have some hypotheses about why that is. I think we get some grounding through the RLHF feedback systems, because obviously the human raiders are by definition, grounded people. We’re grounded right in reality. So our feedback is also grounded. So perhaps there’s some grounding coming in through there. And also maybe language contains more grounding, if you’re able to ingest all of it, than we perhaps thought, or linguists perhaps thought before. So it’s actually some very interesting philosophical questions. People haven’t even really scratched the surface of yet. Looking at the advances that have been made, it’s quite interesting to think about where it’s going to go next. But in terms of your question of large models, I think we’ve got to push scaling as hard as we can, and that’s what we’re doing here. And it’s an empirical question whether that will hit an asymptote or a brick wall, and there are different people argue about that. But actually, I think we should just test it. I think no one knows. But in the meantime, we should also double down on innovation and invention. And this is something that Google research and DeepMind and Google Brain, we’ve pioneered many, many things over the last decade. That’s something that’s our bread and butter. And, you know, you can think of half our effort as to do with scaling, and half our efforts in doing with inventing the next architectures, the next algorithms that will be needed, knowing that you’ve got this scaled larger and larger model coming along the lines. So my betting right now but it’s a loose betting is that you would need both. But I think you got to push both of them as hard as possible. And we’re in a lucky position that we can do that.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:19:27
Yeah. I want to ask more about the grounding. So you can imagine two things that might change which would make the grounding more difficult. One is that as these models get smarter, going to be able to operate in domains where we just can’t generate enough human labels just because we’re not smart enough. Right. So if it does like a million line pull request, how do we tell it? Like, this is within the constraints of our morality and the end goal we wanted and this isn’t. And the other is it sounds like you’re saying more of the compute. So far we’ve been doing next token prediction, and in some sense, it’s a guardrail because you have to talk as a human would talk and think as a human would think. Now, if additional compute is going to come in the form of reinforcement learning, where just like get to the objective, we can’t really trace how you got there. When you combine those two, how worried are you that the sort of grounding goes away?
Demis Hassabis 00:20:12
Well, look, I think if it’s not properly grounded, the system won’t be able to achieve those goals properly. Right. I think, in a sense, you sort of have to have the grounding, or at least some of it, for a system to actually achieve goals in the real world. I do actually think that as these systems and things like Gemini are becoming more multimodal and we start ingesting things like video and audiovisual data as well as text data, and then the system starts correlating those things together. I think that is a form of proper grounding, actually. I do think our systems are going to start to understand the physics of the real world better.
And then one could imagine the active version of that is being in a very realistic simulation or game environment where you’re starting to learn about what your actions do in the world and how that affects the world itself. The world stay itself, but also what next learning episode you’re getting. So these RL agents we’ve always been working on and pioneered, like AlphaZero and AlphaGo, they actually are active learners. What they decide to do next affects what their next learning piece of data or experience they’re going to get. So there’s this very interesting sort of feedback loop.
And of course, if we ever want to be good at things like robotics, we’re going to have to understand how to act in the real world.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:21:35
Yeah. So there’s a grounding in terms of whether the capabilities will be able to proceed or whether they will be in enough touch with reality to be able to do the things we want. And there’s another sense of grounding of we’ve gotten lucky in the sense that since they’re trained on human thought, they maybe think like a human. To what extent does that stay true when more of the compute for training comes from just did you get the right outcome and not guarded by are you proceeding on the next token as a human would? Maybe the broader question I’ll pose to you is, and this is what I asked Shane as well, what would it take to align a system that’s smarter than a human? Maybe thinks in alien concepts, and you can’t really monitor the million line pull request because you can’t really understand the whole thing, and you can’t give labels.
Demis Hassabis 00:22:13
Look, this is something Shane and I and many others here, we’ve had at the forefront of our minds since before we started DeepMind because we planned for success crazy. In 2010, no one was thinking about AI, let alone AGI. But we already knew that if we could make progress with these systems and these ideas, the technology that would be created being unbelievably transformative. So we were already thinking 20 years ago about well, what would the consequences of that be, both positive and negative. Of course, the positive direction is amazing science, things like AlphaFold, incredible breakthroughs in health and science and math and scientific discovery. But then also we got to make sure these systems are sort of understandable and controllable.
And I think there are sort of several, this will be a whole sort of discussion in itself, but there are many, many ideas that people have from much more stringent eval systems. I think we don’t have good enough evaluations and benchmarks for things like, can the system deceive you? Can it exfiltrate its own code, sort of undesirable behaviors? And then there are ideas of actually using AI, maybe narrow AIs, so not general learning ones, but systems that are specialized for a domain to help us as the human scientists analyze and summarize what the more general system is doing. Right. So kind of narrow AI tools. I think that there’s a lot of promise in creating hardened sandboxes or simulations that are hardened with cybersecurity arrangements around the simulation, both to keep the AI in, but also as cybersecurity to keep hackers out. And then you could experiment a lot more freely within that sandbox domain. And I think a lot of these ideas are, and there’s many, many others, including the analysis stuff we talked about earlier, where can we analyze and understand what the concepts are that this system is building, what the representations are, so maybe they’re not so alien to us and we can actually keep track of the kind of knowledge that it’s building.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:24:13
Yeah. Stepping back a bit. I’m curious what your timelines are. So Shane said his, like, I think modal outcome is 2028. I think that’s maybe his median. What is yours?
Demis Hassabis 00:24:21
Yeah, well, I don’t have prescribed specific numbers to it because I think there’s so many unknowns and uncertainties, and human ingenuity and endeavor comes up with surprises all the time. So that could meaningfully move the timelines. But I will say that when we started DeepMind back in 2010, we thought of it as a 20-year project. And actually, I think we’re on track, which is kind of amazing for 20-year projects because usually they’re always 20 years away. So that’s the joke about whatever it is, Quantum AI, take your pick. But I think we’re on track. So I wouldn’t be surprised if we had AGI-like systems within the next decade.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:25:02
And do you buy the model that once you have an AGI, you have a system that basically speeds up further AI research? Maybe not like an overnight sense, but over the course of months and years, you have much faster progress than you would have otherwise?
Demis Hassabis 00:25:12
I think that’s potentially possible. I think it partly depends on what we decide. We, as a society, decide to use the first nascent AGI systems, or even proto-AGI systems for. So even the current LLMs seem to be pretty good at coding, and we have systems like AlphaCode. We also got theorem proving systems. So one could imagine combining these ideas together and making them a lot better. And then I could imagine these systems being quite good at designing and helping us build future versions of themselves, but we also have to think about the safety implications of that, of course. Yeah.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:25:51
I’m curious what you think about that. I’m not saying this is happening this year or anything, but eventually, you’ll be developing a model where during the process of development, you think there’s some chance that once this is fully developed, it’ll be capable of an intelligence explosion-like dynamic. What would have to be true of that model at that point where you’re like, I’ve seen these specific evals, I’ve understood its internal thinking enough, and its future thinking that I’m comfortable continuing the development of the system.
Demis Hassabis 00:26:17
Well, look, we need a lot more understanding of the systems than we do today before I would be even confident of explaining to you what we would need to tick box there. So I think actually what we’ve got to do in the next few years, and the time we have before those systems start arriving, is come up with the right evaluations and metrics, and maybe ideally formal proofs. It’s going to be hard for these types of systems, but at least empirical bounds around what these systems can do. That’s why I think about things like deception as being quite root node traits that you don’t want, because if you’re confident that your system is sort of exposing what it actually thinks, then that opens up possibilities of using the system itself to explain aspects of itself to you. The way I think about that actually is, if I was to play a game of chess against Gary Kasparov, which I played in the past, or the amazing chess players of all time, I wouldn’t be able to come up with a move that they could, but they could explain to me why they came up with that move, and I could understand it post hoc, right? And that’s the sort of thing one could imagine. One of the capabilities that we could make use of these systems is for them to explain it to us and even maybe the proofs behind why they’re thinking something, certainly in a mathematical problem.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:27:42
Got it. Do you have a sense of what the converse answer would be? So what would have to be true? Where tomorrow morning you’re like, “Oh, man, I didn’t anticipate this.” You see some specific observation tomorrow morning where we got to stop Gemini two training. What would specifically…
Demis Hassabis 00:27:55
Yeah, I could imagine that. And this is where things like the sandbox simulations, I would hope. We’re experimenting in a safe, secure environment, and then something happens in it where something very unexpected happens, a new unexpected capability or something that we didn’t want, explicitly told the system we didn’t want, but then it lied about. These are the kinds of things where one would want to then dig in carefully with the systems that are around today, which are not dangerous, in my opinion, today, but in a few years they might have potential, and then you would sort of ideally pause and really get to the bottom of why it was doing those things before one continued.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:28:42
Yeah. Going back to Gemini, I’m curious what the bottlenecks were in the development. Why not make it immediately one order of magnitude bigger if scaling works well.
Demis Hassabis 00:28:52
Look, first of all, there are practical limits. How much compute can you actually fit in one data center? And actually, you’re bumping up against very interesting distributed computing kind of challenges, right? Fortunately, we have some of the best people in the world on those challenges and cross data center training, all of these kinds of things. Very interesting challenges, hardware challenges, and we have our TPUs and so on that we’re building and designing all the time as well as using GPUs. And so there’s all of that. And then, scaling laws, they don’t just work by magic. You still need to scale up the hyperparameters, and various innovations are going in all the time with each new scale. It’s not just about repeating the same recipe at each new scale. You have to adjust the recipe, and that’s a bit of an art form in a way. And you have to sort of almost get new data points. If you try and extend your predictions, extrapolate them, several orders of magnitude out. Sometimes they don’t hold anymore, right, because new capabilities have step functions in terms of new capabilities, and some things hold, and other things don’t. So often you do need those intermediate data points actually to correct some of your hyperparameter optimization and other things so that the scaling law continues to be true. So there are various practical limitations to that, so kind of one order of magnitude is about probably the maximum that you want to carry on, you want to sort of do between each era.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:30:23
Oh, that’s so fascinating. In the GPT four technical report, they say that they were able to predict the training loss tens of thousands of times less compute than GPT four. They could see the curve. But the point you’re making is that the actual capabilities that loss implies may not be so.
Demis Hassabis 00:30:39
The downstream capabilities sometimes don’t follow from the, you can often predict the core metrics like training loss or something like that, but then it doesn’t actually translate into MMLU or some other actual capability that you care about. They’re not necessarily linear all the time, so there are sort of non-linear effects there.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:30:57
What was the biggest surprise to you during the development of Gemini of something like this happening?
Demis Hassabis 00:31:02
Well, I wouldn’t say there was one big surprise, but it was very interesting trying to train things at that size and learning about all sorts of things from an organizational standpoint, how to babysit such a system, and to track it. And I think, getting a better understanding of the metrics you’re optimizing versus the final capabilities that you want. I would say that’s still not a perfectly understood mapping, but it’s an interesting one that we’re getting better and better at.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:31:32
Yeah, there’s a perception that maybe other labs are more compute-efficient than DeepMind has been with Gemini. I don’t know what you make of that perception.
Demis Hassabis 00:31:40
I don’t think that’s the case. I think that actually, Gemini one used roughly the same amount of compute, maybe slightly more than what was rumored for GPT four. I don’t know exactly what was used, so I think it was in the same ballpark. I think we’re very efficient with our compute, and we use our compute for many things. One is not just the scaling but going back to earlier, to these more innovations and ideas, it’s only useful, a new innovation, a new invention, if it also can scale. So, in a way, you also need quite a lot of compute to do new invention because you’ve got to test many things, at least some reasonable scale, and make sure that they work at that scale. And also, some new ideas may not work at a toy scale but do work at a larger scale. And in fact, those are the more valuable ones. So if you think about that exploration process, you need quite a lot of compute to be able to do that. I mean, the good news is we’re pretty lucky at Google that I think this year, certainly, we’re going to have the most compute by far of any sort of research lab. And we hope to make very efficient and good use of that in terms of both scaling and the capability of our systems and also new inventions.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:32:51
Yeah. What’s been the biggest surprise to you, if you go back to yourself in 2010, when you were starting DeepMind, in terms of what AI progresses looked like, did you anticipate back then that it would, in some large sense, amount to spending billions of dollars into these models, or did you have a different sense of what it would look like?
Demis Hassabis 00:33:06
We thought that, and actually, I know you’ve interviewed my colleague Shane, and he always thought that in terms of compute curves and then maybe comparing roughly to the brain and how many neurons and synapses there are, very loosely, but we’re actually, interestingly, in that kind of regime now, roughly in the right order of magnitude of number of synapses in the brain and the sort of compute that we have. But I think more fundamentally, we always thought that we bet on generality and learning, right? So those were always at the core of any technique we would use. That’s why we triangulated on reinforcement learning and search and deep learning as three types of algorithms that would scale and would be very general and not require a lot of handcrafted human priors, which we thought was the sort of failure mode, really, of the efforts to build AI in places like MIT, where there were very logic-based systems, expert systems, masses of hand-coded, handcrafted human information going into that turned out to be wrong or too rigid. So we wanted to move away from that. I think we spotted that trend early, and obviously, we use games as our proving ground, and we did very well with that. And I think all of that was very successful. And I think maybe inspired others to things like AlphaGo, I think, was a big moment for inspiring many others to think, oh, actually, these systems are ready to scale. And then, of course, with the advent of transformers, invented by our colleagues at Google Research and Brain, that was then the type of deep learning that allowed us to ingest masses of amounts of information. And that, of course, has really turbocharged where we are today. So I think that’s all part of the same lineage. We couldn’t have predicted every twist and turn there, but I think the general direction we were going in was the right one.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:34:57
Yeah. And in fact, it’s fascinating because if you read your old papers or Shane’s old papers, Shane’s thesis, I think, in 2009, he said, well, the way we would test for AI is, can you compress Wikipedia? And that’s like, literally, the loss function realms, or, like, your own paper in 2016 before Transformers, where you said you were comparing neuroscience and AI, and he said, attention is what is needed.
Demis Hassabis 00:35:16
Exactly. So we had these things called out, and actually, we had some early attention papers, but they weren’t as elegant as transformers in the end, neural Turing machines and things like this. And then Transformers was the nicer and more general architecture of that.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:35:30
Yeah. When you extrapolate all this out forward and you think about superhuman intelligence, what does that landscape look like to you? Is it still controlled by a private company? What should the governance of that look like concretely?
Demis Hassabis 00:35:45
Yeah, look, I think that this is so consequential, this technology. I think it’s much bigger than any one company or even industry in general. I think it has to be a big collaboration with many stakeholders from civil society, academia, government. And the good news is, I think with the popularity of the recent chatbot systems and so on, I think that has woken up many of these other parts of society, that this is coming and what it will be like to interact with these systems. And that’s great. So it’s opened up lots of doors for very good conversations. I mean, an example of that was the safety summit in the UK hosted a few months ago, which I thought was a big success. To start getting this international dialogue know, I think the whole of society needs to be involved in deciding what do we want to deploy these models for? How do we want to use them, what do we not want to use them for? I think we got to try and get some international consensus around that and then also making sure that the benefits of these systems benefit everyone for the good of everyone and society in general. And that’s why I push so hard things like AI for science, and I hope that with things like our spin out isomorphic, we’re going to start curing diseases, terrible diseases with AI, and accelerate drug discovery, amazing things, climate change and other things. I think big challenges that face us and face humanity. Massive challenges, actually, which I’m optimistic we can solve because we’ve got this incredibly powerful tool coming along down the line of AI that we can apply and I think help us and solve many of these. You know, ideally we would have a big consensus around that and a big discussion at sort of almost like the UN level.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:37:25
If know, one interesting thing is if you look at these systems, you chat with them and they’re immensely powerful and intelligent, but it’s interesting to the extent of which they haven’t automated large sections of the economy yet. Whereas if five years ago I showed you Gemini, you’d be like, wow, this is totally coming for a lot of things. So how do you account for that? What’s going on where it hasn’t had the broader impact yet?
Demis Hassabis 00:37:48
Yeah, I think that just shows we’re still at the beginning of this new era. And I think that for these systems, I think there are some interesting use cases where you can use these chatbot systems to summarize stuff for you, and maybe do some simple writing and maybe more kind of boilerplate-type writing, but that’s only a small part of what we all do every day. So I think for more general use cases, I think we still need new capabilities, things like planning and search, but also maybe things like personalization and memory, episodic memory. So not just long context windows, but actually remembering what we spoke about 100 conversations ago. And I think once those start coming in, I’m really looking forward to things like recommendation systems that help me find better, more enriching material, whether that’s books or films or music and so on. I would use that type of system every day. So I think we’re just scratching the surface of what these AI assistants could actually do for us in our general, everyday lives and also in our work context as well. I think they’re not reliable yet enough to do things like science with them. But I think one day, once we fix factuality and grounding and other things, I think they could end up becoming, like, the world’s best research assistant. For you as a scientist or as.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:39:12
A clinician, I want to ask about memory. By the way, you had this fascinating paper in 2007 where you talk about the links between memory and imagination and how they, in some sense, are very similar. People often claim that these models are just memorizing. How do you think about that claim that people make? Is memorization all you need? Because in some deep sense, that’s compression? Or what’s your intuition here?
Demis Hassabis 00:39:34
Yeah, I mean, sort of at the limit, one maybe could try and memorize everything, but it wouldn’t generalize out of your distribution. And I think these systems are clearly. I think the early criticisms of these early systems were that they were just regurgitating and memorizing, but I think clearly the new era, the Gemini GPT-4 type era, they are definitely generalizing to new constructs. But actually, in my thesis and in that paper, particularly that started that area of imagination in neuroscience, it was showing that, first of all, memory, certainly, at least human memory, is a reconstructive process. It’s not a videotape. Right. We sort of put it together back from components that seem familiar to us, the ensemble. And that’s what made me think that imagination might be the same thing. Except in this case, you’re using the same semantic components, but now you’re putting it together in a way that your brain thinks is novel. Right. For a particular purpose, like planning. I do think that that kind of idea is still probably missing from our current systems, this sort of pulling together different parts of your world model to simulate something new that then helps with your planning, which is what I would call imagination.
Yeah, for sure. Now, you guys have the best models in the world. With the Gemini models, do you plan on putting out some sort of framework like the other two major AI labs have? Once we see these specific capabilities, unless we have these specific safeguards, we’re not going to continue development or we’re not going to ship the product out.
Demis Hassabis 00:41:02
Yes, we have already lots of internal checks and balances, but we’re going to start publishing, actually, sort of watch this space. We’re working on a whole bunch of blog posts and technical papers that we’ll be putting out in the next few months along the similar lines of things like responsible scaling laws and so on. We have those implicitly internally in various safety councils and so on, people like Shane chair and so on. But it’s time for us to talk about that more publicly, I think. So we’ll be doing that throughout the course of the year.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:41:33
That’s great to hear. And another thing I’m curious about is, it’s not only the risk of the deployed model being something that people can use to do bad things, but also rogue actors, foreign agents, so forth, being able to steal the weights and then fine-tune them to do crazy things. How do you think about securing the weights to make sure something like this doesn’t happen, making sure a very key group of people have access to them and so forth?
Demis Hassabis 00:41:57
Yeah, it’s interesting. So, first of all, there’s sort of two parts. There’s one is security, one is open source, maybe we can discuss. But the security, I think, is super key, just as sort of normal cybersecurity type things. And I think we’re lucky at Google DeepMind. We’re kind of behind Google’s firewall and cloud protection, which, you know, I think, is best in class in the world corporately. So we already have that protection. And then behind that, we have specific DeepMind protections within our code base. So it’s sort of a double layer of protection. So I feel pretty good about that, that you can never be complacent on that. But I feel it’s already sort of best in the world in terms of cyber defenses, but we got to carry on improving that. And again, things like the hardened sandboxes could be a way of doing that as well. And maybe even there are specifically secure data centers or hardware solutions to this, too, that we’re thinking about. I think that maybe in the next three, four, five years, we would also want air gaps and various other things that are known in the security community. So I think that’s key. And I think all frontier labs should be doing that, because otherwise, nation-states and other things, rogue nation-states and other dangerous actors, there would be obviously a lot of incentive for them to steal things like the weights. And then, of course, open source is another interesting question, which is we’re huge proponents of open source and open science. I mean, almost every. We’ve published thousands of papers and things like AlphaFold and transformers, of course, and AlphaGo. All of these things we put out there into the world, published and open source, many of them Graphcast, most recently our weather prediction system. But when it comes to the core technology, the foundational technology, and very general purpose. I think the question I would have is for sort of open source proponents, is that how does one stop bad actors, individuals or up to rogue states taking those same open source systems and repurposing them because they’re general purpose for harmful ends? Right. So we have to answer that question. I don’t know what the answer is to that, but I haven’t heard a compelling, clear answer to that from proponents of just sort of open sourcing everything. So I think there has to be some balance there. But obviously, it’s a complex question of what that is.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:44:18
Yeah, I feel like tech doesn’t get the credit it deserves for funding hundreds of billions of dollars’ worth of R&D, and obviously you have DeepMind with systems like AlphaFold and so on. But when we talk about securing the weights, as we said, maybe right now it’s not something that is going to cause the end of the world or anything, but as these systems get better and better, the worry that a foreign agent or something gets access to them, presumably right now there’s like dozens to hundreds of researchers who have access to the weights. What’s a plan for getting into the situation, getting the weights in a situation room, if you need to access them? It’s like some extremely strenuous process. No individual can really take them out.
Demis Hassabis 00:44:54
Yeah, I mean, one has to balance that with allowing for collaboration, speed of progress. Actually, another interesting thing is, of course, you want brilliant independent researchers from academia or things like the UK AI Safety Institute and us one to be able to kind of red team these systems. So one has to expose them to a certain extent, although that’s not necessarily the weights. And then we have a lot of processes in place about making sure that only if you need them, that you have access to those people who need access, have access. And right now, I think we’re still in the early days of those kinds of systems being at risk. And as these systems become more powerful and more general and more capable, I think one has to look at the access question.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:45:42
Some of these other labs have specialized in different things relative to safety, like Anthropic, for example, with interpretability. And do you have some sense of where you guys might have an edge, so that now that you have the frontier model, you’re going to scale up safety where you guys are going to be able to put out the best frontier research on safety?
Demis Hassabis 00:45:59
I think we helped pioneer RLHF and other things like that, which can also be obviously used for performance, but also for safety. I think that a lot of the self-play ideas and these kinds of things could also be used potentially to auto-test a lot of the boundary conditions that you have with the new systems. Part of the issue is that with these very general systems, there’s so much surface area to cover about how these systems behave. So, I think we are going to need some automated testing, and again, with things like simulations and games, very realistic environments, virtual environments, I think we have a long history in that and using those kinds of systems and making use of them for building AI algorithms. So, I think we can leverage all of that history. And then around at Google, we’re very lucky. We have some of the world’s best cybersecurity experts, hardware designers. So, I think we can bring that to bear for security and safety as well.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:47:00
Great. Let’s talk about Gemini. So now you guys have the best model in the world. I’m curious. The default way to interact with these systems has been through chat so far. Now that we have multimodal and all these new capabilities, how do you anticipate that changing, or do you think that’ll still be the case?
Demis Hassabis 00:47:17
Yeah, I think we’re just at the beginning of actually understanding what a full multimodal model system, how exciting that might be to interact with. It’ll be quite different from what we’re used to today with the chatbots. I think the next versions of this over the next year, 18 months, maybe we’ll have some contextual understanding around the environment around you, through a camera or whatever it is, a phone. I could imagine that as the next step. And then I think that we’ll start becoming more fluid in understanding. Let’s sample from a video, let’s use voice, maybe even eventually things like touch. And if you think about robotics and other things, sensors, other types of sensors. So, I think the world’s about to become very exciting. I think in the next few years, as we start getting used to the idea of what true multimodality means on the robotics subject.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:48:13
Ilya said when I was on the podcast that the reason OpenAI gave up on robotics was because they didn’t have enough data in that domain, at least at the time they were pursuing it. I mean, you guys have put out different things like robotransformer and other things. Do you think that’s still a bottleneck for robotics progress, or will we see progress in the world of atoms as well as the world?
Demis Hassabis 00:48:30
Well, we’re very excited about our progress with things like Gatto and RT, two robotic transformers. So, we’ve always liked robotics, and we’ve had amazing research in that, and we still have that going now because we like the fact that it’s a data-poor regime, because that pushes us on very interesting research directions that we think are going to be useful anyway, like sampling efficiency and data efficiency in general, and transfer learning from simulation, transferring that to reality, all of these very sim-to-real, all of these very interesting general challenges that we would like to solve. So the control problem. So, we’ve always pushed hard on that. And actually, I think Ilya is right, that is more challenging because of the data problem. But I think we’re starting to see the beginnings of these large models being transferable to the robotics regime, learning in the general domain, language domain and other things, and then just treating tokens like Gatto as any type of token. The token could be an action, it could be a word, it could be part of an image, a pixel, or whatever it is. And that’s what I think true multimodality is. And to begin with, it’s harder to train a system like that than a straightforward text-language system. But actually, going back to our early conversation on transfer learning, you start seeing that a true multimodal system, the other modalities benefit some different modalities. So you get better at language because you now understand a little bit about video. So, I do think it’s harder to get going, but actually, ultimately, we’ll have a more general, more capable system like that.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:50:10
Whatever happened to Godo? That was super fascinating that you could have it play games and also do video and also do.
Demis Hassabis 00:50:15
Yeah, we’re still working on those kinds of systems, but you can imagine we’re just trying to. Those ideas we’re trying to build into our future generations of Gemini to be able to do all of those things. And robotics, transformers, and things like that. You can think of them as follow-ups to that.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:50:33
Will we see asymmetric progress towards the domains in which the self-play kinds of things you’re talking about will be especially powerful? So math and code, obviously, recently you have these papers out about this. You can use these things to do really cool, novel things. Will they just be superhuman coders, but in other ways, they might still be worse than humans, or how do you think about that?
Demis Hassabis 00:50:52
Sort of. Yeah. So, look, I think that we’re making great progress with math and things like theorem proving and coding, but it’s still interesting if one looks at creativity in general and scientific endeavor in general. I think we’re getting to the stage where our systems could help the best human scientists make their breakthroughs quicker, almost triage the search space in some ways, or perhaps find a solution like AlphaFold does with a protein structure. But they’re not at the level where they can create the hypothesis themselves or ask the right question. And as any top scientist will tell you, that’s the hardest part of science, actually asking the right question, boiling down that space to what’s the critical question? We should go after the critical problem and then formulating that problem in the right way to attack it. And that’s not something our systems really have any idea how to do, but they are suitable for searching large combinatorial spaces if one can specify the problem in that way with a clear, objective function. So, that’s very useful for already many of the problems we deal with today, but not the most high-level creative problems.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:52:06
DeepMind has published all kinds of interesting stuff in speeding up science in different areas. How do you think about that in the context of, if you think AGI is going to happen in the next 10 to 20 years, why not just wait for the AGI to do it for you? Why build these domain-specific solutions?
Demis Hassabis 00:52:21
Well, I think we don’t know how long AGI is going to be. And we always used to say back, even when we started DeepMind, that we don’t have to wait for AGI in order to bring incredible benefits to the world. And especially my personal passion has been AI for science and health. And you can see that with things like Alphafold and all of our various Nature papers on different domains and material science work and so on. I think there’s lots of exciting directions and also impact in the world through products too. I think it’s very exciting and a huge opportunity, unique opportunity we have as part of Google, they got dozens of billion user products that we can immediately ship our advances into, and then billions of people can improve their daily lives and enriches their daily lives and enhances their daily lives. So, I think it’s a fantastic opportunity for impact on all those fronts.
And I think the other reason from the point of view of AGI specifically, is that it battle tests your ideas, right? So you don’t want to be in a sort of research bunker where you just theoretically are pushing some things forward, but then actually your internal metrics start deviating from real-world things that people would care about, right? Or real-world impact so you get a lot of feedback, direct feedback from these real-world applications that then tells you whether your systems really are scaling or actually, do we need to be more data efficient or sample efficient? Because most real-world challenges require that. Right. And so it kind of keeps you honest and pushes you to keep sort of nudging and steering your research directions to make sure they’re on the right path. So I think it’s fantastic. And, of course, the world benefits from that. Society benefits from that on the way, maybe many years before AGI arrives.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:54:18
Yeah, well, the development of Gemini is super interesting because it comes right at the heels of merging these different organizations, Brain and DeepMind. Yeah, I’m curious, what have been the challenges there? What have been the synergies? And it’s been successful in the sense that you have the best model in the world. Now, what’s that been like?
Demis Hassabis 00:54:33
Well, look, it’s been fantastic, actually, over the last year. Of course, it’s been challenging to do that, like any big integration coming together, but you’re talking about two world-class organizations, long, storied histories of inventing many important things, from deep reinforcement learning to transformers. And so it’s very exciting, actually pooling all of that together and collaborating much more closely. We always used to be collaborating, but more on a sort of project-by-project basis versus a much deeper, broader collaboration like we have now. And Gemini is the first fruit of that collaboration, including the name Gemini, actually implying twins. And, of course, a lot of other things are made more efficient, like pooling compute resources together and ideas and engineering, which I think at the stage we’re at now, where there are huge amounts of world-class engineering that has to go on to build the frontier systems. I think it makes sense to coordinate that more.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:55:31
I mean, you and Shane started DeepMind partly because you were concerned about safety. You saw AGI coming as, like, a live possibility. Do you think the people who were formerly part of Brain, the half of Google, DeepMind, now, do you think they approach it in the same way? Have there been cultural differences there, in terms of that question?
Demis Hassabis 00:55:47
Yeah, no, I think overall, and this is why, I think one of the reasons we joined forces with Google back in 2014 was, I think, the entirety of Google and Alphabet, not just Brain and DeepMind, take these questions very seriously of responsibility, and our kind of mantra is to try and be bold and responsible with these systems. So I would class it, as I’m obviously a huge techno-optimist, but I want us to be cautious with that, given the transformative power of what we’re bringing into the world collectively. And I think it’s important. I think it’s going to be one of the most important technologies humanity will ever invent. So we’ve got to put all our efforts into getting this right and to be thoughtful and also humble about what we know and don’t know about the systems that are coming and the uncertainties around that. And in my view, the only sensible approach when you have huge uncertainty is to be sort of cautiously optimistic and use the scientific method to try and have as much foresight and understanding about what’s coming down the line and the consequences of that before it happens. You don’t want to be live A/B testing out in the world with these very consequential systems because unintended consequences may be quite severe. So I want us to move away as a field from a sort of move fast and break things attitude, which has maybe served the valley very well in the past and obviously created important innovations. But I think in this case, we want to be bold with the positive things that it can do and make sure we realize things like medicine and science and advancing all of those things whilst being responsible and thoughtful as far as possible with mitigating the risks.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:57:27
Yeah, and that’s why it seems like the responsible scaling policies are something that is a very good empirical way to precommit to these kinds of things.
Demis Hassabis 00:57:34
Yes, exactly.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:57:35
And I’m curious if you have a sense of, for example, when you’re doing these evaluations, if it turns out your next model could help a layperson build a pandemic class with bioweapon or something, how you would think, first of all, of making sure those weights are secure so that doesn’t get out. And second, what would have to be true for you to be comfortable deploying that system? How would you make sure that that latent capability isn’t exposed?
Demis Hassabis 00:57:58
Yeah, well, first, the secure model part I think we’ve covered with the cybersecurity and make sure that’s world-class and you’re monitoring all those things. I think if a capability was discovered like that through red teaming or external testing by government institutes or academia or whatever independent testers, then we would have to fix that loophole, depending on what it was, right? If that required more different kind of perhaps constitution or different guardrails or more RLHF to avoid that, or removing some training data, depending on what the problem is, I think there could be a number of mitigations. So the first part is making sure you detect it ahead of time so that’s about the right evaluations and right benchmarking and right testing. And then the question is how one would fix that before you deployed it.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:58:51
Sure.
Demis Hassabis 00:58:52
But I think it would need to be fixed before it was deployed generally, for sure, if that was an exposure surface.
Dwarkesh Patel 00:58:57
Right, final question. You’ve been thinking in terms of the end goal of AGI at a time when other people thought it was ridiculous in 2010. Now that we’re seeing this slow takeoff, where we’re actually seeing these generalization and intelligence, what is the psychologically seeing this? What has that been like? Has it just been sort of priced into your world model so it’s not new news for you? Or is it like actually just seeing it live, you’re like, wow, something’s really changed, or what does it feel like?
Demis Hassabis 00:59:24
Yeah, well, for me, yes, it’s already priced into my world model of how things were going to go, at least from the technology side. But obviously, we didn’t necessarily anticipate the general public would be that interested this early in the sequence. Right. Of things like, maybe one could think of if we were to produce more, if, say, Chat GPT and chatbots hadn’t kind of got the interest they had ended up getting, which I think was quite surprising to everyone that people were ready to use these things even though they were lacking in certain directions. Right. Impressive though they are, then we would have produced more specialized systems, I think, built off of the main track, like AlphaFold and AlphaGo, and so on, and our scientific work. And then I think the general public maybe would have only paid attention later down the road, where in a few years’ time, where we have more generally useful assistant-type systems. So that’s been interesting. So that’s created a different type of environment that we’re now all operating in as a field. And it’s a little bit more chaotic because there’s so many more things going on and there’s so much VC money going into it, and everyone’s sort of almost losing their minds over it. I think the only thing I worry about is I want to make sure that as a field, we act responsibly and thoughtfully and scientifically about this and use the scientific method to approach this in, as I said, an optimistic but careful way. And I think I’ve always believed that’s the right approach for something like AI, and I just hope that doesn’t get lost in this huge.
Dwarkesh Patel 01:00:59
Sure, sure. Well, I think that’s a great place to close. Demis, thank you so much for your time and for coming on the podcast.
Demis Hassabis 01:01:04
Thanks. It’s been a real pleasure.
You're currently a free subscriber to [Dwarkesh Podcast](https://substack.com/redirect/62ac104e-865f-45b6-84ac-25ae08b1af2a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). For the full experience, [upgrade your subscription.](https://substack.com/redirect/2/eyJlIjoiaHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuZHdhcmtlc2hwYXRlbC5jb20vc3Vic2NyaWJlP3V0bV9zb3VyY2U9cG9zdCZ1dG1fY2FtcGFpZ249ZW1haWwtY2hlY2tvdXQmbmV4dD1odHRwcyUzQSUyRiUyRnd3dy5kd2Fya2VzaHBhdGVsLmNvbSUyRnAlMkZkZW1pcy1oYXNzYWJpcyZyPThvNTRuJnRva2VuPWV5SjFjMlZ5WDJsa0lqb3hORFUyTXpNeE9Td2lhV0YwSWpveE56QTVNVE0zTVRBMkxDSmxlSEFpT2pFM01URTNNamt4TURZc0ltbHpjeUk2SW5CMVlpMDJPVE0wTlNJc0luTjFZaUk2SW1Ob1pXTnJiM1YwSW4wLktQVURGbVZMdHRNR1R4LU1jSWpLRlFUR1ZVaTFUTzdOdGkxOHRneUlqMDQiLCJwIjoxNDIxMTI4NjksInMiOjY5MzQ1LCJmIjp0cnVlLCJ1IjoxNDU2MzMxOSwiaWF0IjoxNzA5MTM3MTA2LCJleHAiOjE3MTE3MjkxMDYsImlzcyI6InB1Yi0wIiwic3ViIjoibGluay1yZWRpcmVjdCJ9.PriRtmmMHq3rHl8bPMvKGgqmZBVaJ5CegPaNdKRCzro?&utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email&utm_content=postcta)