---
subject: "India had too many telecom operators. India has too many TV channels."
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2019-10-01 02:35:48
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031"]
---
Let’s start with a simple exercise in free markets. What is the number of competitors that can exist in a market? Don’t tell me your answer.
Now, what is the number of profitable competitors that can exist in a market? What about the number of profitable competitors that can exist in a market with artificially limited customer reach? Let’s make the market aggressively regulated as well? And finally, a market that’s in the throes of a generational disruptive shift?
Once upon a while, less than a decade ago, India had 14 telecom operators. Then came a wave of closures, sales and court-ordered shutdowns. Today, that’s down to anywhere between 3 to 3.5, depending on how you count or who you ask.
India’s TV industry finds itself in a similar position today. There are over 900 channels, but viewership is clustered around the top 50-100 channels. And thanks to the rise of always-on high-speed broadband, more Indians are electing to consume “television” via the Internet, instead of via cable or satellite TV.
How many of those 900 channels can exist in the market? How many can exist profitably? How many can exist with price caps? Independently, without being part of a discounted bouquet?
Well, that’s today’s story by Pratap and Pranav. They start with telecom and media regulator TRAI’s decision last year to help consumers reduce their monthly TV bills which have ironically ended up achieving pretty much the exact opposite. In its zeal to prevent larger media groups from bundling their lemon channels with their apples, TRAI seems to have helped them and large telcos like Jio and Bharti Airtel. “All small channels will shut down. The small operators will die,” said one executive with a DTH provider. “This regulation will create monopolies. You are making sure that only people with deep pockets will survive,” the executive added.
PS: In the past weeks, we've been making one story free each day for a particular cohort. Today, that story is our piece on TRAI's broadcast tariff order shortly before it went into effect late last year. If you work at Star TV, Hotstar, Reliance, Airtel, or Netflix, the story is [free](http://link.the-ken.com/uni/wf/click?upn=HQSq6eeRV1xAVaGuFOahuNCZVVXPeP-2FJpSqxhvIUDrk1dbV5ZD-2BnXPqIeMz7MQjXNkeW1OU0qoLet8b-2FLSeOXw1tdbKclRsIk9kdDSHS6RE8zCr9NilKZtAOZ9C0smGG9hp3676R2k1ZlVHBVHgi5zLbRbR076qH7C0wAzLjHd0-3D_S4jLOsNx-2Fv6Jev2nvow8b7P9pBCWGd8KNZfb200gkZLQNlXQHio0noZzXtsWoloZmPWeyZsh7a4QCV9ufwCUKi00jlBT0uEdvwYDMuVuqcMzsvkaHZptrixH4Y-2B3DzHzikOWGw2Jv1FMiHAGeCsagUszea-2FsQDOnuyp5D72ccBJJJdlcmNpEfila9ChtMPtHW0QhY0oLD-2BUJCJjcmKbNbQjjCOgYv-2Bf-2FuxuPzwhwHrCFeGAl2AJEpR79TFsymU0BlBZCqq5efz68rrCXNis8z6NGnu5H3VuEFOPr0s1xQx2y6OHFN6FpTmwE4IphH7QOpJZrmWLxwyb-2FRoEoZkR6kihJajKrSm4O7DJwyOvhEO9CiCNrb4PVl0JAjaTm2T9MfjJI8Ck8WWqDpm1irmFKY-2F5ipQTbfbuTTI-2FEHn7BBRI-3D) for you only for today. Know anyone who works at these companies? Share it with them.