---
subject: "Time for a Change"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-03-05 14:24:40
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Thanks for reading! To support my work, please click the button below: If you want to help keep this project going, please consider purchasing a paid subscription. Paid subscribers — it’s only about 75 cents a week! — get access to the archives, the satisfaction of supporting work they enjoy, and my undying gratitude. For reasons that aren’t entirely clear to me, the United Cigar Stores Company was really into Daylight Saving Time. The company seems to have been very patriotic during World War I, holding a “Wake Up America!” parade just a couple of weeks after the United States joined the war in 1917. It also printed advertisements that encouraged people to buy liberty bonds: That’s all well and good, but for some reason, this purveyor of cigars seemed especially enamored of changing the nation’s clocks. The company encouraged Americans to write their members of Congress to petition for the change: And, once Congress passed the law, they published a number of posters designed to make sure that people would follow the new time system: You can choose to admire the dedication of the United Cigar Stores Company to the concept of daylight savings time, or you can, like me, be a little bit baffled by it. Come to think of it, we still don’t know what to think about daylight savings time — in recent years, there have been For most of human history, time was subjective. In many pre-modern societies, hours didn’t have a fixed length — people would just This way of keeping time worked for a while, but globalization and technology forced people to look for a new system. It now seemed necessary to make time universal. The first attempt to standardize time was the creation of Greenwich Mean Time. As the British Empire grew, it became more important for travelers to have a common reference for time; this helped with mapmaking and navigation. So the Royal Observatory in Greenwich, England, around which the system of longitude was built (it sits at the Prime Meridian), became the standard time for the entire empire. At first, Greenwich Mean Time was used mostly by navigators — ships would have two clocks, one set to local time and the other set to GMT. But, as time went on, more and more people ended up under the sway of Greenwich Mean Time. Imperial officials tried to impose this standard system of time on the entire British Empire; they believed that local practices were confusing and chaotic. But their efforts weren’t welcomed as helpful; in fact, they often led to fierce resistance. The British governor of A couple of decades later, in 1905, the British tried to impose Indian Standard Time which was, of course, linked to GMT. The people of Bombay again pushed back, calling the change a “despotic measure.” One This didn’t only happen in India. Irish people complained bitterly about having to go by British time, and, outside of the British Empire, other countries were not keen on aligning themselves with a British measure. Some of these efforts are entertainingly petty, as when Germans adopted mitteleuropaische Zeit — signifying that Germany, not England, was at the center of European culture — and, my favorite, when the French The fact that the railroad was the impetus for the first British attempt to introduce standard time to Bombay was not an anomaly — trains were the reason for most of the early attempts to standardize timekeeping. The reason for this was very practical. it was easy enough to keep track of the local time in, say, Philadelphia, or to travel to Pittsburgh and sync up with the way time was kept there, but imagine having to run a railroad and schedule a train that made its way across Pennsylvania. You’d have to accommodate your timetables to the fact that the time in Pittsburgh was a few minutes off of the time in Harrisburg, which was a few minutes off of the time in Reading, and so on. This chart from an 1857 copy of Dinsmore’s American Railroad and Steam Navigation Guide and Route-Book gives a sense of the complexity of timekeeping across geographical expanses: So the railroads came up with a solution: time zones! The country was carved up into four zones in 1883. They were based more on railroad routes and territory than political boundaries, as you can see in this 1913 map: Though the zones have become a little more logical over time, they still carry this legacy — which is why, for example, northwestern Indiana is in the central time zone with Chicago, not eastern time like the rest of the state. Though “railroad time” made sense to the railroads, a lot of people found it abhorrent. The backlash mixed local provincialism with a feeling that “natural time” was being subordinated to the needs of corporations and machines. Some of the pushback was pretty hyperbolic, which gives a sense of how upset people were by the invention of time zones. This paragraph from the
The As a practical matter, adjusting to railroad time wasn’t easy. Check out this sample of the The railroads won, of course, but it took a while. Some towns held out, as did many individuals. The time zones didn’t make their way into federal law until 1918. The World Wars were the last major showdown in the time wars, as people battled over the United Cigar Company’s favorite wartime innovation, daylight saving time. The idea of springing clocks forward to allow extra hours of daylight dates back to the late 1800s, when George Hudson, a postal worker who loved to engage in entomology in his free time, petitioned the New Zealand government to change the clocks in the summer so that he would have more time after work to look for bugs. Though he was unsuccessful, a British builder (and great-great-grandfather of the lead singer of Coldplay) named William Willett proposed “British Summer Time,” which, in his formulation, would involve shifting the clocks forward by 20 minutes four separate times in the year. He published a pamphlet making his case in 1912: Some local governments tried versions of Willett’s plan, but the idea didn’t really go anywhere until war broke out in 1914. Germany first introduced daylight saving time as an energy-conservation measure in 1916. The government promoted it via postcards like this: The UK and, to the delight of United Cigar, the United States, followed soon after. Like the other changes, daylight saving time required explanation, as in this This change, like all the others, also provoked backlash. Vanessa Ogle’s great book
A British journalist balked at having his life controlled by bureaucrats, saying that the law “proposes to put us to bed and get us up by Act of Parliament. Personally, I like to choose my own time for these operations.” Though retailers liked daylight saving time, farmers, especially, hated it. Since their work was regulated by natural rhythms and the needs of animals that didn’t understand the need for wartime energy savings, they pushed back against the changes. Part of their resistance was practical, but some of it reflected the feeling that traditional ways of life were slipping away, and the needs of cities and factories were dictating even the ancient rhythms of the farmer. One person complained that the new system of time was created for “a few bloated millionaires who cannot be got out of bed.” After World War I, most national systems of daylight saving time disappeared, although some localities kept them. In the United States, Congress repealed daylight saving time, overriding a veto by Woodrow Wilson, but cities like New York and Chicago retained it because it helped their financial markets to be open at the same time as London’s. Daylight saving came back during World War II, then was dropped again at the end of the war. The United States didn’t permanently adopt daylight saving time until 1966, although municipalities don’t have to follow it. Arizona is the most significant holdout against it today. Now, we’re contemplating changing our system again — either by getting rid of daylight saving time or adopting it permanently. Those who want to stop changing our clocks make several arguments: Changing our clocks is [dangerous to our health](https://substack.com/redirect/e1f1187e-b2af-44bd-bc11-a621ba8e283a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), causing an increase in traffic accidents and heart attacks.It’s [unclear](https://substack.com/redirect/20ad8fd6-7c3b-4c23-a00e-5d831c25c2eb?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)whether the switch actually saves energy — at the very least, the evidence is inconclusive.Farmers still [hate](https://substack.com/redirect/17ca9467-01f2-431c-b95b-8ac74148f1e7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)it.And it’s inconvenient; if there aren’t many benefits, why go through all the messiness of springing forward and falling back?
In 2022, Congress considered the Whatever we decide, it’s a fair bet that there will be plenty of pushback. History shows that people don’t like anybody messing with their time. This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: Or you can share the newsletter with others: Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week! This piece was also published You're currently a free subscriber to |