---
subject: "Yay Adaptivist Activists"
from: "Robin Hanson from Overcoming Bias <overcomingbias@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-09-09 00:07:55
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Overcoming Bias", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8616244883382228708", "UNREAD"]
---
DNA evolution takes place both within and between species, with the between part mattering more for long-term innovation. Similarly, human cultural evolution On reflection, out of these four parameters the one that seems most promising to improve soon is that last one, the rate at which our shared cultural features, and especially of our global elite monoculture, change due to internal processes that don’t seem very aligned with adaptive pressures. And for well over a century the core driver of this process has been: activism. We now reserve our highest honors for activists who lead and inspire groups that push and advocate for changes to our cultures, and such activism has in fact caused much higher rates of cultural change. (More than is induced by tech change.) A key cause of this rise of activism In cultural conflicts between generations over the last century or so, the older generation only As our world is changing fast today, we should want to see adaptivist activists, who try to adapt our cultures to the fast changing conditions of our world. But we should be much more wary of other kinds of activists, such as those who try to change our values, as those changes are less plausibly adaptive. A simple ancestor test: could our ancestors of a century or two ago have been persuaded to make a changes as a way to better achieve its values? If yes, this is more plausibly an adaptive change. In a This makes sense, as youths feel less expert at judging the world and how it has changed, relative to judging their feelings on what morals feel right. When their elders disagree with them there, young folks tend to explain that as older folks becoming corrupted with age, or lacking the energy to stand up for what’s right. So youth movements gravitate to pushing for less-plausibly-adaptive value changes. Youth-movement-driven non-adaptive activism is thus plausibly the main driver of one of the four key cultural evolution parameters that have gone bad. And compared to the other three parameters of selection pressure, cultural variety, and context change, this one seems to me easier (though far from easy) to change, and to inspire folks to want to change it. Which leads me to focus now on this as a way to move people to fix cultural drift. In principle, one solution would be to prevent high school and college age youths from socializing with each other. Alas, while ending such schools and pushing kids into earlier jobs might have worked a century ago, today we’d also need to keep them from socializing via social media. And ending high school seems crazy hard to achieve. A more promising approach seems to me to grow a cultural adaptivist activist movement to in general promote adaptive, and resist maladaptive, change. And more specifically to convince older folks, who are now much more numerous than youth due to rising lifespans and falling fertility, to defer much less to youth re cultural changes, and to be especially wary of value change activism. Yes, this does seem a big ask, and yes even changing this one of the four key cultural evolution parameters may not be enough to fix cultural drift. But if we can’t even change this, the larger goal of fixing cultural drift does look hopeless. Best then to just accept that our civ will fall and be replaced by folks like the Amish and Haredim, who will discard much of what we cherish about our current world monoculture. Some have complained to me that the concept of “adaptive” seems to them too vague to be the basis of a social movement. But it is a core concept in evolutionary biology, a academic field that has been quite well accepted and established for well over a century. Yes, it can be hard to decide in specific cases which design features are more adaptive, but some cases are pretty clear, and our world is full of conceptually clear concepts that are often hard to estimate in particular cases. I see two practical ways to ground the “adaptive” concept for social application, one anchored in the past, the other in the future. The past anchor is tied to the ancestor test I described above: ask if our ancestors from centuries ago could have been convinced to adopt the change, using their values. Distrust proposed changes that fail this test. And perhaps also revert already adopted changes that fail it. The future anchor is to, as I’ve previously suggested, adopt a more effective form of governance, such as perhaps futarchy, So can we jumpstart an adaptivist activist social movement to distrust and resist youthful value-changing activism, if it does not meed the ancestor test, and/or to adopt a governance mechanism tied to a metric at odds with civilization collapse? I don’t know, but these seem to me options worth exploring. You're currently a free subscriber to |