---
subject: "Why the U.S. Can’t Build Icebreaking Ships"
from: "Construction Physics <constructionphysics@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-09-26 12:04:04
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Construction Physics", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8588207018748827248", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
I want to say thank you to all the people who sent condolences following - The U.S. has interests in regions all around the globe. Perhaps none are more remote than the polar region: areas near or in the Arctic and Antarctic Circles. Roughly 1/3rd of Alaska is within the Arctic Circle, and though only around In the Antarctic, the U.S. operates three research facilities: McMurdo Station, Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station, and Palmer Station. McMurdo Station is the The U.S. isn’t the only country with major polar interests. Roughly Because polar bodies of water are often covered in ice, accessing these regions by ship requires specially designed ships which can break up the ice and create a path for other ships to follow. The need for icebreaking vessels will remain even as climate change reduces the extent of sea ice: paradoxically, as new polar routes become accessible and sea ice becomes more mobile, the demand for icebreakers is likely to increase. Russia has an aging fleet of more than The U.S., on the other hand, has allowed its icebreaking capabilities to wither. The Coast Guard has handled all U.S. icebreaking since 1966, and estimates that it needs 8-9 polar icebreakers (4-5 heavy and 4-5 medium) to fulfill its needs. But it currently has only two: the heavy icebreaker And while the U.S. is trying to remedy this with a How an icebreaker worksAn icebreaker is exactly what it sounds like; a ship designed to break up ice, either to create a passage for itself or to create a channel for other ships to follow. A ship might be designed primarily for icebreaking (like the Polar Classification for Icebreaking Ships Create interactive, responsive & beautiful charts — no code required. Breaking ice requires a host of specific design features. Traditional icebreakers pair high-powered engines with specially shaped hulls designed to create downward pressure over the top of the ice, breaking it apart under high tensile forces, as ice is weak in tension. For particularly thick ice, or ice ridges, the entire front of the icebreaker may be driven up onto the ice, breaking the ice beneath it. The hull and ship structure must be strong enough to withstand the impact of ice, and a heavily reinforced “ The development of rotatable “azimuth” thrusters in the late 1980s, sometimes known as The specialized design requirements and equipment make icebreaker ship design and construction a specialized field of expertise. A relatively small number of shipbuilders are responsible for the lion’s share of icebreaker design and construction. By far the most experienced icebreaker builder in the world is Finland. Because Finland’s entire coast can freeze during the winter, and because Finland depends on sea transport for over 90% of its History of U.S. icebreakersShips designed to break up ice became possible with the advent of steam power. The U.S. built the first icebreaker in the world, the steam powered In the 1960s, as the Wind-class ships aged, the Coast Guard began to consider their replacement, and in 1971 awarded a contract to Lockheed shipbuilding for the new Polar-class icebreakers, designed to be “the world’s most powerful icebreakers.” The first Polar-class ship, the Polar Star, was commissioned in 1976, followed by the In the 1990s, funding was allocated for another icebreaker, the medium icebreaker Healy, which was completed in 1999. Since then, no new polar icebreakers have been built in the U.S. Both the Polar Sea and the Polar Star continued to operate until 2010, when the Polar Sea suffered a catastrophic breakdown of its engines. Since then, it has been in drydock, acting as a source of spare parts for the Polar Star, as many of those parts are no longer manufactured. The Polar Star is far past its original service life, and it must spend nearly all its time between McMurdo Station missions being repaired. During a major refurbishment of the Polar Star in 2010, the head of the Coast Guard stated that “it’s a little uncertain to me how many more years we can get out of her in her current condition.” That was 14 years ago; today the Polar Star remains America’s only heavy icebreaker, and the only U.S. ship that can clear a path through the ice to resupply McMurdo Station. The Polar Security Cutter programTo replace its aging icebreakers with a new, larger fleet of ships, in 2013 the Coast Guard initiated its In a report and testimony, the GAO U.S.-based designers and shipbuilders generally lacked experience designing and building heavy polar icebreakers. The ship design is complex, including that it used a specialized steel alloy that required technical study and development of new welding procedures before use. The shipbuilder overestimated the extent to which it could leverage the original design and had to make significant design changes to meet government specifications, according to program officials. The shipbuilder also made some design errors, such as selecting the wrong height for the lowest deck of the ship, which required significant, late redesign to correct. COVID-19 restrictions limited the extent to which the shipbuilder could collaborate and consult with its domestic and international partners.
Notably, VT Halter Marine lost $256 million between 2017 and 2021, after which it was bought for a song (just $15 million) by Originally, the Polar Security Cutters were expected to cost $800-$900 million per ship ($1.1-$1.3 billion in 2024 dollars), but current cost estimates are closer to $1.7-1.9 billion, and given that construction hasn’t started yet, this is likely to rise. And it’s unclear if that 2029 date will be hit either. The By contrast, a Finnish shipyard can build a heavy icebreaker for just a few hundred million dollars, and deliver it within two years, instead of 10 or more. However, the Coast Guard opted not to pursue a foreign manufacturer, instead choosing a U.S. shipyard. The culprit here isn’t the Jones Act, but another protectionist shipbuilding law that requires Naval and Coast Guard ships to be built in U.S. shipyards. It’s possible to waive this requirement via Barring acquiring Finnish icebreakers, the next best option for the U.S. icebreaker program would have been awarding the contract to a team that had icebreaker experience. Finnish shipbuilding firms previously assisted during the design and construction of the The U.S. has made some gestures to try and improve its icebreaker construction with the ConclusionWith icebreakers, we see a microcosm of We also see the same cultural issues that we saw with American shipbuilding more broadly. There seems to be a lack of motivation to take maritime issues seriously or treat them as important. For decades, the U.S. has been willing to accept an undersized icebreaker fleet – complaints about insufficient icebreakers As a result, icebreaking can be added to the list of things like Much of this information comes from Peter Rybski’s substack, For those interested in reading more about icebreakers, and about shipbuilding, a recommended reading list is 1 Per Peter Rybski: “Icebreaker is rather hard to define. There is the 'popular' method, in which all ice-capable ships are called icebreakers. There is a 'technical' method, in which only vessels that are classified as icebreakers (as opposed to only Polar Class) are icebreakers. And there is a third method (which is sometimes used with older vessels – before the Polar Code – based on the purpose of the vessel).” Construction Physics articles will always remain free, but if you find this work valuable, I encourage you to Construction Physics is produced in partnership with the Institute for Progress, a Washington, DC-based think tank. You can learn more about their work by visiting their You can also contact me on |