---
subject: "Open Loops, Main Character Energy, & More"
from: "\"Sahil Bloom's Curiosity Chronicle\" <sahil@sahilbloom.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-07-14 13:11:07
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Sahil Bloom", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_1989028747625928812", "UNREAD"]
---
The Curse of Knowledge, Open Loops, & Moreread on read time 4 minutes Here are 5 interesting ideas to spark your curiosity heading into the weekend. Today at a Glance:- Question: Main character energy.
- Quote: Stand and face life.
- Framework: The Curse of Knowledge.
- Tweet: Managing Open Loops.
- Article: Lessons from 30-year reunion.
It all started when I was looking for a snack that was delicious and incredibly healthy. That search led me to today’s sponsor, House of Macadamias - the tastiest and healthiest nuts around, supported by a wide array of researchers and thought leaders across the health, fitness, and business landscape. Health fanatics like Bryan Johnson, the world record epigenetic age-reducer, swear by the power of eating macadamias daily. These tasty nuts are chock-full of rare omega 7s linked to longevity, and they’re also the number one source of heart-healthy monounsaturated fats, making them a must-have in any healthy diet. House of Macadamias takes pride in partnering with over 90 farmers who own the brand, allowing them to source only the finest, premium-quality nuts with unrivaled flavor. Their macadamia nuts, bars, and butters feature no added sugar or artificial ingredients, ensuring you’re only consuming the best of the best. Now for a limited time, you can receive 20% off your entire purchase with code: SAHIL. You’ll even get a free box of Namibian Sea Salted Macadamias worth $35.
Question to build main character energy:If you were the main character in a movie of your life, what would the audience be screaming at you to do right now? We've all been there... We're watching a movie or reading a book and the main character is clearly off course. We start to feel that internal urge to scream at them: - "No, don't open that door!"
- "Drive to the airport, don't let her go!"
- "Forget about him, you have bigger things ahead!"
The bird's-eye view perspective on the main character's situation provides a unique vantage point—an ability to see the landscape around them and the bigger picture. It may sound crazy, but we are all that main character—and our audience would be screaming something at us right now. What is it? What are they screaming at you? What insight does the bird's-eye view perspective provide that we are missing on the ground? We all need to think about this from time to time. We all need to detach ourselves from our situation and see it through someone else's eyes. Perspective is everything. Remember: When in doubt, zoom out. Quote to stand and face life:"I urge you to find a way to immerse yourself fully in the life that you’ve been given. To stop running from whatever you’re trying to escape, and instead to stop, and turn, and face whatever it is." — Anna Lembke Run and you'll never find peace. Fight and you just might. Framework for effective teaching:The Curse of KnowledgeThe Curse of Knowledge is a common cognitive bias that hinders effective communication and understanding. It occurs when a person with certain knowledge or expertise in a domain struggles to put themselves in the shoes of someone with less knowledge on the subject, thus making them unable to explain or teach in an effective manner for those still coming up the learning curve. In simple terms, it's a mental block that prevents a person from explaining something in a way that others can easily grasp. They are literally “cursed” with knowledge that prevents them from teaching effectively. The Curse of Knowledge is particularly prevalent with business leaders, professors, or "experts" of specific fields. When trying to explain or convey complex ideas, they have an unfounded assumption that the audience has a baseline level of understanding. They become so accustomed to the jargon, intricacies, and nuances that they forget how daunting it can be for novices. It typically leads to frustration and cultural tension on both sides of the relationship: The expert grows frustrated at the inability of the learners to understand, and the learners grow frustrated at the inability of the expert to convey the material in simple enough terms. To overcome the Curse of Knowledge: - As an expert, step back and remind yourself of what it feels like to be a beginner. Use the
[Feynman Technique](https://click.convertkit-mail4.com/zluq9ee70xsnh4el6xxfzu0/m2h7h5h89299lnhm/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuc2FoaWxibG9vbS5jb20vbmV3c2xldHRlci90aGUtZmV5bm1hbi10ZWNobmlxdWU=)and leverage simple language, relatable examples, and minimal jargon. Simple is beautiful. - As a learner, communicate openly on the gaps in your foundational understanding of a more advanced topic. If you're in a group setting, chances are that someone else is feeling the same way and just afraid to say it.
Recognizing the Curse of Knowledge empowers us to become better teachers, communicators, and leaders. It encourages us to bridge the gap between expertise and understanding, promoting inclusivity and knowledge-sharing. Tweet on managing attention killers:Interesting Practical advice for managing Open Loops and their negative impact on your life. Article on 30 years of wisdom: I have my 10-year college reunion coming up in October, so this article really struck a chord. A few of my favorites from the list: - "No one’s life turned out exactly as anticipated, not even for the most ardent planner."
- "We have all become far more generous with our I love you’s. They flew freely at the reunion. We don’t ration them out to only our intimates now, it seems; we have expanded our understanding of what love is, making room for long-lost friends."
- "Nearly all the alumni said they were embarrassed by their younger selves, particularly by how judgmental they used to be."
- "Love is not all you need, but as one classmate told me, 'it definitely helps.'"
Well worth a few minutes of your time this weekend. Refer Friends, Earn Rewards!
If you enjoyed today's newsletter, please share it with your friends and family! If this email was forwarded to you, consider |