---
subject: "AI Companion Piece"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-07-28 12:25:36
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
AI companions, other forms of personalized AI content and persuasion and related issues continue to be a hot topic. What do people use companions for? Are we headed for a goonpocalypse? Mostly no, companions are used mostly not used for romantic relationships or erotica, although perhaps that could change. How worried should we be about personalization maximized for persuasion or engagement? Table of ContentsPersuasion Should Be In Your Preparedness Framework
Zero is on the y-axis, so this is a big boost.
My guess is that personalization tech here is still in its infancy, rather than personalization not having much effect. Kobi agrees with this downthread.
Well yeah, that makes sense.
As does that.
Personalization By Default Gets Used To Maximize EngagementWe need to be on notice for personalization effects on persuasion growing larger over time, as more effective ways of utilizing the information are found. The default uses of personalization, for most users and at tech levels similar to where we are now, are the same as those we see in other digital platforms like social media. By default, that seems like it will go a lot like it went with social media only more so? Which is far from my biggest concern, but is a very real concern. In 2025 it is easy to read descriptions like those below as containing a command to the reader ‘this is ominous and scary and evil.’ Try to avoid this, and treat it purely as a factual description.
The memory features can be persistent in more ways than one.
Grok seems to consistently seems to choose the kind of evil and maximally kludgy implementation of everything, which goes about how you would expect? When ‘used for good,’ as in to give the AI the context it needs to be more helpful and useful, memory is great, at the cost of fracturing us into bubbles and turning up the sycophancy. The bigger problem is that the incentives are to push this much farther:
As is often the case, the question is whether bad will drive out good versus vice versa. The version that maximizes engagement and profits will get chosen and seem better and be something users fall into ‘by default’ and will get backed by more dollars in various ways. Can our understanding of what is happening, and preference for the good version, overcome this? One could also fire back that a lot of this is good, actually. Consider this argument:
Now ask, why think that is harmful? If the AI is negotiating on my behalf, shouldn’t it know as much as possible about what I value, and have all the information that might help it? Shouldn’t I want that? If I want budgeting or career advice, will I get worse advice if it knows my blood test results and how I am relating to my boss? Won’t I get better, more useful answers? Wouldn’t a human take that information into account? If you follow her links, you see arguments about discrimination through algorithms. Wouldn’t the user want this kind of discrimination to the extent it reflected their own real preferences? You can make a few arguments why we should object anyway. Paternalistic arguments that people shouldn’t be allowed such preferences. Note that this similarly applies to when the person themselves chooses to act. Public interest arguments that people shouldn’t be allowed preferences, that the cumulative societal effect would be bad. Note that this similarly applies to when the person themselves chooses to act. Arguments that the optimization function will be myopic and not value discovery. Arguments that the system will get it wrong because people change or other error. Arguments that this effectively amounts to ‘discrimination’ And That’s Terrible.
I notice that I am by default not sympathetic to any of those arguments. If (and it’s a big if) we think that the system is optimizing as best it can for user preferences, that seems like something it should be allowed to do. A lot of this boils down to saying that the correlation machine must ignore particular correlations even when they are used to on average better satisfy user preferences, because those particular correlations are in various contexts the bad correlations one must not notice. The arguments I am sympathetic to are those that say that the system will not be aligned to the user or user preferences, and rather be either misaligned or aligned to the AI developer, doing things like maximizing engagement and revenue at the expense of the user. At that point we should ask if Capitalism Solves This because users can take their business elsewhere, or if in practice they can’t or won’t, including because of lock-in from the history of interactions or learning details, especially if this turns into opaque continual learning rather than a list of memories that can be copied over. Contrast this to the network effects of social media. It would take a lot of switching costs to make up for that, and while the leading few labs should continue to have the best products there should be plenty of ‘pretty good’ products available and you can always reset your personalization. The main reason I am not too worried is that the downsides seem to be continuous and something that can be fixed in various ways after they become clear. Thus they are something we can probably muddle through. Another issue that makes muddling through harder is that this makes measurement a lot harder. Almost all evaluations and tests are run on unpersonalized systems. If
This might be the real problem. We have a hard enough time getting minimal testing on default settings. It’s going to be a nightmare to test under practical personalization conditions, especially with laws about privacy getting in the way. As she notes in her conclusion, the harms involved here are not new. Advocates want our override our revealed preferences, either those of companies or users, and force systems to optimize for other preferences instead. Sometimes this is in a way the users would endorse, other times not. In which cases should we force them to do this? CompanionSo how is this companion thing going in practice? Keep in mind selection effects.
Those are rather huge numbers. Half of teens use them a few times a month. Wow.
What are they using them for? Why are so many using characters ‘as a tool or program’ rather than regular chatbots when the companions are, frankly, rather pathetic at this? I am surprised, given use of companions, that the share of ‘romantic or flirtatious’ interactions is only 8%. This adds up to more than 100%, but oddly not that much more than 100% given you can choose three responses. This distribution of use cases seems relatively healthy. Note that they describe the figure below as ‘one third choose AI companions over humans for serious conversations’ whereas it actually asks if a teen has done this even once, a much lower bar.
Goonpocalypse Now
This and the full post Whereas if you look at the numbers in the study above, it’s clear that mostly no, even among interactions with AIs, at least for now we are not primarily dealing with a Goonpocalypse, we are dealing with much more PG-rated problems. It’s always fun to watch people go ‘oh no having lots smarter than human machines running around that can outcompete and outsmart us at everything is nothing to worry about, all you crazy doomers are worried for no reason about an AI apocalypse. Except oh no what are we going to do about [X] it’s the apocalypse’ or in this case the Goonpocalypse. And um, great, I guess, welcome to the ‘this might have some unfortunate equilibria to worry about’ club?
I mean, yeah, sounds about right, that’s what everyone reports. I’m sure he’s going to respond by having a normal one.
Is it, though? I understand that (his example he points to) OnlyFans exists and AI is generating a lot of the responses when uses message the e-girls, but I do not see this as a dangerous amount of ‘banging robots’? This one seems like something straight out of the Pessimists Archive, warning of the atomizing dangers of… the telephone?
It is easy to understand the central concern and be worried about the societal implications of widespread AI companions and intelligent sex robots. But if you think we are this easy to get got, perhaps you should be at least as worried about other things, as well? What is so special about the gooning? I don’t think the gooning in particular is even a major problem as such. I’m much more worried about the rest of the AI companion experience. Will the xAI male or female ‘companion’ be more popular?
Her doing this could be good or bad for her prospects, it is not as if she was swimming in boyfriends before.
I do think some of them absolutely will. And others will use both in different situations. But I continue to have faith that if we offer a quality life affirming product, a lot of people will choose it, and social norms and dynamics will encourage this.
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse SoonThis seems to be one place where offense is crushing defense, and continuous growth in capabilities (both for GPT-4o style sycophancy and psychosis issues, or for companions, or anything else) is not helping, there is no meaningful defense going on:
This seems right to me. First the problems will get severe enough to cause real damage, then perhaps people will try to construct reasonable defenses. But what would those be? How are you going to use AI to stop these issues? (And yes, I’m actually asking, and no explaining what the AI companies could do doesn’t count unless there is a way to get them to do it.) If you’re wondering ‘does Grok ever decide maybe not to share what it is thinking of because that would be a bad idea?’
I mean, I guess this is a brave and bold principled ‘truth telling AI’ stand?
Okay, yeah, but maybe no, don’t do that? This is not okay for a consumer product? A funny one here is Grok’s suggestion to name the male xAI companion, wait for it because you’d never guess, ‘Adolf Hitler.’ Yes, it was asked for a name ‘that most people will strongly dislike’ so you can say it was provoked, but also it was asked for it to be ‘cool’ and frankly this keeps happening with that one name over and over again?
Also, my lord, ffs, how is this the only praised reply:
So, we’re considering going with the Greek goddess of night, the home of the gods in Theros, oh and the shadow entity that people who don’t want to live collectively call upon to end the world in Persona 3. Meanwhile, OpenAI is building Stargate and Meta is building Hyperion. They’re trying to tell you something. Listen. You're currently a free subscriber to |