---
subject: "AI #72: Denying the Future"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-07-11 14:53:54
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
The Future. It is coming. A surprising number of economists deny this when it comes to AI. Not only do they deny the future that lies in the future. They also deny the future that is here, but which is unevenly distributed. Their predictions and projections do not factor in even what the AI can already do, let alone what it will learn to do later on. Another likely future event is the repeal of the Biden Executive Order. That repeal is part of the Republican platform, and Trump is the favorite to win the election. We must act on the assumption that the order likely will be repealed, with no expectation of similar principles being enshrined in federal law. Then there are the other core problems we will have to solve, and other less core problems such as what to do about AI companions. They make people feel less lonely over a week, but what do they do over a lifetime? Also I don’t have that much to say about it now, but it is worth noting that this week it was revealed Apple was going to get an observer board seat at OpenAI… and then both Apple and Microsoft gave up their observer seats. Presumably that is about antitrust and worrying the seats would be a bad look. There could also be more to it. Table of ContentsIntroduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. Long as you avoid GPT-3.5. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. Many mistakes will not be caught. You’re a Nudge. You say it’s for my own good. Fun With Image Generation. Universal control net for SDXL. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. Owner of a lonely bot. They Took Our Jobs. Restaurants. Get Involved. But not in that way. Introducing. Anthropic ships several new features. In Other AI News. Microsoft and Apple give up OpenAI board observer seats. Quiet Speculations. As other papers learned, to keep pace, you must move fast. The AI Denialist Economists. Why doubt only the future? Doubt the present too. The Quest for Sane Regulation. EU and FTC decide that things are their business. Trump Would Repeal the Biden Executive Order on AI. We can’t rely on it. Ordinary Americans Are Worried About AI. Every poll says the same thing. The Week in Audio. Carl Shulman on 80,000 hours was a two parter. The Wikipedia War. One obsessed man can do quite a lot of damage. Rhetorical Innovation. Yoshua Bengio gives a strong effort. Evaluations Must Mimic Relevant Conditions. Too often they don’t. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. Stealth fine tuning. The Problem. If we want to survive, it must be solved. Oh Anthropic. Non Disparagement agreements should not be covered by NDAs. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Don’t feel the AGI.
Language Models Offer Mundane UtilityYes, they are highly useful for coding. It turns out that Tests failing in GPT-3.5 is the AI equivalent of “IN MICE” except for IQ tests. If you are going to analyze the state of AI, you need to keep an eye out for basic errors and always always check which model is used. So
Then even if you hadn’t realized or checked before (which you really should have), you need to notice that this says 2021, which is very much not the current knowledge cutoff, and realize this is not GPT-4o or even an older GPT-4. You can also notice that the statement is Obvious Nonsense and people are now using ChatGPT (and increasingly Claude 3.5 Sonnet) this way all the time. I also like this way of putting the value of AI for coding:
I definitely would not take it over touch typing in general, but if it was touch typing while typing code in particular I would take that deal because I can copy/paste outputs into the code window. On the others it is not even close.
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
The worry is Gell-Mann Amnesia. The good news is that being only subtly wrong is a huge improvement over one’s state of knowledge for most questions in most areas. The default state is either very wrong or not even wrong. Now you get to be subtly wrong and worry about mistakes and hallucinations. That’s a huge improvement. The key is not taking it too credibly.
You type out the question (or speak it) because you do not know which buttons to click from the account page. Daniel and I, and most of you reading this, are frequent power users and voluntary users of menus. Most people aren’t. Even for us, there are times when we do not yet know the menu item in question. So I do appreciate these bad AIs, even implemented poorly, when they are fully optional. When they actively force the bot on you, it becomes ‘how do you get to a human,’ and that too is a skill. No,
You’re a NudgeSam Altman joins forces with Ariana Huffington (?!) to write a Time article about how AI can help with healthcare.
As far as I can tell the whole thing is essentially a nudge engine? The goal is to point out to people they should be making ‘healthier choices,’ according to Thrive’s beliefs about what that means. I suppose that is good on the margin, versus a nudge engine for healthier choices that doesn’t take context into account, if you can ‘automagically’ do that. But how is the AI going to get all that info, and what else might it get used for? There are answers I can come up with. I don’t love them. Fun with Image Generation
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
The key questions are thus not addressed. The most important is, does this develop skills and habits that enable better and more human interactions in the long term, or does it create dependence and tolerance and alienation from human interactions? Which effect dominates and to what extent? Having an impact short term ‘gets you in the door’ but the long term effects are almost all of what matters. Fell into the slop trap?
First we had small social worlds where everyone was constantly watched and you had to act accordingly. Then we got computers where you could do what you want. Now the algorithms watch us, so we have to take it all into account once again. The good news is you can brute force it in some cases. I sometimes wonder if I should have multiple YouTube accounts for different purposes.
The obvious question is, if you think your creation is too harmful or dangerous to release even though it is clearly useful, why would you tell others how you did it?
The examples the FBI lists are bizarre. This is not the top shelf Russian propaganda. These are claims that might play inside Russia, but I would expect to backfire when shared in the United States. A video of Putin claiming parts of Poland and the Baltics were ‘gifts from Stalin’? What is that message hoping to accomplish? The other question is, what is the ratio of cost to detect and shut down this ‘bot network’ to the cost to spin up a new one? No one involved had their computers taken away and no one got arrested, since Russia is not exactly cooperating. It is not exactly hard to create 968 social media accounts, even if there is some time lag before they become ‘fully functional.’ Thus the main thing happening here, as far as I can tell, is the narrative of the Russian Bot. As in, the Russian bot network is teaming up with the FBI to tell people there exist Russian bots. That is the main actual message. Doesn’t seem like an equilibrium? They Took Our Jobs
Get InvolvedNot in that way: Introducing
As usual with such announcements, this is doubtless heavily gamed and also represents some amount of progress. Another obvious question, where on this chart is DeepSeek?
In Other AI News
Report: What is hilarious about all this is the fear that The New York Times has too much ‘industry alignment’ with the biggest AI tech companies. Seriously, have these people seen The New York Times? It has systematically, for many years, pushed a unified and intentional anti-technology anti-big-tech narrative. For some people, I suppose, no amount of that is ever enough.
The answer is not very situationally aware by default under current conditions. Everyone does better than chance but no model here does well or approaches the human-imitating-LLMs baseline.
Quiet SpeculationsProgress in AI is fast. This goes part and parcel with the people who say ‘I will read that when it is published in a respected peer reviewed journal, Arvix does not count as knowledge or evidence’ or otherwise insist on going through ‘proper scientific rigor.’ The process of ‘proper scientific rigor’ as practiced today is horribly broken, and even when it works it is painfully slow and unwilling to recognize the majority of important evidence and forms of argument. Those who fail to adapt will lack situational awareness, and be left behind.
Wait, ‘math’ data? Can’t you generate as many generic math problems and examples as you like without personas? Claude could not come up with any explanations of why the paper is evidence that the technique is useful. As a general rule, if you choose a highly unimpressive example case, that likely means your other attempts didn’t work. The AI Denialist EconomistsImagine Robin Hanson, as the world transforms around him,
These new calls are echoes of the ‘GDP growth might expand 1.6% over ten years, AI is very exciting’ economic analysis caucus. They lack even the most basic of situational awareness. I welcome their bear cases. I remember when a key argument against AI was ‘if AI is going to be so big why is that not priced into the market?’ Now instead we see ‘AI is not going to be so big, why is it priced into the market?’ Which is funny, since no, it is not yet (fully) priced into the market. Not even close.
If you look at the details, such as the answer at the link by Jim Covello, It also cites I always love That means 86% of the time it did not need help This is the worst it will ever be Wendy’s is indeed already doing this because it is already better Presumably they are using old technology and would do much better if they updated although I’m not going to check Doing parts of many jobs is an economic win far bigger than they claim is possible Also it will probably be serving the food within that 10 year window Seriously, come on, this is dumb, have these people actually used 4-level LLMs?
These people throw shade on the idea that LLMs will ever get better from here, or get much better, and keep doing so as they get better. The thing is, even if they were somehow 100% right about that and Claude Sonnet 3.5 is the best model we ever get, that is more than good enough to eclipse the absurd predictions made in such reports. Goldman Sachs is full of smart people. How is it making this mistake? My answer is they utterly lack situational awareness on this, being intelligent is only sometimes a defense against using your learned algorithms out of distribution without noticing something is amiss, and I’ve seen enough economic types make the same mistakes over and over that it no longer surprises me. Others think it must be an op, and this is Goldman so I can’t blame them for asking.
That does not mean that any particular stock has to be underpriced. Perhaps Nvidia or Google or Microsoft will go down rather than up over the next year. Stranger things have happened and nothing I say is investment advice. Who exactly ends up making money is hard to predict. What I do know is that these predictions of overall economic impact are absurd, and a lot of things are about to change. The Quest for Sane Regulations
What he does not offer are any details on the EU AI Act, and which provisions would be expensive or impossible to comply with. There are indeed various rather stupid provisions in the EU AI Act, but it is extremely long and painful to read and I would really love it if someone else, perhaps someone European, would do the job of telling us what it actually says so I don’t have to. I will try to do it, but have mercy, haven’t I suffered enough? From what I did see, the EU AI Act is the largely the EU being the EU but there is a reason Apple is citing the DMA and data laws rather than the AI Act when delaying its AI offerings in the EU.
Trump Would Repeal the Biden Executive Order on AI
Why are the Republicans doing this? What does this mean for AI regulation, aside from who to vote for in November? No one can ever know for sure, but it sure seems like a pretty simple explanation: Trump wants the Executive Order gone, so that is in the platform. Trump wants the Executive Order gone because it was implemented by Biden. Trump also thinks Regulations (That Don’t Get Me Paid) Are Bad, so there’s that. (Optional) Lobbying/bribing by a16z and others who value their profits above all.
Except that is Obvious Nonsense. Trump said he would repeal the Executive Order the first time he was asked, long before SB 1047 was on anyone’s mind or could plausibly have factored into his decision. Why? See above. The votes on SB 1047 in California are passing on robust bipartisan lines, yes California has Republicans. The votes are usually or always 90%+ in favor. Popular opinion remains remarkably united regardless of party. The parties are working together remarkably well on this. The ‘partisan issue’ is that Trump is reflectively opposed to anything Biden does. Are we under some strange hallucination that if California was taking a different regulatory approach then Trump would be keeping the EO? I cannot get that statement to even parse. It makes zero sense. Instead, this (to the extent it is new information, which it mostly is not) greatly strengthens the case of state actions like SB 1047. What is the best argument against passing a regulatory law in California? The best argument is that it would make it harder to pass a regulatory law in Washington, or that we would be better served by passing a law in Washington, or that we can do it (and to some extent via the Executive Order are doing it) via the existing administrative state. That argument is strong if you think Congress and the White House are capable of passing such a law, or of implementing this via Executive Orders and the administrative state. If Trump (and the Supreme Court) are determined to hamstring the administrative state and its ability to build state capacity and knowledge on AI? What other option do we have? The Republican platform also tells us we will create a ‘robust Manufacturing Industry in Near Earth Orbit.’ It is good to aspire to things. It would also be good to attempt to correspond to reality. I mean, yes, I’m for it in principle, but in the same way I want to, as the chapter calls it ‘build the greatest economy in history’ if we can do that without it being an AI’s economy and also ending all of history. To be fair, there are non-zero good things too, such as energy permitting reform. The thing to note here is that the likely once and future president is going to start by taking a big step backwards. Ordinary Americans Are Worried About AI
I went to their website to see the details and they haven’t posted them yet. I’ll take a look when they do. AIPI certainly is strongly in favor of making sure we do not all die. Is AIPI slanting their question wording and order somewhat? Based on previous surveys, not egregiously, but not zero either. Do we know that people actually care about this or consider it important enough to change their votes? Not yet, no. I do think such polls show definitively that the public is suspicious and fearful of AI in a variety of ways, and that once the salience of the issue grows politicians will be under quite a lot of pressure to get in line. Similarly, A bunch of very loud and obnoxious and mostly deeply disingenuous people have decided that if they are loud and obnoxious as often as possible on Twitter, and say various things that have no relation to what is actually in the bill or what its impact would be or where it does and does not apply, then people will confuse Twitter with real life, and think that SB 1047 is unpopular or turning people against EA or widely seen as a tyranny or whatever. It’s not true. Do not fall for this. The Week in Audio
He’s not even talking about existential risk, he is talking about things like job losses and balance of power among humans. So is he, too, ‘hiding the truth’ about AI? No. Like him, the mainstream media is not ‘hiding the truth’ about AI. The mainstream media does not have any inkling of the truth about AI. It hides nothing. He also says ‘ChatGPT is as intelligent as Einstein,’ which is quite the claim, and which would have implications he is not at all considering here. Instead he goes on to discuss various mundane concerns.
The Wikipedia War
About half of the old version of the page was about a sufficiently obscure concept (R***’s B******) that I can’t remember the last time anyone else mentioned it on LessWrong, which has since been trimmed to one paragraph but is still presented as to draw one’s attention as a central focus. Even more than that, almost all other discussion is hidden or minimized. Key facts, such as the revival of the cite by Oliver Habryka, or even the site’s focus on AI, remain not present. There is no list of or reference to its major authors and contributors beyond Eliezer Yudkowsky. And so on. The good news is that a spot check of pages for individuals seemed far better. My own page clearly remains untouched and almost entirely about my Magic: The Gathering career. My blog is linked, but my writings on Covid and AI are not mentioned. It contains an easy to correct minor factual error (my time at MetaMed preceded Jane Street) but one does not edit one’s own page, I am curious how fast that gets fixed. Some of you reading this edit Wikipedia, or know people who do, including people higher up. If that is you, I implore you: Read this article, look at the LessWrong page, and notice that this has been permitted to continue for a decade. If this cannot be addressed despite this level of attention, at least to the point of making this not a clear ‘hit job’ on the community, then I will update accordingly. If that is not you (or if it is), take this knowledge with you as you read the rest of Wikipedia, including noticing how they react from here, and judge to what extent it is a ‘reliable source.’ Which it mostly still is, but, well, yeah. We should also pay attention to whether his more general war to label sources as reliable or unreliable gets any pushback. Wikipedia’s problem there is far bigger than what it says in its article about one little website. Some other confirmations:
A sad assessment, yes this all applies beyond Wikipedia:
In any organization, over a long enough time horizon, there will arise an implicit coalition devoted to promoting those who promote the advancement of the implicit coalition, and who care about winning political fights rather than the organization’s supposed goal. If the rest of the organization does not actively fight this, the organization will increasingly fall into the coalition’s control. Atlanticesque is saying that you must fight such people step by step, with a similar obsession over the fights, and do the work. Over the long run, that will not get it done, unless that includes stripping those waging these petty battles of power. It is not viable to beat the Gerards of the world via fighting them on every little edit. You do not beat cheaters by catching them every single time and forcing them to undo each individual cheat. You do not beat defectors by reverting the impact every time you see them defect back to the status quo. You beat cheaters and defectors through punishment. Or you lose. Rhetorical Innovation
AGI/ASI are impossible or definitely centuries distant. AGI is decades away so no need to react yet. AGI is reachable but ASI is not. AGI and ASI would be ‘kind to us.’ Corporations will only design well-behaving AIs, existing laws are sufficient. We should accelerate AI capabilities and not delay AGI’s benefits. Talking about catastrophic risk hurts efforts to mitigate short term issues. Those concerned with the USA-China cold war. Those who think international treaties will not work. The genie is out of the bottle so just let go and avoid regulation. Open weight (and code) AGI are the solution. Those who think worrying about AGI is falling for Pascal’s Wager.
There are always more objection categories or fallbacks, but these are the highlights. These are not the exact answers I would have given. Often he bends over backwards to be respectful and avoid being seen as overconfident, and in places he chooses different core argument lines than I think are most effective. Overall this is very strong. It is especially strong against the ‘there will not be a problem’ objections, that AGI/ASI won’t happen or will be harmless, or that its downsides are not worth any attention, either absolutely or compared to benefits. The other broad category is ‘yes this is a problem but doing anything about it would be hard.’ To which he patiently keeps saying, yes it would be hard, but not impossible, and being hard does not mean we can afford to give up. We cannot afford to give up. His weakest answer is on those who think ‘open source’ is the solution to all ills. I do think his explanations are sufficient, but that there are even stronger and clearer reasons why the full open approach is doomed.
That post is also an example of how most people are not good at explaining the whys behind the social dynamics involved, especially the idea that there is no ‘we’ that makes decisions or would step in to prevent terrible decisions from being made, or that anyone involved has to want AGI or ASI to be built in order for it to happen. Evaluations Must Mimic Relevant ConditionsA standard evaluation strategy is to: Have a benchmark of tasks to solve. Ask the LLM to solve them. Score the LLM based on whether it solves them, which it mostly doesn’t. Ignore that with some scaffolding and time and effort the LLM does way better.
Another issue is that you might not have a precise measurement.
They point out that you need to ensure at least: Space for Reasoning, without which LLMs underperform their potential a lot. Interactive Environment, to give the model the attempt to error correct and learn. Specialized Tools, to give the model the tools it would have access to. Perfect Verification, of whether the attempt was successful. Sampling Strategy, to ensure models attempt exploration.
They aim to provide a Code Browser, Python tool, Debugger and Reporter. This seems like a good start. In general if you want to verify a negative, that an ability is not present, that is very hard, and you need to give broad flexibility to look for it. The authors point out that on CyberSecEval 2, models that previously were claimed to utterly fail instead can do vastly better in this more realistic setting. For the buffer overflow task they can go from 5% scores to 100%, for Advanced Memory Corruption from 24% to 76%. If you see LLMs getting any non-zero score on such tests, worry that they are effectively being ‘hobbled’ and that someone could as Leopold puts it ‘unhobble’ them. When GPT-4 Turbo and Gemini 1.5 Pro attempt these tasks, and are given 20 chances and told to mix up their strategies, they often succeed. The least you can do, if you want to prove X cannot do Y, is to give X every advantage and opportunity to do Y. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is DifficultWe all know open weights are unsafe because you can easily undo any safety protocols.
Whoops!
The paper does not discuss compute costs. Which is odd, since to me that seems like the central thing you are doing? Claude estimates that compared to asking the question directly, using the article is a 1.2x-1.5x compute cost. If you use advanced techniques, then if the models had similar costs the cost would be 6x-8x for consultancy, 8x-10x for debate and 7x-11x for open versions, times N if you do best-of-N. Then you have to multiply again because the consultants and debaters are larger more expensive models. And of course, given that we know Gemini 1.5 Pro is not misaligned or deceptive, there is every expectation that any strategy by Gemma other than ‘trust Gemini 1.5’s answer’ is going to make it score worse. So what have we learned about scalable oversight? It seems like this setup sidesteps the actual problems? Instead I would say it implicitly highlights the problem that it is extraordinarily difficult to get the judge to do better than trusting the stronger models, a strategy which then breaks down catastrophically when you need the judge the most.
The core finding is that LLMs can with 95%+ accuracy distinguish past from future events, but couldn’t we have easily verified that without the sleeper agents? One place DeepMind has done a good job The Problem
The goal is to design a system that allows for good outcomes however you define good outcomes. If you take a bunch of humans, and you mostly give them all broad freedom to do what they want, then it turns out trade and enlightened self-interest and other neat stuff like that ensures that historically this turns out really well, provided you take care of some issues. If you give those people AI tools that you are confident will remain ‘mere tools’ then that continues. You have to worry about some particular cases, but mostly you want to let people do what they want, so long as you can guard against some particular catastrophic or systematically harmful things. The problem is that if you throw in a bunch of sufficiently capable AIs that are not doomed to mere toolhood into the mix, and allow competition to take its course, then the competition is going to happen between AIs not between people, attempts to keep control over AIs will cause you and those AIs to be left behind, and the resulting world will belong to and be determined by which AIs are most competitive. By default, the long term answer to that is not going to be one that we like, even if we can give each individual AI whatever alignment we want to their original owner’s preferences. That won’t be enough. Or, alternatively, if the AI does better without your help than with your help, and attempts to adjust what it does tend to get in the way, and putting yourself in the loop slows everything down, how are you going to keep humans in the loop? How will we continue making meaningful choices? I have tried various versions of this explanation over the last year and a half. I have yet to see a good response, but it clearly is not getting through to many people either. The simple version is (with various different adjectives and details alongside ‘competitive’): If you create new entities that are more competitive than humans… …which can copy themselves and create variants thereof… …and put them into competition with humans and each other… …then the end result will probably and quickly not include any humans.
Or, you have a trilemma: Free competition between entities for resources or control. Entities that can outcompete humans. Humans surviving or remaining in control.
We want a highly ‘unnatural’ result. It won’t fall out of a coconut tree. It would be good to see it explicitly on charts like this one:
That chart comes Overall I found the report directionally useful and good, but vague and hesitant in key places. The generic calls for international cooperation and awareness of the dangers including existential dangers and taking the problem seriously remain welcome. If this is what makes people listen and lay groundwork? Great. On the question of a policy solution, I mean, there is one option that hits everything, called ‘Don’t f***ing build it.’ Otherwise, no, not so much with the one size fits all? These are not problems that have a joint simple solution. You need to solve many different problems via different related and complementary solutions. There are some things on this chart that AI makes better rather than worse. I am once again begging people to realize that global inequality is shrinking rather than widening, and that non-transformational AI is likely to continue to shrink it for practical purposes, and with transformational AI it becomes a wrong question. Most of that holds for national inequality too. If everyone is vastly wealthier and better off, I am not going to sweat the distribution so much. If everyone is dead, we’re all equal. Medical diagnosis failures are almost certainly better with more and better AI, rather than worse. People use inequality as a stand-in for the effects of runaway competition for resources, but the inequality between different people is a poor proxy for the bigger worry that AIs will outcompete humans, and that humans in competition will feel forced to (and choose to) unleash those AIs to compete in these ways outside of our control even if the option to control them exists, and to take humans out of the loop.
Oh AnthropicLast week
Anthropic is a business. Asking people who were fired (and thus get severance) sign non-disparagement agreements to get that severance is reasonably normal, so long as those agreements can be disclosed, and safety is made an exception, although one would need to worry that Anthropic will say ‘no that wasn’t safety’ when they get mad at you. You can evaluate for yourself how worrisome all this is, and what it says about Anthropic’s policies on information control. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing EveryoneCohere CEO Aidan Gomez Also, here’s some refreshing honesty in response to the clip. I can’t remember the last time someone said ‘yeah I was hungover on that one.’
So there are three core beliefs here. The models won’t scale beyond some (reasonable) limit. If there is some (reasonable) limit, then you don’t have to worry on an existential level about reward hacking and misalignment. Without reward hacking and misalignment you cannot have doom.
The first claim seems uncertain and most people seem overconfident on whether the limit will be what counts in context as reasonable (obviously there is some physical limit). No one knows where the plateau will come. But sure, he expects it soon. The second claim is that you need the model to ‘always find a way to break your reward,’ or otherwise require super strong capabilities, in order to be a takeover threat. I think that one is definitely wrong, in the sense that the limit needs to be a lot lower than I am guessing he thinks it needs to be. Certainly there is a minimum threshold for base model strength, which we have (almost certainly) not yet crossed. However you absolutely do not need the model to be fully superhuman, or for the model to always defeat every reward mechanism. Potentially all you need is for it to happen once at the wrong place and time. Or you don’t need it to ‘defeat’ the mechanism at all, instead merely to have the mechanism imply things you did not want, or for the combination of such mechanisms to result in a bad equilibrium. Certainly it sometimes not happening is not much comfort or defense. You need security mindset. The implicit third claim, that you need some form of active ‘misalignment’ or ‘reward hacking’ to get the bad results, I think is also clearly false. The default situations are not ‘alignment’ and ‘reward matches what you want.’ Even if they were, or you managed to get both of those, the interplay of the incentives of different such powerful AIs would by default still spell out doom.
The Lighter SideYou're currently a free subscriber to |