---
subject: "Links For January 2025"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-01-17 00:18:10
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX"]
---
[I haven’t independently verified each link. On average, commenters will end up spotting evidence that around two or three of the links in each links post are wrong or misleading. I correct these as I see them, and will highlight important corrections later, but I can’t guarantee I will have caught them all by the time you read this.] 1: 2: I agree with 3: Ruxandra Teslo and Willy Chertman: 4: This month in nominative determinism: 5: Someone is working on a dating site that uses your conversations with Claude to find a match. Link 6: The Lyttle Lytton Contest searches for the worst possible opening line for a novel; it’s been going on since 2001 and 7: 8: “The probability that cows (or other non-human animals) are experiencing constant bliss, lack tanha (craving, aversion, and the resulting suffering), or are "enlightened by default" is, 9: 10: In 11: Jacob Falkovich has 12:
This is pretty galaxy-brained, but something galaxy-brained must be going on for God to tolerate the existence of evil at all, and this is a surprisingly natural extension of some common premises on the subject. 13: Swedish study: 14: 15: 16: Adrian Dittman, a Twitter account widely accused of being Elon Musk’s alt, has been revealed to be . . . 17: Related: Musk claims to be among the top players in the world at several computer games. A veteran Path of Exile gamer 18: Related: Sam Harris says he has been friends with Musk since 2008, but he noticed a sudden shift for the worse in his personality around 2020 which made it impossible to stay friends with him. He gives the example of Musk losing a bet with him that there would be 35,000+ COVID cases in the US, refusing to pay up, and launching personal attacks on Sam when asked to do so. What happened? Some theories: Musk turned right-wing, which ended his friendship with Sam for the same reason political differences have always ended friendships (but then what about the bet, which seems like objectively bad behavior?) It’s [the ketamine](https://substack.com/redirect/21159b4c-c8f2-4277-8793-414b39b4a774?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)(I still think people should be more open about what doses of ketamine they take so I can calibrate my opinions better!)Gwern’s [longstanding theory that Musk is bipolar](https://substack.com/redirect/8fe22163-485a-414f-a9ee-1fd2b0dbaf38?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)(I keep objecting to this because he doesn’t show the right kind of mood shifts; a single shift from a steady state age 0-40, to a different but worse steady state in his fifties is, if anything, even weirder).I wonder if he’s doing some kind of steroids. Side effects are irritability, aggression, paranoia, mood swings. He appears to be extremely physically fit, but also claims to “ [almost never work out](https://substack.com/redirect/710ffac2-edf2-423e-bd3e-16217fe09153?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)”. Imagine that you’re the kind of guy who hires people to play computer games for you so that you can appear on the leaderboard as the best in the world. And imagine that you bring that same attitude to looks and fitness. What’s the obvious low-hanging fruit?
19: Ozy 20: This is especially surprising because A16Z is famous for going all in on crypto early. But during the 2015 - 2018 period, Bitcoin - the absolute dumbest and most obvious crypto bet - went up 2,000%. So how is performance this bad even possible? The Twitter thread speculates that just as Uber used to happily lose money on every ride in order to gain market share, A16Z is happily losing money on every investment in order to gain VC market share. But ride-sharing is a natural monopoly; how will A16Z prevent competitors from entering venture capital? And why should people give it any market share at all if it can’t make them money? Maybe their pitch could be that you’ll make less money, but it will be uncorrelated with the regular stock market? But is that true? Aren’t tech startups pretty cyclical? Also, I wonder if this was framed to their LPs as “yeah we’ll definitely lose your money for the first ten years, but eventually it’ll all work out”. They must be the most trusting people in the world. 21: Nathan Young has 22: 23: Related: 54% of the public 24: Related: Scott Wiener, author of the SB 1047 AI safety bill, has submitted 25: 26:
27: Asterisk: 28: Max Tabarrok: 29: Claim: global fertility decline 30: Related: Turkish fertility collapse: I have the same question as 31: There’s now 32: China 33: I hate recommending/endorsing therapists or life coaches because they’re so hard to judge and “personal fit” is so important, but Chris Lakin makes a pretty good case for himself: I do worry that even if you officially say “pay on results”, therapy results are naturally fuzzy and hard to assess, and it’s too aggressive to refuse to pay your life coach who’s put dozens of hours of work into your case, so most people will say “yeah, I guess that kind of worked in a sense” and pay the money (this works even better if your clients are “lifelong pushovers”). How would one design a version of this system which avoided this failure mode? 34: Why does China, an advanced economy, have the tap water issues that we associate with developing countries? 35: The NASDAQ 36: AskReddit
Some speculation 37: In response to my post on H5N1 bird flu, 38: Claim
39: Many people responded that an IQ-increasing pill would be great, which I think misses the point. Obviously it would be great - but I think the tweet succeeds at giving an analogy for the sort of nervousness people might feel about losing what makes them special. 40: The 41: Some discussion at the site of what “consuming” water means, although not as much as I would like. My other concern is that I can’t tell whether this is inference only, or also amortizes the cost of training over all inference queries. I think it’s the former. If you did the latter, then Andy calculates 2L per kWh consumed by a data center. The last AI that we have good data for, GPT-3, took 1.3 mWh to train; let's say modern AIs are 10x that or ~10 mWh. That suggests 20,000L of water consumed in training. Since an AI model will get hundreds of millions of queries through its life - no, it seems like amortizing this per query doesn't change things at all, unless I'm missing something. 42: Paul Graham has 43: In the past, I’ve used amisulpride as an example of American drug regulation failures - it’s a good antipsychotic drug which is widely used in Europe but which patent issues have prevented pharma from bringing it to the US. Now a pharma company is 44: Ashlee Vance has a new tech industry Substack, 45: 46: 47: From
You're currently a free subscriber to |