---
subject: "Agoraphilia & Claustrophilia"
from: "\"River Kenna from In•Star\" <riverkenna@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-08-01 12:21:16
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "River Kenna", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3010718370428876194", "UNREAD"]
---
I keep coming back to these two reflexes, these two modes in me. They show up in just about every area, every layer, every action in my life. Claustrophilia is familiar, it’s how just about everything operates. It’s a love of tight spaces, a love of gripping and clinging, a love of pulling things in. Agoraphilia is available to most people in moments of open ecstasy and relaxed bliss. It’s a love of open spaces, a love of falling, a carbonated pleasure in the ephemeral vastness of everything, a place where it’s impossible to hold onto anything except by letting it go entirely. Claustrophilia is being cozy, wrapped up in something tight and warm. It’s a womb. It’s filling your entire mouth with ice cream, letting the sweetness hit every sensory capacity at once. It’s the way you clench and focus during sex, climbing and directing yourself towards climax. It’s the pleasure of craving something, the drive of knowing you can get it if you slither your way towards it in just the right way. It’s a crush — what a great word for the pleasure and the closing off of other possibilities, of holding something so tight; crush. Claustrophilia is the mode of having a crush on every particular thing. Agoraphilia is luxuriating in open space. It’s the psychedelic dissolve where your bones turn to starlight. It’s skydiving without clenching a single muscle. Having sex from an agoraphilic space doesn’t lead to a climax, it leads to an endless rolling plateau where there would usually be a peak. Breathe deep and open into your belly when you would usually start constricting and climbing, and maybe you’ll find it. Agoraphilia doesn’t do crushes, it does a glittery depth of Love that has no need to go anywhere specific, no need to fill any specific shape or template. It’s an exhale. It’s the moment when you stop fighting against death or change, and release yourself into the body of Time itself. I don’t think that claustrophilia is evil and agoraphilia is good — I think both of them are appropriate and joyful in different contexts. But I know for myself, and am almost certain for others, that the claustrophilic impulse is an automatic reflex that makes it difficult to find the agoraphilic mode. And that’s a problem. Any automatic reflex that doesn’t serve you is a problem, and having entire cultures where the claustrophilic muscles are so cramped that they don’t allow the agoraphilic muscles to open — that’s an issue. A big one. And it’s really damn clear, looking out at the world, the way that this impulse towards craving, comfort, crushing, and constricting is doing a lot of harm to all of us. Not sure I want to get into that. You can see it or you can’t. Agoraphilia is incredibly intense when we first encounter it. We tend to get a small glimpse that feels like falling from a great height — the weightless tingling in the body as everything opens up into living aurora. From that small glimpse, we tend to clench again, shut down, come back to where we’re familiar. But it is possible to become as comfortable in that open ecstatic space as we are in the cozy space. It’s possible to feel the frisson of holding on to nothing, and to let it move through you. And when you can do that, the claustrophilic impulse takes on a new pleasure too — the pleasure of something that’s optional, not forced. We’ve all experienced the bubbly buzz of a crush turn into a crushing constriction, caught in the boa constrictor grip of unrequited desire. The total pain of being unable to let go, unable to relax your awareness around someone or something, unable to drop the craving, even when you paradoxically no longer want them. I don’t actually have much more to say here. I’ve just been using these two terms over and over and over again to describe inner motions of my psyche and soma and emotions, and it seems like I should probably share the terms so I can check if y’all relate. In•Star is free and will stay free, but if you get something out of my work, consider giving something back.- Share my writing with friends & followers,-pick up my |