---
subject: "The Casual Fridays Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-03-05 14:03:07
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Tamzin Astani (TA) publishes Tamzin here. I work in an office in a city with a lot of power and influence. On Fridays, I get to wear jeans to that office. Recently, I’ve been fixated on the fact that my city’s ‘Casual Fridays’ workplace default is not a coincidence, nor an act of free will by our bosses. It is the result of an extremely successful lobbying campaign. Specifically: A coordinated 1960s–90s effort by the Hawaiian Fashion Guild to convince mainland corporations that allowing employees to dress more casually on Fridays would boost morale, increase productivity, and, critically, increase the purchase of aloha shirts. This effort was eventually branded “Operation Liberation,” which sounds like something from a declassified CIA memo. Why is this interesting? In the postwar period, Hawaii’s economy was struggling. Industries beyond tourism were in dire need of mainland demand. So the Guild began sending two aloha shirts to every member of the Hawaiian Senate and House, encouraging them to wear them to work on Fridays. The idea was to normalize the shirt in professional settings locally, then export the concept to the continental U.S. It worked at every level. The Hawaiian Senate passed a resolution urging “the male populace return to ‘aloha attire’ during the summer months for the sake of comfort and in By the 1990s, the idea had metastasized into what we now know as Casual Friday—a concept so ubiquitous today that nobody thinks to look into its origins. I’d always assumed it was a natural impulse — wanting to be comfortable at the end of the week. In reality, it may be one of the most successful soft-power campaigns in American corporate history. A small island industry didn’t just manufacture demand for a product, they manufactured an entire social norm. (TA) You're currently a free subscriber to |