---
subject: "JOINT REVIEW: Starting Strength, by Mark Rippetoe"
from: "\"Mr. and Mrs. Psmith’s Bookshelf\" <thepsmiths@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-10 13:48:08
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Psmith", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_3517400622088263897", "UNREAD"]
---
The following is an email exchange between the Psmiths, edited slightly for clarity. John: I hate the cold. I belong in the tropical heat and humidity, sprawled out on a rock like an enormous monitor lizard, tongue lolling out, eyes half closed as the barest movement of air tickles my glistening neck and stirs my thick and sluggish blood.¹ Extremes of heat are relaxing if you just stop moving and sink into them. Extremes of cold always make me feel like I’m going to die. So it’s odd that this morning, with the temperature a couple of degrees below freezing, I walked past the warm, inviting cocoon of my automobile and rode my bike to work instead. One of my favorite things about commuting by bike is my rich inner monologue, but on a cold winter morning the first ten minutes are usually: “Fuck, fuck, fuck, fuck...”² I was midway through this sparkling conversation with myself when I felt the first icy drops land on the back of my neck. A minute later and a steady freezing rain set in, and then I really felt it, that fight-or-flight response, the butterflies in your stomach feeling that you get the moment you’re perched at the top of a roller coaster, or when you’re out in the woods and What’s so strange about this feeling is that it's a perfect mixture of dread and excitement. Part of it is knowing, deep in your bones, that what’s about to happen is going to suck. But if it’s going to suck, then what am I becoming excited by? It’s only in the last few years that I figured out the answer: the excitement is because you’re about to learn who you really are. The freezing rain that will drench me for the next 45 minutes is a calamity, but it’s also a scouring pad that will strip away all the layers of pretension and social position that I’ve spent a lifetime weaving around myself. There’s no bribing or cajoling or reasoning with the elements, it’s just a question of enduring them. And because in this case enduring them is a choice, because that warm and inviting car is still there, just a couple blocks behind me, the struggle is also with myself. And in little patches here and there, where the surface layers have been stripped away entirely, I get a glimpse at my soul, and get to see where it’s made of iron and where it’s just hot air. To a certain kind of personality, these fleeting glimpses can become an addiction. I think something like that must have happened to me. When I was younger I was firmly dedicated to hedonism, but to me that didn’t just mean seeking out new and interesting experiences, it also meant avoiding suffering at all costs. I built my life around avoiding suffering, and was partway through building a political philosophy around it too, when the ground beneath my feet began to shift. The first chink in my armor happened in math class (don’t laugh). The second step in my transformation from indulgent sensate to challenge-addict was bound up in my conversion to Christianity, but I’m much less sure about the direction of causality here. You’ve written before about how The original Ancient Greek meaning of ascesis (ἄσκησις) was “training,” and sure enough I eventually moved from spiritual weightlifting into the corporeal kind. It started shortly after the birth of our second kid, when I was DMing with Nassim Taleb, naturally. He told me to go do some pull-ups.³ I had never done a pull-up in my life. It didn’t seem like the kind of thing I could do. But this was another sort of turning point, and the two previous turning points made it easier to grit my teeth and say, “I'll show you.” So I went on Amazon and bought what amounts to a Sometime after that was when somebody slipped me a copy of Rippetoe’s book. But before I get into that, why don’t you tell our readers a little bit about your relationship with exercise? I think this is another way in which you and I are very different. Jane: Oh yeah, that rubber band! Some time after you graduated from using it, I got it into my head that I was going to learn to do a pull-up too. Unfortunately I could barely even hang from the bar so I kept tightening it and tightening it and tightening it until finally it snapped. I have still never done a pull-up. Like you, I started out as a lazy nerd. I managed to avoid most of my high school athletics requirements by such expedients as keeping score for the varsity softball team, taking Unlike you, though, I never really had the experience of struggling with my academics — it took effort, but it wasn’t what you’d call hard. (This is less a humblebrag than it was “I took classes in stuff I found fun and easy,” I’m afraid.) So when I decided I wanted to become strong, it was the first time in my entire life I was really bad at something, stuck with it even though I didn’t have to, and realized I had gotten better.⁴ I feel silly admitting it, but the first time I went to pick up something that used to be hard to lift and found that it was now easy, I was sincerely shocked. It turned out this was for people like me after all. Why did I decide to get strong? For very boring reasons: I wanted get back in my pre-baby jeans without needing to go to a gym, and I hate running. But then I made a terrible discovery: it was fun. Picking up heavy things felt good to do, and even better to have done. I slept better. I thought more clearly. I was happier. And I did lose weight, not because the exercise burned calories or because my new muscle upped my metabolic rate, but because I didn’t feel as hungry and didn’t get as cranky about it when I was. Plus, it’s very useful to be able to pick up heavy things! I’m still smug about the time you came home all confused that our new toilet had been delivered but it wasn’t waiting on the porch — because I’d carried it inside and up the stairs all by myself. Unfortunately my “relationship with exercise” has all been rather two steps forward, one step back. Without getting into too much whiny detail about Our culture (by which I mostly mean “online nerd culture” but if you’re reading this isn’t that your culture too?) can be very strange about bodies. There’s a real strain of vulgar dualism, a sense that what’s going on in your mind is the only “real” part and that your physical existence is a weird concession to the decaying meat-mecha you’re doomed to pilot until you can upload your consciousness to the cloud. At best, the body can transmit the sensations of the occasional sybaritic luxury, and beyond that the most you can hope for the absence of pain. The great joy of strength training has been realizing on a visceral level that this is dead wrong. Yeah, yeah, the Church has taught this for two thousand years: our embodiment matters in a fundamental way, we are not merely souls trapped by flesh (and still less intellects trapped by flesh), our temporary separation from our bodies in death is a consequence of the Fall, and our eternity will be spent not floating among the clouds strumming harps but in bodies. But there’s a big difference between intellectually assenting to something and actually believing it, and I didn’t actually believe all that until I experienced the way simply existing as a body, moving through space, interacting with physical objects, could feel good. Not physically pleasurable, quite (though sometimes it is!), but satisfying, meaningful — like you’re Or, as Mark Rippetoe puts it:
Weirdly, Starting Strength reminds me of nothing so much as Cheryl Mendelson’s Home Comforts ( John: When I first cracked open Rippetoe's book, I did not expect it to begin with a jeremiad against exercise machines, but I think this is pretty much the key to understanding his whole vision of human excellence. The human body is an instrument evolved for a purpose, and wondrously, when used regularly for that purpose, resculpts itself to perform better at it. But that purpose is moving around, clambering over obstacles, carrying heavy objects, and shifting them from place to place. These are all complex motions requiring thousands of muscles, tendons, ligaments, nerves, and bones to function together holistically. They are designed to be used together and trained together. Just consider this description of the basic squat motion:
In contrast to this “total physical and mental experience,” the exercise machines at the gym boast of their ability to “target” particular muscle groups. But a moment's reflection tells you that this “targeting” is completely unnatural and utterly contrary to the way that biomechanical systems are meant to work. What are the benefits to “targeting” a hamstring or quadriceps without also working and strengthening the dozens of small muscles that brace, stabilize, and control it? Why “target” it and leave out the skeleton it pulls on or the nerves and tendons that guide and direct its movements? After all, “bone is living, stress-responsive tissue, just like muscle, ligament, tendon, skin, nerve, and brain.” Is there really any benefit to “isolating” and “targeting,” has anybody ever actually thought seriously about this, or does this all just flow from a sick combination of commercial gyms’ financial incentives and modernity's fetish for pretending it knows better than nature and tradition?⁵ Rippetoe’s opinion on this is about as extreme as they come: he thinks that outside of a tiny group of people with exotic injuries, nobody should ever use an exercise machine. To start with, by training one relatively small muscle here and there in isolation, they sacrifice 90% of the physical, skeletal, mental, hormonal, and spiritual benefits of weightlifting. But it’s actually worse than that: making a particular muscle very strong while allowing the stabilizing and accessory muscles around it to atrophy is a recipe for injury. And this is made much worse by the Procrustean nature of the machines themselves: “The pattern of the movement through space is determined by the machine, not the individual biomechanics of the human using it.” One could conclude from this that one should only do bodyweight exercises, and indeed some people do!⁶ But Rippetoe sees complex barbell motions as a reasonable compromise — the barbell is ergonomic enough that you can use it to move massive weights (with the accompanying skeletal and hormonal benefits), but close enough to natural and permitting “the minute adjustments during the movement that allow individual anthropometry to be expressed.” There's a real philosophical subtlety here, something almost There’s so much in this worldview which rhymes with contemporary intellectual trends, and I think that goes a long way towards explaining the resurgent popularity of powerlifting. One immediately sees, for instance, why Taleb is constantly going on about deadlifts: the skepticism of over-optimization that pervades Taleb’s work, the emphasis on hormesis and anti-fragility, and the deep and abiding humanism (and, also, the macho bellicosity) — it's all right there in Rippetoe. In fact, Taleb didn’t just read Rippetoe, he Speaking of pasta, Rippetoe is basically to exercise what Michael Pollan is to food:⁷ a rejection of modernism, artificiality, over-refinement, the whole panoply of Jane: That’s more or less the argument You could draw a couple of different conclusions from Rippetoe’s fulmination against exercise machines. The first, what we might call This is all very strange and counterintuitive to the recovering In fact, the less you think about those details, the better off you’ll be. You have millions of years of evolution and years of life experience behind your motor planning capabilities. You have to get out of your own way. Instead Rippetoe offers cues, like the “look where you’re trying to go!” I try when I’m teaching my kids to ride a bike:
But your body really does learn! I’ve spent the last few days trying to master a particular set of complex movements, and as soon as I would get one part of it right I’d realize something else was all wrong. And then this morning I tried again, and it all just….worked? Somehow this was a surprise to me. I’ve read approximately seventy-three different “learning to fight with a sword” sequences in various fantasy novels, and I spend most of my time with small people who are mastering motor skills that range from picking things up to writing in cursive, and yet I was really expecting to have to be constantly thinking about every aspect of this forever. When I was a kid, I used to regard my poor posture as essentially a form of poor character. I figured I slouched because, I don’t know, I didn’t think enough about sitting up straight (which I assumed that I would do if I were a better person). Then eventually I discovered that people with good posture don’t actually think about it, either: they just have strong core muscles that make their natural, not-thinking-about-it way of sitting or standing, well, straight. Slouching was a matter of physical weakness, not moral weakness. But lately I’ve come full circle on this: being strong isn’t quite the same as being good, but all the things you have to do in order to become physically stronger — joyfully embracing a challenge, bringing your mind and body into harmony with one another and into subjection to your will, identifying and seeking the version of excellence that’s available to you — will make you a better person, too.⁸ John: The moral dimension you describe is driving every aspect of Rippetoe’s agenda. He doesn’t come out and say this, but it’s pretty obvious that beneath all the fulmination about ergonomics and holistic training and systemic benefits, part of what Rippetoe hates about the machines is that they’re easy.⁹ Easy to get started with, easy to use without direction or instruction. He comes from a world of elite powerlifters with a rich culture, folklore, traditional practices, and a particular form of excellence; and now that world is being demolished by technology and capital. I’d be angry too! A way to interpret this book is as one long, bitter act of “gatekeeping.” But what if gatekeeping is good, actually? The right attitude for picking up any kind of new skill is humility. Some people are naturally humble, but most are not. Since time immemorial, practiced sages have hazed their apprentices, made them perform menial tasks, enforced brutal hierarchy between older and younger students, and so on. As a modern and a lib, I naturally assume that these are benighted backward customs preserving the legacies of ancient power imbalances blah blah blah, and like most libs I subconsciously find such institutions offensive and I structure my life to avoid them. But what if I’m completely wrong? Monasteries force novices to be humble because humility is the path to salvation, but if humility is also the path to education then there’s a reason for other sorts of institutions to put the newbies in their place as well. The lib view also fundamentally misunderstands human psychology. Everybody in a tizzy to make their hobby “accessible” should note that Islam has amassed a billion or so adherents while requiring them to learn Classical Arabic (a very difficult language that I have personally tried and failed to learn) in order to read its scriptures. If your little club isn’t popular, making it harder to get in is a great way to turn that around. People crawl Is the same now happening for powerlifting? We can only hope so, because here we find not exclusivity for exclusivity’s sake; but something that is difficult because it demands that your body and mind work in unison to do something that is beneficial for both. Once you get over yourself and start to squat, peace and tranquility will flood into you. Revolutions have been made out of less. Or, as Rippetoe puts it:
1 The character I identify with most in the Star Wars movies is Jabba the Hutt. 2 Sorry, this is a family-friendly Substack and we try to avoid profanity, but sometimes I must tell it like it is. 3 As I recall his language was a good bit more colorful, but as I said this is a family-friendly Substack. 4 The runner-up may be 5 Rippetoe:
6 Besides the bodyweight people, there’s another parallel community that’s more extreme than Rippetoe — they disdain barbell exercises as artificial, and just endlessly heave themselves up onto ledges and drag massive objects around their front yards instead. I’d be lying if I said that a small part of me wasn’t intrigued. 7 You think I’m reaching? I have not yet begun to reach. Rippetoe is also to exercise what the “all-up testing” of the Saturn V was to rocket design. 8 The parallels between the physical and the spiritual go beyond that — I once had a physical therapist tell me I was trying to use momentum as a substitute for strength, which is to this day the most insightful thing anyone has ever told me about myself. 9 The other reason he hates them, by the way, is that much of what the machines aim to do is aesthetic. They sell you on a Hollywood You're currently a free subscriber to |