---
subject: "The Monday Media Diet with Vicky Gu"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-06-12 10:01:34
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Vicky Gu (VG) is a friend of WITI, She’s an editor, producer, photographer, & poet. Check her Tell us about yourself. I'm an editor, producer, photographer, & poet. Artist who went to business school. Indie strategy consultant at By day, I'm the brand manager at NewtonX, a B2B research company with $47M in funding. Here I build editorial operations and work on our partnerships with research/biz/media leaders at orgs like Meta and Adweek. I care lots about food and health, so in 2018 I founded I also write an infrequent newsletter that sends out erratic missives on strategy and culture: Describe your media diet. That said, I'm drawn to the dark arts. Not the magical kind, just the sad kind. (Though there's magic in the sad too.) I fuel this through shopping at Books are Magic in Brooklyn, and opening my My media diet is at its healthiest when I engage outside techno-optimism. I'm sensitive to lofty language and its blind spots, after spending my early career years as an insecure marketing professional. There's nothing like the image of SF dudes pumping Drake while microdosing on the toilet and dreaming up the next inconsequential dating app — all while my post-grad self manually growth hacked brand communities on $17.50/hour without benefits. When I'm sporadically back on IG, I load up on the usual: The Eras concert reels, The Office clips, and bi-coastal millennial bits like For work, I read a lot of McKinsey and HBR and MIT Technology Review-type pubs, market research trade publications like GreenBook, and superfluous AI carousels on LinkedIn. Misc notes: [The Content Technologist](https://substack.com/redirect/d7ab4a0d-c25a-41c2-87ec-9c6c31e3340a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)is great if you're in brand/content and looking for senior level writing that also gets dirty (disclosure: I write for them!).I need to get back into data viz pub [The Pudding](https://substack.com/redirect/216fc9f7-83f5-455d-bd7d-4b53910ee53a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).Definitely catch HK-based creative culture pub [MAEKAN](https://substack.com/redirect/5e6eeb12-c406-49d5-b9e7-c064a63ed30c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)(disclosure: I wrote for them!).[Semafor](https://substack.com/redirect/e344e460-530f-4c06-aa24-c06d5196dba3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)has a good tech newsletter. I first read Louise Matsakis’s reporting while she was at[Rest of World](https://substack.com/redirect/1752e37d-40ee-495f-a036-aff46a5f00cf?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)and I’m glad to have her back in my inbox. (I believe she edited this story, which struck me: “[Why China’s crypto cowboys are fleeing to Texas](https://substack.com/redirect/207edf12-c7d7-40f9-953b-a5af07a5859a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)”)
What’s the last great book you read? What are you reading now? It's joined the rotation of What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication? Generally cover to cover. If I'm pressed for time at a coffee shop that gets the NYT in print, I read the stories that sound most interesting. Who should everyone be reading that they’re not? Also UK-based chef What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone? Plane or train? What is one place everyone should visit? Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into.
|