---
subject: "AI #139: The Overreach Machines"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-10-23 15:21:46
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
The big release this week was The idea of Atlas is that it is Chrome, except with ChatGPT integrated throughout to let you enter agent mode and chat with web pages and edit or autocomplete text, and that will watch everything you do and take notes to be more useful to you later. From the consumer standpoint, does the above sound like a good trade to you? A safe place to put your trust? How about if it also involves (at least for now) giving up many existing Chrome features? From OpenAI’s perspective, a lot of that could have been done via a Chrome extension, but by making a browser some things get easier, and more importantly OpenAI gets to go after browser market share and avoid dependence on Google. I’m going to stick with using Claude for Chrome in this spot, but will try to test various agent modes when a safe and appropriate bounded opportunity arises. Another interesting release is that Finally, there was a I also offered Also of note were a potential definition of AGI, and another rather crazy legal demand from OpenAI this time demanding an attendee list of a funeral and any photos and eulogies. Table of Contents[Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/dbb9b102-458c-4a88-93bf-5b5e406ffd3d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Therapy, Erdos problems, the army.[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/8f2c2d32-319e-4e43-93fb-0b4ec455f0b2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Erdos problem problems.[Huh, Upgrades.](https://substack.com/redirect/5fb11267-7226-4e75-a3f7-24550152617b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Claude gets various additional connections.[On Your Marks.](https://substack.com/redirect/2f5ffb3d-fda4-4633-8853-eb40b583a382?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A proposed definition of AGI.[Language Barrier.](https://substack.com/redirect/06f3107d-2073-409f-a1d6-6ab360704d51?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Do AIs respond differently in different languages.[Choose Your Fighter.](https://substack.com/redirect/e7263d34-4ace-4d09-a1d0-f5b7f52ca2ab?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The rise of Codex and Claude Code and desktop apps.[Get My Agent On The Line.](https://substack.com/redirect/107ae5a1-be98-492b-a8da-6f5920d6c62a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Then you have to review all of it.[Fun With Media Generation.](https://substack.com/redirect/e83fdb44-417c-446a-af58-c2b35b8fc810?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Veo 3.1. But what is AI output actually good for?[Copyright Confrontation.](https://substack.com/redirect/c2565fee-1600-4ace-ae75-bd7e1c174d9e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Legal does not mean ethical.[You Drive Me Crazy.](https://substack.com/redirect/f7d7d0cf-d425-46e5-b63e-33121a4e736b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)How big a deal is this LLM psychosis thing, by any name?[They Took Our Jobs.](https://substack.com/redirect/76ecb51b-0b39-4ce6-9c05-ef58c5c2b1ff?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Taking all the jobs, a problem and an opportunity.[A Young Lady’s Illustrated Primer.](https://substack.com/redirect/dd38db9d-671a-4187-ae67-a8c22e3fef64?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)An honor code for those without honor.[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/56a61df8-7623-449a-8fa1-6159f184e383?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Foresight, Asterisk, FLI, CSET, Savash Kapoor is on the market.[Introducing.](https://substack.com/redirect/b1f5a65c-cb53-4373-895a-c53ba400804a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Claude Agent Skills, DeepSeek OCR.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/16206f07-2b23-4093-84e4-eafa8bb3a750?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Grok recommendation system still coming real soon, now.[Show Me the Money.](https://substack.com/redirect/d93f934d-bfb1-43be-8c44-ce59c6ce9457?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Too much investment, or not nearly enough?[So You’ve Decided To Become Evil](https://substack.com/redirect/ba61e803-ca3f-49ef-a967-494e63aeca71?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/ba61e803-ca3f-49ef-a967-494e63aeca71?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Seriously, OpenAI, this is a bit much.[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/bbe5354c-b61c-401c-b660-0cde40ac5634?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Investigating the CapEx buildout, among other things.[People Really Do Not Like AI.](https://substack.com/redirect/2473301d-0e0d-4f33-9deb-172953e8d84a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Ron Desantis notices and joins the fun.[The Quest for Sane Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/9c655a9f-c0bf-4612-9b1b-ece85f863bc1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The rise of the super-PAC, and what to do.[Alex Bores Launches Campaign For Congress.](https://substack.com/redirect/cc166be3-f15d-4137-a27f-093e4f507859?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)He’s a righteous dude.[Chip City.](https://substack.com/redirect/d2963e96-5710-4e57-bde7-ca165bcdc48b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Did Xi truly have a ‘bad moment’ on rare earths?[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/6493497e-fa5d-4019-8759-78c99f56ed3f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Sam Altman, Brian Tse on Cognitive Revolution.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/5e9f4eba-d603-422d-94fa-32e15aa178fc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Things we can agree upon.[Don’t Take The Bait.](https://substack.com/redirect/aa9c876a-9408-46ec-ba8a-0b0f10787551?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A steelman is proposed, and brings clarity.[Do You Feel In Charge?](https://substack.com/redirect/25eb76ac-623c-401f-8a1e-137284aa7777?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Also, do you feel smarter than the one in charge?[Tis The Season Of Evil.](https://substack.com/redirect/bf6c39d3-60c4-40d0-ab6c-b890d7041f22?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Everyone is welcome at Lighthaven.[The Lighter Side.](https://substack.com/redirect/b7fbd48d-d82b-4b78-8707-10b52cbf197d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Autocomplete keeps getting smarter.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane UtilityPeople objected to the exact tweet used to announce the search for existing Erdos problem solutions, including criticizing me for quote tweeting it, and A bunch of people interpreted the OP as claiming that GPT-5 discovered the proofs or otherwise accomplishing more than it did, and yeah the wording could have been clearer but it was technically correct and I interpreted it correctly. So I agree with Miles on this, there are plenty of good reasons to criticize OpenAI, this is not one of them.
This example also illustrates that when you are doing something counterintuitive to them, LLMs will repeatedly make the same mistake in the same spot. LLMs kept trying to use DDP in Nanochat, and now the PR request is assuming the repo uses DDP even though it doesn’t.
File this note under people who live differently than I do:
Huh, Upgrades
On Your MarksSWE-Bench-Pro updates its scores,
By their scores, GPT-4 was at 27%, GPT-5 is at 58%. As executed I would not take the details too seriously here, and could offer many disagreements, some nitpicks and some not. Maybe I think of it more like another benchmark? So here it is in the benchmark section.
Performance differs greatly on the nine different benchmarks. Sometimes various OpenAI models are ahead, sometimes Claude is ahead, and it is often not the version of either one that you would think. That’s the part I find so weird. Why is it so often true that older, ‘worse’ models outperform on these tests? Language Barrier
Here DeepSeek-V3.2 is asked two very different questions, and gives two very different answers, because chances are the two people are in different countries (she notes later that this particular quirk is particular to DeepSeek and does not happen with American models, one can likely guess why and how that happened):
Kelsey Piper’s hypothesis on why this might happen seems wrong?
It’s not that you can’t think the same thoughts in English and Chinese. It’s that the language you are using is important Bayesian evidence. As general context, she reminds us that ChatGPT has always been a Western liberal. The language you speak in doesn’t change the political orientation of the models. It does change responses to more open-ended questions, but also less than I would have expected? Kelsey notes this as an example of a notable difference…
…but aren’t those the same answer, adjusted for the cultural context a bit? Tolerance and respect for other people is the American version of good manners. Both second answers are independence and autonomy. Both third answers basically match up as well. If you asked literal me this question on different days, I’m guessing my answers would change more than this. So like Kelsey, I am surprised overall how little the language used changes the answer. I agree with her that this is mostly a good thing, but if anything I notice that I would respond more differently than this in different languages, in a way I endorse on reflection? Choose Your Fighter
Everyone is different. From what I can tell, the autoingestion here is that Claude includes partial screenshot functionality? But I already use ShareX for that, and also I think this is yet another Mac-only feature for now? Macs get all the cool desktop features first these days, and I’m a PC. For me, even if all these features were live on Windows, these considerations are largely overridden by the issue that Claude for Desktop needs its own window, whereas That swings back to Atlas, which I discussed yesterday, and which I similarly wouldn’t want for most purposes even if it came to Windows. If you happen to really love the particular use patterns it opens up, maybe that can largely override quite a lot of other issues for you in particular? But mostly I don’t see it.
Always worth checking to see what works in your particular agent use case and implementation, Get My Agent On The LineYou can generate endless code at almost no marginal human time cost, so the limiting factor shifts to prompt generation and especially code review.
You can either keep them on a short leash and do code review, or you can Fun With Media Generation
Sora’s most overused gimmick was overlaying a dumb new dream on top of the key line from Dr. Martin Luther King’s ‘I have a dream’ speech. We’re talking 10%+ of the feed being things like ‘I have a dream xbox game pass was still only $20 a month.’ Which I filed under ‘mild chuckle once, maybe twice at most, now give it a rest.’ Well, now the official fun police have showed up and did us all a favor.
Better get used to setting speed records on this sort of thing. It’s going to keep happening. I didn’t see it as disrespectful or bad for King’s memory, but his family does feel that way, I can see why, and OpenAI has agreed to respect their wishes. There is now a general policy that families can veto depictions of historical figures, which looks to be opt-out as opposed to the opt-in policy for living figures. That seems like a reasonable compromise. What is AI video good for? Well, it seems it is good for And it is good for
Or, alternatively, the problem is what people choose to supply. But it’s not an AI issue.
Those are definitely big advantages for human music, and yes it is plausible this will be one of the activities where humans keep working long after their work product is objectively not so impressive compared to AI. The question is, how far do considerations like this go? Copyright ConfrontationLegal does not mean ethical.
Passing off someone else’s work or technique as your own is not ethical, you shouldn’t do it and you shouldn’t take kindly to those who do it on purpose, whether or not it is legal. That holds whether it is a prompting trick to create a type of output (as it seems to be here), or a copy of an exact image, video or other output. Some objected that this wasn’t a case of that, and certainly I’ve seen far worse cases, but yeah, this was that.
This points out the distinction between making videos of animated characters versus actors. Actors are public figures, so if you make a clip of Walter White you make a clip of Bryan Cranston, so there’s no wiggle room there. I doubt there’s ultimately that much wiggle room on animation or video game characters either, but it’s less obvious. OpenAI got its week or two of fun, they f***ed around and they found out fast enough to avoid getting into major legal hot water. You Drive Me Crazy
This distinction is important:
AI romantic relationships seem far more dangerous than AI erotica. Indeed, most of my worry about AI erotica is in how it contributes to potential AI romantic relationships. Tyler Cowen linked to all this, That may sound like a dumb or deeply cruel question, but it is not. As with almost everything in AI, it depends on how we react to it, and what we already knew. The learning about what is happening? That part is definitely good news. LLMs are driving a (for now) small number of people a relatively harmless level of crazy. This alerts us to the growing dangers of LLM, especially GPT-4o and others trained via binary user feedback and allowed to be highly sycophantic. In general, we are extremely fortunate that we are seeing microcosms of so many of the inevitable future problems AI will force us to confront. Back in the day, rationalist types made two predictions, one right and one wrong: The correct prediction: AI would pose a wide variety of critical and even existential risks, and exhibit a variety of dangerous behaviors, such as various forms of misalignment, specification gaming, deception and manipulation including pretending to be aligned in ways they aren’t, power seeking and instrumental convergence, cyberattacks and other hostile actions, driving people crazy and so on and so forth, and solving this for real would be extremely hard. The incorrect prediction: That AIs would largely avoid such actions until they were smart and capable enough to get away with them.
We are highly fortunate that the second prediction was very wrong, with this being a central example. This presents a sad practical problem of how to help these people. No one has found a great answer for those already in too deep. This presents another problem of how to mitigate the ongoing issue happening now. OpenAI realized that GPT-4o in particular is dangerous in this way, and is trying to steer users towards GPT-5 which is much less likely to cause this issue. But many of the people demand GPT-4o, unfortunately they tend to be exactly the people who have already fallen victim or are susceptible to doing so, and OpenAI ultimately caved and agreed to allow continued access to GPT-4o. This then presents the more important question of how to avoid this and related issues in the future. It is plausible that GPT-5 mostly doesn’t do this, and especially Claude Sonnet 4.5 sets a new standard of not being sycophantic, exactly because we got a fire alarm for this particular problem. Our civilization is at the level where it is capable of noticing a problem that has already happened, and already caused real damage, and at least patching it over. When the muddling is practical, we can muddle through. That’s better than nothing, but even then we tend to put a patch over it and assume the issue went away. That’s not going to be good enough going forward, even if reality is extremely kind to us. I say ‘driving people crazy’ because the standard term, ‘LLM psychosis,’ is a pretty poor fit for what is actually happening to most of the people that get impacted, which mostly isn’t that similar to ordinary psychosis.
How cautious do you need to be? Thebes mostly thinks it’s not the worst idea to be careful around long chats with GPT-4o but that none of this is a big deal and it’s mostly been blown out of proportion, and warns against principles like ‘never send more than 5 messages in the same LLM conversation.’ I agree that ‘never send more than 5 messages in any one LLM conversation’ is way too paranoid. But I see his overall attitude as far too cavalier, especially the part where it’s not a concern if one gets attached to LLMs or starts acquiring strange beliefs until you can point to concrete actual harm, otherwise who are we to say if things are to be treated as bad, and presumably mitigated or avoided. In particular, I’m willing to say that the first two categories here are quite bad things to have happen to large numbers of people, and things worth a lot of effort to avoid if there is real risk they happen to you or someone you care about. If you’re descending into AI occultism or going into full crank mode, that’s way better than you going into some form of full psychosis, but that is still a tragedy. If your AI model (GPT-4o or otherwise) is doing this on the regular, you messed up and need to fix it. They Took Our JobsWill they take all of our jobs?
As always: On Jason’s specific claim, yes Amazon is going to be increasingly having robots and other automation handle packing and shipping boxes. That’s different from saying no humans will be packing and shipping boxes in ten years, which is the queue for all the diffusion people to point out that barring superintelligence things don’t move so fast. Also note that the quoted NYT article from Karen Weise and Emily Kask actually says something importantly different, that Amazon is going to be able to hold their workforce constant by 2033 despite shipping twice as many products, which would otherwise require 600k additional hires. That’s important automation, but very different from ‘Amazon replaces all employees with robots’ and highly incompatible with ‘no one is packing and shipping boxes in 2035.’ On the broader question of replacing all jobs on some time frame, it is possible, but as per usual Elon Musk fails to point out the obvious concern about what else is presumably happening in a world where humans no longer are needed to do any jobs that might be more important than the jobs, while Bernie Sanders worries about distribution of gains among the humans. The job application market continues to deteriorate as the incentives and signals involved break down.
I mean sure, why not, it’s a clear win-win, making it a slightly better deal to be a driver and presumably Uber values the data. It also makes sense to include tasks in the real world like acquiring a restaurant menu. AI To use one obvious clean example, presumably if you were predicting employment of ‘soldiers in the American army’ on December 7, 1941, and you used the growth trend of the last 10 years, one would describe your approach as deeply stupid. That doesn’t mean general predictions are easy. They are indeed hard. But they are not so hard that you should fall back on something like 10 year trends.
Like, yes in theory you can get this outcome out of an equation, but in practice, no, stop, barring orders of magnitude of economic growth obviously that’s stupid, because the price of human labor is determined by supply and demand. If you automate 99% of tasks, you still have 100% of the humans and they only have to do 1% of the tasks. Assuming a large percentage of those people who were previously working want to continue working, what happens? There used to be 100 tasks done by 100 humans. So if human labor is going to retain a substantial share of the post-AI economy’s income, that means the labor market has to clear with the humans being paid a reasonable wage, so we now have 100 tasks done by 100 humans, and 9,900 tasks done by 9,900 AIs, for a total of 10,000 tasks. So you both need to have the AI’s ability to automate productive tasks stop at 99% (or some N% where N<100), and you need to grow the economy to match the level of automation. Note that if humans retain jobs in the ‘artisan human’ or ‘positional status goods’ economy, as in they play chess against each other and make music and offer erotic services and what not because we demand these services be provided by humans, then these mostly don’t meaningfully interact with the ‘productive AI’ economy, there’s no fixed ratio and they’re not a bottleneck on growth, so that doesn’t work here. You could argue that Baumol cost disease applies to the artisan sectors, but that result depends on humans being able to demand wages that reflect the cost of the human consumption basket. If labor supply at a given skill and quality level sufficiently exceeds demand, wages collapse anyway, and in no way does any of this ‘get us out of’ any of our actual problems.
This is a correct argument for two things: That the growth rate and ultimate amount of productivity or utility available will at the limit be bounded by the available supply of mass and energy and by the laws of physics. Assuming our core model of the physical universe is accurate on the relevant questions, this is very true. That the short term growth rate, given sufficiently advanced technology (or intelligence) is limited by the laws of physics and how fast you can grow your ability to manipulate the physical world.
Okay, yeah, but so what? A Young Lady’s Illustrated PrimerUniversities need to adopt to changing times, relying on exams so that students don’t answer everything with AI, but you can solve this problem via the good old blue book.
Get Involved
Constellation is hiring
Introducing
That’s a cool trick, and kudos to DeepSeek for pulling this off, by all accounts it was technically highly impressive. I have two questions. It seems obviously suboptimal to use photos? It’s kind of the ‘easy’ way to do it, in that the models already can process visual tokens in a natively compressed way, but if you were serious about this you’d never choose this modality, I assume? This doesn’t actually solve your practical problems as well as you would think? As in, you still have to de facto translate the images back into text tokens, so you are expanding the effective context window by not fully attending pairwise to tokens in the context window, which can be great since you often didn’t actually want to do that given the cost, but suggests other solutions to get what you actually want.
In Other AI News
I was going to check it out (they don’t give an address but given a photo and an AI subscription you don’t need one) but it looks like there’s a wait list.
Show Me the Money
Microsoft had to choose to either be ready for OpenAI’s compute demands in full, or to let OpenAI seek compute elsewhere, or to put OpenAI in a hell of a pickle. They eventually settled on option two.
The real answer of course is that OpenAI believes they can get away with this, and are trying to pull off what is plausibly the largest theft in human history, that they feel entitled to do this because norms and this has nothing to do with a fair trade. Oliver Habryka tries to steelman the case by suggesting that if OpenAI’s value quadruples as a for-profit, then accepting this share might still be a fair price? He doubts this is actually the case, and I also very much doubt it, but also I don’t think the logic holds. The nonprofit would still need to be compensated for its control rights, and then it would be entitled to split the growth in value with others, so something on the order of 50%-60% would likely be fair then.
So You’ve Decided To Become Evil
Quite a few people expressed (using various wordings) that this was abhorrent, who very rarely express such reactions. How normal is this? From a formal legal perspective, it’s maximally aggressive and unlikely to stick if challenged, to the point of potentially getting the lawyers sanctioned. You are entitled to demand and argue things you aren’t entitled to get, but there are limits. From an ethical, social or public relations perspective, or in terms of how often this is done: No, absolutely not, no one does this for very obvious reasons. What the hell were you thinking?
This is part of a seemingly endless stream of instances of highly non-normal legal harassment and intimidation, of embracing cartoon villainy, that has now gone among other targets from employees to non-profits to the family of a child who died by suicide after lengthy chats with ChatGPT that very much do not look good. OpenAI needs new lawyers, but also new others. The new others are more important. This is not caused by the lawyers. This is the result of policy decisions made on high. We are who we choose to be. That’s not to say that Jason Kwon or Chris Lehane or Sam Altman or any particular person talked to a lawyer, the lawyer said ‘hey we were thinking we’d demand an attendee list to the kid’s memorial and everything related to it, what do you think’ and then this person put their index fingers together and did their best ‘excellent.’ It’s to say that OpenAI has a culture of being maximally legally aggressive, not worrying about ethics or optics while doing so, and the higher ups keep giving such behaviors the thumbs up and then the system updates on that feedback. They’re presumably not aware of any specific legal decision, the same way they didn’t determine any particular LLM output, but they set the policy. Quiet Speculations
It’s 2025, you can just say things, but Elon Musk was ahead of his time on that.
Gary Marcus offered Elon Musk 10:1 odds on the bet, Gary Marcus also used the exact right term for Elon Musk’s claim, which is bullshit. He is simply saying things, because he thinks that is what you do, that it motivates and gets results. Many such cases, and it is sad that Elon’s words in such spots do not have meaning.
People Really Do Not Like AIRepublican politicians have started noticing.
That’s a pretty good Tweet from Ron Desantis, less so from Josh Hawley. The point definitely stands. The Quest for Sane Regulations
He suggests you can coordinate hard money donations via aisafetypolitics@gmail.com, and can donate to Scott Alexander doesn’t mention the possibility of launching an oppositional soft money PAC. The obvious downside is that when the other side is funded by some combination of the big labs, big tech and VCs like a16z, trying to write checks dollar for dollar doesn’t seem great. The upside is that money, in a given race or in general, has rapidly diminishing marginal returns. The theory here goes: If they have a $200 million war chest to unload on whoever sticks their neck out, that’s a big problem. If they have a $1 billion war chest, and you have a $200 million war chest, then you have enough to mostly neutralize them if they go hard after a given target, and are also reliably using the standard PAC playbook of playing nice otherwise. With a bunch of early employees from OpenAI and Anthropic unlocking their funds, this seems like it’s going to soon be super doable?
Also, yes, as some comments mentioned, one could also try doing a PEPFAR PAC, or target some other low salience issue where there’s a clear right answer, and try to use similar tactics in the other direction. How about a giant YIMBY SuperPAC? Does that still work, or is that now YIEBY? AWS had some big outages this week, as US-EAST-1 went down. Guess what they did? Promptly filed incident reports. Yet thanks to intentional negative polarization, and also see the previous item in this section, even fully common sense, everybody wins suggestions like this provoke hostility.
Alex Bores Launches Campaign For Congress(This section appeared in Monday’s post, so if you already saw it, skip it.) When trying to pass laws, it is vital to have a champion. You need someone in each chamber of Congress who is willing to help craft, introduce and actively fight for good bills. Many worthwhile bills do not get advanced because no one will champion them. Alex Bores did this with New York’s RAISE Act, an AI safety bill along similar lines to SB 53 that is currently on the governor’s desk. By far the strongest argument against the bill is that it would be better if such bills were done on the Federal level.
If you do decide to donate, As always, remember while considering this that political donations are public. Scott Weiner, of SB 1047 and the successful and helpful SB 53, is also running for Congress, to try to take the San Francisco seat previously held by Nancy Pelosi. It’s another deeply blue district, so like Bores this won’t impact the partisan balance at all. He is not emphasizing his AI efforts in his campaign, Chip CityHow goes the quest to beat China?
As I’ve said, such a proposal is obviously completely unacceptable to America. The Chinese thinking they could get Trump to not notice or care about what this would mean, and get him fold to this extent, seems like a very large miscalculation. And as Sharp points out, if the plan was to use this as leverage, not only does it force a much faster and more intense scramble than we were already working on to patch the vulnerability, it doesn’t leave a way to save face because you cannot unring the bell or credibly promise not to do it again. Andrew also points out that on top of those problems, by making such an ambitious play targeting not only America but every country in the world that they need to kowtow to China to be allowed to engage in trade, China endangers the narrative that the coming trade disruptions are America’s fault, and its attempts to make this America versus the world.
Hey, that’s unfair. Jensen Huang is highly useful, but is very much not an idiot. He knows exactly what he is doing, and whose interests he is maximizing. Presumably this is his own, and if it is also China’s then that is some mix of coincidence and his conscious choice. The editorial, as one would expect, is over-the-top jingoistic throughout, but refreshingly not a call of AI accelerationism in response. What Nvidia is doing is working, in that they have a powerful faction within the executive branch de facto subjugating its other priorities in favor of maximizing Nvidia chip sales, with the rhetorical justification being the mostly illusory ‘tech stack’ battle or race. This depends on multiple false foundations: That Chinese models wouldn’t be greatly strengthened if they had access to a lot more compute. The part that keeps boggling me is that even the ‘market share’ attitude ultimately cares about which models are being used, but that means the obvious prime consideration is the relative quality of the models, and the primary limiting factor holding back DeepSeek and other Chinese labs, that we can hope to control, is compute. The second limiting factor is talent, so we should be looking to steal their best talent through immigration, and even David Sacks very obviously knows this (see the All-In Podcast with Trump on this) alas we do the opposite.
That China’s development of its own chips would be slowed substantially if we sold them chips now, which it wouldn’t be (maybe yes if we’d sold them more chips in the past, maybe not, and my guess is not, but either way the ship has sailed). That China has any substantial prospect of producing domestically adequate levels of chip supply and even exporting large amounts of competitive chips any time soon (no just no). That there is some overwhelming advantage to running American models on Nvidia or other America chips, or Chinese models on Huawei or other Chinese chips, as opposed to crossing over. There isn’t zero effect, yes you can get synergies, but this is very small, it is dwarfed by the difference in chip quality. That this false future bifurcation, the the theoretical future where China’s models only run competitively on Huawei chips, and ours only run competitively on Nvidia chips, would be a problem, rather than turning them into the obvious losers of a standards war, whereas the realistic worry is DeepSeek-Nvidia.
The Week in Audio
He then says he ‘expects some really bad stuff to happen because of the technology,’ but in a completely flat tone, saying it has happened with previous technologies, as his host puts it ‘all the way back to fire.’ Luiza Jarovsky calls this ‘shocking’ but it’s quite the opposite, it’s downplaying what is ahead, and no this does not create meaningful legal exposure.
Of course, supposed refusal to be ‘AGI pilled’ also explains a lot of our own government’s recent decisions, except they then try to appropriate the ‘race’ language.
I would add that not only do they respect scholars, the Politburo is full of engineers. So once everyone involved does get ‘AGI pilled,’ we should expect it to be relatively easy for them to appreciate the actually important dangers. We also have seen, time and again, China being willing to make big short term sacrifices to address dangers, including in ways that go so far they seem unwise, and including in the Xi era. See their response to Covid, to the real estate market, to their campaigns on ‘values,’ their willingness to nominally reject the H20 chips, their stand on rare earths, and so on. Right now, China’s leadership is in ‘normal technology’ mode. If that mode is wrong, which I believe it very probably is, then that stance will change. Rhetorical InnovationThe principle here is important when considering your plan.
If your plan involves very high levels of coordination, have you considered what else you could do with such coordination? In National Review, James Lynch reminds us that ‘
Eliezer has strong priors, as in strong beliefs strongly held, in part because of an endless stream of repetitive, incoherent or simply poor arguments for why he should change his opinions, either because he supposedly hasn’t considered something, or because of new evidence that usually isn’t relevant to Eliezer’s underlying reasoning. And he’s already taken into account that most people think he’s wrong about many of the most important things. But when there’s relevant empirical evidence, he acknowledges and remembers it.
Don’t Take The Bait
For David Sacks, that he is accusing Anthropic of the very thing he and his allies are attempting to do, as in regulatory capture and subjugating American policy to the whims of specific private enterprises, and that this is retaliation because Anthropic has opposed the White House on the (I think rather insane) moratorium and their CEO Dario Amodei publicly supported Kamala Harris, and that Anthropic supported SB 53 (a bill even Sacks says is basically fine). This is among other unmentioned things Anthropic did that pissed Sacks off.
For Anthropic, that they warn us to use ‘appropriate fear’ yet keep racing to advance AI, and (although Dan does not use the word) build superintelligence. This is the correct accusation against Anthropic. They’re not trying to do regulatory capture, but they very much are trying to point out that future frontier AI will pose existential risk and otherwise be a grave threat, and trying to be the ones to build it first. They have a story here, but yeah, hmm.
And he kept it short and sweet. Well played, Dan. I would only offer one note, which is to avoid conflating David Sacks with the White House. Something is broadly ‘White House policy’ if and only if Donald Trump says it. Yes, David Sacks is the AI Czar at the White House, but there are factions. David is tweeting out over his skis, very much on purpose, in order to cause negative polarization, and incept his positions and grudges into being White House policy. In case you were wondering whether David Sacks was pursuing a negative polarization strategy, here No matter what side of the AI debates you are on, remember: Do not take the bait. In the wake of the unprovoked broadside attacks, rather than hitting back, Anthropic once again responds with an olive branch,
Once once fully parses Neil’s steelman, it becomes clear that even if you fully buy Neil’s argument, what we are actually talking about is ‘Anthropic wants transparency requirements and eventually hopes the resulting information will help motivate Congress to impose pre-deployment testing requirements on frontier AI models.’ Neil begins by accurately recapping what various parties said, and praising Anthropic’s products and vouching that he sees Anthropic and Jack Clark as both deeply sincere, and explaining that what Anthropic wants is strong transparency so that Congress can decide whether to act. In their own words:
So far, yes, we all agree. This, Neil says, means they are effectively seeking for there to be regulatory capture (perhaps not intentionally, and likely not even by them, but simply by someone to be determined), because this regulatory response probably would mean pre-deployment regulation and pre-deployment regulation means regulatory capture:
He explains that this is ‘based on fear-mongering’ because it is based on the idea that if we knew what was going on, Congress would worry and choose to impose such regulations.
So in other words, I see his argument here as: Anthropic sincerely is worried about frontier AI development. Anthropic wants to require transparency inside the frontier AI labs. Anthropic believes that if we had such transparency, Congress might act. This action would likely be based on fear of what they saw going on in the labs. Those acts would likely include pre-deployment testing requirements on the frontier labs, and Anthropic (as per Jack Clark) indeed wants such requirements. Any form of pre-deployment regulation inevitably leads to someone achieving regulatory capture over time (full thread has more mechanics of this). Therefore, David Sacks is right to say that ‘Anthropic is running a sophisticated regulatory capture strategy based on fear-mongering.’
Once again, this sophisticated strategy is ‘advocate for Congress being aware of what is going on inside the frontier AI labs.’ Needless to say, this is very much not the impression Sacks is attempting to create, or what people believe Sacks is saying, even when taking this one sentence in isolation. When you say ‘pursuing a sophisticated regulatory capture strategy’ one assumes the strategy is motivated by being the one eventually doing the regulatory capturing. Neil Chilson is helpfully clarifying that no, he thinks that’s not the case. Anthropic is not doing this in order to itself do regulatory capture, and is not motivated by the desire to do regulatory capture. It’s simply that pre-deployment testing requirements inevitably lead to regulatory capture. Indeed, among those who would be at all impacted by such a regulatory regime, the frontier AI labs, if a regulatory capture fight were to happen, one would assume Anthropic would be putting itself at an active disadvantage versus its opponents. If you were Anthropic, would you expect to win an insider regulatory capture fight against OpenAI, or Google, or Meta, or xAI? I very much wouldn’t, not even in a Democratic administration where OpenAI and Google are very well positioned, and definitely not in a Republican one, and heaven help them if it’s the Trump administration and David Sacks, which currently it is. (As a standard reminder, these transparency and testing requirements would not apply to any but the frontier labs, which in America likely means only those listed above, yet the claim is this will somehow shut out or hurt companies to whom such laws and regulations would not apply at all.) When you say ‘fear-mongering,’ one assumes this means trying to make people unjustifiably afraid and knowingly misrepresenting the risks and the situation. So, for example, you would not say ‘your strategy of accurately pointing out that my child was running into the street was fear-mongering,’ even though this strategy involves getting me afraid and this fear motivating me to run and pull my child out of the street. Neil Chilson is helpfully clarifying that in this case, ‘fear-mongering’ means ‘make Congress aware of what is going on inside the labs.’ As in, it is fear-mongering because knowing the actual situation would inspire fear. Well, okay, then. I interpret Neil Chilson as straightforwardly saying and believing (in good faith, to be clear) that there is no difference between advocating for regulation (or at least, regulation ‘with teeth’) and advocating for regulatory capture. One implies the other. I think this is a highly reasonable general position to take about regulation in practice in America in the 21st century. Indeed, similar considerations are a lot of why I expect to agree with Neil’s positions on most non-AI issues - when you plan to regulate, you need to plan for your regulations to by default over time become increasingly captured, and your plan and design must account for this. This reduces the optimal amount of regulatory action, and in some places it can reduce it to zero. When I support taking regulatory action on AI, it is not that I have not considered these problems, or don’t consider them important, although I am sure Neil cares about such factors even more. It is that I have considered these problems, I think they are important, I have taken them into account including in the design, and believe we need to take action anyway, in spite of this. And I believe Anthropic has done the same, and this importantly informs what they are asking for and what they lobby for, which is actively designed to minimize such downsides. Neil does not, in this thread, comment on David Sacks’s second sentence from the same Tweet, which is ‘[Anthropic] is principally responsible for the state regulatory frenzy that is damaging the startup ecosystem.’ I assert that, no matter what you think of the first sentence in isolation, this second sentence is simply false, indeed simply false several distinct times, and also it changes a reasonable person’s interpretation of the claims in the first sentence, to an interpretation that is, again, simply false. If you include other context from other Sacks claims, this becomes even more clear. Thus, to reiterate, I would say that what David Sacks is doing, here and elsewhere, is exactly what most people understand the term ‘sophisticated regulatory capture strategy based on fear-mongering’ to apply to, even if you fully agree with the perspective Neil is advocating for in his full thread. Do not take the bait. Do You Feel In Charge?
Not every time, no. But most of the time, very much so.
What this is doing in an AI post rather than the monthly roundup is left as an exercise to the reader. Tis The Season Of EvilHolly Elmore calls Sam Altman ‘evil’ for the whole ‘endangering the world’ thing, in the context of Altman visiting Lighthaven for the Progress Studies conference,
In response to which, others doth protest back that yes it seems highly reasonable to use the word ‘evil’ here and that no, the main effect of Sam Altman has been to accelerate the development of AI, you can think this is good or you can think this is bad but that’s what he did. I don’t think ‘evil’ is the best descriptor here and try to not use that word to describe humans, but yeah, I also wouldn’t use ‘good’ and I see how you got there:
This very week Holly called yours truly out for ‘sounding like a complete dupe’ regarding Jack Clark and while I strongly believe she was wrong and missing context and it annoyed the hell out of me, I also have no doubt that she is consistently saying what she believes in, and I appreciate both the willingness to say the thing and the moral clarity. As Oliver Habryka confirms, none of this means Sam Altman shouldn’t be welcome at Lighthaven,
On the contrary, Lighthaven is like Sunnydale High School, which famously also allowed some vampires in, as it in spirit it too says ‘all who seek knowledge, enter.’ People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone
The Lighter SideFor fans of the excellent Here’s an alternative idea proposed by Samo Burja,
You're currently a free subscriber to |