---
subject: "Smith Review Stiglitz"
from: "Marginal REVOLUTION <donotreply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-04-23 11:19:24
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tyler Cowen", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2466199532210586699", "UNREAD"]
---
Vernon Smith [reviews](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=e20282afb58df3dcdf77c8aa964578252c9152b7aedc3ae567db9b7e61bc8bd4&blog_id=42693868&post_id=90504&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=861a178bffd2ad619c1c9f3436ac0fc7&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuaW5kZXBlbmRlbnQub3JnL3Rpci8yMDI0LTI1LXdpbnRlci90aGUtcm9hZC10by1mcmVlZG9tLw=&email_id=e1440e423ac0aa8b81d6668b99345b7f) Joe Stiglitz's book [The Road to Freedom](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=60181eee925c700f243a59099184a62e76b43064ba3c38d7984503d06d398c41&blog_id=42693868&post_id=90504&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=093e131453dcfbf8da234394bcfcabed&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYW1hem9uLmNvbS9ncC9wcm9kdWN0LzEzMjQwNzQzN1gvP3RhZz1tYXJnaW5hbHJldm9sLTIw&email_id=e1440e423ac0aa8b81d6668b99345b7f):
Stiglitz did work in the abstract intellectual theoretical tradition of neoclassical economics showing how the standard results were changed by asymmetric or imperfect information. He is oblivious, however, to the experimental lab and field empirical research showing that agent knowledge of all such information is neither necessary nor sufficient for a market to converge to competitive supply-and-demand equilibrium outcomes.
Consequently, both the standard and the modified theories are irrelevant because buyers and sellers in possession only of dispersed, private, decentralized, value information easily converge to competitive price-quantity allocations in experimental markets over time via learning in repeat transactions.
...The first experiments, showing that complete WTP/WTA information was not necessary, were reported in Smith (1962), and none of us could any longer accept the standard and Stiglitz-modified theories. Further experiments, showing that such information was not sufficient, and that equilibrium prices need not require that markets clear, were reported in Smith (1965). (For propositions summarizing and evaluating observed empirical regularities in these experimental markets, see Vernon L. Smith, Arlington Williams, W. K. Bratt, and M. G. Vannoni, 1982, “Competitive Market Institutions: Double Auctions vs. Sealed Bid-Offer Auctions,” American Economic Review 72, no. 1, 58–77; and Vernon L. Smith, 1991,
[Papers in Experimental Economics], Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.) It was natural, in the first market experiments, to investigate those questions, such as the information state of traders, that were central to the abstract economic theory of the time.So, the Akerlof-Stiglitz modifications of theory were founded on a false conditional and thus were not germane to practical market performance. They were born falsified.
...The needed policy implications are quite clear, and they have nothing to do with Stiglitz’s market failure and everything to do with how markets function. Indeed, the appropriate policy recommendation is to fully support the market-system maximization of prosperity, as did Friedman and Hayek, then use incentive mechanisms to improve the relative positions of those who are disadvantaged in that system. Never kill the goose that lays eggs of gold.