---
subject: "NYC Congestion Pricing: Early Days"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-01-14 13:53:11
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
People have to pay $9 to enter Manhattan below 60th Street. What happened so far? Table of ContentsCongestion Pricing Comes to NYCWe’ve now had over a week of congestion pricing in New York City. It took a while to finally get it. The In the end, we got a discount price of $9 in Manhattan south of 60th Street, and it only applies to those who cross the boundary into or out of the zone, but yes we finally did it. As part of this push, there was an existing congestion surcharge of $2.50 for taxis and $2.75 for rideshares. Thus, ‘congestion pricing’ was already partially implemented, and doubtless already having some positive effect on traffic. For rides that start or end within the zone, they’re adding a new charge of $0.75 more for taxis, and $1.50 more for rideshares, so an Uber will now cost an extra $4.25 for each ride, almost the full $9 if you enter and then leave the zone. Going in, I shared an attitude, roughly like these good folks:
Well said. Like any other new policy, the first question is how to enforce it. The answer is, we can all pay via E-ZPass, and if you try to go into the zone without one, we take a picture of your license plate. How Much Is Traffic Improving?Everyone agrees it is dramatically improving
At actual zero traffic these would each take between 2 and 3 minutes to cross, so this is a 50%+ reduction in extra time due to traffic. And it is a vast underestimate of the total time saved, because when we talk about for example ‘delays at the Holland Tunnel’ most of it comes before you reach the tunnel itself. If you want to look yourself,
I agree as well, at relatively lower prices of course. The MTA records a modest reduction in entries into the zone. When we look in absolute numbers, the elasticity looks reasonable - a $9 charge reduced total throughput by ~7.5% (although this doesn’t adjust for the low temperatures), or 43,800 fewer vehicles per day, but that marginal 7.5% can make a huge difference by shifting traffic to a new equilibrium.
Within the city, there are three positions one can take. Traffic is not improving within the city. Traffic is improving within the city, and that’s awesome. Traffic is improving within the city, and that’s… terrible?
Position number one is certainly possible in theory. The data on There are reports claiming that trips that cross into the congestion zone are improved a lot, but within the zone many claim things aren’t changing much.
This is As both Ostrovsky and Cowen note, the correct answer is to charge the fee for cars on the street within the zone, and to raise the fees on taxis to at least match the fees for visitors - although I expect that 50% of the baseline fee for taxi trips within the zone is good enough for equality, because a visitor makes a trip there and then a trip out, or better yet I like the extra per-mile charge as per Ostrovsky, so we don’t overly penalize short trips. And I like that Cowen refers to ‘stiff’ tools - we want enough fees to actually cause people to drive and take taxis less, enough to improve traffic. It does seem like we’ve at least done that with the bridges and tunnels, even at $9. I suspect the congestion tracker isn’t picking up the full situation. Too many others are making observations that suggest the situation is very much otherwise, with greatly reduced traffic. Even if this is due to weather, the tracker should be picking that up, so it’s strange that it isn’t. I’m not sure what to make of that.
This could be biased by it being early January, when traffic typically dies down a bit, and an unusually cold one at that. This is still an overwhelming vote with 90%+ reporting improvement.
One would think that, if one were under that impression, this would result in position number two. Often it does. And That’s Terrible?Now, dear readers, allow me to introduce advocates of position number three!
Drops like that are very obviously some combination of ‘people are able to actually get where they are going faster’ and ‘it was really f***ing cold.’ If they are real. They quite obviously aren’t real. Measured cars coming into the city are down less than 10%. No, a $9 charge did not cause sudden mass abandonment of downtown Manhattan, where many pay $100+ per day in extra rent to live there. Then remember the subway and bus ride counts earlier, and a lot of people walk. Yeah, this was obviously about it being below freezing outside. You Mad, BroThe threads above were examples of some very angry people. A lot of threads about this were like that. The amount of vitriol and hatred that many on Twitter are directing at anyone supportive of congestion pricing is something else. We also have a remarkable amount of ‘NYC is dying and that is a good thing.’ And a lot of ‘you got rid of poor people, congratulations (you monsters).’
The people who don’t like this really, really don’t like this. I’ve seen some nastiness around AI and of course around politics, but somehow this is the worst I’ve seen it. Some of it is accusations of hating or driving out poor people, some of it claims the city is dying (or that it’s good the city is dying). It’s like a 2020-style cancellation mob is trying to form, except it’s 2025 and about congestion pricing, so no one feels the need to care. Then there are the people who felt like this before, All AboardThe purpose of congestion pricing is in part to switch people from cars to trains. Which in turn means, by default, more crowded trains.
Anecdotally I found the same, the trains did seem more crowded than usual. How much more crowded? It can’t be that much, because
The New York Times reports the MTA has it at ~143k workers driving in per day.
The N/R/W isn’t even a relatively good train, it’s relatively slow, someone get on that. A majority of those ~150k daily drivers will presumably pay the $9, only some of them will substitute into the subway or a bus, and some people will increase their trip counts because of the time saved. Total throughput on the bridges and tunnels is down less than 10%. So this doesn’t seem like it should be able to increase ridership directly by that much, plausibly this is capped at ~2% of ridership, So yes mass transit use is up year over year, but it mostly isn’t due to this. That is enough to cause noticeable marginal trouble at rush hour on some lines that were already near capacity, especially the green line (4-5-6) which I was on most often, but you could fix it entirely by running more trains.
There is an obvious easy solution there, of course, which is to add more trains, especially at peak times. The same is true of the subway. If ridership goes up, and you add more trains such that average ridership per train stays the same, everyone is better off, with shorter wait times, and the system is more profitable to boot. That can be an issue if you run out of capacity, but that’s not a physical issue anywhere but maybe the 4-5-6. So at worst this is a short term problem. Time is Money
The legal minimum wage in New York City is $16.50, even entry level service jobs requiring no starting skills mostly pay $20+/hour, babysitters realistically cost $30/hour, and the median salary in Manhattan is $173k/year or $86/hour at full time, within the zone the median is even higher and cost of employment is substantially higher still. The break-even point for congestion pricing, where the employer pays the cost, is super low if there are any traffic benefits whatsoever. Solving For the EquilibriumThe weird part about all this is that $9 is so little money. The price of living in the congestion zone is very high. If you want a one bedroom apartment you can expect to pay over $4,000 a month, or over $130 a day, several times the national average. Or consider the price of parking in the zone. Typically, monthly parking spots are on the order of $600. Daily rates are on the order of $50. Even metered parking is $5.50 for one hour, $9 for two. So it would be very easy for other costs to offset the $9 here.
Whether or not this then raises the necessary congestion price is unclear. The whole situation is showing bizarre levels of elasticity of demand. The $9 charge is clearly very salient and compelling, in ways that other charges aren’t. My guess is that $9 cheaper parking wouldn’t offset it? Of course, if it does, Matt’s right, that’s a win. At the end of the New York Times article we get this:
That’s an unfortunate change, since it doesn’t alter the amount of traffic, and also doesn’t change the amount of congestion pricing paid - someone has to drive either way and he’s basically trying to use default social norms to shift costs onto others. But also it’s kind of strange, given the costs of parking and tolls (and dealing with the traffic!) was already much higher than $9. Enforcement and License Plates
I do not understand how this is permitted to continue. The camera doesn’t read the fake and think ‘oh, that’s legit.’ If you are using any of these tactics, the camera system knows damn well you are using those tactics. So does any traffic cop who sees you. These tactics also are not accidents. There’s no ‘honest mistakes’ here. So make it a rather large fine (as in ‘you might not to claim your car’) to be using such tactics, or worse. Then, when someone tries it, you have incentive to catch them, so you do. And people stop. It’s not like these things happen by accident. Taylor also considers possible adaptations, with one concern being people who try to park uptown then get on the subway, and worries that the charge is not big enough to reduce traffic that much especially given ridesharing. He also worries about future autonomous cars when they arrive. I expect that would be helpful because those cars will be more efficient. Uber Eats the Traffic
I love the new argument that congestion pricing could be reducing fees collected at the bridges and tunnels because fewer people are using them. Sure, to the extent that is happening we should subtract that from net revenue, same with any reduced taxes and fees paid on parking, but it seems fairly obvious that the additional charge for such trips increases net revenue. The other half here is so strange. What supports businesses other than parking garages are the people, not the cars. It doesn’t matter whether the person also parked a car. Yes, I suppose this means less support for parking garages, hang on while I play the world’s tiniest violin that some of those might transition to something else. The Ubers and Lyfts take up more space on the roads, but they take up vastly less space in parking lots which is also expensive to provide, and they do so while transporting passengers. If you’re driving yourself and can park at will, you can in theory get 100% of miles ‘on meter’ but realistically you have to park, and people will often be driving someone else and have to go out of their way, and so on. When my in-laws drive us back to the city, that’s 50% utilization for all practical purposes. My guess would be it’s something like 60% for the apps vs. 80% otherwise for time on road. Which is a real difference. But if you count ‘time in park’ then the apps are way ahead, and you at least partially should. We Can Do Even Better Via Congestion TollsAs currently implemented, congestion pricing in Manhattan is highly second best.
As with the rest of this, people complain ‘but that will sometimes cost money and that’s bad, I don’t want to pay that,’ and the correct reply is ‘getting you to not pay that is exactly the point.’ This trades off against higher transaction costs and confusion and stress. Do we want people continuously checking traffic prices and adjusting their plans and having this take up their head space, likely far out of proportion to the charges involved? What we actually mostly want is for people to shift into relatively good habits and patterns, I think, rather than to respond that much in real time to conditions. So my guess is we want a compromise - we should be doing more to charge extra at rush hour and other expected peak times, but in predictable ways. We already do a bit of this with night and weekend discounts. The other flaw is that we are not charging people for trips within the zone, except for taxis and rideshares. We can and should fix that, if your car is on the street within the zone at all you should pay the charge for the day, for the same reason everyone else pays. Tyler Cowen blames this on political economy, my presumption is it is actually about enforcement being a lot easier if you only have to watch the borders. Abundance Agenda Fever Dream
This would obviously be a great idea, so long as there was substantial congestion that you would want to price. But no, I don’t think this is how it works. People don’t respond to this kind of logic. If they did, we’d all have carbon pricing by now. When I look at the pure vitriol coming from congestion pricing opponents, I do not get the sense that it is at all tied to a budget crisis. I also don’t get the sense that ‘but we cut sales taxes’ would make them feel better. Indeed, I think it would make them even more mad. They’d say you were taxing poor people’s cars and using it to discount rich people’s lattes. It will be a few months before we have enough different conditions, and enough time for adjustments, to start to draw robust conclusions about effect sizes. A lot of this is complicated by the gradual rebirth of Manhattan in the wake of Covid, with trips into the city up substantially year over year for other reasons, and by the partial implementation via most of the taxi congestion charges having already gone live before. Certainly this wasn’t a fully first best implementation. The prices are almost certainly too low, and we need to charge for travel within the zone. But it’s a great start. The Lighter SideYou're currently a free subscriber to |