---
subject: "Information as a Universal Complement and Universal Substitute"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <byrne@thediff.co>"
to: ""
date: 2023-08-07 13:29:28
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
|
In this issue: - Information as a Universal Complement and Universal Substitute
- Diff Jobs
- Making a Market
- Financial Innovation
- IRL
- Open-Ended Liabilities
- Meme Stock Relapse
Information as a Universal Complement and Universal SubstituteTwo useful ingredients in microeconomic analysis are complements and substitutes. They are the somewhat rare case where a term of art means almost precisely what it sounds like: goods A and B are complements if a decrease in the price of A leads to an increase in demand for B, all else being equal. The most stylized example of compliments is a fun one about shoes: a decrease in the demand for left shoes increases the demand for right shoes, and the most realistic example describes the relationship between gas prices and cars (particularly heavy, fuel-inefficient ones). On the other hand, substitutability is the case where a decrease in the price of good A leads to a decrease in consumption for B, because consumers switch. Consider what on-demand streaming has done to linear TV, or what more convenient food delivery has done to home cooking. This is a great theoretical model for reasoning about some price changes, but it quickly gets tricky. Even early on we found Even though they're microeconomic concepts, the visible real-world impact of complementary and substitutability are visible on a macro scale. The story of economic growth in the twentieth century is a story of cheaper energy being complementary to an increasing number of activities, from manufacturing to transportation (and, thanks to cheaper transportation, to services—you'd go to fewer nice dinners or shows if you were traveling on horseback!). It's also a story of substituting mechanical for manual labor; the average kitchen in the developed world is a testament to how much labor can be replaced by appliances. - Continuing to use hydrocarbons for power instead of shifting wholesale to nuclear (though some of the impact of this is offset, decades into the process, by adopting renewables-plus-storage).
- The inability to drive meaningful productivity growth in healthcare and education, two sectors that have been highly resistant to automation.
- Service sector growth is partly driven by the substitutability of labor: at some point, engineers drive the cost of making some physical goods low enough that the price cuts can't stimulate much more marginal demand. And if students switch from majoring in engineering to aiming for law school, they end up in a career that creates more demand for its services as headcount rises.
Economic growth since the 1970s has been strongly skewed towards 1) the IT sector itself, and 2) sectors that can benefit from its increases in efficiency. That process had been running at an impressive pace for decades, and has recently inflected positively thanks to AI. But understanding its economic impact partly means figuring out whether knowledge/information/compute are more of a complement or a substitute. There are cases for both. On the substitution side, software has been eating the world for a very long time. One early example of this came during the Apollo Program, when NASA was able to eschew a heavy heat shield by programming the guidance computer to slowly rotate the craft instead. Earlier than that, Vannevar Bush's differential analyzer was On the complement side, consider finance, which is plausibly the field most impacted by automated information processing and storage given how much of it consists of the manual kind. All of the activity in
All of this is to say that lowering the cost of transactions doesn’t just increase their frequency; it also increases their complexity. Something that would have been a weird prop bet decades ago ("GE probably won't go up 10% this month, but if it does the least it would go up is 15%") is easy to construct with options. More esoteric bets are available, particularly to institutional investors. This breadth of potential transactions means that more activities can either directly reference the market—as in the case of widespread stock-based compensation—or can indirectly reference it through hedging. At the level of tasks, rather than jobs, it's very easy to see easy access to information as a complement to just about everything. If there's something you need to do around your house or involving your car, there is almost certainly a wealth of information on YouTube about how to do it slightly better; if there's something you need to do involving a computer, it's very likely that someone has done something similar enough that the answer is available on blogs, Stack Exchange, or through ChatGPT. Part of the trouble with fitting "knowledge" into a goods-and-services framework is that one of the simplifying assumptions in microeconomic models is that we can define a set of goods that are, for the model's purpose, totally homogeneous. If you're reasoning about the price of bread, it's always possible to interject with "Whole wheat or white? Fresh-baked or not?" etc. to complicate the analysis. But at some point, we just treat it as a fixed category so we can talk about the cross-elasticity of bread and cold cuts. But we can't do this with knowledge. Once you start We can, of course, impose some homogeneity on our bits. Whether we're looking at tick data from an exchange or streaming a video, there are some sets of data that come in in a roughly predictable way, where each bit is fairly likely to be as valuable as the last one or the next one. This is especially frustrating because the knowledge economy is growing as a share of the overall economy. The top ten companies by market cap right now include one oil company, one holding company, one car company that The good news is that if it's truly universal in its role as both a complement and a substitute, all is not lost: we'll still notice the effects, and even be able to measure where they're strongest by looking at variation in productivity growth across industries. But as we do so, we'll have to acknowledge that the fundamental source of economic growth is itself a form of economic dark matter. One of the most evocative summaries of this effect comes from * [The Path to Power](https://www.thediff.co/r/326884c4?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99), which has a section on the literally backbreaking labor the average housewife had to do in the Texas Hill Country before electrification.[↩︎](#fnref1)Though in both cases, there's still heterogeneity. If your exchange feed cuts out the moment a flash crash happens, or you miss a critical bit of foreshadowing in a show you're watching, you know some bits are more equal than others. [↩︎](#fnref2)Even Berkshire is an edge case here. Insurance is certainly a market that benefits from an increase in available data and processing power to analyze it, and Buffett is now slouch at consuming and interpreting information himself. Though in that case, it's more about the individual than about the company; it's entirely possible that Buffett has experienced a productivity paradox of his own if the opportunity cost of [an eight hour a week online bridge habit](https://www.thediff.co/r/972bcdb7?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)exceeds whatever productivity gains he's experienced from personally using computers.[↩︎](#fnref3)
You're on the free list for The Diff, but most of our content is paywalled—here's what you missed this week: Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. A sampling of current open roles: - A vertically integrated PE-backed cannabis company is looking for a data analyst with visualization experience. Excel wizards encouraged to reach out. (Little Rock, AR—no remote, but relocation assistance is possible)
- A proprietary trading firm is seeking systematic-oriented traders with ML experience—ideally someone who has displayed excellence in DS and ML, like a Kaggle Master. (Montreal)
- A company building the new pension of the 21st century and building universal basic capital is looking for a product manager with fintech experience. (NYC)
- A startup building a new financial market within a multi-trillion dollar asset class is looking for generalists with banking and legal experience. (US, Remote)
- A hedge fund is looking for a researcher who is deeply familiar with alternative data sources (transactions, clickstream, app usage, scraping, others), who is comfortable with coding (NYC).
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. ElsewhereMaking a MarketThe US government is One interesting feature of the carbon economy is that, operating on the assumption that CO2 reduction rather than geoengineering and mitigation are the best approaches, there are really two parts of the market. One is reducing emissions, which is often a side effect of driving the sorts of efficiencies the private sector tries to attain anyway. The fact that US emissions per capita are Financial InnovationMaxfield on Banks has a IRLThe metrics fraud story at IRL
There's a longer tradition of auditing GAAP accounting than company-specific KPIs, and there is sometimes variance in how companies define some of the metrics they report. There are, presumably, some acquisitive companies that are very good at auditing app usage and web traffic claims to look for suspicious partners, either in the adtech space or among serial acquirers like System1 and Red Ventures. But for other acquirers (like JPMorgan) or investors (like Softbank), there isn't a standard set of best practices for auditing user numbers, and without revenue to tie them to reality, it's hard to tell the difference between a hit and a scam. Open-Ended LiabilitiesNew features for software products fit into a 2x2 matrix, with one axis representing how useful the feature is and another representing how cool it sounds. In the "Useful/uncool" quadrant would be endless tweaks to recommendation and spam-detection algorithms, all of which slowly nudge the product towards being just a bit more addictive. And in the other corner would be features like Meme Stock RelapseMeme stocks |
||
|
|
|
|||
|