---
subject: "5 (more) charts that explain crypto right now"
from: "a16z crypto <a16zcrypto@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-11-01 15:57:23
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "a16zcrypto"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_2535365729249697677"]
---
IN THIS EDITION: The data behind the stablecoin surge and four more metrics that explain crypto right now What’s different about measuring growth in crypto — which metrics no longer apply and which need to be adapted The a16z crypto team talks [State of Crypto 2025](https://substack.com/redirect/f2499eeb-b712-458b-bbd1-7b4ee667f18c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Stablecoins meet IRL payment rails
As we start looking back on 2025, here are five of the metrics that defined the industry this year, from stablecoin transaction volume to developer activity and blockchain throughput. And for more key indicators, check out our Stablecoins are doing trillions in transaction volume
They’ve done $46 trillion in total transaction volume in the last year, up 106% from the year before. That’s nearly 3x that of Visa’s transaction volume, and is approaching the volume of the ACH network that plumbs the entire U.S. banking system. While these are not apples-to-apples comparisons, the sheer volume highlights just how large this trend has become. (The stablecoin figures mostly represent financial flows versus retail payments for card and other networks.) A better measure of organic activity looks at adjusted stablecoin transaction volume, which filters out bots and other artificially inflationary activity. On this basis, stablecoins have done $9 trillion in volume in the last 12 months. This is more than 5x PayPal’s throughput. So why have stablecoins exploded so quickly in size and popularity? Head of Data and Fund Strategy Daren Matsuoka explains: Blockchains can process more than 3,400 transactions per secondIn just five years, aggregate transaction throughput across major blockchain networks has increased more than 100x. Back then, blockchains processed fewer than 25 transactions per second. Now they process 3,400 transactions per second, which is on par with Stripe’s global throughput on Black Friday — at a fraction of the historical cost. Solana’s high-performance, low-fee blockspace now underpins everything from DePIN projects to NFT marketplaces, with its native applications generating $3 billion in revenue in the past year. As Ethereum continues to execute on its scaling roadmap, most of its economic activity is migrating to L2s. Average transaction costs on L2s have dropped from around $24 in 2021 to less than one cent today. Ethereum, Solana, Bitcoin, and Base are attracting the most developersEthereum and its L2s were the top destination for new builders in 2025. Meanwhile, Solana is one of the fastest-growing ecosystems, with builder interest increasing by 78% in the last two years. This analysis from the a16z crypto investment team is a reflection of the number of founders who tell us which ecosystem they are building on or are interested in building on. You can take a closer look at how these trends are changing over time in the State of Crypto Users want more privacyHere are a few indicators of growing interest and momentum: Google searches related to crypto privacy surged in 2025 Zcash’s shielded pool supply grew to nearly 4 million ZEC Railgun’s transaction flows surpassed $200 million monthly The Ethereum Foundation formed a new privacy team Paxos partnered with Aleo on a private, compliant stablecoin (USAD) The Office of Foreign Assets Control lifted sanctions on decentralized privacy protocol [Tornado Cash](https://substack.com/redirect/6bbaca75-bd6f-4dd1-87db-fa9c3a459028?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)
We expect this trend to gain even more momentum as crypto continues to go mainstream. For more, here’s a16z crypto CTO Eddy Lazzarin on why blockchain privacy is more urgent than ever: 13 million memecoins launched in the last yearMore than 13 million memecoins A lack of regulatory clarity in the U.S. may have contributed to this surge. During the last administration, it was This trend appears to be cooling down in recent months: There were 56% fewer launches in September than in January. Which metrics matter most?What metrics are we tracking in 2025? Here are [5 metrics](https://substack.com/redirect/d9aa842c-421f-4d99-b94a-d53a0594cf79?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)to watch and how[they’ve evolved](https://substack.com/redirect/66677235-9aec-41b4-8494-acc5f4f9965f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)this year.What’s different about crypto growth metrics? Here are [the metrics](https://substack.com/redirect/8c6dc3ae-75ff-46c4-b9cb-aa81c3f6576a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)that are unique to crypto, which metrics no longer apply, and which need to be adapted.
AROUND THE WEB Investing is a test of conviction and patienceChris Dixon on TPBN Investing is an emotional test disguised as an intellectual one, says a16z crypto Founder and Managing Partner Chris Dixon. In his recent TPBN interview, he also talks about why institutions have shifted from doubt to adoption; how AI, robotics, and crypto are reinforcing “megatrends”; and more. Inside the 2025 State of Crypto ReportDaren Matsuoka and Robert Hackett on Milk Road What’s the state of the crypto industry? In short: it’s growing up. As a16z crypto’s Daren Matsuoka and Robert Hackett discuss on Milk Road’s podcast and The price-innovation cycle: Where are we now?Daren Matsuoka and Eddy Lazzarin on Bankless Why did ETFs and memecoins lead the market rally of 2024? What’s different about this cycle? And will the next phase of crypto be developer-driven? Daren and Eddy argue yes on this Bankless podcast. With blockchains now capable of processing 3,400 transactions per second, the bottlenecks are shifting from throughput and scalability to user experience and regulation. NEWS AND UPDATES Stablecoins meet IRL payment railsOne of the biggest legacy payments networks is now embracing blockchain rails for real-world money movement: Western Union just Meanwhile, payments processor — a16z crypto editorial team You’re receiving this newsletter because you signed up for it on our websites, at an event, or elsewhere (you can opt out any time using the ‘unsubscribe’ link below). This newsletter is provided for informational purposes only, and should NOT be relied upon as legal, business, investment, or tax advice. This newsletter may link to other websites or other information obtained from third-party sources — a16z has not independently verified nor makes any representations about the current or enduring accuracy of such information. Furthermore, the content is not directed at nor intended for use by any investors or prospective investors in any a16z funds. Please see a16z.com/disclosures for additional important details, including link to list of investments. subscribe to our podcast ' |