---
subject: "The Nutgraf: Airtel finds the gap between Truecaller and Trai"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-09-28 04:52:31
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
A couple of quick updates:
1. First, The Nutgraf will be off for a couple of weeks in mid-October. I’ll be gone on my usual annual vacation. My plan is to publish the results of the Product Management survey next week (it’s taking more time than I expected!), and after that, I’ll be back on 26 October with the usual stuff.
2. Second, do listen to this week’s episode of Two by Two if you haven’t already. It’s one of my favourite episodes—[Netflix’s last growth market](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/two-by-two/netflixs-last-growth-market/). My co-host Rohin Dharmakumar and I are joined by two wonderful guests: Kunj Sanghvi (VP Content at KukuFM, ex-COO InsideIIM) and Nishad Kenkre (Operating Partner at Verlinvest, Ex-Head of Revenue and Growth at Swiggy Instamart, Ex-Head of Strategy at Disney India). We talk about why Netflix missed opportunities to create “export quality” Indian content, and how it can secure its future by winning in India.
I had a lot of fun disagreeing with everyone. Great weekend listen.
If you are a Premium subscriber of The Ken, you can listen to the latest full, subscriber-only episode of Two by Two on The Ken’s mobile app [here](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/two-by-two/netflixs-last-growth-market/?utm_source=twobytwo&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=twobytwo), and on Apple Podcasts [here](https://podcasts.apple.com/in/podcast/two-by-two/id1757938645).
Okay, that’s it. On to the edition.
Just recently, I found out that Truecaller has 270 million monthly active users in India, making it one of the most popular consumer apps in the country. Personally, I don’t use Truecaller, so I had no idea it was that popular.
Two-hundred-and-seventy million! And such a deceptively simple product, with a clear proposition. Even the way it works is quite straightforward—collect data about numbers in a “crowd-sourced” manner from everyone’s contact books, and use it to inform users about who is calling them so they can decide if they want to pick up the call or not. I know that’s a bit of an oversimplification, but that’s really the heart of what Truecaller does.
Truecaller is one of those startups that should have been an Indian startup, but isn’t. I’m amazed how it took a Swedish company to create a product to solve a problem that millions of Indians were experiencing for decades. Perhaps some entrepreneur in India came up with a similar idea a long time ago, but never got funding from VCs.
I say this because India is a country that’s practically under siege from spam callers. The incentives for spam calling are both economic and social. First, telecom rates in India are one of the cheapest in the world, so the costs of calling, say, a million people to pitch them a home loan totally works if you can succeed in selling it to a handful of them. Second, we live in a place where there are no social costs to calling people up at random hours to sell them something they don’t need. Add on things like the lack of a robust (and enforceable) spam-reporting structure, a much-delayed data protection law, and well… you can see how Truecaller found its place.
Everyone in India is part of a spam calling ‘cohort’. Some are stuck receiving endless calls offering them all forms of insurance. Others are part of the lending cohort, i.e., ‘Do you want a personal loan?’. For some reason, spam callers have put me in the SaaS target segment. I’ve been offered ‘cloud solutions’ so often that I’ve started wondering, do I actually need a cloud solution to fix my life?
India is now a country where it’s harder to get Coldplay tickets than it is to ask people to stop calling you. It’s truly a peculiar set of circumstances.
Anyway, back to Truecaller.
Truecaller’s business model is straightforward. First, it inserts itself into your life by offering a free service to help you filter people who want to get in touch with you. It does this and gets entrenched in your life. Then it goes to the businesses who are trying to reach you, and offers them a way to do it better in exchange for a fee. Then it comes back to you, and in exchange for a subscription, offers you a few additional services apart from just seeing who is calling you. Truecaller sits in the middle, between the businesses who are trying to reach you and consumers who want peace and quiet, and offers services to both sides. This model is more common than you’d think (See MyGate).
Anyway, all of this is a long backstory for what happened last week.
Bharti Airtel on Wednesday launched India’s first network-based, AI-powered spam detection solution to address the issue of spam calls and messages for its customers.
“A first-of-its-kind solution by a telecom service provider in the country, the tool will alert customers in real-time to all suspected spam calls and SMSes. The solution is free of cost and will get auto-activated for all Airtel customers without them having to raise a service request or download an app,” the company said in a press release.
Gopal Vittal, Managing Director and Chief Executive Officer, Bharti Airtel said, “Spam has become a menace for customers. We have spent the last twelve months to solve this comprehensively. Today marks a milestone as we launch the country’s first AI-powered spam free network that will shield our customers from the continuous onslaught of intrusive and unwanted communications”.
Airtel launches India’s first Al-powered network solution for spam detection, [Mint](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/telecom/telecom-news/airtel-launches-indias-first-al-powered-network-solution-for-spam-detection/articleshow/113656522.cms?from=mdr)
Hah!
Essentially, in fell swoop, a telecom company has gone up the stack and made something in the application layer somewhat redundant. This would be a little like, say, the Prestige Group offering a MyGate-type application.
Of course, at this point, you may be tempted to ask—what took Airtel so long to do this? Surely curbing spam calls is something that telecom companies can do better than any mobile app, so this could have been done earlier? Was Airtel asleep at the wheel?
Well, the answer is a bit more complicated, and it all begins with the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India’s (Trai) priorities and how it has historically viewed spam calling. There’s a long history to how Trai approached spam. This context is important if you want to understand why and how Airtel is stepping in to solve this problem.
Trai has made curbing spam a major priority, and to do this, they’ve had two approaches—one conventional and the other unconventional.
Back in 2018, the unconventional solution that Trai came up with to curb spam was… believe it or not, blockchain.
Yes.
So here’s how it worked. Trai wanted all businesses to register their entities, their message templates, and anything they sent as communication to their customers via SMS on a DLT (Distributed Ledger Technology)—essentially a blockchain that was built and maintained by telecom companies.
This sounds really novel, but nobody was particularly happy with this. Telecom companies believed that this would make SMS unviable as a channel. Businesses were unwilling to comply with these regulations—which they believed was onerous. Some of them even challenged this in court. But finally, after a long delay, Trai insisted and pushed and pulled everyone screaming on the blockchain.
And how did that work out?
Well, let’s just say it took time… a lot of time. The implementation is complicated, and there are several moving parts. Telecom companies asked for more time. Trai insisted they do it soon. And after some danger of SMS services being disrupted and nearly six years of back and forth, Trai gave everyone a final deadline to implement the whitelisting system connected to the blockchain that was intended to solve for spam.
And what’s the final, final deadline?
Day after tomorrow.
After telcos, banks and others highlighted that message delivery may get disrupted on September 1 due to the whitelisting mandate for certain messages, the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (Trai) has extended the deadline by one month.
In a directive issued a few weeks ago, the regulator had asked telcos to stop transmitting messages containing URLs, OTT links, APKs (Android application packages) or call-back numbers that are not whitelisted—or registered with telcos—by senders from September 1.
But the industry urged the regulator to give some more time for implementing the mandate as they need to update their system, failing which there could be large-scale disruption in delivering service and transactional messages.
“Top executives from the stakeholders like banks and telecom firms urged for the extension. They said they will ensure compliance after the extension, so some more time is being given to them,” an official said. Trai has now extended the deadline to October 1.
India escapes SMS outage as Trai rule on hold till September 30, [The Economic Times](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/telecom/telecom-news/trai-likely-to-extend-whitelisting-deadline/articleshow/112925065.cms?from=mdr)
That’s just one part of what Trai is doing to curb spam calling. The other thing they’ve been battling with telecom companies is to implement CNAP (Calling Name Presentation service). Essentially, this is like a built-in caller identification for everyone. This has been in the works since 2022, and if implemented, will practically make Truecaller redundant. However, telecom companies are opposed to CNAP for reasons ranging from privacy concerns, costs, and difficulty of implementation due to legacy technology in devices and in the network infrastructure.
In this gap, came Airtel’s solution.
What makes the Airtel solution interesting is that it’s one of those moves that practically solves everything. It’s implemented at the network level and does not reveal the identity of the caller, but it tells you whether a call is ‘suspected spam’—which is exactly what most users want to know. Because it’s implemented at the network layer, it does not have to go into complex stuff like blockchain or do a lot of work integrating systems it’s unfamiliar with. Also, and most importantly, it gives Airtel a way to monetise the feature—just like Truecaller. Tomorrow, Airtel can charge businesses and consumers for add-ons to make this service better.
And finally, Airtel’s figured out an actual use-case for AI.
I mean, it’s beautiful.
Regards,
Praveen Gopal Krishnan