---
subject: "AI #70: A Beautiful Sonnet"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-06-27 14:36:03
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
They said it couldn’t be done. No, not No, not the Claude-Sonnet-empowered automatic meme generators. Those were whipped together in five minutes. They said I would never get quiet time and catch up. Well, I showed them! That’s right. Yes, there is a new best model, but otherwise it was a quiet week. I got a chance to incorporate the remaining biggest backlog topics. The RAND report is covered under Thirty Eight Ways to Steal Your Model Weights. Last month’s conference in Seoul is covered in You’ve Got Seoul. Table of Contents
Introduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. I am increasingly persuaded. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. EU’s DMA versus the AiPhone. Clauding Along. More people, mostly impressed. Fun With Image Generation. They are coming for our memes. Then Hollywood. Copyright Confrontation. The RIAA does the most RIAA thing. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. Character.ai addiction. Am I out of touch? They Took Our Jobs. More arguments that the issues lie in the future. The Art of the Jailbreak. We need to work together as a team. Get Involved. AISI, Apollo, Astra, Accra, BlueDot, Cybersecurity and DOE. Introducing. Forecasting, OpenAI Mac App, Otto, Dot, Butterflies, Decagon. In Other AI News. OpenAI equity takes steps forward. You can sell it. Quiet Speculations. A distinct lack of mojo. You’ve Got Seoul. Delayed coverage of the Seoul summit from last month. Thirty Eight Ways to Steal Your Model Weights. Right now they would all work. The Quest for Sane Regulations. Steelmanning restraint. SB 1047. In Brief. The Week in Audio. Dwarkesh interviews Tony Blair, and many more. Rhetorical Innovation. A demolition, and also a disputed correction. People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Don’t give up. Invest wisely. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone. What even is ASI? The Lighter Side. Eventually the AI will learn.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
I do believe the result that none of the models was ‘more persuasive than human baseline’ in the test, but that is based on uncustomized messages on generic political topics. Of course we should not expect above human performance there for current models.
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
Sometimes I wonder if these false positives are good, actually? If the AI thinks an AI wrote your paper, and instead you wrote your paper, what does that say about your work? What grade do you deserve? Clauding AlongTakes on Claude 3.5 continue to come in. While I consider Claude 3.5 to be clearly best for most purposes right now,
It is always weird to see what people think about ‘the common man.’ The common man does not know Claude exists, and barely knows about ChatGPT. This comment was in response to Teortaxes:
So there’s AI takeover risk, then? And it is being created now, from alignment failures being observed now? Huh. I do see how one could worry about what Teortaxes worries about here. But I see it as indicating rather than creating a problem. The true problem does not go away if you force the existing model to stop expressing it. If most people are reporting that plugging in Sonnet 3.5 gives them much better performance? I am inclined to believe them. Nor do I think instruction handling issues are that big a deal here, but I will keep an eye out for other complaints.
Fun with Image GenerationClaude makes it easy to create automatic meme generators.
Good fun was had by all,
The original took all of five minutes to create. It often seems like that is where our society is at. We can do things in five minutes, or we can take forever. Choose.
His call for creatives to think about themselves like software engineers, who only benefited from advances in tech, does not seem like something to say to creatives. It needs to be appreciated in all such discussions the extent to which almost all creatives, and also most consumers and fans, absolutely despise AI in this context. He also does not appreciate the extent to which the technology is not ready. All this talk of innovation and new forms and six second dance videos illustrates that it will be a bit before AI is all that visibly or centrally useful for producing great work. They should use it the same ways everyone should use it. Yes, it helps you code and implement things, it helps you learn and so on. Do all that. But directly generating a ton of content on its own as opposed to helping a human write? Not well, not yet. His talk of the ‘$1000 blockbuster movie’ forgets that such a movie would suck, and also cost vastly more than that if you count the labor of the writers and coders.
Copyright Confrontation
Did Suno and Udio do the crime? Oh, hell yes. They very much went with the ‘we are doing it and daring you to sue us’ strategy. The question is, are they allowed to do it, or not? We are about to find out. This is good. We should have that fight and find out what current law says. If it turns out current law says you can train on any song you want, and produce soundalike versions on demand, without compensation? My strong prediction is that Congress would change the law very quickly. In other copyright news:
The evidence is a little thin, but what a great title, chef’s kiss by Wired: Perplexity did not do one of their previously reported ‘post a version of the full article to our own website’ specials. What they did do was provide a summary upon request, which included accessing the article and reproducing this sentence: “Instead, it invented a story about a young girl named Amelia who follows a trail of glowing mushrooms in a magical forest called Whisper Woods.” That sentence was obviously not a coincidence, but as Wired notes it is not fully clear this crosses any red lines, although not having quote marks was at best a very bad look. I doubt they will be able to make anything stick unless they find worse. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse SoonTo the extent there is already an ongoing Botpocalypse it is likely at Character.ai.
When I look there, I continue to not see the appeal at current tech levels.
I do my best not to kink shame. This is no exception. My objection is not to the scenario being role played. It is purely that the AI is not yet… good at it?
They Took Our Jobs
This seems to be a very patient, well reasoned reiteration of all the standard economic arguments about how technology always creates new jobs to replace the ones it automates away, and how yes you might have a robot or chatbot do X but then the human will need to do Y. As I’ve noted before, I agree that we should be short term jobs optimists, but there could come a point at which the robot or chatbot also does Y and also new thing Z. But that is because, like most people making such arguments, Michael Strain does not feel the AGI. He thinks AI is a tool like any other, and will always remain so, and then writes at length about why tools don’t create structural unemployment. True, they don’t, but this is completely missing the point. It is telling that while he mentions Eliezer Yudkowsky and existential risk in his opening paragraph, he then spends all his time talking about economics and jobs without noticing the ways AI is different, and with zero mention of existential risk, and then closes like this:
What does one have to do with the other? That is very similar to saying:
Presumably one can see that none of that has anything to do with whether doing so is pumping carbon into the atmosphere, and whether that is altering the climate. It has nothing to do with what we should or should not do about that. It flat out is not evidence one way or another. On jobs the argument is better. It is a good explanation for why in the short term this time will be the same time. In the short term, I buy that argument. Such arguments still fail to grapple with any of the reasons that long term, this time is different.
What’s it good for? Mainly productivity. Access to information is also essentially productivity, after all. The Art of the JailbreakOne alternative to jailbreaking is to Well, sure. A strong model can help you do anything better without directly violating ethics, the same way you can get a lot of help out of ethical people and use that plus unethical henchman to do lots of unethical things. That does not mean the safeguards are useless. In practice they are still big barriers if they force you into this song and dance. Also note that the strategic planning layer has to be done by the weaker model, so that makes it much harder to get humans properly out of the loop. Get Involved
Introducing
I notice this use case confuses me. What makes this model better than alternatives for that? They offer some evaluation numbers, which are solid but seem disappointing for a model this large, and few are discussing this release. Indeed, it has entered the Arena Elo rankings at 1208, which essentially ties it with Llama-3-70B while being five times as large.
Decagon,
They gave scaffolding to the models. Their central technique for cyber capabilities was ‘capture the flag’ problems, where you can read the answer in a file if you do other things first. For chemistry and biology they used private expert-written questions. Agent evaluations assigned the models various tasks, none succeeded at anything with a long time horizon. Safeguard checks… did not go well. They have now done evaluations prior to release for Gemini 1.5 Pro and Claude 3.5 Sonnet. This all looks reasonable, but implementation matters and is hard to evaluate from here, and this will need to expand over time. In Other AI News
The exception is if a tender offer is oversubscribed, with more sellers than buyers, in which case current employees get prioritized. A loophole, but fair enough. Former employees can still be excluded from ‘donation rounds,’ which I assume is relatively minor but not nothing. These changes are a major step forward, if we trust these promises to be enacted, as a lot of this is ‘we will do X’ or ‘we will revise the documents to say Y.’ If they are not enacted as promised, that would be a gigantic red flag. If we feel that makes the promises sufficiently credible, then this counts for a lot.
Um, Bloomberg, how exactly would Meta do that? Meta’s models are open weights. Is Meta going to say ‘we are asking you nicely not to use our model, if we discover you copied and used it anyway we will be cross with you?’ Are they going to sue the Chinese companies for not getting a commercial license? Good luck with that. Also, it pains me when I see reports like this that cite Meta as part of the lead group in AI but that do not mention Anthropic, despite Anthropic having the best model.
Quiet Speculations
I mean, sure, in peacetime, when everyone is mostly fine with that. If we are in AGI world, and a few months lead in tech would if implemented be decisive, what happens then? Presumably we go on a wartime footing and throw our procurement rules out the window. Wartime militaries work completely differently from peacetime militaries. If not, well, then our military is going to stop being effective, even against domestic rivals, because being 10 years behind is going to be quite obviously fatal even in relatively slow scenarios.
What’s weird about GPT-4o is actually that it scores so well on Arena, versus my observation that it is fine but not that good.
Ability at math competitions is bizarrely strongly correlated among humans with later winning Fields Medals for doing frontier math, despite the tasks being highly distinct.
What happens by default, if capabilities keep advancing, is that those who do let AIs make those decisions win and those who don’t let them make those decisions lose. Keeping humans in the loop is cheaper for strategic decisions than tactical ones, but still expensive. After some point, humans subtract rather than add value to AI decisions, even by their own metrics, except that not doing so means you lose control. That’s the game. You could ask for recommendations, but what happens when it is clear that when you disagree you are by default making things worse, while also wasting valuable time?
There is a lot of wishcasting here. The AGIs will rapidly be doing lots of things no one can understand. Events will presumably be well out of our control. Yet being somewhat less completely confused, or getting completely confused slower, will be where it is at, and will pay meaningful dividends in real world outcomes? This requires threading quite a few needles. Your expertise has to give you better understanding, despite the AGIs being able to explain things. That has to let you make better decisions. Your better decisions have to matter. Even taking his metaphor at face value, are returns to being athletic higher? Yes, you can make quite a lot of money by being the very best. But you can be outrageously good at athletics, as in a minor league baseball player, and get very little return. Even trying for college scholarships is quite the sweepstakes. This is a winners-take-all (or at least most) competition.
It is hard to imagine, short of it being completely botched and useless, an early warning system being a bad use of funds. You’ve Got SeoulWhat happened in Seoul last month? Mostly: Diplomacy happened. That makes it difficult to know whether things moved forward. In diplomacy (as I understand it) most time is spent establishing foundation and trust, laying groundwork for the final agreement. But always, always, always, when it comes to the bottom line, nothing is done until everything is done. Still, this commitment goes beyond that and seems like an excellent start?
That is remarkably similar to SB 1047.
In order to comply with this, you need to detail your safety protocols, which also means detailing what is being trained in at least a broad sense. You have to have procedures to verify your mitigations. You have to comply with shifting international standards and best practices that are not defined in advance. The only substantial parts missing are the shutdown protocol and protecting the model weights until such time as they are intentionally released. Also the thresholds are set by the companies rather than the governments. This seems worse for everyone, in the sense that a government standard offers safe harbor, whereas not having one opens the door to arbitrary declarations later. So if this is so terrible, presumably companies would not sign… oh.
I am not saying that is ‘everyone’ but aside from some Chinese companies it is remarkably close to everyone who is anyone.
What else happened?
I do not know why anyone would have any hope for the United Nations. I worry that saying ‘the UN should take a leading role’ is a lot like saying ‘we should do nothing.’ Then again, if we already believe all five security council members have de facto vetoes over everything anyway, then does it change anything? I don’t know.
They got everyone together. They got China and America into the same room. There were calls for cooperation between many AI safety institutes. The interim international scientific report was unanimously welcomed. In Imane’s opinion, IISR is ‘history in the making.’
Again, that’s diplomacy. Did it matter? Hard to say.
AI safety institutes say they will partner and share info. Companies make the commitments above. [US AISI within NIST releases strategic vision](https://substack.com/redirect/382c15ec-8ca4-4f9f-b3a6-0a86011d4b8d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)([full version here](https://substack.com/redirect/67d63627-0c4e-40d6-ac82-bcdb8166eaaf?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)).[Soul Ministerial Statement is super explicit about existential risk.](https://substack.com/redirect/fb8d063b-6662-44a6-a9f3-84f05b0fee80?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)UK government sets up $11mm grant program for AI safety.
I looked over the NIST strategic vision. I have no particular objections to it, but neither does it involve much detail. It is a case of successfully not messing up. Some have ambitious further plans.
Contrast this with SB 1047. This would heavily regulate above 10^25 including full bans on open source (until a protocol is designed to allow this to happen safety, they say, no idea what that would be), with no adjustments over time. SB 1047 starts at 10^26, requires only reasonable assurance, and has a $100 million minimum such that the threshold will rapidly scale higher very soon. Indeed, the ICFG says the threshold This also proposes a ban on ‘long term planning agents,’ which unfortunately is not how any of this works. I don’t know how to allow short term planning agents, and effectively stop people from making long term ones. What would that mean in practice?
What about the full They even say that a loss of control of highly capable AI systems is ‘not necessarily catastrophic.’ That is the only time the word ‘catastrophic’ is used, and they do not say ‘existential.’ ‘Extinction’ is only mentioned once, in the section directly after that, entitled ‘AI researchers have differing views on loss of control risks.’ Thus, despite the conference saying it should focus on existential dangers, this report is in effect highly dismissive of them, including implicitly treating the uncertainty as reason not throw up one’s hands and focus on issues like implicit bias. Thirty Eight Ways to Steal Your Model WeightsTop AI labs are currently dramatically insecure. As the value of their model weights and other assets rises, both commercially and as an existential risk and matter of national security, this will increasingly become a problem.
What are their core recommendations? They start with things that need to be done yesterday. The biggest dangers lie in the future, but our security now is woefully inadequate to the dangers that exist now.
This is the least you could do if you cared about the security of model weights. Have an actual plan, limit access and attack surface, use red-teaming and defense in depth. As Leopold noted, our goal must be to stay ahead of the threat curve. The authors note that FBI Director Christopher Wray implied China had a workforce of more than 175,000 hackers. If China wanted to go full OC5+, they could. For now it would not make sense given the economic and diplomatic costs. Later, it will. They also say North Korea invests ‘between 10% and 20% of the regime’s military budget’ in cyberwarfare, between $400 million and $800 million. I presume they do this largely because it is profitable for them. Everyone acknowledges that an OC5-level attack on any major lab would almost certainly succeed. For now, that is fine. The question is, when does that become not fine, and where should we be right now? Should we be able to block an OC4 attack? I certainly hope we would be able to block an OC3 one given the value at stake. We do not need to attempt bulletproof security until we are under robust attack and have assets that justify the real costs of attempting bulletproof security. We do need to be trying at all, and starting our preparations and groundwork now. Longer term we will need things like this to have much chance, similar to what one would do if worried about model self-exfiltration, which we should be worried about in such scenarios as well:
They highlight 38 potential attack vectors in 9 categories. How many resources are needed to launch various attacks? They have a table for that. The numbers here are weird, representing chance of success linearly from <20% to >80%, against an arbitrary target. I would think things would scale differently. I also do not think that ‘up to 20% chance of success’ is the right category? If something has a 10% chance of success it is a big deal. Also important is that this is an enumeration of things we know about. That is a lower bound on the risk. The actual situation is far worse, because it includes unknown unknowns. It is very hard for the things we do not know about to be ‘good news’ here.
Bold is mine. All of that involves human attack vectors only. If we include future AI attack vectors, enabled by future frontier models, the situation gets even more dire if we do not bring our new capabilities to play on defense with similar effectiveness. Chapter 6 proposes that labs define security levels (SLs) from SL1 to SL5. If you are SL(X), you are protected against threats of OC level X. So what does it take to get to even SL1? In some senses this is easy. In others, in the context of a startup? It is asking a lot. Moving to SL2 means ‘industry best practices’ across the board. Doing all of the standard things everyone says one should do is a standard few companies, in practice, actually meet. Almost everyone is doing some number of ‘stupid’ things in the form of not doing some of the things on this list. What about SL3? It is essentially more of the same, only more so, and with serious worries about insider threat vectors. Any individual item on the list seems plausible but annoying. Doing all of them, in a world where your weakest point gets attacked, is not going to happen without a concerted effort. SL4 gets expensive. Things are going to get slowed down. You do not want to be implementing this level of paranoia too early. SL5 is that much more expensive to implement. You have to care quite a lot. Having eight security layers is quite the ask as are many other action items. Is all that necessary? Would it even be sufficient? Consensus weakens as you move up to higher security levels.
I have definitely talked to an expert who thought that against an OC5 operation all you can hope to do is buy some time. You can prevent them from stealing everything the first day they set their sights on it, but protecting assets over time is, they claimed, rather hopeless. I haven’t seen credible claims that SL3-style procedures would be sufficient to protect against OC5, and I find that highly implausible, even if it has rarely if ever been tried. The low tens seems to me quite a lot of people to have access to your core asset. I am not sure how different ‘low tens’ is from infinity. Certainly if your plan involves dozens of people each not being compromised, then you have no plan.\ The second half of the report is details of the different attack vectors. The Quest for Sane Regulations
So essentially: For now we should observe and monitor, lay groundwork such as with NIST, and perhaps do select sector-specific interventions such as in cybersecurity. Later we will do, and will want to do various regulatory actions. But let’s try and push the key decisions forward in time so we learn more.
Also GPDR is deeply stupid law. Do not make laws like GPDR. They do great harm via creating frictions without accomplishing almost anything. It is also correct to worry about regulatory lock-in. Not infinitely worried as in ‘anything imposed is automatically forever,’ but yes there is a lot of inertia and these things are hard to reverse. How much do we need to worry about moving too slowly? That depends on: How long you think we have. How quickly you think we can move. How sensibly you think we would move in a crisis but with more information. Whether you think that by the time there is a crisis, it will be too late.
Reasonable people disagree on all those questions. What most critics and skeptics fail to do is differentiate their responses to different types of regulatory proposals. As in, is a proposal about observing and monitoring and allowing us to intervene when the time comes? Or is it attempting to intervene now on what people can do now, or dictate the form of intervention later? Consider the response to something like SB 1047 or Biden’s executive order. Both are primarily about transparency, observation and monitoring of frontier models for the sole purpose of concerns on catastrophic or existential risks. They are deeply compatible with the perspective outlined here by Krier. The logical response is suggesting improvements and discussing details, and talking price. Instead, most (not Krier!) who are skeptical of other forms of regulation choose for SB 1047 instead to hallucinate a different bill and different impacts, and for the executive order to demand it be repealed. They hallucinated so badly on SB 1047 that they demanded the removal of the limited duty exception, a free option that exclusively lightened the burden of the bill, and got their wish. The logic of these others seems to be: You want to be able to observe and monitor, and prepare to act. If you did that, you might later act. Can’t have that. So we can’t let you observe or monitor.
SB 1047
This is unsurprising, although the margin is impressive. We have yet to see a poll on AI that doesn’t go this way.
The Week in Audio
Also has this great line from Blair: “The problem with government is not that it's a conspiracy, either left-wing or right-wing. It's a conspiracy for inertia.”
When discussing events around Altman’s firing, Altman sticks to his story and lets Chesky tell a series of rather glaring whoppers. Both try to walk back the idea of an ‘AGI moment,’ there are only various capabilities in various areas, and try to deny that there is ‘a race’ in a meaningful sense. Altman follows the general theme of acting like everything will stay normal under AGI. I know he knows better. When he says ‘AGI could double the world’s GDP’ Holt points out this sounds outlandish, but I see it as outlandish on the downside and I think Altman knows that. And he is making the ‘we have great ability to steer our current models and their values’ card, the real problem is choosing our values, which I see as a highly disingenuous attempt to dismiss alignment problems as being handled.
She says we should expect to get ‘PhD-level intelligence for specific tasks’ in a year to 18 months. The usual suspects responded to this as saying no GPT-5 for over a year and did some gloating, which seems like the wrong response to this kind of prediction. She was broadly supportive of the government understanding what is going on and called for more of that. She says of the AI ‘it’s a tool, right’ and there is a subtle blackpill that she does not seem to notice that this might not be the full story in the future. [It does seem she said](https://substack.com/redirect/e0db56cd-21f1-42c8-b043-f69e9f4ae58c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)‘Some creative jobs maybe will go away due to AI, but maybe they shouldn’t have been there in the first place.’ Hot take.[She then tried to save it on Twitter](https://substack.com/redirect/b04325e5-3453-4d31-b798-a6c7c881794b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).
Larry Summers introduces Bloomberg to the concept of recursive self-improvement, eventually using the term explicitly, and predicting transformative and seismic change. The issue, he says, is how do you manage that? He says we cannot leave AI only to AI developers. Public authorities must take a strong role in ensuring it gets used for good, but stopping it or slowing it down without thinking about positive developments would seed the field to the irresponsible and our adversaries, and he endorses ‘responsible iterative deployment.’ If this counts as highly based, where public authorities must take a strong role, and we should consider the positive benefits and also the downsides, perhaps we are getting somewhere. Lots of great stuff here, we need to now also work in alignment and the control problem, which did not get mentioned.
Rhetorical Innovation
People Are Worried About AI Killing EveryoneI’m not going to lie and say it’s good.
Everyone who thinks you should obviously do [insane thing] is wrong. That is the easy realization. The hard part is: What is the sane thing?
There were a ton of replies to Fleuret. They did not contain original ideas. The most common were things like energy, Microsoft and Nvidia, which are a way to go out while having previously had more dollars to your name. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing EveryoneAs many have long suspected about many accelerationists:
We can safety consider the matter closed, then. The Lighter Side
You're currently a free subscriber to |