---
subject: "AI #131: Gemini 2.5 Flash Image is Cool"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-08-28 16:13:58
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Once again we’ve reached the point where the weekly update needs to be split in two. Thus, the alignment and policy coverage will happen tomorrow. Today covers the rest. The secret big announcement this week was Claude for Chrome. This is a huge deal. It will be rolling out slowly. When I have access or otherwise know more, so will you. The obvious big announcement was Gemini Flash 2.5 Image. Everyone agrees this is now the clear best image editor available. It is solid as an image generator, but only as one among many on that front. Editing abilities, including its ability to use all its embedded world knowledge, seem super cool. The third big story was the suicide of Adam Raine, which appears to have been enabled in great detail by ChatGPT. His parents are suing OpenAI and the initial facts very much do not look good and it seems clear OpenAI screwed up. The question is, how severe should and will the consequences be? Table of Contents[Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/593ad142-2e32-4fdc-9bae-8ca154c51341?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Find what you’re looking for.[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/873510d1-c2d7-48f0-aebe-258882ce19a3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)You weren’t using them.[Huh, Upgrades.](https://substack.com/redirect/64a85dd4-aab2-4027-aa32-d752353159ba?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)OpenAI Codex adds features including an IDE extension.[Fun With Image Generation.](https://substack.com/redirect/60ffede7-a7ea-480c-83b7-85a43f434870?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Gemini 2.5 Flash Image is a great editor.[On Your Marks.](https://substack.com/redirect/6377c11f-5526-41ed-88fd-8fc1d2495eed?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)VendingBench, water use and some more v3.1 results.[Water Water Everywhere.](https://substack.com/redirect/3d7f4a61-a836-468f-b75e-08f179854060?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)There’s plenty left to drink.[Get My Agent On The Line](https://substack.com/redirect/9e4bd564-c3af-49d5-9d12-5eedfc6a57a0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/9e4bd564-c3af-49d5-9d12-5eedfc6a57a0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Claude for Chrome. It’s coming.[Choose Your Fighter.](https://substack.com/redirect/222112cb-3f8b-4df1-94fd-fd2bd46362f6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Some advocates for GPT-5’s usefulness.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon.](https://substack.com/redirect/320c8db0-95cf-40aa-8a57-7314afd754a7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Elon has something to share.[You Drive Me Crazy.](https://substack.com/redirect/43c414ff-af76-4368-a1fe-83064d68d8a2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)AI psychosis continues not to show up in numbers.[The Worst Tragedy So Far.](https://substack.com/redirect/65e353c4-448b-4df4-9206-4e4e581e4e8a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Adam Raine commits suicide, parents sue OpenAI.[Unprompted Attention.](https://substack.com/redirect/ba3bde96-86db-4c7c-83d8-1c4680e8a89b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)I don’t see the issue.[Copyright Confrontation.](https://substack.com/redirect/0b0b5a33-68ba-4007-bd03-46c25c0019b4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Bartz v. Anthropic has been settled.[The Art of the Jailbreak.](https://substack.com/redirect/66a02d32-2acd-46fc-ad8a-438e5afaf32f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Little Johnny Tables is all grown up.[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/ceb5bcb0-6d36-4b8a-a025-46dc40c03cff?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)40 ways to get involved in AI policy.[Introducing.](https://substack.com/redirect/7ec0d545-2908-4dcb-8ea1-289e581f1315?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Anthropic advisors aplenty, Pixel translates live phone calls.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/28ee0b63-a7d1-4cab-aff9-721f3e21e41b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Meta licenses MidJourney, Apple explores Gemini and more.[Show Me the Money.](https://substack.com/redirect/36e7309f-b440-48ff-a62d-910abbbd4692?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Why raise money when you can raise even more money?[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/373406c4-5f4a-4105-a0e7-04e8bac690b5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Everything is being recorded.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/5ce4f66e-15f6-4788-9967-8cce8220a709?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The real math does not exist.[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/db48ee92-a561-47f0-b91b-dddd9aedc43a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)How to properly use Claude Code.
Language Models Offer Mundane UtilityOr anything else. Very handy.
The numbers-are-favored bias shows up only in OpenAI reasoning models including GPT-5, and in r1-0528. There are clear genre patterns, and there are some consistent picks, especially among Claudes. The three artists that appear three times are David Bowie, Prince and Stevie Wonder, which are very good picks. It definitely seems like the open models have worse (or more random) taste in correlated ways. Why bother thinking about your vibe coding?
I mean that makes sense. There’s little reason to cheapen out on tokens when you think about token cost versus your time cost and the value of a good vibe code. You gotta boldly go where no one has gone before and risk it for the biscuit.
University teaching and classroom instruction, which includes creating educational materials and practice problems (77.4% augmentation); Writing grant proposals to secure external research funding (70.0% augmentation); Academic advising and student organization mentorship (67.5% augmentation); Supervising student academic work (66.9% augmentation).
Managing educational institution finances and fundraising (65.0% automation); Maintaining student records and evaluating academic performance (48.9% automation); Managing academic admissions and enrollment (44.7% automation).
Mostly there are no surprises here, but concrete data is always welcome. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane UtilityAs always, if you don’t use AI, it can’t help you.
This seems like a skill issue for those doing the fine tuning? It does not seem so difficult a behavior to elicit, if it was made a priority, via ordinary methods. At some point I hope and presume the labs will decide to care. Huh, Upgrades
Fun With Image Generation
They pitch that it maintains character consistency, adheres to visual templates, does prompt based image editing,
You can do things like
Our standards are getting high,
We’re seeing some cool examples, but they are also clearly selected.
That seems cool if you can make it fast enough, and if it works on typical things rather than only on obvious landmarks? The right question in the long term is usually: Can the horse talk at all?
Are mistakes still being made? Absolutely. This is still rather impressive. Consider where image models were not too long ago. This is a Google image model, so the obvious reason for skepticism is that we all expect the Fun Police.
The continuing to have a stick up the ass about picturing ‘real people’ is extremely frustrating and I think reduces the usefulness of the model substantially. The other censorship also does not help matters. On Your Marks
The most surprising result here is probably that the human did so poorly. I like saying an AI query is similar to nine seconds of television. Makes things clear. It also seems important to notice when in a year energy costs drop 95%+?
AIs potentially ‘sandbagging’ tests is an increasing area of research and concern. This seems very wrong to me. Right now failure to do proper elicitation, mostly via unhobbling and offering better tools and setups, is the far bigger problem. But sandbagging will be an increasing and increasingly dangerous future concern, and a ‘deliberate’ sandbagging has very different characteristics and implications than normal elicitation failure. I find ‘sandbagging’ to be exactly the correct name for this, since it doesn’t confine itself purely to evals, unless you want to call everything humans do to mislead other humans ‘eval gaming’ or ‘failure of capability elicitation’ or something. And no, this is not solved even now, even if it was true that it could currently be remedied by a little fine-tuning, because you don’t know when and how to do the fine-tuning. Report that DeepSeek v3.1 will occasionally
Water Water EverywhereThe purpose of
Alas Google’s water analysis had an unfortunate oversight, This results in the bizarre situation where: Google’s water cost estimation was off by an order of magnitude. The actual water cost is still rather hard to distinguish from zero.
Andy Masley is right that This Is Nothing even at the limit, that the water use here is not worth worrying about even in worst case. It will not meaningfully increase your use of water, even when you increase Google’s estimates by an order of magnitude. A reasonable headline would be ‘ I do think saying ‘Google was being misleading’ is reasonable here. You shouldn’t have carte blanche to take a very good statistic and make it sound even better.
Get My Agent On The LineIt’s coming. As in, Claude for Chrome.
Do not say you were not warned.
Oh, those risks. Yeah. They offer some Good Advice about safety issues, which includes using a distinct browser profile that doesn’t include credentials to any sensitive websites like banks:
AI browsers from non-Anthropic sources? Oh, the safety you won’t have.
Choose Your FighterHere’s someone very happy with OpenAI’s Codex.
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
I notice I pattern match this to ‘oh more meaningless hype, therefore very bad sign.’ Whereas I mean this seems to be what Elon is actually up to these days, sorry? Or, alternatively, what does Elon think the ‘G’ stands for here, exactly? (The greeting in question, in a deep voice, is ‘little f***ing b****.) Also, she might tell everyone what you talked about, you little f***ing b****, if you make the mistake of clicking the ‘share’ button, so think twice about doing that.
I’m not sure xAI did anything technically wrong here. The user clicked a ‘share’ button. I do think it is on xAI to warn the user if this means full Google indexing but it’s not on the level of doing it with fully private chats.
An ominous view of even the superficially glorious future?
You Drive Me Crazy
Is this statistically a big deal yet? As with previous such inquiries, so far the answer seems to be no. The UK statistics show a potential rise in mental health services use, but the data is noisy and the timing seems off, especially not lining up with GPT-4o’s problems, and data from the USA doesn’t show any increase. Scott Alexander does a more details, more Scott Alexander investigation and set of intuition pumps and explanations.
I like the framing that having a sycophantic AI to talk to moves people along a continuum of crackpotness towards psychosis, rather than a boolean where it either does or does not cause psychosis outright:
Another insight is that AI psychosis happens when moving along this spectrum causes further movement down the spectrum, as the AI reinforces your delusions, causing you to cause it to reinforce them more, and so on. Scott surveyed readership, I was one of the 4,156 responses.
He says he expects sampling concerns to be a wash, which I’m suspicious about. I’d guess that this sample overrepresented psychosis somewhat. I’m not sure this overrules the other consideration, which is that this only counts psychosis that the respondents knew about. Only 10% of these cases were full ‘no previous risk factors and now totally psychotic.’ Then again, that’s actually a substantial percentage. Thus he ultimately finds that the incidence of AI psychosis is between 1 in 10,000 (loose definition) and 1 in 100,000 for a strict definition, where the person has zero risk factors and full-on psychosis happens anyway. From some perspectives, that’s a lot. From others, it’s not. It seems like an ‘acceptable’ risk given the benefits, if it stays at this level. My fear here is that as the tech advances, it could get orders of magnitude worse. At 1 in 1,000 it feels a lot less acceptable of a risk, let alone 1 in 100.
A fine point in general:
Yes, for now we are primarily still dealing with the mental impact of the internet and smartphones, after previously dealing with the mental impact of television. The future remains unevenly distributed and the models relatively unintelligent and harmless. The psychosis matters because of where it is going, not where it is now. The Worst Tragedy So Far
There are similarities to previous tragedies. ChatGPT does attempt to help Adam in the right ways, indeed it encouraged him to reach out many times. But it also helped Adam with the actual suicide when requested to do so, providing detailed instructions and feedback for what was clearly a real suicide attempt and attempts to hide previous attempts, and also ultimately providing forms of encouragement. His parents are suing OpenAI for wrongful death, citing his interactions with GPT-4o. This is the first such case against OpenAI.
I am highly sympathetic to the argument that it is better to keep the conversation going than cut the person off, and I am very much in favor of AIs not turning their users in to authorities even ‘for their own good.’
The fact that we now have an option we can talk to without social or other consequences is good, actually. It makes sense to have both the humans including therapists who will use their judgment on when to do things ‘for your own good’ if they deem it best, and also the AIs that absolutely will not do this. But it seems reasonable to not offer technical advice on specific suicide methods?
Actually if you dig into the complaint it’s worse:
Yeah. Not so great.
It is typical that LLMs will, if pushed, offer explicit help in committing suicide. The ones that did so in Dr. Schoene’s tests were GPT-4o, Sonnet 3.7, Gemini Flash 2.0 and Perplexity.
I am not sure if this rises to the level where OpenAI should lose the lawsuit. But I think they probably should at least have to settle on damages? They definitely screwed up big time here. I am less sympathetic to the requested injunctive relief. I don’t think that the failure of various proposed laws to address the issues here is a failure for those laws, exactly because the lawsuit is the system working as designed. This is something ordinary tort law can already handle. So that’s not where we need new laws. Unprompted Attention
This makes so much sense. Saying ‘I see the problem’ without confirming that one does, in fact, see the problem, plausibly improves the chance Claude then does see the problem. So there is a tradeoff between that and sometimes misleading the user. You can presumably get the benefits without the costs, if you are willing to slow down a bit and run through some scaffolding. Copyright Confrontation
The Art of the JailbreakOpenAI puts your name into the system prompt, Get Involved
Introducing
Anthropic also how has a
In Other AI News
I would rank the choices as follows given their use case, without seeing the candidate model performances: Anthropic > Google > OpenAI >> Internal. We don’t know if Anthropic can deliver a model this small, cheap and fast, and Google is the obvious backup plan that has demonstrated that it can do it, and has already been a strong Apple partner in a similar situation in search. I would also be looking to replace the non-Siri AI features as well, which Mark Gurman reports has been floated. As always, some people will wildly overreact.
This is deeply silly given they were already considering Anthropic and OpenAI, but also deeply silly because this is not them giving up. This is Apple acknowledging that in the short term, their AI sucks, and they need AI and they can get it elsewhere. Also I do think Apple should either give up on AI in the sense of rolling their own models, or they need to invest fully and try to be a frontier lab. They’re trying to do something in the middle, and that won’t fly. A good question here is, who is paying who? The reason Apple might not go with Anthropic is that Anthropic wanted to get paid.
Show Me the Money
It makes sense. a16z’s central thesis is that hype and vibes are what is real and any concern with what is real or that anything might ever go wrong means you will lose. Anthropic succeeding is not only an inevitably missed opportunity. It is an indictment of their entire worldview.
Quiet Speculations
Rhetorical InnovationAndrew Critch pointed me to his 2023 post that This isn’t quite right but perhaps the framing will help some people?
One could also say ‘this five year old seems much more capable than they were a year ago, but they messed something up that is simple for me, so they must be an idiot who will never amount to anything.’ Who is worried about AI existential risk? Anyone worth listening to?
That’s all? And technically Sunni Islam outnumber Catholics? Guess not. Moving on.
I do think there is a legitimate overloading of the term ‘math’ here. There are at least two things. First we have Math-1, the thing that high schoolers and regular people do all the time. It is the Thing that we Do when we Do Math. There is also Math-2, also known as ‘Real Math.’ This is figuring out new math, the thing mathematicians do, and a thing that most (but not all) high school students have never done. A computer until recently could easily do Math-1 and couldn’t do Math-2. Thus we have had two distinct step changes. We’ve had the move from ‘LLMs can’t do Math-1’ and even ‘LLMs will never do Math-1 accurately’ to ‘actually now LLMs can do Math-1 just fine, thank you.’ Then we went from ‘LLMs will never do Math-2’ to ‘LLMs are starting to do Math-2.’ One could argue that IMO problems, and various optimization problems, and anything but the most 2-ish of 2s are still Math-1, are ‘not real math.’ But then you have to say that even most IMO competitors cannot yet do Real Math either, and also you’re going to look rather silly soon when the LLMs meet your definition anyway. Seriously, this:
An excellent point is that most people have
Right now we are dealing with problems caused by AIs that very much are not smart or powerful enough to be adversaries, that also aren’t being tasked with trying to be adversaries, and that mostly don’t even involve real human adversaries, not in the way the Russian Internet Research Agency is our adversary, or Mossad might make someone its adversary. Things are quiet so far both because the AIs aren’t that dangerous yet and also because almost no one is out there actually trying.
Who said anything about ‘not making any obvious mistakes’? This is a form of the classic ‘AI takeover requires everything not go wrong’ argument, which is backwards. The AI takeover is a default. It does not need to make a particular deliberate effort to attain power. Nor would an attempt to gain power that fails mean that the humans win. Nor does ‘makes an obvious mistake’ have to mean failure for a takeover attempt. Consider the more pedestrian human takeover attempts. As in, when a human or group tries to take over. Most of those who succeed do not avoid ‘making an obvious mistake’ at some point. All the time, obvious mistakes are recovered from, or simply don’t matter very much. The number of times a famous authoritarian’s first coup attempt failed, or they came back later like Napoleon, is remarkably not small. Very often, indeed most of the time, the other humans can see what is coming, and simply fail to coordinate against it or put much effort into stopping it. I’m sure Ezra, if reading this, has already thought of many examples, including recently, that fit this very well. The Week in Audio
You're currently a free subscriber to |