---
subject: "Feeling Through Art / Revealing read / Airport rides"
from: "Recomendo <recomendo@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-11-16 10:02:03
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Recomendo", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8455078693589186571", "UNREAD"]
---
Pre-booked airport ridesI’ve used Animated Guide to Feeling Through ArtThis Revealing readChina has 100 million gig workers, delivering food, sorting packages, driving ubers, barely making it. The diary of Hu Anyan, one of those gig workers, became a runaway bestseller in China. It has just been translated into English as “ World Map of Human IdeasHere’s a person-made map listing the Best cameraI’ve been seriously photographing for 55 years and the best camera I’ve ever owned is the Best online file converterMost online file converters are littered with ads and are sketchy about what they do with your files. But THIS ISSUE IS SPONSORED BY BROOKBrook is the first all-glass water fountain for cats and small dogs! Brook is the most hygienic, functional, and easy-to-maintain cat fountain – with minimal plastic, and all-glass parts that give a clear view to the water. Recomendo Unclassified Ads work! UNCLASSIFIEDS For Supply Chain and Business Nerds: Did you know that Amazon offers free tours of their warehouses in USA & Canada? It’s a PR move, but also cool to see. New article on my personal blog: 9 Hidden Perks of Your Amazon Prime Membership. Are you taking advantage of your Amazon Prime perks? Amazon Prime offers much more than just free shipping! Thinking of getting married in Italy, Portugal, Spain or Ireland? Peach Perfect Weddings makes it easy for couples to say “I do!” in Europe since 2014. We offer customizable I Ate 25 Healthy Protein Bars So You Don’t Have To. I did a very rigorous investigation into finding the very best healthy protein bar—and here are my top 5 recommendations (plus, runner-ups, alternatives, & a customizable spreadsheet): Say Goodbye to Inbox Overload. Bulletproof Inbox ONLY lets approved senders land in your inbox. Everything else? Filtered to a review folder. Approve or block emails inside Gmail/Outlook—no new app, no new address. Filter noise, reclaim focus. Get smarter about AI in 5 min. Our Email Templates That Turn Subscribers Into Buyers: A collection of 15 proven copywriting templates you can use to get more sales, leads, and clients from your email list. Recomendo is an authentic, hand-crafted, human-written weekly newsletter that is free, but not cheap. Please consider supporting our work with a paid option, now at the low price of $45 per year. Paid subs enable us to keep making it free for others. Recomendo is published by Cool Tools Lab, a small company of three people. We also run the Recomendo is copyrighted by Cool Tools Lab, LLC. Commissions may be earned from the links above. |