---
subject: "Markets in everything?"
from: "Marginal REVOLUTION <donotreply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-22 21:24:37
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tyler Cowen", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2466199532210586699", "UNREAD"]
---
Senior U.S. Officials, including National Security Advisor Mike Waltz, are reporting that the United States and Ukraine are on the verge of signing an “Improved” Mineral Deal and Partnership. According to the New York Times, who has read the Document, the Deal calls for Ukraine to relinquish Half of its Revenues from Natural Resources, including Minerals, Gas and Oil, as well as Earnings from Ports and other Infrastructure, without any kind of U.S. Defense or Security Guarantees. The Revenue from Ukraine’s Natural Resources will be directed to a Fund in which the U.S. holds 100% Financial Interest, and that Ukraine should contribute to until it reaches $500 Billion; while stating that for any additional Military Assistance provided by the United States, Ukraine will be required to contribute to the Fund a sum equal to twice the amount provided to Ukraine. As stated previously, the Deal does not contain any Security or Defensive Guarantees by the United States to Ukraine, but does state that the U.S. intends to provide a “Long-Term Financial Commitment to help Ukraine develop Economically.”
Link [here](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=467b008153512777e473b5dec3b509d14521201304ddfddc56cfd48ddd658b1a&blog_id=42693868&post_id=90134&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=da8521de5a6952aac503d184e324bd49&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly94LmNvbS9zZW50ZGVmZW5kZXIvc3RhdHVzLzE4OTMzNTc5MzI5OTUzMjIxNzg), and [more speculatively](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=616ca9ecec175888f12cc88391ea120905b8d9e264eb467445f6047c1a0e5103&blog_id=42693868&post_id=90134&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=da0f7cf77761598d12058846c433aa89&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly94LmNvbS9iZWhpenl0d2VldHMvc3RhdHVzLzE4OTMzNTExMjEzODY5MDU5MTE/cz00NiZ0PVFqZlZfWkhOdlAydWx6Si1qOEpGY2c):
BREAKING: The President of Congo just offered the United States ownership of his country's minerals to entice President Trump to put an end to the war backed by Rwanda. Congo holds more than half the world's Cobalt and Colton. They also have substantial deposits of Gold, Copper, Tin, Lithium, etc. China currently has a considerable influence in Congo's mineral sector, and before them, it was the Europeans.
Equilibria will be solved for.