---
subject: "GPT-4.1 Is a Mini Upgrade"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-04-16 18:56:34
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Yesterday’s news alert, nevertheless: The verdict is in. GPT-4.1-Mini in particular is an excellent practical model, offering strong performance at a good price. This post does not cover OpenAI’s new reasoning models. That was today’s announcement, which will be covered in full in a few days, once we know more. Introducing GPT-4.1, 4.1-mini and 4.1-nanoThat’s right, 4.1.
On the one hand, I love that they might finally use a real version number with 4.1. On the other hand, we would now have a GPT-4.1 that is being released after they previously released a GPT-4.5. The whole point of version numbers is to go in order. The new cheat sheet for when to use
I mean, I think that’s wrong, but I’m not confident I have the right version of it. They are not putting GPT-4.1 in ChatGPT, only in the API. I don’t understand why.
The best news is, Our Price Cheap, Based on the benchmarks and the reports elsewhere, the real release here is GPT-4.1-mini. Mini is 20% of the cost for most of the value. The full GPT-4.1 looks to be in a weird spot, where you probably want to either go big or go small. Nano might have its uses too, but involves real tradeoffs. On Your MarksWe start with the official ones. They lead with coding, SWE-bench in particular. I almost admire them saying no, we don’t acknowledge that other labs exist. They have an internal ‘instruction following’ eval. Here the full GPT-4.1 is only okay, but mini and nano are upgrades within the OpenAI ecosystem. It’s their benchmark, so it’s impossible to know if these scores are good or not. Next up is This is an outside benchmark, so we can see that these results are mid. Gemini 2.5 Pro leads the way with 51.9, followed by Claude 3.7 Thinking. GPT-4.5 is the best non-thinking model, with various Sonnets close behind. They check IFEval and get 87%, which is okay probably, o3-mini-high is 94%. The mini version gets 84%, so the pattern of ‘4.1 does okay but 4.1-mini only does slightly worse’ continues. All three model sizes have mastered needle-in-a-haystack all the way to 1M tokens. That’s great, but doesn’t tell you if they’re actually good in practice in long context. Then they check something called Graphwalks, then MMMU, MathVista, CharXiv-Reasoning and Video long context. Their charts are super helpful, check ‘em out:
Other BenchmarksMostly things have been quiet, but for those results we have it is clear that GPT-4.1 is a very good value, and a clear improvement for most API use over previous OpenAI models. Where we do have reports, we continue to see the pattern that OpenAI’s official statistics report. Not only does GPT-4.1-mini not sacrifice much performance versus GPT-4.1, in some cases the mini version is actively better. We see this for EpochAI’s tests,
Huh, I hadn’t previously seen these strong math results for Grok 3.
There are obvious reasons to be skeptical of this index, I mean Gemini Flash 2.0 is not as smart as Claude 3.7 Sonnet, but it’s measuring something real. It illustrates that GPT-4.1 is kind of expensive for what you get, whereas GPT-4.1-mini is where it is at.
ReactionsThis is the kind of thing people who try to keep up say these days:
Then you have the normal sounding responses, also positive.
I think mostly doing unprompted tables is good. Here is a bold but biased claim.
And here’s a bold censorship claim and a counterclaim, the only words I’ve heard on the subject. For coding and similar purposes no one seems to be having similar issues.
Justice for GPT-4.5OpenAI has announced the scheduled deprecation of API access for GPT-4.5. So GPT-4.5 will be ChatGPT only, and GPT-4.1 will be API only. When I heard it was a full deprecation of GPT-4.5 I was very sad. Now that I know it is staying in ChatGPT, I think this is reasonable. GPT-4.5 is too expensive to scale API use while GPUs are melting, except if a rival is trying to distill its outputs. Why help them do that?
Safety ThirdThis space intentionally left blank. As in, I could find zero mention of OpenAI discussing any safety concerns whatsoever related to GPT-4.1, in any way, shape or form. It’s simply, hey, here’s a model, use it. For GPT-4.1 in particular, for all practical purposes, This Is Fine. There’s very little marginal risk in this room given what else has already been released. Everyone doing safety testing is presumably and understandably scrambling to look at o3 and o4-mini. I assume. But, I don’t know. Improved speed and cost can cause what are effectively new risks, by tipping actions into the practical or profitable zone. Quantity can have a quality all its own. Also, we don’t know that the safeguards OpenAI applied to its other models have also been applied successfully to GPT-4.1, or that it is hitting their previous standards on this. I mean, again, I assume. But, I don’t know. I also hate the precedent this sets. That they did not even see fit to give us a one sentence update that ‘we have run all our safety tests and procedures, and find GPT-4.1 performs well on all safety metrics and poses no marginal risks.’ We used to have this principle where, when OpenAI or other frontier labs release plausibly frontier models, we get a model card and a full report on what precautions have been taken. Also, we used to have a principle that they took real and actually costly precautions. Those days seem to be over. Shame. Also, ut oh. You're currently a free subscriber to |