---
subject: "Apple World Cup bid ⚽, Meta opens VR OS 🌎, Anthropic's prompt library 🤖"
from: "TLDR <dan@tldrnewsletter.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-04-23 10:19:33
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "TLDR"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_795315172960844453"]
---
[
Apple Working to Secure Streaming Rights to FIFA Club World Cup (1 minute read)
](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Flinks.tldr.tech%2FgpEyd8/1/0100018f0a77ca4b-f21e7811-70ce-4d67-8568-566691947be0-000000/a_3CWHmAfAazkCYqTaA55omBpyu1Bf1H1TOt360j2zY=350)
Apple is working to secure an exclusive TV deal with FIFA, who plans to launch a revamped version of Club World Cup in 2025. Apple wants the TV rights to the event, which will feature 32 teams from each of the six confederations. The first tournament will take place in the US next summer. The deal could be worth around $1 billion. Apple has already paid $2.5 billion to secure global broadcasting rights to Major League Soccer and it has also secured a deal with Major League Baseball. The company sees live sports as a way to lure new customers to the Apple TV+ streaming service.
|
[
First real-life Pixel 9 Pro pictures leak, and it has 16GB of RAM (3 minute read)
](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Flinks.tldr.tech%2FepwrTF/1/0100018f0a77ca4b-f21e7811-70ce-4d67-8568-566691947be0-000000/L8W3leA2CvZnCmblqMk9981PqlSjfKgKkAIQLPtf8ms=350)
Real-life pictures of the Pixel 9 Pro have leaked. The prototypes look just like the renders that came out back in January. The device features a new pill-shaped camera bump with rounded corners that match the body shape. The front and back of the phone are totally flat, with a metal band around the side. There will be three models of the phone this year: the Pixel 9, Pixel 9 Pro, and Pixel 9 Pro XL.
|
|
Science & Futuristic Technology
|
[
Generative A.I. Arrives in the Gene Editing World of CRISPR (8 minute read)
](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Flinks.tldr.tech%2FGIOqzu/1/0100018f0a77ca4b-f21e7811-70ce-4d67-8568-566691947be0-000000/4Q20plov_LMnnQUVS1CVsmD0yBls8d09LkdvNRtltxY=350)
Profluent, a Berkeley startup, has used generative AI technology to create new gene editors based on CRISPR. The company has used one of the AI-generated gene editors to edit human DNA, but it has yet to put any of them through clinical trials. While Profluent plans to open source the gene editors generated by its AI technology, it will not be open sourcing the AI technology itself. The project is part of a wider effort to build AI technologies that improve medical care.
|
[
Meet QDEL, the backlight-less display tech that could replace OLED in premium TVs (14 minute read)
](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Flinks.tldr.tech%2FTJdvFb/1/0100018f0a77ca4b-f21e7811-70ce-4d67-8568-566691947be0-000000/3OfIfN3vPGkKmIye9XiEbSiCJCUs5WjlULC9DdILGxk=350)
Quantum dot electroluminescent (QDEL) screens produce wide color spaces and are bright, affordable, and resistant to burn-in. Also known as NanoLED, the technology is being eyed as one of the most potentially influential developments for consumer displays over the next two years. There aren't any QDEL products yet and they may not be released for a while yet. This article explains how the technology works, looks at its advantages, and explores competing technologies.
|
|
Programming, Design & Data Science
|
[
Prompt library (Website)
](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Flinks.tldr.tech%2F2AED1m/1/0100018f0a77ca4b-f21e7811-70ce-4d67-8568-566691947be0-000000/a3qAkGNGVhWN1SkPq_zIh-sYVjjHocSL4NuqBeMS6xA=350)
This site allows users to submit and explore optimized prompts for a breadth of tasks. The prompts on the site can help generate games, extract insights from reports, create websites, write Excel formulas, and more. They are split into three categories: personal prompts, business prompts, and user-submitted prompts. The prompts can be filtered by keyword.
|
[
Good Ideas in Computer Science (3 minute read)
](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Flinks.tldr.tech%2FdV9S3Z/1/0100018f0a77ca4b-f21e7811-70ce-4d67-8568-566691947be0-000000/OHHKwsdp_cLjw9xr5q6Fv5nJ6Kqyxz9r0QJFAoKa6O4=350)
Programmers love to argue for their favorite technologies, but there are some ideas that are universally agreed on. This article provides a list of ideas within computer science that are universally considered good and the year each idea appeared. These ideas are so widespread and effective that many may not even think of them as being invented. The list focuses on ideas, not implementations, so some things like Unix aren't on the list. Some example items from the list include binary numbers, boolean algebra, arrays, and version control.
|
|
[
Sam Altman Invests in Energy Startup Focused on AI Data Centers (5 minute read)
](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Flinks.tldr.tech%2Fj7OaWn/1/0100018f0a77ca4b-f21e7811-70ce-4d67-8568-566691947be0-000000/5hfjzKDYZ5RlCWz16XnIZv9kRn0slF9vTUEbDcJwSIY=350)
Sam Altman and other investors, including venture capital firm Andreessen Horowitz, have put $20 million into Exowatt, a company that aims to provide big data centers with clean energy. The AI industry uses a lot of energy - a single new data center can use as much electricity as hundreds and thousands of homes. Exowatt has developed modules roughly the size of shipping containers that hold solar lenses that convert energy from the sun into heat. The company hopes to eventually offer electricity as cheap as 1 cent per kilowatt-hour without subsidies.
|
|
|
Want to advertise in TLDR? 📰
|
If your company is interested in reaching an audience of tech executives, decision-makers and engineers, you may want to [advertise with us](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Flinks.tldr.tech%2FAoyrzX/1/0100018f0a77ca4b-f21e7811-70ce-4d67-8568-566691947be0-000000/tSy7qjc2azTXPq8QGPrHhUE5FLwHRp5XwFy2gxb_FsA=350).
If you have any comments or feedback, just respond to this email!
Thanks for reading,
[Dan Ni](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Flinks.tldr.tech%2F8uLtZx/1/0100018f0a77ca4b-f21e7811-70ce-4d67-8568-566691947be0-000000/oS4HXCSj74noRpB284TOIjQjiXZHeGbwdfAWns6rJsk=350) & [Stephen Flanders](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Flinks.tldr.tech%2FFy0Ebu/1/0100018f0a77ca4b-f21e7811-70ce-4d67-8568-566691947be0-000000/JrlhQAEV3tGDUrp1Jc09uv_OkOIyX_VvwIFgZoi5ozY=350)
|
If you don't want to receive future editions of TLDR, please [unsubscribe](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Factions.tldrnewsletter.com%2Funsubscribe%3Fep=1%26l=cfa2d55a-b7be-11e8-a3c9-06b79b628af2%26lc=27cda92b-93eb-11ec-9258-0241b9615763%26p=f5fa3c36-0146-11ef-a02a-bf504d06486c%26pt=campaign%26pv=4%26spa=1713866435%26t=1713867573%26s=aa452a80233bb0feab9c35b8d1ab445183138601a08a4f2965e045c91847179e/1/0100018f0a77ca4b-f21e7811-70ce-4d67-8568-566691947be0-000000/k-hpoJAvxYMFfaXdc-sC6i6gfwM5BhiuyNgKWpwRyys=350).
|
|
|
|