---
subject: "Welcome to Infra #1"
from: "River Kenna from Infra <riverkenna@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-07-05 19:52:49
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "River Kenna"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3010718370428876194"]
---
note: If you subscribed to my substack at “Inner Wilds” but don’t want to receive this newsletter, just unsubscribe at the bottom of the e-mail. “Inner Wilds” will continue to be where I publish longform articles on whatever subjects I want to write on. This newsletter, “Infra”, will be bi-weekly short-form on archetypal psychology, mythopoetic cognition, and what William James called “the deeper, blinder strata of character.” The format will be just like the newsletter below. If this looks like a ride you want to come along for, welcome to Infra: StrataOn their own, the most powerful archetypes are useless or worse. They have to be paired with another pattern, animated by specific content. The archetype of rebirth, for example, has to answer a question: reborn as what? That’s true for the whole family of rebirth-adjacent patterns: evolution, development, transformation, unfoldment, emergence,,, Evolve into what? Transform into what? Emerge as what? It’s one thing to be transformed into a Warrior, or to develop into a Sage, or to emerge as a Tribe. It’s another thing to non-specifically just unfold. To deny the dynamic tension of the evolving path, in favor of continuing to just evolve without settling into a form. A ton of energy can be raised by invoking rebirth, but if that energy doesn’t get channeled somewhere specific, it either fades away or ends up following the path of least resistance, like lightning or floodwaters. Archetypes are form, not content. The forms are at our disposal, but the content we animate them with is a deciding factor. The energy they raise can do almost anything—which sounds promising right up until you see what almost anything looks like up close. Encounter
This quote strikes me as resoundingly world-shifting—but only for certain ideas of what consciousness is. If you believe that consciousness is generated by the brain, or that it’s an accident of evolution or an illusion, then the way it gets coded in culture might be an interesting curiosity, but nothing really crucial to learn about. If, though, you believe consciousness is a more mysterious and fundamental aspect of reality, not generated by the human body but rather filtered through it, then its encoding in culture and history suddenly becomes a very interesting way of exploring the nature of reality. Near & DearLast week, my friend Rosa Lewis put out an episode of Nouveau Shamanic Cinema where she and Joost Vervoort discuss the imaginal and spiritual lens on The Green Knight (2021).
Infra is free and will stay free, but if you get something out of my work, consider giving something back. Share my writing with friends & followers, pick up my |