---
subject: "OpenAI: Exodus"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-05-20 13:01:30
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Previously: Ilya Sutskever and Jan Leike have left OpenAI. This is
Altman acknowledged there was much work to do on the safety front. Then we learned that OpenAI has systematically misled and then threatened its departing employees, forcing them to sign draconian lifetime non-disparagement agreements, which they are forbidden to reveal due to their NDA. Altman has to some extent acknowledged this and promised to fix it once the allegations became well known, but so far there has been no fix implemented beyond an offer to contact him privately for relief. These events all seem highly related. Also these events seem quite bad. What is going on? This post walks through recent events and informed reactions to them. The first ten sections address departures from OpenAI, especially Sutskever and Leike. The next five sections address the NDAs and non-disparagement agreements. Then at the end I offer my perspective, highlight another, and look to paths forward. Table of ContentsThe Two Departure Announcements Who Else Has Left Recently? Who Else Has Left Overall? Early Reactions to the Departures The Obvious Explanation: Altman Jan Leike Speaks Reactions After Lekie’s Statement Greg Brockman and Sam Altman Respond to Leike Reactions from Some Folks Unworried About Highly Capable AI Don’t Worry, Be Happy? The Non-Disparagement and NDA Clauses Legality in Practice Implications and Reference Classes Altman Responds on Non-Disparagement Clauses So, About That Response How Bad Is All This? Those Who Are Against These Efforts to Prevent AI From Killing Everyone What Will Happen Now? What Else Might Happen or Needs to Happen Now?
The Two Departure AnnouncementsHere are the full announcements and top-level internal statements made on Twitter around the departures of Ilya Sutskever and Jan Leike.
[Ilya then shared the photo below]
Who Else Has Left Recently?
If you asked me last week whose departures other than Sam Altman himself or a board member would update me most negatively about the likelihood OpenAI would responsibly handle the creation and deployment of AGI, I would definitely have said Ilya Sutskever and Jan Leike. If you had asked me what piece of news about OpenAI’s employees would have updated me most positively, I would have said ‘Ilya Sutskever makes it clear he is fully back and is resuming his work in-office as head of the Superalignment team, and he has all the resources he needs and is making new hires.’ If Jan’s and Ilya’s departures were isolated, that would be bad enough. But Here is Shakeel’s list of safety researchers at OpenAI known to have left in the last six months, minus Cullen O’Keefe who worked on policy and legal (so was not a clear cut case of working on safety), plus the addition of Ryan Lowe. Ilya Sutskever Jan Leike Leopold Aschenbrenner Pavel Izmailov William Saunders Daniel Kokotajlo Ryan Lowe
Here’s some other discussion of recent non-safety OpenAIemployee departures.
Ilya Sutskever was one of the board members that attempted to fire Sam Altman. Jan Leike worked closely with Ilya to essentially co-lead Superalignment. William Saunders also worked on Superalignment; Leopold Aschenbrenner and Pavel Izmailov
We do not have a full enumeration of how many people would have counted for a list like this. Based on Then we lost 7 within 6 months, concentrated on senior leadership. This seems like rather a lot. Then we can add, within weeks, the head of nonprofit and strategic initiatives, the head of social impact and a vice president of people. That sounds a lot like this goes well beyond potential future safety issues, and goes deep into problems such as general ethical behavior and responsible strategic planning. Who Else Has Left Overall?
OpenAI As we all know, I asked GPT-4o, Claude Opus and Gemini Advanced to rank the current and former employees of OpenAI by how important they are in terms of AGI safety efforts:
Ilya Sutskever Dario Amodei Paul Christiano Jan Leike Geoffrey Irving Chris Olah Jakob Foerster Alec Radford Ryan Lowe Miles Brundage
Paul Christiano Jan Leike Dario Amodei Geoffrey Irving Amanda Askell Miles Brundage Jack Clark Ilya Sutskever Sam Altman Chris Olah
Ilya Sutskever Jan Leike Paul Christiano Dario Amodei Chris Olah Jeff Wu Vicki Cheung John Schulman Pieter Abbeel Alec Radford
On average, over 80% of the named people have now departed, including 100% of the top 5 from all lists. This is in addition to what happened to the board including Helen Toner. Those that remain are CEO Sam Altman, co-founder John Schulman, Alec Radford and Jeff Wu. What do all of them appear to have in common? They do not have obvious ‘safety branding,’ and their primary work appears to focus on other issues. John Schulman does have a co-authored alignment forum post. Once is a coincidence. Twice is suspicious. Over 80% of the time is enemy action. Early Reactions to the DeparturesHere are various early reactions to the news, before the second wave of information on Friday from
Version of that comment on Friday morning, still going: For symmetry, [tktk][because formatting has to be done on SS] Gary Marcus summarized, The Obvious Explanation: AltmanWe know that a lot of OpenAI’s safety researchers, including its top safety researchers, keep leaving. We know that has accelerated in the wake of the attempted firing of Sam Altman. That does not seem great. Why is it all happening?
Jan Leike SpeaksI want to deeply thank Jan Leike for his explanation of why he resigned. Here is Jan Leike’s statement, in its entirety:
This paints a very clear picture, although with conspicuous absence of any reference to Altman. The culture of OpenAI had indeed become toxic, and unwilling to take safety seriously. This is a deeply polite version of ‘We’re f***ed.’ Leike’s team was starved for compute, despite the commitments made earlier. OpenAI was, in his view, severely underinvesting in both Superalignment and also more mundane forms of safety. Safety culture took a backseat to shiny new products (presumably GPT-4o was one of these). According to Bloomberg, Ilya’s departure was Jan’s last straw.
Now the Superalignment team has been dissolved. I presume that OpenAI would not be so brazen as to go after Jan Leike or confiscate his equity in light of this very respectful and restrained statement, especially in light of other recent statements in that area. It would be very bad news if this turns out to not be true. Again, note that the threat is stronger than its execution. Reactions after Leike’s Statement
Roon is in some ways strategically free and reckless. In other ways, and in times like this he
Others were less Straussian.
Greg Brockman and Sam Altman Respond to Leike
A few days to process all this and prepare a response is a highly reasonable request. So what did they come back with? Here is the full statement.
Others went further, and noticed this said very little. This did indeed feel like that part of Isaac Asimov’s Foundation, where a diplomat visits and everyone thinks he is a buffoon, then after he leaves they use symbolic logic to analyze his statements and realize he managed to say exactly nothing. So I had a fun conversation where I asked GPT-4o, what in this statement was not known as of your cutoff date? It started off this way: Then I shared additional previously known information, had it browse the web to look at the announcements around GPT-4o, and asked, for each item it named, whether there was new information.
And then finally: Reactions from Some Folks Unworried About Highly Capable AI
Note the distinction between Colin’s story here, that OpenAI lacks the resources to do basic research, and his previous claim that a culture clash makes it effectively impossible for OpenAI to do such research. Those stories suggest different problems with different solutions. ‘OpenAI does not have sufficient resources’ seems implausible given their ability to raise capital, and Leike says they’re severely underinvesting in safety even on business grounds over a two year time horizon. A culture clash or political fight fits the facts much better.
So there are outsiders who want work done on safety and many of them think endangering humanity would have been a good justification, if true, for firing the CEO? And that makes it good to purge everyone working on safety? Got it.
Good questions, even if like Timothy you are skeptical of the risks. Don’t Worry, Be Happy?How bad can it be if they’re not willing to violate the NDAs, asks Mason.
This follows in the tradition of people saying versions of: If you were truly worried about this you would blow up your life and savings, in this way that I say would make sense, despite all explanations why it doesn’t. You didn’t. So clearly you are not worried. Nothing to worry about.
You did. So clearly you are an idiot. Nothing to worry about.
Classic versions of this include ‘are you short the market?’ ‘why are you not borrowing at terrible interest rates?’ and ‘why haven’t you started doing terrorism?’
Other favorites include all variations of both ‘why are you taking any health risks [or other consequences]’ and ‘why are you paying attention to your long term health [or other consequences].’ Maybe half the explanation is embodied in this very good two sentences:
Then the next day Jan Leike got a lot less cryptic, as detailed above. Then we found out it goes beyond the usual NDAs. The Non-Disparagement and NDA ClausesWhy have we previously heard so little from ex-employees? Short of forfeiting their equity,
If this was me, and I was a current or former OpenAI employee, I would absolutely, at minimum, consult a labor lawyer to review my options.
Release of Claims: If the Grantee becomes a Withdrawn Limited Partner, then unless, within 60 days following its applicable Withdrawal Event, the Grantee (or, if the Grantee has become a Withdrawn Limited Partner in consequence of death or Permanent Incapacity, such Withdrawn Limited Partner's estate, custodian or other legal representative or successor) duly executes and delivers to the Partnership a general release of claims against the Partnership and the other Partners with regard to all matters relating to the Partnership up to and including the time of such Withdrawal Event, such Grantee's Units shall be cancelled and reduced to zero (0) effective as of the date of the Withdrawal Event, as set forth in Section 7.5(c) of the Partnership Agreement. Removal for Cause. If the Grantee becomes a Withdrawn Limited Partner pursuant to Section 7.3(b) of the Partnership Agreement in response to an action or omission on the part of such Limited Partner that constitutes Cause, then such Grantee's Units shall be cancelled and reduced to zero (0) effective as of the date of the Withdrawal Event, as set forth in Section 7.5(d) of the Partnership Agreement.
Clause four was the leverage. Have people agree to sign a ‘general release,’ then have it include a wide variety of highly aggressive clauses, under threat of loss of equity. Then, even if you sign it, OpenAI has complete discretion to deny you any ability to sell your shares. Note clause five as well. This is a second highly unusual clause in which vested equity can be canceled. What constitutes ‘cause’? Note that this is another case where One potential legal or ethical justification for this is that these are technically ‘profit participation units’ (PPUs) rather than equity. Perhaps one could say that this was a type of ‘partnership agreement’ for which different rules apply, if you stop being part of the team you get zeroed. But notice Sam Altman has acknowledged, in the response we will get to below, that this is not the case. Not only does he claim no one has had their vested equity confiscated, he then admits that there were clauses in the contracts that refer to the confiscation of vested equity. That is an admission that he was, for practical purposes, thinking of this as equity. Legality in PracticeSo the answer to ‘how is this legal’ is ‘it probably isn’t, but how do you find out?’
Overly broad non-disparagement clauses (such as ‘in any way for the rest of your life’) can be deemed unenforceable in court, as unreasonable restraints on speech. Contracts for almost anything can be void if one party was not offered consideration, as is plausibly the case here. There are also whistleblower and public policy concerns. And the timing and context of the NDA and especially non-disparagement clause, where the employee did not know about them, and tying them to a vested equity grant based on an at best highly misleading contract clause, seems highly legally questionable to me, although of course I am not a lawyer and nothing here is legal advice. Certainly it would seem bizarre to refuse to enforce non-compete clauses, as California does and the FTC wants to do, and then allow what OpenAI is doing here. Implications and Reference ClassesA fun and enlightening exercise is to ask LLMs what they think of this situation, its legality and ethics and implications, and what companies are the closest parallels. The following interaction was zero shot. As always, do not take LLM outputs overly seriously or reliably: (For full transparency: I pause here because this is a
At a minimum, this practice forces us to assume the worst, short of situations so dire a threat to humanity that caution would in practice be thrown to the wind.
To be fair, the whole point of these setups is the public is not supposed to find out. That makes it hard to know if the practice is widespread.
Exactly. The non-disparagement agreement that can be discussed is not the true fully problematic non-disparagement agreement.
It is wise and virtuous to have extraordinarily tight information security practices around IP when building AGI. If anything I would worry that no company is taking sufficient precautions. OpenAI being unusually strict here is actively a feature. This is different. This is allowing people to say positive things but not negative things, forever, and putting a high priority on that. That is deception, that is being a bad actor, and it provides important context to the actions of the board during the recent dispute.
Altman Responds on Non-Disparagement Clauses
So, About That ResponseThree things: Thank you for acknowledging this happened and promising to fix it. This is insufficient until you legally release all former employees and return all equity to [Daniel Kokotajlo](https://substack.com/redirect/e02eef83-7954-47c7-80e0-71b1b7274736?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)(or confirm his equity is intact and will stay that way.)[You’re shock, shocked to find gambling in this establishment](https://substack.com/redirect/594a97eb-abd9-44b2-ab2a-55d71360128b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)?[Bullshit](https://substack.com/redirect/103e18ca-f5d8-495b-b90f-05c8550ca948?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).
As in:
And
I do want to acknowledge that: Being a CEO of a company like OpenAI is overwhelming. You cannot be fully on top of everything or read every legal document. Many lawyers consider it their job to make all contracts as one sided as possible.
But, here, in this case, to this extent? I asked around. These levels of legal silencing tactics, in addition to being highly legally questionable, are rare and extreme, used only in the most cutthroat of industries and cases, and very much not the kind of thing lawyers sneak in unrequested unless you knew exactly which lawyers you were hiring. Why has confiscation not happened before? Why hadn’t we heard about this until now? Because until Daniel Kokotajlo everyone signed.
None of this is okay. How Bad Is All This?I think it is quite bad. It is quite bad because of the larger pattern. Sutskever’s and Leike’s departures alone would be ominous but could be chalked up to personal fallout from the Battle of the Board, or Sutskever indeed having an exciting project and taking Leike with him. I do not think we are mostly reacting to the cryptic messages, or to the deadening silences. What we are mostly reacting to is the costly signal of leaving OpenAI, and that this cost has now once again been paid by so many of its top safety people and a remarkably large percentage of all its safety employees. We are then forced to update on the widespread existence of NDAs and non-disparagement agreements—we are forced to ask, what might people have said if they weren’t bound by NDAs or non-disparagement agreements? The absence of evidence from employees speaking out, and except for those by Geoffrey Irving the lack of accusations of outright lying, no longer seem like strong evidence of absence. And indeed, we now have at least a number of (anonymous) examples of ex-employees saying they would have said concerning things, but aren’t doing so out of fear. Yes, if the departing people thought OpenAI was plausibly about to destroy humanity in the near future due to a specific development, they would presumably break the NDAs, unless they thought it would not do any good. So we can update on that. But that is not the baseline scenario we are worried about. We are worried that OpenAI is, in various ways and for various reasons, unlikely to responsibly handle the future creation and deployment of AGI or ASI. We are worried about a situation in which the timeline to the critical period is unclear even to insiders, so there is always a large cost to pulling costly alarms, especially in violation of contracts, including a very high personal cost. We are especially worried that Altman is creating a toxic working environment at OpenAI for those working on future existential safety, and using power plays to clean house. We also have to worry what else is implied by OpenAI and Altman being willing to use such rare highly deceptive and cutthroat legal tactics and intimidation tactics, and how they handled the issues once brought to light. At minimum, this shows a company with an extreme focus on publicity and reputation management, and that wants to silence all criticism. That already is anathema to the kind of openness and truth seeking we will need. It also in turn suggests the obvious question of what they are so keen to hide. We also know that the explicit commitment to the Superalignment team of 20% of current compute was not honored. This is a very bad sign. If OpenAI and Sam Altman want to fix this situation, it is clear what must be done as the first step. The release of claims must be replaced, including retroactively, by a standard release of claims. Daniel’s vested equity must be returned to him, in exchange for that standard release of claims. All employees of OpenAI, both current employees and past employees, must be given unconditional release from their non-disparagement agreements, all NDAs modified to at least allow acknowledging the NDAs, and all must be promised in writing the unconditional ability to participate as sellers in all future tender offers. Then the hard work can begin to rebuild trust and culture, and to get the work on track. Those Who Are Against These Efforts to Prevent AI From Killing EveryoneNot everyone is unhappy about these departures. There is a group of people who oppose the idea of this team, within a private company, attempting to figure out how we might all avoid a future AGI or ASI killing everyone, or us losing control over the future, or other potential bad outcomes. They oppose such attempts on principle. To be clear, it’s comprehensible to believe that we should only engage in private preventative actions right now, either because (1) there is no worthwhile government action that can be undertaken at this time, or because (2) in practice, government action is likely to backfire. I strongly disagree with that, but I understand the viewpoint. It is also not insane to This is something else. This is people saying: “It is good that a private company got rid of the people tasked with trying to figure out how to make a future highly capable AI do things we want it to do instead of things we do not want it to do.” There is a reduction in voluntary private safety efforts. They cheer and gloat. This ranges from insane but at least in favor of humanity…
…to those who continue to have a false idea of what happened when the board attempted to fire Altman,
…to those who (I think correctly) think OpenAI’s specific approach to safety wouldn’t work, and who are modeling the departures and dissolution of the Superalignment team as a reallocation to other long term safety efforts as opposed to a move against long term (and also short term) safety efforts in general…
…to those who dismiss all such concerns as ‘sci-fi’ as if that is an argument…
…
…to those who are in favor of something else entirely and want to incept even more of it.
What Will Happen Now?
John Schulman will replace Jan Leike as head of AGI related safety efforts, but without a dedicated team. Remaining members have been dispersed across various research efforts. We will watch to see how OpenAI chooses to handle their non-disparagement clauses. What Else Might Happen or Needs to Happen Now?One provision of the proposed bill SB 1047 is whistleblower protections. This incident illustrates why such protections are needed, whatever one thinks of the rest of the bill. This also emphasizes why we need other transparency and insight into the actions of companies such as OpenAI and their safety efforts. If you have information you want to share, with any level of confidentiality, you can reach out to me on Twitter or LessWrong or otherwise, or you can If you don’t have new information, but do have thoughtful things to say, speak up. Everyone needs to update their views and plans based on this new information. We need to update, and examine our past mistakes, including taking a hard look at the events that led to the founding of OpenAI. We should further update based on how they deal with the NDAs and non-disparagement agreements going forward. The statements of anyone who worked at OpenAI at any point need to be evaluated on the assumption that they have signed a self-hiding NDA and a non-disparagement clause. Trust and confidence in OpenAI and in Sam Altman has been damaged, especially among safety advocates and the worried. Also across the board given the revelations about the non-disparagement provisions. The magnitude remains to be seen.
Most large investors do not care about ethics. They care about returns. Nor do they in practice care much about how likely a company is to kill everyone. Credibly signaling that you will not pay to produce badly needed public goods, and that you will be ruthless and do what it takes, that you are willing to at least skirt with the edges of the law and employ highly deceptive practices, and are orienting entirely around profits, near term results and perhaps building a business? By default these are all very good for the stock price and for talking to venture capital. The flip side is that past a certain point such actions are highly indicative of a company and leader likely to blow themselves up in the not too distant future. Such tactics strongly suggest that there were things vital enough to hide that such tactics were deemed warranted. The value of the hidden information is, in expectation, highly negative. If there is a public or government backlash, or business partners stop trusting you, that is not good. There is also the issue of whether you expect Altman to honor his deal with you, including if you are an employee. If you sign a business deal with certain other individuals we need not name, knowing what we know about them now, and they as is their pattern refuse to honor it and instead attempt to cheat and sue and lie about you? That is from my perspective 100% on you. Yet some people still seem eager to get into business with them, time and again. OpenAI says roughly to ‘look upon your investment as something akin to a donation.’ When you invest in Sam Altman, you are risking the world’s largest rug pull. If they never earn a dollar because they are fully serious about being a non-profit, and you will get no money and also no voice, then you better find a greater fool, or you lose. If instead Altman and OpenAI are There is also the issue that cutting this work is not good business. If this was all merely ‘OpenAI was toxic to and lost its long term safety teams forcing others to do the work’ then, sure, from one angle that’s bad for the world but also good hard nosed business tactics. Instead, notice that Jan Leike warned that OpenAI is not ready for the next generation of models, meaning GPT-5, meaning this is likely an issue no later than 2025. Ideas like weak-to-strong generalization are things I do not expect to work with GPT-9, but I do expect them to likely be highly useful for things like GPT-5. A wise man does not cut the ‘get the AI to do what you want it to do’ department when it is working on AIs it will soon have trouble controlling. When I put myself in ‘amoral investor’ mode, I notice this is not great, a concern that most of the actual amoral investors have not noticed. My actual expectation is that for raising capital and doing business generally this makes very little difference. There are effects in both directions, but there was overwhelming demand for OpenAI equity already, and there will be so long as their technology continues to impress. What about employee relations and ability to hire? Would you want to work for a company that is known to have done this? I know that I would not. What else might they be doing? What is the company culture like? You're currently a free subscriber to |