---
subject: "Details!"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <the-diff@ghost.io>"
to: ""
date: 2024-06-03 14:27:22
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
In this issue: - Details!—Financial markets are mostly a venue to litigate small disagreements about the value of various assets, but sometimes those disagreements take the form of outright dishonesty. Fortunately, this kind of dishonest behavior is relatively easy to spot, and tends to get punished either by other traders or by regulators.
- The Google Feedback Loop—The browser owned by an ad company is making it harder to block ads.
- Fees on What?—As it turns out, interest on a money market fund is not alpha.
- The Micro Meta Turnaround—Young adults are coming back to Facebook.
- Yes, We're Doing the Meme Stock Thing Again—Short covering will be less of a feature this time, but Roaring Kitty has more buying power than he used to.
- Diversification—When the value-maximizing choice is to beg someone to take equity for free.
This issue of The Diff is brought to you by our sponsor, Details!Finance is, at every level, a game of being the first to correctly update your mental model based on new information. That can happen at wildly varying timescales—from the millisecond-level updates that happen when a single bid vanishes from the orderbook to the weeks-to-months interval for recognizing some factor that will impact next quarter's earnings to the decade-plus venture journey that starts with a realization like "Hey, maybe fusion power is no longer in the category of technologies that are twenty years away and always will be." But correctly updating your mental model with new information means ensuring that only the right information passes through. And one of the filters that information has to pass through, again at multiple timescales, is: was this particular new piece of data engineered specifically to trick me into making the trade I'm about to make? At the shortest timescales, this can take the form of spoofing, which works a bit like this: - Buy 100 shares at $10.
- Place a bid for 10,000 shares at $9.90.
- Algorithms that see the large order immediately move their prices up.
- Sell 100 shares at $10.10 or something, and cancel the 10,000-share order.
Spoofing gets prosecuted sometimes; A legally and morally much riskier variant on spoofing goes like this: take a position in a stock; announce a deal to take the company private at a high valuation; and then instead of buying the company, sell the shares they bought. The SEC has a The someone in this case was Trillium Capital, after The next day, Getty shares closed at $6.63, up 31%, and during the day they traded as high as $8. This is not a big pop for a company that got a merger proposal at roughly double its previous price, but it was a big move to anyone who owned Getty shares, especially if they had bought them on margin or owned them in the form of short-dated call options. And that describes both Trillium's manager and a friend mentioned in the SEC filing. There are some white-collar crimes where the evidence is that the perpetrator Googled something like "how to get away with a fake tender offer" or "how to permanently delete text messages," but this one didn't rise to that level of sophistication. Instead, we have records of: - The perpetrator telling his broker that he planned to sell all of his Getty options. (It was in the context of the broker software limiting users to trading 200 options contracts at a time; he insisted on a larger order limit, explaining that he'd need to trade a lot in a hurry.)
- The same person telling his friend to buy a lot of Getty, and particularly not to sell until a specific date (it was the date that the fake offer was announced.)
- Him telling his friend to delete all of the text messages between them. (These messages are quoted in the complaint.)
- Both of them selling all of their shares right after the offer. To be fair, the offering press release does state, in all-caps and underlined, "WE MAY SELL OR SOME OF ALL OF OUR HOLDINGS OF GETTY AT ANY TIME WITHOUT NOTICE." We'll see how that disclaimer holds up in court.
These kinds of offers happen sometimes, though usually with smaller companies: someone will show up, make an unsolicited offer to buy the business, sometimes actually close, but sometimes just walk away after the stock pops. A big part of the job of risk arbitrageurs is to look at an offer and decide if it's credible, and when a company gets a surprise offer, every holder has suddenly become a risk arb whether they like it or not. There are some standard checklists, based on things like the buyer's financing, whether or not the board is receptive, each side's track record in this kind of situation. But there's also a more vibe-based approach, which doesn't fit into a checklist format but does ask: is something kind of off here? There were some off things here, but every famous corporate acquirer was once some nobody who didn't seem like they could pull off a deal. But there were signs. Specifically, Trillium's press releases had lots of typos. For example, they referred several times to how much stock their firm's "principles" owned, and they mentioned that they "own hundreds of thousand [sic] shares of common stock and common stock equivalents of Getty." It's really not the case that typos are incompatible with good business decisions, and there is probably, through selection effects, a positive correlation between typos and dollar alpha generated within investment firms. But it's also generally true that people in finance are obsessed with these sorts of details in public communications. Perfectly-formatted powerpoints, well-designed Excel models, and grammatically flawless prose are all things junior investment bankers complain about that senior bankers insist on. And this turns out to have signaling value. A banking client is not necessarily going to dig through the PowerPoint and find the strategically-chosen set of comparable companies in the valuation table; a buy-side firm may not notice, at first glance, that an Excel model's detailed outputs are all driven by one big set of hard-coded assumptions; nobody's going to vet every one of a hundred footnotes in a research initiation. But anyone can notice formatting errors or typos. So the point of being a stickler about the superficial stuff is that it's the best way to get full credit for the substance. And it turns out to be a good heuristic: the financial firm with a notable number of typos in its various press releases pumping a stock really did turn out not to have much substance behind it. Markets are fairly efficient because they're ruthless at punishing stupidity. Very quickly, irrational actors find that they've transferred their wealth to more rational ones, who now have the financial firepower to align stock prices even more closely with value. But that alignment only pays when there's someone making a mistake on the other side of the trade. Usually, big money is made from the accumulation of small errors and biases, but occasionally a single asset is influenced by wholesale irrationality from someone who did not have enough money or connections to finance a $4bn acquisition, but did have the resources to engineer temporary a half-billion dollar swing in one company's market cap. This is how the whole process works: brief bursts of extreme inefficiency are the raw material for markets that ultimately do a pretty solid job of pricing assets. This gets into fun and tricky territory. Placing a limit order is really making a paired long/short trade in two un-quoted products. A limit order is a free option to the counterparty, who has the right to trade at the price of the last un-cancelled order that everyone else has submitted. Position in the queue is an asset. If the next trade is a sell at $10, and you want to be the buyer, being first in line is worth more than being tenth in line. The value of the queue-position-as-asset tends to rise over time, as other orders get executed and the oldest still-live order gets closer to the front, while the option's value fluctuates unpredictably. As far as I know, nobody comes up with real-time values for both of these; the timescales involved make elaborate computations expensive. But implicitly, that's what high-frequency traders are really in the business of trading. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/b7d811c5?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)Of [oil](https://www.thediff.co/r/b3eddd52?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99),[art musem](https://www.thediff.co/r/d9003f8c?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99), and[funding people who disrupt art museums to protest the oil industry](https://www.thediff.co/r/fb9f7027?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)fame.[↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/05d6b416?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
You're on the free list for The Diff! This week, paying subscribers read about A Word From Our SponsorsThe art of establishing a strong financial foundation In the world of startups, being the first can be exhilarating. Being the first finance lead to join a startup, however, can be daunting. That’s why Mercury’s VP of Finance, Dan Kang, explores the five steps to establishing a strong financial foundation in your first 90 days. The article covers how to navigate existing processes, align with the CEO on key priorities, craft a financial strategy at scale, and build relationships across the company to make better decisions. Read the full article to learn the art of simplifying complex financial operations, so you and the company can perform at your highest level. *Mercury is a financial technology company, not a bank. Banking services provided by Choice Financial Group and Evolve Bank & Trust, Members FDIC. ElsewhereThe Google Feedback LoopGoogle is It really drives home Fees on What?Back when Alfred Winslow Jones launched his investment partnership, he needed to choose a fee structure. Naturally, for a Harvard-educated diplomat-turned-journalist-turned-late-in-life financier, he chose an obscure historical analogy and charged the same 20% of profits that Phoenecian ship captains used to. That fee structure was surprisingly durable even if you date it to 1949 rather than to the first millennium BC. It's evolved over time, as the median hedge fund's returns have worsened and as the marginal dollar has gone to higher-fee pod shop firms. And that evolution tracks increasing LP sophistication about what they're paying for: That fee evolution happened at a fast pace in the 2010s, in part because hedge funds were producing less alpha and their backers were getting pickier about what to pay for. And that means that fee-related thinking solidified at a time when interest rates rounded down to zero. Now, rates are nonzero, and absolute returns are lower, which means that investors are thinking more about how active management compares to cash. That's particularly important for pod shops, because a model where their long and short positions balance out is a model where their cash on hand is roughly equal to assets under management. A 10% return sounds a lot better than a 5% return from investing and a 5% return from holding cash. So The Micro Meta TurnaroundBack when Meta was a user-growth story first and a revenue-growth story second (with profits seeming to take care of themselves), one of the rare ways the company could spook investors after an otherwise-solid earnings report was to hint that younger users weren't quite as engaged as they used to be. This is hard to avoid in social media, for the usual generational-turnover reasons: businesses that target based on age either hit a demographic of a particular age range (Sesame Street, the AARP) or people born in a particular decade (MTV, Rolling Stone). If an app has good enough retention that the 18-year-olds on it will still be using it two decades later, it's going to be hard to convince the future crop of 18-year-olds that they should hang out in the same digital space as a bunch of people pushing forty. But Meta has somehow turned that around, at least slightly; in a recent piece on Disclosure: Long META. Yes, We're Doing the Meme Stock Thing AgainRoaring Kitty of GameStop fame has been posting vague memes on Twitter for a few weeks, which inevitably caused GameStop shares to briefly triple, before giving back those gains but also giving GameStop time to raise just under $1bn. He's Earlier, The Diff noted that the forces that propelled the first meme stock rally aren't as strong today: hedge funds are more cautious about shorting small companies with high retail ownership, and much more quick to cover when meme magic starts brewing. But on the other side of this, Roaring Kitty's financial firepower is a lot higher than it used to be—he owns 1.4% of GameStop's shares and has options on another 3.4%. And there's been a movie about him. In a situation like this, traders make more money when they're getting famous, but they can move prices more when they are famous, especially when they're famous and quite rich. DiversificationThe WSJ has a Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. See a sampling of current open roles below: - A seed-stage startup is using blockchains to enforce commitments and is in need of a fullstack developer with Solidity experience. (Remote)
- A top prop trading firm is looking for an intellectually curious, mathy generalist to work on projects spanning business strategy, technology, and markets. (NYC)
- A startup building the world’s most performant parallel-EVM is looking for a low level engineer with C++/Rust/CUDA experience who wants to deploy their GPU-EVM core to web3 projects. (Remote, EU preferred)
- A startup building tools to enable people to build communities and own their own data is looking for a site reliability engineer with deep Kubernetes experience. (Remote, SF preferred)
- A diversified prop trading firm with a uniquely collaborative team structure is looking for experienced software engineers. (Singapore or Austin, TX preferred)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. |
||||||||||
|
|
|
||||||||||
|