---
subject: "Free Speech in the US vs Europe: Who Is Right?"
from: "Tomas Pueyo from Uncharted Territories <unchartedterritories@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-27 13:03:16
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tomas Pueyo", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_28238133486362596", "UNREAD"]
---
On February 14th 2025, US Vice-President JD Vance gave Given the forum, you’d expect he would have used the time to address Russia and Ukraine. Instead, he argued that the biggest threat to Europe was internal: the loss of freedom of expression. As a European and an American, I feel like I’m in a good position to address both sides of the argument: Why is Vance accusing the EU of backsliding on freedom of speech? Is he right? If both regions share their values of freedom, why are there differences between them? What is the right amount of free speech? JD Vance: What Does the US Stand For?Vance stated that the very point of the existence of the West, what we stand for, what we fight for, is freedom. Freedom allows people to enjoy their lives, but also to invent, to improve, to build. And he sees a lack of this freedom in Europe, giving some examples: The EU canceled Romania’s elections, apparently because of Russian interference. This means the EU believes Romania’s democracy is not strong enough to fend off a few social ads from Russia. If so, how valuable is that democracy? Do they believe it’s not worth defending? EU commissars threatened to shut down social media during times of social unrest the moment they spot “hateful content”. German police have carried out raids against people posting anti-feminist content on social media, to combat misogyny. In Sweden, the government convicted a Christian activist for participating in Quran burnings that resulted in his friend’s murder. The judge of that case said: “Sweden’s laws to supposedly protect freedom of expression do not in fact grant a free pass to do or say anything without risking offending the group that holds that belief.” In the UK, a person was charged for standing 50 meters away from an abortion clinic and praying silently for his unborn child who was aborted a few years earlier.¹ The Biden Administration pushed social media companies (among many ohter things) to silence the coronavirus lab leak theory, which turns out to be likely true.
So he wonders: What’s the point of fighting together if we don’t agree on what we fight for? JD Vance’s argument is rooted in US tradition: The This is so important that the Founding Fathers gave it teeth, and freedom of speech in particular is backed by the US Constitution’s 1st amendment:
Now, Vance’s speech would make it look like the US will one-up Voltaire and put the strength of the state behind defending your right to say anything, but that’s not true. There are a bunch of
You will notice some weird exceptions, including false statements of fact and advertising. What?!
You also can’t commit fraud: lie for personal gain. That includes perjury, false advertising, lying to investors… You also can’t lie if your lie causes direct harm, especially to a private individual.⁴ So there are some limits to free speech, even in the US. How does that differ from Europe?⁵ What Does the EU Stand for?The
This is vastly different from the US. It opens up the option for politicians to curtail freedom of speech at will, because any speech that is against your values can be subject to restrictions or penalties. It’s not surprising, then, that Germany’s criminal code bans hate speech⁶ and speech that reviles religions.⁷ You can imagine how easy it is for governments to abuse this. In the UK, thousands of people have been jailed Here are a few more examples, just from Germany, to illustrate the point: [Robert Habeck](https://substack.com/redirect/7b8e2eaa-a98c-4367-a376-4059f3bf04ca?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), the head of the Greens in Germany, and minister of economy and environment, and his colleague Annalena Baerbcok,[have sued over 1300 Germans](https://substack.com/redirect/706e502e-e4de-4e41-a8e8-c37fda10b9ee?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)for their attacks against them on social media.Here’s an example of the consequences of these: The [police raided](https://substack.com/redirect/6601f1b3-5399-44d7-ad96-87e33f07419c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)the house of Stefan Niehoff, a 64 year old pensioner living in the Bavarian village of Burgpreppach for sharing an image calling Robert Habeck “weak head”.A woman [had her house searched](https://substack.com/redirect/706e502e-e4de-4e41-a8e8-c37fda10b9ee?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)in 2023 and her mobile phone and her son’s laptop confiscated because she had shared a meme on social media that made fun of leading government politicians.⁹
A 42-year-old man from Hamburg had his home raided by police after posting a tweet [calling a local politician, Walter Wobmann, a "Pimmel"](https://substack.com/redirect/832996ea-1da8-40be-adf6-cee29134f10f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)(German slang for "penis").A student was [fined €1,500](https://substack.com/redirect/d282dbd1-4f8a-46e2-9cb8-40d31ab68090?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)for calling the state “dirty”.A man [was sued](https://substack.com/redirect/4a97afcd-d293-4e29-bbcf-93a3917328ff?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)because he wanted to fight antisemitism by exposing antisemites, who carried a swastika.
Here’s an example of these home searches: I think we all agree that things like fraud and incitement to imminent violence are bad and should be banned. Then there are things that the US bans that are debatable, such as lying. Purposefully lying with the express intent of hurting someone is defamation and should be illegal. But what if the lie wasn’t purposeful? Is it a lie then, or is it a mistake? What if the intent was not really to hurt? This is not so clear cut. Then there are things that are totally legal in the US but illegal in many EU countries, such as negationism, hate speech, or toxic criticism of power. AFAIK the main thing that the US bans that the EU doesn’t is obscenity, which is. For a country that prides itself on freedom of speech, it sure is righteously prudish. Outside of that, the US is much more permissive than Europe. We can broadly summarize all this: Where do these differences come from, and who is right? US vs EU Traditions of Free SpeechAt the beginning of the French Revolution, in 1789, the French wrote the
We can see that the freedom of speech was already limited. Why? The Europeans invented free speech. In the quote at the top, I shared the spirit of Voltaire in the 1700s: that he could vehemently disagree with somebody but defend to the death their ability to say it. But Rousseau was another influence, and unlike Voltaire, he thought we also had to take into account the common good. Here are a few other factors that influenced freedom of speech during the French Revolution: The French had one single Church (Catholicism), so religious diversity was not as important to the French as it was to the Americans, many of whom had escaped religious persecution, and whose country was founded on the ideal of religious freedom. In the mid-1700s, although there was censorship in France, it couldn’t have been very strict, since the ideas of enlightenment spread easily across the salons of the country. Notably, ideas against the Church and in favor of secularism spread widely, [producing France’s fertility crash](https://substack.com/redirect/33c13b28-6223-4f84-a4e5-cddedb432982?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).The French suffered tumultuous times before and during the Revolution, which sensitized them to the value of censoring ideas to keep the peace.
All these reasons drove the French to push for rights—including freedom of speech, but with some recourse to censor it when needed. In 1791, the Americans opted for a broader freedom of speech in the One of their philosophical influences was John Locke, for whom natural freedoms were extremely important. The British were extremely strong censors, limiting use of the printing press and any criticism to the crown. The Americans grew extremely sensitive to censorship. Americans had to deal with religious diversity. They saw how important it was for religions to be protected, in part through freedom of speech. Originally, the United States were 13 separate colonies. They were very wary of federal power. They wanted to avoid any abuse of it, recalling how the British had abused their power.
So Americans and Europeans had different experiences that led them to create different laws early on. But their laws are not the only differences between them. The US is about to celebrate a quarter millennium of continued democracy. This is unprecedented. And it has gone quite well for them. Therefore, they think: Freedom is good! This has not been the European experience. Take Germany, for example: It became a true democracy¹⁰ in 1918, when the losses in WW1 pushed it to renounce the monarchy and replace it with a Hitler used many subterfuges, but he won people’s minds with his oratory and propaganda skills. He was simply a master communicator. So Germans have a great sense of how communication can be really bad. They fear it. Here’s my attempt at graphing this: In the continuum between total freedom of speech and total censorship, Europeans are more concerned about the rise of charismatic dictators than Orwellian, 1984-type governments. So they temper their freedom of speech with more censorship. Americans are scared to death about the 1984-type dictatorship, with a bureaucracy that stifles speech and even thought, as the UK did before independence. So the U.S. position is more open to freedom. Who Is Right?...Keep reading with a 7-day free trialSubscribe to Uncharted Territories to keep reading this post and get 7 days of free access to the full post archives. A subscription gets you:
|