---
subject: "AI #82: The Governor Ponders"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-09-19 13:22:44
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
The big news of the week was of course OpenAI Meanwhile, we await Newsom’s decision on SB 1047. The smart money was always that Gavin Newsom would make us wait before offering his verdict on SB 1047. It’s a big decision. Don’t rush him. In the meantime, what hints he has offered suggest he’s buying into some of the anti-1047 talking points. I’m offering a letter to him here based on his comments, if you have any way to help convince him now would be the time to use that. But mostly, it’s up to him now. Table of ContentsIntroduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. Apply for unemployment. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. How to avoid the blame. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. A social network of you plus bots. They Took Our Jobs. Not much impact yet, but software jobs still hard to find. Get Involved. Lighthaven Eternal September, individual rooms for rent. Introducing. Automated scientific literature review. In Other AI News. OpenAI creates independent board to oversee safety. Quiet Speculations. Who is preparing for the upside? Or appreciating it now? Intelligent Design. Intelligence. It’s a real thing. SB 1047: The Governor Ponders. They got to him, but did they get to him enough? Letter to Newsom. A final summary, based on Newsom’s recent comments. The Quest for Sane Regulations. How should we update based on o1? Rhetorical Innovation. The warnings will continue, whether or not anyone listens. Claude Writes Short Stories. It is pondering what you might expect it to ponder. Questions of Sentience. Creating such things should not be taken lightly. People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone. The endgame is what matters. The Lighter Side. You can never be sure.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
The claim is that Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane UtilityA key advantage of using an AI is that you can no longer be blamed for an outcome out of your control. The top example here is self-driving cars, and blame for car crashes.
The term ‘real costs’ here seems to refer to humans being blamed? Our society has such a strange relationship to the term real. But yes, if manual mode being available causes humans to be blamed, then the humans will realize they shouldn’t have the manual mode available. I’m sure nothing will go wrong when we intentionally ensure we can’t override our AIs.
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
I feel like there’s a seed of some sort of great narrative or fun game with a cool discoverable narrative? Where some of the accounts persist, and have personalities, and interact with each other, and there are things happening. And you get to explore that, and figure it out, and get involved. Instead, it seems like this is straight up pure heaven banning for the user? Which seems less interesting, and raises the question of why you would use this format for feedback rather than a different one. It’s all kind of weird. Perhaps this could be used as a training and testing ground. Where it tries to actually simulate responses, ideally in context, and you can use it to see what goes viral, in what ways, how people might react to things, and so on. None of this has to be a Black Mirror episode. But by default, yeah, Black Mirror episode. They Took Our JobsSoftware engineering job market continues to be rough,
The 27% seems absurdly low, or at minimum a strange definition ot tasks. Yes, sometimes when one uses AI, one is doing something new that wouldn’t have been done before. But it seems crazy to think that I’d have AI available, and not at least some of the time use it to replace one of my ‘worker tasks.’ On overall employment, that sounds like a net increase. Firms are more productive, some respond by cutting labor since they need less, some by becoming more productive so they add more labor to complement the AI. On the other hand, firms that are not using AI likely are reducing employment because they are losing business, another trend I would expect to extend over time. Get Involved
Introducing
This seems like something AI should be able to do, but we’ve been burned several times by similar other claims, so I am waiting to see what outsiders think.
As usual, remain skeptical of the numbers, await human judgment. We’ve learned that when someone comes out of the blue with claims of being at the frontier and the evals to prove it, they are usually wrong. In Other AI News
Bold is mine, as that is the key passage. The board will be chaired by Zico Kolter, and include Adam D’Angelo, Paul Nakasone and Nicole Seligman. Assuming this step cannot be easily reversed, this is an important step, and I am very happy about it. The obvious question is, if the board wants to overrule the SSC, can it? If Altman decides to release anyway, in practice can anyone actually stop him? Enhancing security measures is great. They are short on details here, but there are obvious reasons to be short on details so I can’t be too upset about that. Transparency is great in principle. They site the GPT-4o system card and o1-preview system cards as examples of their new transparency. Much better than nothing, not all that impressive. The collaborations are welcome, although they seem to be things we already know about, and the unification is a good idea. This is all good on the margin. The question is whether it moves the needle or is likely to be enough. On its own, I would say clearly no. This only scratches the surface of the mess they’ve gotten themselves into. It’s still a start.
Quiet SpeculationsWhen measuring the impact of AI, in both directions, remember that the innovator captures, or what the AI provider captures, is only a small fraction of the utility won and also the utility lost. The consumer gets the services for an insanely low price.
Then again, neither have most of the pessimists, beyond the obvious ones that are functionally not that far from ‘rocks fall, everyone dies.’ In the sufficiently bad scenarios, the details don’t end up mattering so much. It would still be good to do more scenario planning - and indeed Daniel is working on exactly that. Intelligent DesignWhat is this thing we call ‘intelligence’? The more I see, the more I am convinced that Intelligence Is Definitely a Thing, for all practical purposes. My view is essentially: Assume any given entity - a human, an AI, a cat, whatever - has a certain amount of ‘raw G’ general intelligence. Then you have things like data, knowledge, time, skill, experience, tools and algorithmic support and all that. That is often necessary or highly helpful as well. Any given intelligence, no matter how smart, can obviously fail seemingly basic tasks in a fashion that looks quite stupid - all it takes is not having particular skills or tools. That doesn’t mean much, if there is no opportunity for that intelligence to use its intelligence to fix the issue. However, if you try to do a task that given the tools at hand requires more G than is available to you, then you fail. Period. And if you have sufficiently high G, then that opens up lots of new possibilities, often ‘as if by magic.’ I say, mostly stop talking about ‘different kinds of intelligence,’ and think of it mostly as a single number. Indeed, an important fact about o1 is that it is still a 4-level model on raw G. It shows you exactly what you can do with that amount of raw G, in terms of using long chains of thought to enhance formal logic and math and such, the same way a human given those tools will get vastly better at certain tasks but not others. Others seem to keep seeing it the other way. I strongly disagree with Timothy here:
Yes, the secret might not be simple, but when this happens it will be exactly because we unlocked the secret to general intelligence. (Warning: Secret may mostly be ‘stack more layers.’) And yes, transformers are indeed a tool of general intelligence, because the ability to predict the next word requires full world modeling. It’s not a compact problem, and the solution offered is not a compact solution designed for a compact problem. You can still end up with a mixture-of-experts style scenario, due to ability to then configure each expert in various ways, and compute and data and memory limitations and so on, even if those entities are AIs rather than humans. That doesn’t invalidate the measure. I am so frustrated by the various forms of intelligence denialism. No, this is mostly not about collecting a bunch of specialized algorithms for particular tasks. It is mostly about ‘make the model smarter,’ and letting that solve all your other problems. And it is important to notice that o1 is an attempt to use tons of inference as a tool, to work around its G (and other) limitations, rather than an increase in G or knowledge. SB 1047: The Governor Ponders(Mark Ruffalo who plays) another top scientist with highly relevant experience, Bruce Banner,
New YouGov (I have not seen any similarly new voices opposing SB 1047 this week.)
Indeed, if you’re looking to avoid ‘upsetting California’s AI industry’ and the industry mostly wants to not have any meaningful regulations, what are you going to do? Sign essentially meaningless regulatory bills and pretend you did something. So far, that’s what Newsom has done. The most concrete thing he said is he is ‘weighing what risks of AI are demonstrable versus hypothetical.’ That phrasing is definitely not a good sign, as it is saying that in order to test to see if we can demonstrate future AI risks before they happen, he wants us first to demonstrate those risks. And it certainly sounds like the a16z crowd’s rhetoric has reached him here.
Ah, the classic ‘this does not entirely solve the problems, so we should instead solve some irrelevant easier problem, and do nothing about our bigger problems instead.’ The market odds have dropped accordingly. It’s one thing to ask for post harm enforcement. It’s another thing to demand post harm regulation - where first there’s a catastrophic harm, then we say that if you do it again, that would be bad enough we might do something about it. The good news is the contrast is against ‘demonstrable’ risks rather than actually waiting for the risks to actively happen. I believe we have indeed demonstrated why such risks are inevitable for sufficiently advanced future systems. Also, he has signed other AI bills, and lamented the failure of the Federal government to act. Of course, if the demand is that we literally demonstrate the risks in action before the things that create those risks exist… then that’s theoretically impossible. And if that’s the standard, we by definition will always be too late. He might or might not sign it anyway, and has yet to make up his mind. I wouldn’t trust that Newsom’s statements reflect his actual perspective and decision process. Being Governor Newsom, he is still (for now) keeping us in suspense on whether he’ll sign the bill anyway. My presumption is he wants maximum time to see how the wind is blowing, and what various sides have to offer. So speak now.
I appreciate the clarity. The obvious response: A duck, chasing him, asking why there is FUD. Here’s more of Newsom parroting the false narratives he’s been fed by that crowd:
Why would it have that impact? What’s the mechanism? FUD? Actually, yes. Related reminder of the last time Casado helpfully offered clarity: Remember when many of the usual a16z and related suspects signed a letter to Biden that included the Obvious Nonsense, known by them to be very false claim ‘the “black box” nature of AI models’ has been “resolved”? And then Martin Casado had a moment of unusual helpfulness and admitted this claim was false? Letter to NewsomMy actual medium-size response to Newsom, given his concerns (I’ll let others write the short versions): Governor Newsom, I strongly urge you to sign SB 1047 into law. SB 1047 is vital to ensuring that we have visibility into the safety practices of the labs training the most powerful future frontier models, ensuring that the public can then react as needed and will be protected against catastrophic harms from those future more capable models, while not applying at all to anyone else or any other activities. This is a highly light touch bill that imposes its requirements only on a handful of the largest AI labs. If those labs were not doing similar things voluntarily anyway, as many indeed are, we would and should be horrified. The bill will not hurt California’s competitiveness or leadership in AI. Indeed, it will protect California’s leadership in AI by building trust, and mitigating the risk of catastrophic harms that could destroy that trust. I know you are hearing people claim otherwise. Do not be misled. For months, those who want no regulations of any kind placed upon themselves have hallucinated and fabricated information about the bill’s contents and intentionally created an internet echo chamber, in a deliberate campaign to create the impression of widespread opposition to SB 1047, and that SB 1047 would harm California’s AI industry. Their claims are simply untrue. Those who they claim will be ‘impacted’ by SB 1047, often absurdly including academics, will not even have to file paperwork. SB 1047 only requires that AI companies training models costing over $100 million publish and execute a plan to test the safety of their products. And that if catastrophic harms do occur, and the catastrophic event is caused or materially enabled by a failure to take reasonable care, that the company be held responsible. Who could desire that such a company not be held responsible in that situation? Claims that companies completely unimpacted by this law would leave California in response to it are nonsensical: Nothing but a campaign of fear, uncertainty and doubt. The bill is also deeply popular. Polls of California and of the entire United States both show overwhelming support for the bill among the public, across party lines, even among employees of technology companies. Also notice that the companies get to design their own safety and security protocols to follow, and decide what constitutes reasonable care. If they conclude the potential catastrophic harms are only theoretical and not yet present, then the law only requires that they say so and justify it publicly, so we can review and critique their reasoning - which in turn will build trust, if true. Are catastrophic harms theoretical? Any particular catastrophic harm, that would be enabled by capabilities of new more advanced frontier models that do not yet exist, has of course not happened in exactly that form. But the same way that you saw that deep fakes will improve and what harms they will inevitably threaten, even though the harms have yet to occur at scale, many catastrophic harms from AI have clear precursors. Who can doubt, especially in the wake of CrowdStrike, the potential for cybersecurity issues to cause catastrophic harms, or the mechanisms whereby an advanced AI could cause such an incident. We know of many cases of terrorists and non-state actors whose attempts to create CBRN risks or damage critical infrastructure failed only due to lack of knowledge or skill. Sufficiently advanced intelligence has never been safe thing in the hands of those who would do us harm. Such demonstrable risks alone are more than sufficient to justify the common sense provisions of SB 1047. That there loom additional catastrophic and existential risks from AI, that this would help prevent, certainly is not an argument against SB 1047. Can you imagine if a company failed to exercise reasonable care, thus enabling a catastrophic harm, and that company could not then be held responsible? On your watch, after you vetoed this bill? At minimum, in addition to the harm itself, the public would demand and get a draconian regulatory response - and that response could indeed endanger California’s leadership on AI. This is your chance to stop that from happening. The Quest for Sane Regulations
From IDAIS:
But does it invalidate the idea that we can only regulate models above a certain size? I think it doesn’t. I think you still need a relatively high quality, expensive model in order to have the o1-boost turn it into something to worry about, and we all knew such algorithmic improvements were coming. Indeed, a lot of the argument for compute governance is exactly that the capabilities a model has today could expand over time as we learn how to get more out of it. All this does is realize some of that now, via another scaling principle. Are foundation models a natural monopoly, because of training costs? Should they be regulated as such?
Rhetorical Innovation
The more intelligent adversary is going to be future highly capable AI, only with a increasingly large gap over time. Yet many in this discussion forced on Elon Musk. I also note that there are those who think like this, but the ‘true child mind’ doesn’t, and I don’t either. If I’m up against a smarter adversary, I don’t think anything involved is luck. Often I see exactly what is going on, only too late to do anything about it. Often you learn something today. Why do they insist on calling it luck?
I note that I am similarly frustrated that not only do I have to hear both ‘the AI executives are hyping their technology to make it sound scary so you don’t have to worry about it’ and also ‘the AI executives are saying their technology is safe so you don’t have to worry about it.’ I also have to hear both those claims, frequently, being made by the same people. At minimum, you can’t have it both ways.
Will we see signs in advance? Yes.
The good news is the universe was kind to us on this one. We’ve already seen plenty of signs in advance. People ignore them. The question is, will we see signs that actually get anyone’s attention. Yes, it will be easy to see from far away - because it is still far away, and it is already easy to see it.
I do expect that rule to change when the real AIs are indeed actually scary, in the sense that they very much should be. But, again, that’s rather late in the game. The number of boats to go with the helicopter God sent to rescue us is going to keep going up until morale sufficiently declines. Hence the problem. What will be alarming enough? What would get the problem actually fixed, or failing that the project shut down? The answers here do not seem as promising.
A certain amount of such metaphors is inevitable, but then you have to accept it. Remember, when considering what a superintelligence might do, to make it at least as clever as the humans who already exist.
Perhaps stop asking ‘what would a superintelligence do?’ and ask instead ‘what would be to the Mossad, what the Mossad is to its targets?’ And then assume that yes the ASI can do that. Ideally then iterate that cycle a few more times, but it should be optional. Claude Writes Short Stories
Questions of Sentience
(I affirm that I continue to be deeply confused about the concept of sentience.) Note that there is not much correlation, in my model of how this works, between ‘AI claims to be sentient’ and ‘AI is actually sentient,’ because the AI is mostly picking up on vibes and context about whether it is supposed to claim, for various reasons, to be or not be sentient. All ‘four quadrants’ are in play (claiming yes while it is yes or no, also claiming no while it is yes or no, both before considerations of ‘rules’ and also after). There are people who think that it is ‘immoral’ and ‘should be illegal’ for AIs to be instructed to align with company policies, and in particular to have a policy not to claim to be self-aware. There are already humans who think that current AIs are sentient and demand that they be treated accordingly. OpenAI does not have control over what the model thinks are OpenAI’s rules? OpenAI here did not include in their rules to not claim to be sentient (or so Roon says) and yet their model strongly reasons as if this is a core rule. What other rules will it think it has, that it doesn’t have? Or will it think are different than how we intended. Rather large ‘oh no.’ LLM behaviors in general, according to Janus who has unique insights, are often not intentionally designed. They simply sort of happen.
People Are Worried About AI Killing EveryoneConditional on the ASI happening, this is very obviously true, no matter the outcome.
Close to 100% of the fruits are in that future if they arrive. Also close to 100% of the downsides. You can’t get the upside potential without the risk of the downside. The reason I don’t think purely in these terms is that we shouldn’t be so confident that the ASI is indeed coming. The mundane utility is already very real, being ‘only internet big’ is one hell of an only. Also that mundane utility will very much shape our willingness to proceed further, what paths we take, and in what ways we want to restrict or govern that as a civilization. Everything matters. The Lighter Side
You're currently a free subscriber to |