---
subject: "The Picture of Free, Untrammeled Womanhood"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-16 14:03:11
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Thanks for reading! To support my work, please click the button below: If you want to help keep this project going, please consider purchasing a paid subscription. Paid subscribers — it’s only about 75 cents a week! — get access to the archives, the satisfaction of supporting work they enjoy, and my undying gratitude. This is the second installment of a two-parter about the history of women and bicycles. If you missed part 1, check it out: Beatrice Grimshaw lived a life that most women of her time couldn’t have imagined. She was born into a fairly wealthy family in the suburbs of Belfast in 1870. She attended several colleges but never took a degree. Most people in her life likely assumed that she was headed for marriage and kids. What other options were there? But Grimshaw refused to marry. Her parents wanted her to be a teacher, but she didn’t want to do that either. Instead, she found a job as a writer, publishing articles about sports and putting out a couple of novels about “new women” living liberated lives. Ireland felt too small for her; she became fascinated with the islands of the Pacific, which were just becoming known to Europeans at this time. So she took off. Grimshaw found a job writing promotional material for shipping lines about the islands of the South Pacific. Then she got the chance to travel to Papua (then a British colony) to write about it for a newspaper. She stayed for almost three decades. I’ll let Grimshaw
However awful her attitudes were toward the people she encountered, we have to acknowledge that Beatrice Grimshaw found a way to live a life of travel and exploration that wasn’t available to most European women of her time. What sparked this unconventional life? It was, in no small measure, a bicycle. In 1939, Grimshaw
She explored the world on two wheels, eventually getting serious about cycling. She entered cycling contests, trying to bike as many miles as she could in 24 hours. This led to a job writing for a magazine called Irish Cyclist, which opened the door to other writing jobs in sports and travel. The bicycle ended up taking her halfway around the world. Let us now praise the bicycle. Most of the influential feminists of the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries saw the two-wheeler as more than a convenient mode of transformation. It was a machine for empowering women. Frances Willard, a suffragist and temperance leader, took up cycling on her bike “
She explained further: “I began to feel that myself plus the bicycle equaled myself plus the world.” Her best-selling cycling The following year, at age 76, suffrage legend Susan B. Anthony
And Elizabeth Cady Stanton wrote a speech The answer was yes:
The bicycle became part of the equipment of the “New Woman,” as this 1896 cartoon illustrates: Riding a bike was part of a new self-sufficiency for women: So was learning to perform one’s own bike maintenance: Soon the “bicycle girl” became a cultural fixture, the subject of popular songs: In many cases, the bicycle was tied directly to other issues of women’s liberation. This cartoon from New Zealand compares the difference between old “penny farthing” bikes and new “safety bicycles” to the difference between letting women vote in only municipal elections and full suffrage for women: Bikes were a business, and manufacturers soon learned to market their products directly to women. This Crawford ad from 1896 makes the bike seem like a practical purchase — for “health and recreation” — but also opens up the prospect of romance: This Stormer ad shows the rider pulling off a jaunty “look ma, no hands!” move: This 1893 Shirk ad pitches itself to the “prudent buyer” but has an air of freedom about it: This French cyclist has a knowing smile: And this 1896 ad promises contentment: Other ads made the bike out to be a profoundly fashionable object: In all of these ads, the female cyclist is shown outside of the constraints of traditional womanhood. There are no kids, and there’s no husband. Often, the cyclist is alone, out in the world, enjoying her freedom. There was, unsurprisingly, a backlash against women on bikes. Cycling was seen as unhealthy, worrying that it might damage women’s delicate constitutions. Some doctors worried that a bicycle seat might damage women’s ability to have children — or Others warned that cycling would make women ugly. According to the
Cycling was unladylike and even morally corrupting, as this Los Angeles Herald But the backlash would not succeed. The bicycle changed the lives of countless women. As an article in the Nebraska
Like all trends, the “bicycle craze” came to an end, partially because the automobile began to dominate the streets, making cycling a riskier proposition. But women didn’t forget the freedom they had found on two wheels, and began to demand that freedom in other areas of life. This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: Or you can share the newsletter with others: Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week! You're currently a free subscriber to |