---
subject: "First Principles: Leaning into procrastination"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-09-15 05:40:12
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
First Principles
Sun, 15 Sep 24
Your Sunday newsletter on mental models and leadership, seasoned with insights from some of India’s most disruptive thinkers.
Good Morning Ishan,
(dum dum dum)
“A minute please,” I say.
(DUM DUM DUM)
We’re roughly 400–450 steps up the [roughly 1,200 steps](https://indiahikes.com/documented-trek/nandi-hills-trek) that take you to the top of Nandi Hills, located around 60 kilometres from Bengaluru.
Ahead of me is Dharmendra, who’s effortlessly bouncing up the steps, often two at a time. He’s a [running coach](https://www.runningcoach.in/about) with the soul of a mountain goat, I’m thinking. It’s around 6.15 am and we’re taking the scenic route up on a Friday morning. There’s no one else on the trail and we’re surrounded by mist and clouds.
(dum dum dum)
The sound of my heart trying to beat its way out of my chest has come down by a few decibels, so we start climbing again.
Bad idea to do this just four days after catching a bad viral flu that knocked you out for a few days, I tell myself.
“Did you know legend has it that [Visvesvaraya](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/M._Visvesvaraya) could climb all the way to the top in 30 minutes, well into his 70s?” says Dharmendra.
(dum dum dum)
It would take us nearly 50 minutes that day. I intend to go back and aim for a better time soon.
Dharmendra and I had made the plan for the climb roughly two months ago, when we met after being introduced via the [Fitness Quest edition](https://the-ken.com/newsletter/first-principles/first-principles-quest-special-the-meaning-of-fitness/). For no reason other than just doing it.
The wind is howling so loudly around us that I get a warning notification from my watch when it crosses 100 decibels.
Things ease up after the halfway mark, but we can’t see anything from the top. Because everything is draped in clouds.
On our way back, we have a bit of a “our own Mount Fuji” moment.
It’s festival time for us Malayalis today, and also that one day of the year when Youtube can reliably expect the exact same query from me.
“How to tie a Kerala-style mundu?”
I fail every year. And yet, my ego prevents me from just buying a Velcro mundu.
Thiruvonam Ashamsakal. Happy Onam!
And please also welcome our new Books Editor, Hari!
Here’s what we have for you today:
1. Leaning into procrastination
2. Tsundoku 📚
3. Why couldn’t Stripe become the Stripe of India? 🎙️
[Pro tip: This email is a highly abbreviated version, since many email clients impose restrictions on the amount of material we can publish in a single email before intervention. In fact, it’s likely some email clients may even clip this truncated email.
The best way to experience this edition is to [read it on our website](https://the-ken.com/newsletter/first-principles/leaning-into-procrastination/), where all sections are featured in full and unabridged form.
Also, if your default setting is to not show images within emails, please consider turning it off for this newsletter. Or else, you’ll miss many of the interesting images and photos we carry each Sunday.]
Like many of you, I’ve had a tortured relationship with to-dos. From discovering them in the first few years of work, to learning how to manage them better, to reading various books and authors on finding the best to-do techniques, to installing the best new to-do apps every six months, to feeling like a failure because no matter what I did, my to-do lists always won.
My phone and laptop are littered with broken and forgotten apps, lists, notes, and files, each bearing witness to my struggle to master the dreaded to-do.
It has been less than two years since I stopped trying. Because I realised it was never really about the things that needed to get done.
Instead, it was the things I wanted to do.
“There is a story attributed to Warren Buffett—although probably only in the apocryphal way in which wise insights get attributed to Albert Einstein or the Buddha, regardless of their real source—in which the famously shrewd investor is asked by his personal pilot about how to set priorities. I’d be tempted to respond, “Just focus on flying the plane!” But apparently this didn’t take place midflight, because Buffett’s advice is different: he tells the man to make a list of the top twenty-five things he wants out of life and then to arrange them in order, from the most important to the least. The top five, Buffett says, should be those around which he organizes his time. But contrary to what the pilot might have been expecting to hear, the remaining twenty, Buffett allegedly explains, aren’t the second-tier priorities to which he should turn when he gets the chance. Far from it. In fact, they’re the ones he should actively avoid at all costs—because they’re the ambitions insufficiently important to him to form the core of his life yet seductive enough to distract him from the ones that matter most.”
That was an excerpt from [Four Thousand Weeks](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/54785515-four-thousand-weeks) by Oliver Burkeman. It’s a wonderful and deftly written book, and I do recommend it.
Burkeman skewers many of the conventional and popular methods of “getting things done” (a cult in itself, of which I was a part too for a brief while).
The chapter from his book that spoke most to me was about procrastination. For years, I’ve struggled with the guilt of procrastination and the weight of unfinished “tasks”. But since last year, I’ve not just begun to accept that it’s okay to procrastinate, but also that it could even be enjoyable.
Provided we are honest enough with ourselves to know when we’re ignoring tasks that aren’t that important.
“As the American author and teacher Gregg Krech puts it, we need to learn to get better at procrastinating. Procrastination of some kind is inevitable: indeed, at any given moment, you’ll be procrastinating on almost everything, and by the end of your life, you’ll have gotten around to doing virtually none of the things you theoretically could have done. So the point isn’t to eradicate procrastination, but to choose more wisely what you’re going to procrastinate on, in order to focus on what matters most. The real measure of any time management technique is whether or not it helps you neglect the right things.”
Once you accept that literally everyone procrastinates, you realise you can let go of the guilt of doing it yourself. And once you do that, you can do it more consciously, with agency. You can begin to think about what you can, even what you should, ignore.
Lest we get carried away too much into celebrating procrastination, remember what we really want is to do the things that matter to you.
You are at the center of this equation you’re trying to optimise. So, get ahead in line and “pay yourself first.”
“Principle number one is to pay yourself first when it comes to time. I’m borrowing this phrasing from the graphic novelist and creativity coach Jessica Abel, who borrowed it in turn from the world of personal finance, where it’s long been an article of faith because it works. If you take a portion of your paycheck the day you receive it and squirrel it away into savings or investments, or use it for paying off debts, you’ll probably never feel the absence of that cash; you’ll go about your business—buying your groceries, paying your bills—precisely as if you’d never had that portion of money to begin with. (There are limits, of course: this plan won’t work if you literally earn only enough to survive.) But if, like most people, you “pay yourself last” instead—buying what you need and hoping there’ll be some money remaining at the end to put into savings—you’ll usually find that there isn’t any. And this won’t necessarily be because you frittered it away self-indulgently, on lattes, or pedicures, or new electronic gadgets, or heroin. Every expenditure might have felt eminently sensible and necessary in the moment that you made it. The trouble is that we’re terrible at long-range planning: if something feels like a priority now, it’s virtually impossible to coolly assess whether it will still feel that way in a week or a month. And so we naturally err on the side of spending—then feel bad later when there’s nothing left over to save.
The same logic, Abel points out, applies to time. If you try to find time for your most valued activities by first dealing with all the other important demands on your time, in the hope that there’ll be some left over at the end, you’ll be disappointed. So if a certain activity really matters to you—a creative project, say, though it could just as easily be nurturing a relationship, or activism in the service of some cause—the only way to be sure it will happen is to do some of it today, no matter how little, and no matter how many other genuinely big rocks may be begging for your attention. After years of trying and failing to make time for her illustration work, by taming her to-do list and shuffling her schedule, Abel saw that her only viable option was to claim time instead—to just start drawing, for an hour or two, every day, and to accept the consequences, even if those included neglecting other activities she sincerely valued. “If you don’t save a bit of your time for you, now, out of every week,” as she puts it, “there is no moment in the future when you’ll magically be done with everything and have loads of free time.” This is the same insight embodied in two venerable pieces of time management advice: to work on your most important project for the first hour of each day, and to protect your time by scheduling “meetings” with yourself, marking them in your calendar so that other commitments can’t intrude. Thinking in terms of “paying yourself first” transforms these one-off tips into a philosophy of life, at the core of which lies this simple insight: if you plan to spend some of your four thousand weeks doing what matters most to you, then at some point you’re just going to have to start doing it.”
This is why I said earlier that I’d started enjoying procrastination. Because it allowed me to redirect a chunk of my own time to myself. Whether it’s to just “think” about something big I truly want to do, or to simply read a book sitting next to Gabru on a Sunday afternoon. I’m paying myself first, unapologetically. To-dos be damned.
Hello, dear readers! This is Hari Krishna, and I’ll be filling Anushka’s shoes as First Principles Books Editor from today.
I thought I’d start my stint with a confession that also serves as an introduction, and I can show it to you first before I even begin to explain. Here goes:
And before you think, “oh, he reads a lot”, let me stop you. No. What I do is buy a lot of books. What you see laid out before you is evidence of my craving to splurge. I took a count yesterday just to put a number to how much of an embarrassment I’m leaving myself open to, and I’m happy to report that this year alone, that number is 37 books! (Three are missing in the picture, probably with some of my colleagues). I’ve finished about eight of those. Some the day I got them. Some a few months later, through sleepless nights.
And here’s the twist: I have another 30-odd other books I’ve accumulated over the previous years that I still haven’t gotten around to reading. Some I picked up and then left unfinished. Some I’ve not even taken out of their plastic wrapping.
There’s a word in Japanese for this affliction of mine: [Tsundoku](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tsundoku)—the phenomenon of constantly acquiring reading material, but letting them pile up without reading most, if not all, of them. So considering there’s already a word for it, I feel there must be more people like me around. 🙂
If you’re one of them, I would be happy to talk and maybe get a recommendation to add to my collection of unread books. Who knows, one silent night, I might just pick it up and finish it. Either way, I’ll be thankful to you.
For me, buying books is a joyous exercise. It is the only thing in the world that I don’t feel guilty spending money on. I think of books as my wealth. I’ve never felt overwhelmed by the knowledge that surrounds me. In my eyes, there are countless worlds, stories, and experiences that are just an arm’s length away for me to unlock, eventually.
But let’s be real, some of these books will remain unread forever, and that’s fine. Because as Nassim Nicholas Taleb wrote in his book, The Black Swan (emphasis mine):
The writer Umberto Eco belongs to that small class of scholars who are encyclopedic, insightful and nondull. He is the owner of a large personal library(containing thirty 30,000 books), and separates visitors into two categories: those who react with “Wow! Signore professore dottore Eco, what a library you have! How many of these books have you read?” and the others – a very small minority – who get the point that a private library is not an ego-boosting appendage but a research tool. Read books are far less valuable than unread ones. The library should contain as much of what you do not know as your financial means, mortgage rates, and the currently tight real-estate market allow you to put there. You will accumulate more knowledge and more books as you grow older, and the growing number of unread books on the shelves will look at you menacingly. Indeed, the more you know, the larger the rows of unread books. Let us call this collection of unread books an antilibrary.
So yes, I’m happily building my anti-library. And because I’ve made a huge splash on the books I buy, I’ll let you in on the next one I’ve got my eyes on. This was recommended to me by Rohin. It’s called the [Checklist Manifesto](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/6667514-the-checklist-manifesto), written by Atul Gawande.
I’ll see you next week with some new recommendations. And please do not forget to send in your own recommendations for books you are reading, or have already read. You can use [this link](https://theken.typeform.com/FPBooks).
This week, my co-host on the Two by Two podcast, Praveen Gopal Krishnan and I met with Arundhati Ramanathan, The Ken’s Deputy Editor, and Vikram Bhat, ex-Chief Product Officer at a bunch of really innovative tech organisations and startups.
We were discussing the conundrum of why Stripe, the world’s most valuable fintech startup, couldn’t succeed in India.
Read here 👉🏾 [https://the-ken.com/newsletters/two-by-two/why-couldnt-stripe-become-the-stripe-of-india/](https://the-ken.com/newsletters/two-by-two/why-couldnt-stripe-become-the-stripe-of-india/)
Listen here 👉🏾[https://the-ken.com/podcasts/two-by-two/](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/two-by-two/)
That’s a wrap for this week. Before you go, if you know someone who might like this newsletter, forward us to them!
Please write to [fp@the-ken.com](mailto:fp@the-ken.com) if there’s anything you’d like to share with us. Or leave a comment on our on-site edition. See you next Sunday!
Regards,
Rohin Dharmakumar
Data can be leveraged only if it is digestedData can drive the smartest decisions. But only if it is backed by a concise, impactful, strategic narrative. The Ken spoke to over a thousand business leaders to diagnose a brewing narrative crisis inside Indian companies. And we’ve devised an answer: our very first Data Storytelling Workshop. We have limited slots open for the next quarter. |