---
subject: "AI #146: Chipping In"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-12-11 13:56:41
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
It was touch and go, I’m worried GPT-5.2 is going to drop any minute now, but We did have a major chip release, in that the Trump administration unwisely I spent the weekend If all goes well this break can continue, and the rest of December can be its traditional month of relaxation, family and many of the year’s best movies. On a non-AI note, I’m working on a piece to enter into the discourse about poverty lines and vibecessions and how hard life is actually getting in America, and hope to have that done soon, but there’s a lot to get through. Table of ContentsLanguage Models Offer Mundane UtilityShould you use them more as simulators?
I agree with Gallabytes (and Claude) here. I would default to asking the AI rather than asking it to simulate a simulation, and I think as capabilities improve techniques like asking for what others would say have lost effectiveness. There are particular times when you do want to ask ‘what do you think experts would say here?’ as a distinct question, but you should ask that roughly in the same places you’d ask it of a human. Running an open weight model isn’t cool. You know what’s cool? ChatGPT Needs More Mundane UtilitySo sayeth Sam Altman,
The ‘we are going to create a hostile misaligned-to-users model’ talk is explicit if you understand what all the relevant words mean, total engagement myopia:
OpenAI reportedly believes they’ve ‘solved the problems’ with this, so it is fine. That’s not possible. The problem and the solution, the thing that drives engagement and also drives the misalignment and poor outcomes, are at core the same thing. Yes, you can mitigate the damage and be smarter about it, but OpenAI is turning a dial called ‘engagement maximization’ while looking back at Twitter vibes like a contestant on The Price is Right. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
On Your MarksPoetiq, a company 173 days old, uses a scaffold and One should expect that there are similar low hanging fruit gains from refinement in many other tasks.
Sayash Kapoor of ‘AI as normal technology’ declares that
That seems exactly right, with Gemini 3 Deep Think for when you want ‘answers requiring thought.’ If all you want is a pure answer, and you are confident it will know the answer, Gemini all the way. If you’re not sure if Gemini will know, then you have to worry it might hallucinate. DeepSeek v3.2 disappoints in LM Arena, Choose Your FighterModel quality, including speed, matters so much more than cost for most users.
That’s a high bid but very far from unreasonable. Human time and clock time are insanely valuable, and the speed of AI is often a limiting factor. Cost is real if you are using quite a lot of tokens, and you can quickly be talking real money, but always think in absolute terms not relative terms, and think of your gains.
AIs and computers have always been highly jagged, or perhaps humans always were compared to the computers. What’s new is that we got used to how the computers were jagged before, and the way LLMs are doing it are new.
Get My Agent On The LineMcKay Wrigley is He Who Is Always Super Excited By New Releases but there is discernment there and the excitement seems reliably genuine. This is big talk about Opus 4.5 as an agent. From what I’ve seen, he’s right.
This matches my limited experiences. I didn’t do a comparison to Codex, but compared to Antigravity or Cursor under older models, the difference was night and day. I ask it to do the thing, I sit back and it does the thing. The thing makes me more productive. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse SoonThose in r/MyBoyfriendIsAI are a highly selected group. It still seems worrisome?
Fun With Media Generation
Copyright ConfrontationJudge in the New York Times versus OpenAI copyright case A Young Lady’s Illustrated Primer
I like to put this as: AI is the best tool ever invented for learning. AI is the best tool ever invented for not learning. Which way, modern man?
They Took Our Jobs
As usual, everyone wants AI to augment them and do the boring tasks like paperwork, rather than automate or replace them, as if they had some voice in how that plays out.
From the abundance and ‘things getting worse’ debates, a glimpse of the future:
Even when progress is steady in terms of measured capabilities, inflection points and rapid rise in actual uses is common. Obsolescence comes at you fast.
Americans Really Do Not Like AI
People choose ‘participation-based’ compensation over UBI, even under conditions where by construction there is nothing useful for people to do. The people demand Keynesian stimulus, to dig holes and fill them up, to earn their cash, although most of all they do demand that cash one way or another.
I expect that these choices are largely far mode and not so coherent, and will change when the real situation is staring people in the face. Most of all, I don’t think people are comprehending what ‘AI does almost any job better than humans’ means, even if we presume humans somehow retain control. They’re thinking narrowly about ‘They Took Our Jobs’ not the idea that actually nothing you do is that useful. Meanwhile
Get InvolvedI looked again at
If you have money to give, that puts an even bigger premium than usual on getting that money out the door soon. Right now there’s a shortage of funding even for obvious opportunities, in the future that likely won’t be the case. That also means that if you are planning on earning to give, to any cause you would expect Anthropic employees to care about, that only makes sense in the longer term if you are capable of finding illegible opportunities, or you can otherwise do the work to differentiate the best opportunities and thus give an example to follow. You’ll need unique knowledge, and to do the work, and to be willing to be bold. However, if you are bold and you explain yourself well, your example could then carry a multiplier. IntroducingOpenAI, This is an excellent use of open source, great job everyone.
Also, oh no:
Gemini 3 Deep Think
If you do have it, you select ‘Deep Think’ in the prompt bar, then ‘Thinking’ from the model drop down, then type your query. On the one hand Opus 4.5 is missing from their slides (thanks
I presume, based on previous experience with Gemini 2.5 Deep Think, that if you want the purest thinking and ‘raw G’ mode that this is now your go-to. In Other AI News
OpenAI gives us
We now write largely for the AIs, both in terms of training data and when AIs use search as part of inference. The place that actually does not allow access is Twitter, I presume in order to give an edge to Grok and xAI, and this is super annoying, often I need to manually copy Twitter content. This substantially reduces the value of Twitter.
This Means War
This is inevitable, and also a good thing given the circumstances. We do not have the luxury of saying AI and lethal do not belong in the same sentence, if there is one place we cannot pause this would be it, and the threat to us is mostly orthogonal to the literal weapons themselves while helping people realize the situation. Hence my longstanding position in favor of building the Autonomous Killer Robots, and very obviously we need AI assisting the war department in other ways. If that’s not a future you want, you need to impact AI development in general. Trying to specifically not apply it to the War Department is a non-starter. Show Me the Money
The stock market continues to punish companies linked to OpenAI, with many worried that Google is now winning, despite events being mostly unsurprising. An ‘efficient market’ can still be remarkably time inconsistent, if it can’t be predicted. Bubble, Bubble, Toil and Trouble
Technologies take time to realize real gains. There are many AI companies, we should expect market concentration. Concerns about Chinese electricity generation and chip development. Yeah, yeah, you say ‘this time is different,’ never is, sorry. OpenAI and ChatGPT’s revenue is 75% subscriptions. The AI companies will need to make a lot of money.
Especially amusing is the argument that ‘OpenAI makes its money on subscriptions not on business income,’ therefore all of AI is a bubble, when Anthropic is the one dominating the business use case. If you want to go long Anthropic and short OpenAI, that’s hella risky but it’s not a crazy position. Seeing people call it a bubble on the basis of such heuristics should update you towards it being less of a bubble. You know who you are trading against.
Paul’s objection is a statement about what is convincing to skeptics. If you’re paying attention, you’d say: So what, if the use and revenue are real? Your investors also being heavy users of your product is an excellent sign, if the intention is to get mundane utility from the product and not manipulative. In the case of Anthropic, it seems rather obvious that the $10 billion is not an attempt to trick us. However, a lot of this is people looking at heuristics that superficially look sus. To defeat such suspicions, you need examples immune from such heuristics. Quiet SpeculationsDerek Thompson, in his 26 ideas for 2026,
I would correct ‘more useful’ to ‘provides value to people,’ as I continue to believe a lot of the second trend is a skill issue and people being slow to adjust, but sure. Something’s gotta give. Sufficiently advanced AI would be highly additionally used. If the first trend continues, the second trend will accelerate. If the second trend continues, the first trend will stop.
ImpossibleI mention this one because |