---
subject: "Netflix codes/Travel Adapter/Real China"
from: "Recomendo <recomendo@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-03-09 16:55:57
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Recomendo", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8455078693589186571", "UNREAD"]
---
Note — we accidentally excluded free subscribers from this week’s issue. Sorry about that! We’ve unlocked the paywall at recomendo.com. And here’s the issue below. Visiting the real ChinaChina is vast, nearly a continent to itself with highly diverse ethnic cultures. It has become an easy place to travel, with 28,000 miles (45,000 km) of high speed trains, and cheap domestic flights. My guide to traveling to the most interesting places in China is an English-speaking YouTuber, Yan, who calls herself Psychedelic readiness preparednessIf you’re considering psychedelic therapy, I recommend starting with Althea’s European word explorerThis web tool instantly shows Netflix codesI’m often very unimpressed with my Netflix algorithm, but these Nuclear bomb rocketsOne of the crazier projects funded by the US government was a plan in 1957 to build a 4,000-ton spaceship powered by exploding nuclear bombs. A small group of scientists aimed to reach Mars by 1965 in Project Orion, long before the dream of NASA’s Apollo. One of those working on the project was physicist Freeman Dyson. His son George Dyson interviewed his father and all remaining participants, and got thousands of declassified documents to tell the whole astounding story in a remarkable book, Universal travel adapter with USB chargingThe compact Recomendo is an authentic, hand-crafted, human-written weekly newsletter that is free, but not cheap. Please consider supporting our work with a paid option, now at the low price of $45 per year. Paid subs enable us to keep making it free for others. Recomendo Unclassified Ads work! UNCLASSIFIEDS Thousands of trusted product recommendations from Recomendo, now instantly searchable. Explore years of out newsletter picks in one There are a million newsletters about stocks. That's why we like Investogy. Investogy follows the journey of our own real-money portfolio—from humble beginnings in 2022 to over $60,000 today. Obsessed with Japan? So are we. The Japan or Die newsletter has the best insider travel tips about Japan since the invention of travel tips. Food, drinks, culture, places, things to do, and more. Get 250+ curated Mac apps for one subscription. Discover productivity tools, creative software, and utilities you never knew you needed. Share with friends and both get a free month. New apps added regularly. Get the most out of what you read. Recomendo is published by Cool Tools Lab, a small company of three people. We also run the Recomendo is copyrighted by Cool Tools Lab, LLC. Commissions may be earned from the links above. |