---
subject: "The Waldenponding Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-11-02 18:15:59
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Re-running this WITI from 2019. - Noah (NRB) Noah here. As I’ve written before, my most fertile spaces for WITI topics are always those things that I share most often. To that end, one of the links that has topped my list for the last few months is Now there’s no problem with finding distance from technology or trying to find time to break its spell on us, but there’s a pretty good argument that many of the folks arguing most stringently in favor of the extreme version of this approach—people like Jaron Lanier and his book It’s not quite that simple, though. As Rao explains, “… retreating from information flows is just a different way of having your attention hacked by others. … If FOMO, Fear Of Missing Out, is the basic fear exploited by third parties that want to drown you in information, the basic fear exploited by people telling you to unplug and retreat is FOBO: Fear Of Being Ordinary.” PAID AD: Miki here. I'm the founder of YoEmbryo, where we are building okCupid for embryo donation. The idea came out of our own experience trying to find families to donate our remaining embryos after IVF. YoEmbryo's purpose is to normalize embryo donation, particularly as something that creates a bond between families, rather than a simply transactional act. If you have frozen embryos or are somewhere in your fertility journey where you're starting to contemplate all the emotional and ethical complexities around infertility, donation, and genetic connection (or you're just curious), you should check us out. Want to run an ad in WITI? That distinction has framed a lot of my reading and thinking about social media and the possibility of a broader tech backlash recently. By and large, the recommendations that come along with these thought pieces are a return to the slow(er) media of newspapers, magazines, and books (which also happen to be where the writing appears). “That is in fact the original attention hack,” says Rao. “Powerful religious leaders telling smart people to check out and unplug from information flows. That way, they get the power.” While I’m not sure I’m ready to go quite this far, I do think we should view this advice far more suspiciously than we do. Why is this interesting? The
She goes on to make some other worthwhile points, most pointedly about how we use these platforms to relate to others. But beyond that, there’s a real power in these platforms. That, more than their ability to take advantage of us, is how they found themselves with billions of combined users. That’s not to say that there aren’t a host of other issues they raise, or even an argument that the secondary or tertiary societal effects are worth the tradeoff, but at a personal level, many of us (myself included) find a tremendous amount of value by being plugged in. Not surprisingly, that’s also Rao’s anti-Waldenponding thesis:
What theoretically exists on the other side is books and longform journalism, and long conversations over coffee with friends, except I find all my books and links in these flows, and the friends are kept up with through the platforms. As a result, I read better stuff, see people more, and have better conversations when we meet. Rather than stepping away from the streams, I think there’s an opportunity to better control them: Optimizing for both personal happiness and intellectual fodder. On Twitter, for instance, I’ve got 30+ words muted that range from TV—#gameofthrones—to boring conversations—millennials—to the obvious political keywords that make us all shudder. That takes upfront work and ongoing maintenance, but it also points to a specific area where these applications can focus on building helpful functionality. Interestingly, this approach also dovetails nicely into the broader call for increased — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) —
Invite your friends and earn rewardsIf you enjoy Why is this interesting?, share it with your friends and earn rewards when they subscribe. |