---
subject: "The Nutgraf: Product is finally back in power"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-08-30 04:57:55
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
Starting this week, I’m no longer Chief Operating Officer at The Ken.
I’m going back to my previous role to head The Ken’s products as its Chief Product Officer.
So why am I doing this?
Because for the first time in a long while, I am convinced that products are going to make a dramatic comeback. And hence, the people working on them—product managers (PM) and product designers are going to become immensely valuable. Finally.
And thus, I’ve also come back.
For that, we can thank AI—but more on that later.
Most people have a different view. In fact, if you’d asked me a month ago, I actually would have agreed with them. At The Ken’s [event](https://the-ken.com/event/bfo/how-ai-is-breaking-and-remaking-the-way-products-are-built/) on product building in the age of AI, one of the feedback we received from an attendee was, “Good event, but there could have been less PM bashing.”
I understand where they were coming from. PMs and product designers (PDs) have been going through a hard time. Increasingly, nobody is sure why they are still relevant anymore—not CEOs, founders, or engineers. Most of India’s newest AI startups don’t even have PMs. Others don’t see the need for hiring any at all because AI takes care of all the things that PMs have done. And it does it better and more cheaply. Product designers probably have it worse—now, even the HR person in your company can make an account on Figma, connect your company’s design system, and start churning out wireframes and high-fidelity prototypes.
So most CEOs are naturally thinking, “Do I really want to hire an experienced PM or PD and pay them an obscene amount of money, just to listen to them lecture me about user research and product sense?” Now that anyone can build, CEOs naturally want everyone to build.
So, some people have even started giving helpful advice on what PMs should do next to stay relevant—which is the surest sign that they believe that an entire function is in a dead-end job. PMs and PDs are waking up everyday, opening Linkedin, and figuring out their exit options. At The Ken’s event, some of the audience members (some of whom were senior leaders in startups) felt that PMs and designers would have to reinvent themselves by doing things like coding, or by appropriating customer-facing roles like sales or business development.
But why listen to anyone else? Go talk to your nearest Product person and ask them yourself. Chances are, you’ll be surprised at what they’ll tell you.
Last year, I conducted a detailed survey with 1,000+ PMs [across](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/who-made-the-frauduct-manager/) India and discovered a loose archetype among them which I termed as the “Frauduct Manager”. Loosely, these are smart, ambitious people who got into product management because they assumed that it was going to be exciting, interesting, and significant. But when they started doing it, they realised that it was anything but. Here’s how I described it:
Frauduct Managers work in Product Management, aren’t convinced that what they do has any meaning or purpose, and yet, they still do it. They are the ones whose lofty expectations of Product Management have been dashed and killed by what they’ve experienced in their workplaces and companies. Ask them if they’d recommend Product Management as a career to a friend, and they’ll likely say no. Once they get comfortable, they are more likely to confess something like, “This whole PM thing feels like a scam… it’s all a fraud”.
So, to summarise where we’re at:
a) AI has made everyone into a product manager or a product designer.
b) Founders and CEOs believe that PMs and PDs are mostly a waste of resources.
c) Product managers themselves feel like they got tricked into this and hate doing it.
After all this, if you still choose to go into product management or design, it feels like running into a house on fire.
And yet, I believe this is the best time to become a PM or PD. Trust me—I’ve been doing this for a while now, and the last time I felt this way was maybe back in 2013.
In fact, I’m not just moving back into product. I’m actively recruiting others to join me. While others are annihilating these roles in their orgs, I’m hiring for product managers and product designers to help The Ken reimagine our products in an AI-first world. So if you are a PM/PD looking to join us, just apply [here](https://theken.typeform.com/to/lF79Lsm9). You’ll work directly with me. The work will be rewarding, but as most people who’ve worked at The Ken will tell you, it’ll also be some of the hardest problems and opportunities you’ve ever solved in your career. We’ll build many things that will fail spectacularly. We’ll build a few that’ll do well. But it’ll be fun.
The reason why I’m so confident that the future belongs to product is because I can now see much more clearly what AI is actually doing to product managers and product designers, and how this will play out. AI isn’t killing these functions—it’s simply clearing the field. Like the aftermath of an apocalypse, those who make it will be the ones who’ll inherit the earth. My broad theory is this—in a world where anyone can build anything, the people who decide what to build will eventually become much more powerful. Today everyone in your organisation—starting from your HR person, your engineer, to that weird guy who has an impressive title like ‘SVP Global Partnerships’—thinks they can do PM and design.
In a few months, across all organisations, there’ll come a time when the CEO looks around at the smouldering wreckage all around and yells, “My God why are we building so much garbage? Can we please hire someone who decides what makes it to our product and what doesn’t? Ideally someone who understands how to make these decisions well.” I guarantee this is going to happen. It’ll take some startups several quarters before they realise that they really, really screwed up their products, and have no idea where to begin fixing it.
Some of you are probably thinking, “But that’s what PMs do today in organisations!”
I hate to break it to you, but no, they don’t.
Longtime readers of The Nutgraf have known that for nearly a couple of years now, I’ve been griping and bemoaning about how the art has gone out of product management, and how the function is now mostly filled with [bureaucrats](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/product-managers-used-to-be-creators-now-they-are-mostly-bureaucrats/). The vast majority of PMs are just people whose primary job is to “align” everyone. They do not have any real power to do anything, because all that gets decided by someone else. When you have, say, 10 ideas, you need an execution plan. When you have 300 ideas, prototypes, and vibe-coded applications, you need a point of view. And the sharper the point of view, the greater the outcomes.
Some people, especially in tech, have recently started throwing around a word called “taste”—this is what they are referring to. Unfortunately, “taste” is not a skill that can be acquired. There are no bootcamps, courses, or communities that teach PMs how to develop taste. Taste is who you are as a person, and a culmination of everything you’ve experienced as a human.
Taste is art, not science.
And finally, the art is back in product management.
I can’t even begin to tell you how exciting, and liberating this feels. It’s like someone just pressed a switch, and all the old rules are gone, and nobody knows what the new rules really are. This is really what I’ve missed the most about product management, as I’ve written about on [multiple](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/who-killed-the-art-of-product-management-in-india/) [occasions](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/product-managers-used-to-be-creators-now-they-are-mostly-bureaucrats/). Back in 2011, when I started my career, product was dismissed as an offshoot of the IT team. By 2016, friends on track for partners at MBB firms were asking me how to break into PM. By 2020, gimmicky PM courses were everywhere. I’ve lived through it all. So by 2021, I felt that product management had run its course, and decided to do other things instead.
But today, I feel like the power has decisively shifted back to Product.
And so, I’ve shifted back.
By the way, this power shift is not going to be easy or smooth.
And there’s going to be far more losers than winners.
In a subscriber [survey](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/how-ai-is-being-pushed-at-workplaces-and-who-is-feeling-the-heat/) I ran before the event, the functions that reported feeling the most pressure from AI were product managers and designers.
Most of the current crop of PMs and designers have started to feel the heat and are looking for escape hatches. The ones who remain will go through a hellish, difficult transition. But I predict that in about five years, they’ll be the ones who’ll make products relevant again, and in the process, change the trajectory of their careers in ways they never imagined.
If you’re a PM and are wondering how to make this transition to this new era, I’m not entirely sure, but I know the kinds of companies where it will happen. So if you want to commit to a product career over the long term, this advice is for you. Some of this is what I looked for when I was just starting off back in 2011, and most of the rules broadly hold true today.
Seek out companies that hold proprietary data, preferably the kind that actually makes AI-driven products viable. By this, I don’t mean stuff like transactions or user data, but actual human-created stuff which makes it a great hotbed for running tons of experiments using AI. A great example is Reddit, which is seeing a [resurgence](https://www.wsj.com/tech/ai/reddit-rddt-stock-ai-search-2dcc69a4) in fortunes thanks to AI. Also, the more private and “closed” the data you have access to, the better. This is going to be the “raw material” on which PMs and designers build and reimagine products for the AI-age. Now that public data has lost its advantage, the companies I expect to drive the most interesting product innovations are those with closed, proprietary, and valuable datasets—shielded from platforms like ChatGPT and Perplexity.
Focus your efforts on companies that are true pioneers. Most Indian startups are excellent at being the second company to adopt a good idea someone else has implemented first. Again, this is the classical pre-AI thinking, because if you believe that product isn’t an axis of disruption, how does it matter if you build it first? This is why the prevailing wisdom to PMs and designers is, “Let someone else take the risk and experiment, and we’ll copy the things that succeed.”
But this rule has changed because being the first to build a product actually matters. And that’s why you need to seek out the pioneers—some of them may be seed-stage companies nobody has heard of, and some of them may be established unicorns. This is important because the companies who are pioneers usually operate from a place of conviction and intuition. You simply can’t kill that part of the company that easily. And honestly, building products with intuition even when the data or users are telling you something different is the most fun part of being a product manager or a designer.
In a world where AI makes you build anything, choosing what to build becomes a specialised skill. And usually, the direction on what to build does not come from users or numbers, but from an intuition of what’ll work. The pioneers will be the ones willing to take that risk. Join them.
Work for companies with users who are loyal and deeply love their products. No matter how ambitious, sharp or how much “taste” you have, the truth is no one knows what will work—which is why you need to experiment widely.
And as most old-school designers and PMs from my era will tell you, what makes experiments work isn’t stuff like the right A/B testing framework, but access to users who “get” what you are trying and will tell you honestly what they think about it. And because AI massively scales up the number of prototypes you can create to test your hypotheses, your limiting factor is going to be… human users. Find companies that have direct access to human users, who’ll boldly tell you on your face that the AI chatbot you are slapping on the product is ugly and opportunistic, and that they’d never use it. So you need users who care deeply about the product, even if they are small in number.
Of course, I wouldn’t believe any of this if I didn’t believe these rules apply to us at The Ken (hence my [call for applications](https://theken.typeform.com/to/lF79Lsm9) for PMs and product designers).
I’ll end with a final point.
The thing that most people misunderstand about AI and Product is the cause and effect. AI isn’t making product management and product designers irrelevant—most of India’s PMs and designers have already been redundant for a long time. AI just makes this truth much more apparent. Frankly, this isn’t even their fault. Product managers and designers in India became redundant when startups decided that products no longer mattered.
I recently met a founder who asked me, “When was the last time an Indian startup disrupted the market through a superior product?” I struggled to think of a good answer. Just look at the major companies across sectors today—food delivery, payments, quick commerce, ride-sharing, SaaS. You don’t even have to take a close look at them to see they are all almost clones of one another. Homescreens. Flows. Products. UX. All of them have converged into each other. Their growth loops look alike. Some of them even run practically identical branding campaigns.
This is not to say that these startups do not innovate—it’s just that their axes of innovation have concentrated on things like distribution and partnerships, operational efficiency, or a business model.
Product? Hardly any.
Design? Can’t think of a single one.
Until a few years ago, some of the same startups were boldly experimenting with some really audacious products. Back then, Product and Design teams held a lot of power and significance, but over time, that faded away.
But now, finally, after a long period in the wilderness, products are finally back in power.
It’s going to be fun.
Regards,
Praveen Gopal Krishnan