---
subject: "WIRTW: AI Manhattan Project"
from: "Chamath Palihapitiya <chamath@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-11-30 19:43:14
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Chamath", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_4017391144830520384", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
What I Read This Week: a summary of the content that I consumed in the previous week… Caught My Eye…1) Genesis Mission: The AI Manhattan Project
The Genesis Mission is framed as a modern-day counterpart to the Manhattan Project, harnessing the Department of Energy’s 17 National Laboratories, industry, and academia to build an integrated discovery platform. The goal is to leverage this platform and advanced artificial intelligence to double U.S. research and development productivity within a decade. They plan to reach this ambitious goal by getting access to the world’s largest collection of Federal scientific datasets to train scientific foundation models and create AI agents to test new hypotheses, automate research workflows, and accelerate scientific breakthroughs. The initiative also emphasizes strong public-private partnerships to integrate cutting-edge commercial AI infrastructure from leading tech companies. The Genesis Mission is targeted at addressing a defined set of three critical national challenges: American energy dominance: Accelerate advanced nuclear, fusion, and grid modernization. Advancing discovery science: Build the quantum ecosystem that will power discoveries and industries. Ensuring national security: Advance AI technologies for national security missions, deploying systems to ensure the safety and reliability of the U.S. nuclear stockpile and accelerating the development of defense-ready materials.
2) Tether: Largest Independent Holder of Gold Reserves
This corresponds to a gold position that is in the order of magnitude of the holdings of smaller central banks such as South Korea, Hungary or Greece (each holding around 100-115 tonnes of gold). A small portion of these holdings, about 12 tons, directly underpins the gold-backed token Tether Gold (XAUt). Jefferies suggests that Tether sees bullion as a structural asset: using profits and stable-coin revenue to build a long-term store of value, Learn With Me and My Friends…Other Reading…[Part 1: My Life Is a Lie](https://substack.com/redirect/29e4cd33-044e-45a6-9bf9-45b7ef828f78?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)(Michael W. Green)[Taking Jaggedness Seriously](https://substack.com/redirect/60c986fa-963b-4534-b499-92ee5d7321f8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)(Helen Toner)[Bitcoin and the Quantum Problem](https://substack.com/redirect/e2dc4bc7-10ae-45b9-ab8a-181be508840a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)(Nic Carter)
On X… |