---
subject: "Art as Data in Political History"
from: "Marginal REVOLUTION <donotreply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-12-14 06:01:13
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tyler Cowen", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2466199532210586699", "UNREAD"]
---
From Valentine Figuroa of MIT:
Ongoing advances in machine learning are expanding opportunities to analyze large-scale visual data. In historical political economy, paintings from museums and private collections represent an untapped source of information. Before computational methods can be applied, however, it is essential to establish a framework for assessing what information paintings encode and under what assumptions it can be interpreted. This article develops such a framework, drawing on the enduring concerns of the traditional humanities. I describe three applications using a database of 25,000 European paintings from 1000CE to the First World War. Each application targets a distinct type of information conveyed in paintings (depicted content, communicative intent, and incidental information) and a cultural transformation of the early-modern period. The first revisits the notion of a European “civilizing process”---the internalization of stricter norms of behavior that occurred in tandem with the growth of state power---by examining whether paintings of meals show increasingly complex etiquette. The second analyzes portraits to study how political elites shaped their public image, highlighting a long-term shift from chivalric to more rational-bureaucratic representations of men. The third documents a long-term process of secularization, measured by the share of religious paintings, which began prior to the Reformation and accelerated afterward.
Here is [the link](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=61627b1d9427aa93a27683c9e4821da4d39cd3312e807e5bd77ffe6d57d53150&blog_id=42693868&post_id=92023&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=c247103689ae26ab54968307f0324f94&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly9wYXBlcnMuc3Nybi5jb20vc29sMy9wYXBlcnMuY2ZtP2Fic3RyYWN0X2lkPTU3MDc5ODI&email_id=145c1bb07e98110aa856b3a415b8aaaa), via the excellent [Kevin Lewis](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=fcf5477555470d32c1284d9294cd9f62af1cd8be6e2954be747174e8cc88d864&blog_id=42693868&post_id=92023&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=8399435cf059ebb92698a3223139e644&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cubmF0aW9uYWxhZmZhaXJzLmNvbS9ibG9nL2RldGFpbC9maW5kaW5ncy1hLWRhaWx5LXJvdW5kdXAvYnVpbGRpbmctYmlnZ2Vy&email_id=145c1bb07e98110aa856b3a415b8aaaa).