---
subject: "The Mask Comes Off: A Trio of Tales"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-14 15:22:44
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
This post covers three recent shenanigans involving OpenAI. In each of them, OpenAI or Sam Altman attempt to hide the central thing going on. First, in Second, we have Frog and Toad, or There Is No Plan, where OpenAI reveals that its plan for ensuring AIs complement humans rather than AIs substituting for humans is to treat this as a ‘design choice.’ They can simply not design AIs that will be substitutes. Except of course this is Obvious Nonsense in context, with all the talk of remote workers, and also how every company and lab will rush to do the substituting because that’s where the money will be. OpenAI couldn’t follow this path even if it wanted to do so, not without international coordination. Which I’d be all for doing, but then you have to actually call for that. Third, A Trade Offer Has Arrived. Sam Altman was planning to buy off the OpenAI nonprofit for about $40 billion, even as the for-profit’s valuation surged to $260 billion. Elon Musk has now offered $97 billion for the non-profit, on a completely insane platform of returning OpenAI to a focus on open models. I don’t actually believe him - do you see Grok’s weights running around the internet? - and obviously his bid is intended as a giant monkey wrench to try and up the price and stop Table of ContentsThree ObservationsAltman used to understand that creating things smarter than us was very different than other forms of technology. That it posed an existential risk to humanity. He now pretends not to, in order to promise us physically impossible wonderous futures with no dangers in sight, while warning that if we take any safety precautions then the authoritarians will take over.
Even when he says ‘this time is different,’ he’s now saying this time is just better.
Yes, there’s that sense. And then there’s the third sense, in that at least by default it is rapidly already moving from ‘tool’ to ‘agent’ and to entities in competition with us, that are smarter, faster, more capable, and ultimately more competitive at everything other than ‘literally be a human.’ It’s not possible for everyone on Earth to be ‘capable of accomplishing more than the most impactful person today.’ The atoms for it are simply not locally available. I know what he is presumably trying to say, but no. Altman then lays out three principles.
Even if we fully accept point one, that doesn’t tell us as much as you might think. It doesn’t tell us how many OOMs (orders of magnitude) are available to us, or how we can make them available, or how much they cost. It doesn’t tell us what other ways we could also scale intelligence of the system, because of algorithmic efficiency. He covers this in point #2, but we should expect this law to break to the upside (go faster) once AIs smarter than us are doing the work. It doesn’t tell us what the scale of this ‘intelligence’ is, which is a matter of much debate. What does it mean to be ‘twice as smart’ as the average (let’s simplify and say IQ 100) person? It doesn’t mean ‘IQ 200,’ that’s not how that scale works. Indeed, much of the debate is people essentially saying that this wouldn’t mean anything, if it was even possible. It doesn’t tell us what that intelligence actually enables, which is also a matter of heated debate. Many claim, essentially, ‘if you had a country of geniuses in a data center’ to use Dario’s term, that this would only add e.g. 0.5% to RGDP growth, and would not threaten our lifestyles much let alone our survival. The fact that this does not make any sense does not seem to dissuade them. And the ‘final form’ likely goes far beyond ‘genius’ in that data center.
Then point two, as I noted, we should expect to break to the upside if capabilities continue to increase, and to largely continue for a while in terms of cost even if capabilities mostly stall out. Point three may or may not be correct, since defining ‘linear intelligence’ is difficult. And there are many purposes for which all you need is ‘enough’ intelligence - as we can observe with many human jobs, where being a genius is of at most marginal efficiency benefit. But there are other things for which once you hit the necessary thresholds, there are dramatic super exponential returns to relevant skills and intelligence by any reasonable measure. Altman frames the impact of superintelligence as a matter of ‘socioeconomic value,’ ignoring other things this might have an impact upon?
Um, no shit, Sherlock. This is like saying dropping a nuclear bomb would have a significant impact on an area’s thriving nightlife. I suppose Senator Blumenthal was right, by ‘existential’ you did mean the effect on jobs. Speaking of which, if you want to use the minimal amount of imagination, you can think of virtual coworkers, while leaving everything else the same.
Then comes the part where he assures us that timelines are only so short.
Yes, everything will change. But why all this optimism, stated as fact? Why not frame that as an aspiration, a possibility, an ideal we can and must seek out? Instead he blindly talks like Derek on Shrinking and says it will all be fine. And oh, it gets worse.
No it bloody does not. Do not come to us and pretend that your technical problems are solved. You are lying. Period. About the most important question ever. But don’t worry, he mentions AI Safety! As in, he warns us not to worry about it, or else the future will be terrible - right after otherwise assuring us that the future will definitely be Amazingly Great.
That’s right. Altman is saying: We know pushing forward to AGI and beyond as much as possible might appear to be unsafe, and what we’re going to do is going to be super unpopular and we’re going to transform the world and put the entire species and planet at risk directly against the overwhelming preferences of the people, in America and around the world. But we have to override the people and do it anyway. If we don’t push forward quickly as possible then China Wins. Oh, and all without even acknowledging the possibility that there might be a loss of control or other existential risk in the room. At all. Not even to dismiss it, let alone argue against it or that the risk is worthwhile. Seriously. This is so obscene.
Let’s say, somehow, you could pull that off without already having gotten everyone killed or disempowered along the way. Have you stopped, sir, for five minutes, to ask how that could possibly work even in theory? How the humans could possibly stay in control of such a scenario, how anyone could ever dare make any meaningful decision rather than handing it off to their unlimited geniuses? What happens when people direct their unlimited geniuses to fight with each other in various ways? This is not a serious vision of the future. Or more to the point: How many people do you think this ‘anyone’ consists of in 2035? As we will see later, there is no plan. No vision. Except to build it, and have faith. Now that Altman has made his intentions clear: What are you going to do about it? Frog and Toad (or There Is No Plan)
Agency is important. By all means teach everyone agency. Also don’t pretend that the frontier AI models will effectively be ‘very smart toasters.’ The first thing many people do, the moment they know how, is make one an agent. Similarly, what type of agent will you build? Oh, OpenAI said at the summit, we’ll simply only build the kind that complements humans, not the kind that substitutes for humans. It’ll be fine. Wait, what? How? Huh? This was the discussion about it on Twitter. The OpenAI plan here makes no sense. Or rather, it is not a plan, and no one believes you when you call it a plan, or claim it is your intention to do this.
I don’t think it is their plan. I don’t even think it is a plan at all. The plan is to tell people that this is the plan. That’s the whole plan. Is it a design choice for any individual which way to build their AGI agent? Yes, provided they remain in control of their AGI. But how much choice will they have, competing against many others? If you not only keep the human ‘in the loop’ but only ‘complement’ them, you are going to get absolutely destroyed by anyone who takes the other path, whether the ‘you’ is a person, a company or a nation. Once again, I ask, is Sam Altman proposing that he take over the world to prevent anyone else from creating AI agents that substitute for humans? If not, how does he intend to prevent others from building such agents? The things I do strongly agree with: We collectively have agency over how we create and deploy AI. Some ways of doing that work out better for humans than others. We should coordinate to do the ones that work out better, and to not do the ones that work out worse.
The problem is, you have to then figure out how to do that, in practice, and solve for the equilibrium, not only for you or your company but for everyone. Otherwise, You can also say ‘oh, any effective form of coordination would mean tyranny and that is actually the worst risk from AI’ and then watch as everyone closes their eyes and runs straight into the (technically metaphorical, but kind of also not so metaphorical) whirling blades of death. I suppose that’s another option. It seems popular. A Trade Offer Has ArrivedConfirmed.
One piece of good news is that this intention - to take OpenAI actual open source - will not happen. This would be complete insanity as an actual intention. There is no such thing as OpenAI as ‘open-source, safety-focused force for good’ unless they intend to actively dismantle all of their frontier models. Indeed I would outright say: OpenAI releasing the weights of its models would present a clear and present danger to the national security of the United States. (Also it would dramatically raise the risk of Earth not containing humans for long, but alas I’m trying to make a point about what actually motivates people these days.) Not that any of that has a substantial chance of actually happening. This is not a bid that anyone involved is ever going to accept, or believes might be accepted. Getting it accepted was never the point. This offer is designed to be rejected. The point is that if OpenAI still wants to transition to a for-profit, it now has to pay the nonprofit far closer to what it is actually worth, a form of a It also illustrates the key problem with a Harberger tax. If someone else really does not like you, and would greatly enjoy ruining your day, or simply wants to extort money, then they can threaten to buy something you’re depending on simply to blow your whole operation up. Altman of course happy to say the pro-OpenAI half the quiet part out loud.
And that Altman could essentially dissolve OpenAI and start again if he needed to, as he essentially threatened to do last time. In this case, it’s a credible threat. Indeed, one (unlikely but possible) danger of the $97 billion bid is if Altman accepts it, takes the $97 billion and then destroys the company on the way out the door and starts again. Whoops. I don’t think this is enough to make that worth considering, but there’s a zone where things get interesting, at least in theory.
That is all. You're currently a free subscriber to |