---
subject: "why DeFi matters; grand challenges in crypto; table talk"
from: "web3 weekly from a16z crypto <a16zcrypto@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-11-22 01:31:03
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "a16zcrypto"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_2535365729249697677"]
---
1. Beyond the news: Why DeFi matters, and howThere’s been a lot of news lately around FTX [see our DeFi describes the ecosystem of blockchain-enabled products and services that replace (or at least augment) traditional financial intermediaries with open, freely available, autonomous, and transparent software for global, democratized finance. DeFi also includes novel innovations around settlement efficiency, risk management, and accessibility. That’s why there’s been so much interest (not to mention significant traction) in this trend from entrepreneurs, corporate leaders, policymakers, and institutions big and small. In the past, however, some skeptics dismissed DeFi as an idealistic movement destined to be relegated to “the fringes” of the financial system and internet. But DeFi likely could (and should) become a foundational piece of the financial infrastructure not only for cryptocurrencies, but also potentially for other classes of markets. So what are the features/ benefits of DeFi, and what technically makes it possible? And what needs to be addressed on the road to mainstream adoption? (1) Read this guest-contributed …on the philosophy of “not your keys, not your crypto” and the [“non-custodial” wallet fallacy](https://substack.com/redirect/38201537-8dac-43ed-8292-dbdbb2de9097?r=8o54n)[also covered in this[past newsletter](https://substack.com/redirect/248cb9ac-ea1f-4754-8269-c9dac831b448?r=8o54n)]…on smart contract security, a useful [checklist](https://substack.com/redirect/70ad9bcf-dd57-4fd3-8945-fcaf99bcf150?r=8o54n)…on formal verification; plus notes on DeFi security, in #2 and #3 [here](https://substack.com/redirect/46e7d0ee-7d9b-4197-8c68-e6e52f7c7091?r=8o54n)
2. Trend/ solution: Zero knowledge for privacy and (not or!) regulatory complianceJoseph Burleson, Michele Korver, and Dan Boneh; Jai Ramaswamy For both regulators and users, the goals of (1) reducing the risk of illicit finance (for national security and other reasons); and of (2) preserving the privacy of consumers (especially given transparency in blockchains) are often at odds with each other. Regulators and financial institutions need to know who people are, in order to screen out bad actors. On the other hand, the very act of gathering that information creates a “honeypot” that scammers can hack to get personally identifiable information. But what if we could resolve this binary either/or choice? That’s where the power of zero-knowledge proofs (which have 👂hear also: this recent-past [episode](https://substack.com/redirect/2e0940e5-9c32-4a61-a3d9-06f92b2f2b4b?r=8o54n)of our podcast, which discusses illicit finance, compliance, and the difference between “obfuscating” vs. “privacy-preserving” technologies
3. Field notes: ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security 2022Valeria Nikolaenko The ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS) is the flagship annual conference of the Association for Computing Machinery’s special interest group on Security, Audit, and Control. One of the largest events for the computer and communication-security communities, CCS brings together information security researchers, practitioners, developers, and users from all over the world to explore cutting-edge ideas and results. As part of our ongoing sharing of ▶️ BONUS/ holiday special: On some results and (grand) challenges in cryptoeconomicsa16z crypto head of research Tim Roughgarden shares an overview of some “grand challenges” in crypto and blockchain research at the intersection of microeconomics and macroeconomics, in this slightly expanded version of the talk he gave at the recent Crypto Economics Security Conference (CESC). [We covered an affiliated workshop at CESC in a previous installment of [watch the video](https://substack.com/redirect/1c9bc8aa-7ec0-4f45-82fb-a627ce51da68?r=8o54n)(watch time ~45 minutes)
--Sonal Chokshi, Robert Hackett, and the a16z crypto team
subscribe to our podcast ' |