---
subject: "Three Pieces, May 2025"
from: "Contraptions <contraptions@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-05-25 17:09:59
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Contraptions", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_5493170773715678215", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
I’m going to be at the The Another week where I couldn’t get my own essay done in time, so sharing a few pieces I liked instead. I’m going to make this “three pieces” format a standard for weeks where I can’t get my own shit together in time to ship an original essay. After this week, I should be done with travel for several months, so I hope to get into more of a writing groove and get a bunch of pieces out the door. First, I want to share The piece links to his NYT op-ed, co-authored with Dan Davies, arguing that crypto is a threat to the US financial system. The way Trump is playing it, it’s hard to argue otherwise. That it needn’t be this way is a moot point. Farrell and Davies also have separate substack essays linking to that op-ed, elaborating on the argument. Given what’s been going on, it’s hard for all but the more naive and uncritical of crypto enthusiasts to pretend current political developments are positive, despite the numbers going up on the speculation side of the game. What’s going on begs the whole question of the political philosophy premises of crypto. If you think the technology is about decentralization and censorship/capture resistance, rather than speculation and political patronage, this is a bad trajectory. I’ve been remarking to my friends in the crypto world about the Trump regime’s embrace of crypto that we’re in a situation of “with friends like this, who needs enemies?” On a more pleasant front in the world of protocol technology, the second and first place winners of our Terminological Twists protocol science fiction contest are out. In second place, a fun story about getting back to square one with AI labor substitution. And in first place, a story about what might happen if the world were run by neighborhood-noise-hating people like me. That’s it for the week. I’ll get back to regular programming next week. You're currently a free subscriber to |