---
subject: "The Nutgraf: Blusmart and the dogs that didn’t bark"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-04-19 04:33:02
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
Before I jump into today’s edition, a couple of quick notes:
Beyond the First Order
If you are in Bengaluru, I hope you’re attending The Ken’s event this Monday, 21 April. Rohin and I are going to be in conversation with three unique leaders—Harshil Mathur (CEO and co-founder of Razorpay), Vasuta Agarwal (Chief Business Officer, Inmobi), and Prof. Sourav Mukherji (IIM Bangalore). We’re going to spend 90 minutes talking about how to rethink careers in this age of uncertainty—with broken career ladders, shortening career spans, collapsing organisational structures, and of course, AI.
It sounds scary, but I think it’s going to be fun. Harshil, Vasuta, and Prof. Mukherji are what I call pragmatic solutionists. We’re going to spend some time talking about how you can (and should) plan your career, what will change and what won’t, and how you can seek and find satisfaction, stability, and professional growth.
We have limited space available and we’re nearly sold-out, so I recommend snapping up those tickets ASAP.
You can buy them here: [https://the-ken.com/event/building-unique-career-lattices/](https://the-ken.com/event/building-unique-career-lattices/?utm_source=nutgraf&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=bfo_event)
The Nutgraf Premium Podcast
As always, I also do a read-aloud version of The Nutgraf every week. It’s me. No AI.
If you’re subscribed to The Ken’s Premium plan, you can listen to today’s edition [here](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/the-nutgraf/blusmart-and-the-dogs-that-didnt-bark/).
And if you’ve subscribed to The Nutgraf on Apple Podcasts, we’ve moved the podcast into The Ken’s new Premium channel subscription. This is quite cool, because you just need one subscription to listen to all of The Ken’s audio products—right now, the channel has The Nutgraf and First Principles, our leadership podcast hosted by Rohin. In time, you’ll see more products added to this line-up.
You can subscribe to The Ken’s Premium channel for just Rs 299/month [here](https://podcasts.apple.com/in/channel/the-ken-premium/id6744577070).
Oh, and if you still haven’t got a subscription to The Ken, you can purchase our Premium plan [here](https://the-ken.com/pricing/).
Now, on to today’s edition.
Over a year ago, my then colleague Shaswata published a [story](https://the-ken.com/story/blusmarts-relationship-with-co-founders-listed-company-could-prove-costly/) in The Ken titled Blusmart’s relationship with co-founder’s listed company could prove costly. In it, he drew attention to the somewhat unusual relationship between Blusmart, an insurgent EV ride-hailing startup and Gensol Engineering, a relatively conventional energy company. Blusmart was private, and exciting. Gensol was publicly held, and, well, much more boring. Blusmart helped people book car rides reliably, cheaply, and provided a great experience. Gensol did things like build solar farms.
Two completely different companies.
Except, both Gensol and Blusmart had the same set of significant shareholders.
This wasn’t a story that exposed some massive wrongdoing, but it called attention to some weird patterns that turned out to be prescient. Gensol leased electric cars to Blusmart, and the terms of the arrangement were surprisingly favourable to the latter. When asked about it, Gensol said some hand-wavy stuff about offering better rates for “great customers”. They also said that transactions between the two companies were “under the purview of the audit committee of the Blusmart board”. Also, Gensol was the one raising money, and Blusmart seemed to be the one burning it. It was all very strange.
Anyway, earlier this week, Blusmart informed customers that it was temporarily pausing operations.
The decision to halt services in the three cities it served – Bengaluru, Mumbai and Delhi – came after Indian market regulator, the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Sebi), alleged that BluSmart’s founders Anmol Singh Jaggi and Puneet Singh Jaggi were diverting loans from another firm they owned to buy luxury apartments and golf equipment. The loans were meant to help BluSmart lease new cars.
BluSmart has not responded to the BBC’s questions.
The problem appears to be with both gross financial mismanagement alleged by the regulator and also the way in which BluSmart business model was structured.
Unlike traditional cab aggregators who lease their vehicles from individual drivers, BluSmart leased its fleet from companies – in particular from one firm called Gensol Engineering Limited (GEL), a stock market listed solar energy and EV leasing firm which is also run by the Jaggis.
BluSmart breakdown – how Uber’s EV rival in India collapsed, [BBC](https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/c62znepddq4o)
Frankly, I’m not here to discuss the specifics of what Sebi discovered in its investigation or the arcane methods of how this scheme was orchestrated by Blusmart’s founders. That’s less interesting. Instead, it’s the broader response to this that’s much more fun to talk about. As Youtube view counts often demonstrate, reaction videos can often be much more enthralling than the event itself.
And the response to news about the Blusmart collapse has been strikingly consistent. Within hours of the SEBI order, thousands of full-time employees at companies opened Linkedin on one tab, fired up ChatGPT on the other tab, and wrote bullet-pointed, neatly sectioned lessons, takeaways, and cautionary tales about what Blusmart’s fall means for the rest of us. The takes were startlingly indisputable. Corporate governance is important. Blusmart was loved by customers. Instances like this will hurt legitimate businesses. India is a low-trust society. This is a reality check for the ecosystem. Systemic issues. Structural problems. Trust is everything. And OF COURSE there’s a stupid AI-generated image attached to the post.
There were responses from other founders who said equally trite things. Aman Gupta, co-founder and CEO of Boat, wrote his incontestable option about the Blusmart saga, i.e., “build not just fast, but right.” Pathbreaking. As if the alternative was what everyone else was doing. Sabeer Bhatia, co-founder of Hotmail, wrote that the media “shouldn’t vilify all founders over one case”. As if India’s business media has ever preemptively vilified a single startup founder over any case, anytime, anywhere. Who exactly is disagreeing with any of these opinions?
Then, there are the “I guessed as much but I chose to say nothing” opinions. Lesser known CEOs came out of the woodwork to say, “I always knew something was off about them.” VCs stopped recording their techno-euphoria podcasts with their portfolio founders for a moment to say, “They came to me but I passed.” Again, nobody can disagree with this.
In some ways, Indian business, startups, and media personalities have built and monetised a content economy that’s ultimately conformist, unremarkable, and post hoc. Youtube channels talk about masterstrokes and genius plans of companies only after the event, and almost never before. VCs and founders sit together and talk about how the future market for their businesses are going to be wonderful and amazing. One random company releases a Studio Ghibli image generator and in a few hours, everyone is on the trend. The discourse on Indian startups is to be as non-controversial as possible. When everyone agrees that something is on the way up, people make content about it. And suddenly, overnight, when it becomes apparent that the thing is on the way down, everyone jumps on it to make content about it… again. The smart ones make money across both sides of the curve—up and down. All content is created on uncontestable things. All monetisation and status comes from saying things nobody can disagree with.
The unfortunate part is that I don’t expect this to change.
Just take Blusmart. It was an organisation that was clearly involved in some shady stuff. And yet, think about all the people who possibly guessed that something was off about Blusmart but didn’t say a word about it. I’m not even expecting Blusmart’s co-founders, board members, or VCs to speak up. But I’m finding it hard to imagine why there wasn’t one Youtube content creator or one newsletter writer or one Linkedin poster who suggested in the last year that maybe Blusmart wasn’t a great business after all.
In fact, even parties who were in the thick of it are finally acting, but only after the event is done. Harsh Singh and Kuljit Singh Popli, two of Gensol’s independent directors, stepped down a couple of days ago. Arun Menon, another of Gensol Engineering’s independent directors, stepped down last week. In his resignation email, he went into great lengths to explain what he noticed, what he did, and what happened.
In an email to Jaggi, Menon noted that he had been seeking clarity on GEL’s debt position since July-August 2024 but received no response. He said he had offered to help the company restructure its debt to lower interest costs, but the plan never progressed.
The email also revealed that Menon had reached out to the company’s secretary, Rajesh Parmar, and requested a meeting with the CFO, but it never materialised. “There was growing concern on the leveraging of GEL’s balance sheet to fund the capex of other business; and the sustainability of servicing such high debt costs by GEL,” Menon wrote.
Menon added that he had considered stepping down earlier. “Since I felt I was adding limited value to the company, I had expressed last year to Mr. Parmar that I would like to put in my resignation, but was told to hold on till the IPO of Matrix is successfully concluded,” he said.
Gensol independent director Arun Menon steps down, says promoter had another IPO plan, [CNBCTV18](https://www.cnbctv18.com/business/companies/gensol-share-price-independent-director-arun-menon-resigns-anmol-jaggi-matrix-ipo-19590757.htm)
I’m sure other people also suspected something was off, but didn’t act. In some ways, the reasons why they played it safe is similar to the reasons why content creators play it safe. There are no incentives for co-founders to speak up. VCs care less about the ethics of the company, and more about secondary transactions—as long as a bigger entity comes along and buys their stake off them, they don’t really have an incentive to look closer. Go back and look at some of the biggest startup scandals of the last few years. Nearly all of them were exposed when some new VC was considering making an investment and decided to conduct a due-diligence. Blusmart’s institutional investors were Responsability, Lightsource BP, and BP Ventures (among others). Did none of them notice anything strange? Did nobody in India’s business media bother to read Blusmart’s MCA filings, which were publicly available for just Rs 100?
Maybe just like how all content and monetisation is created on uncontestable things, perhaps all financial transactions are also created on uncontestable things. It’s far more lucrative to go where everyone else is going, to chase what everyone else is chasing, to ride the trend that others are riding.
And if you are smart enough, you can win across both sides of the curve—up and down
Regards,
Praveen Gopal Krishnan