---
subject: "AI #109: Google Fails Marketing Forever"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-03-27 14:39:28
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
What if they released the new best LLM, and almost no one noticed? Google seems to have pulled that off this week with Gemini 2.5 Pro. It’s a great model, sir. I have a ton of reactions, and it’s 90%+ positive, with a majority of it extremely positive. They cooked. But what good is cooking if no one tastes the results? Instead, I love that for us, but we did kind of bury the lede. We also buried everything else. Certainly Also seriously, did you know Claude now has web search? It’s kind of a big deal. This was a remarkably large quality of life improvement. Table of Contents[Google Fails Marketing Forever](https://substack.com/redirect/7ebea85b-82c0-4a23-ad21-7dfdd11feef3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/7ebea85b-82c0-4a23-ad21-7dfdd11feef3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Gemini Pro 2.5? Never heard of her.[Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/d285e914-b913-4239-bb67-73efc2e0f821?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)One big thread or many new ones?[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/0ac96a1b-9501-4eb3-9ad7-6be13fdcd6c0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Every hero has a code.[Huh, Upgrades](https://substack.com/redirect/f9a18fe7-780e-4ba9-9cc3-bbfd3a1e8256?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/f9a18fe7-780e-4ba9-9cc3-bbfd3a1e8256?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Claude has web search and a new ‘think’ cool, DS drops new v3.[On Your Marks.](https://substack.com/redirect/a203c7db-b139-4c17-a416-011488c32132?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Number continues to go up.[Copyright Confrontation.](https://substack.com/redirect/d3ff5d3c-eaae-440e-97cc-7a2e228600c2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Meta did the crime, is unlikely to do the time.[Choose Your Fighter.](https://substack.com/redirect/21482386-1e2d-4a49-b583-dbc4227db125?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)For those still doing actual work, as in deep research.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon.](https://substack.com/redirect/5c29f76d-9445-4886-a934-dd6da994d361?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The code word is *********.[They Took Our Jobs.](https://substack.com/redirect/6ed556d7-7957-49d1-a3aa-3ad94ea2df65?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)I’m Claude, and I’d like to talk to you about buying Claude.[The Art of the Jailbreak.](https://substack.com/redirect/fa68b017-a4b4-474b-afe0-139552edd2e1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)You too would be easy to hack with limitless attempts.[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/00065ca8-3e31-4d87-a3b9-47c6f6435ae3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Grey Swan, NIST is setting standards, two summer programs.[Introducing.](https://substack.com/redirect/75bf89a0-21f2-4cce-b16a-23b6ede0fb47?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Some things I wouldn’t much notice even in a normal week, frankly.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/d09e0ad0-05bf-42aa-8b12-149774008b9b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Someone is getting fired over this.[Oh No What Are We Going to Do.](https://substack.com/redirect/9009707a-653c-4f87-92f4-090b48ee503f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The mistake of taking Balaji seriously.[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/8f0283a5-dcdf-4381-8389-beb73e93fb40?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Realistic and unrealistic expectations.[Fully Automated AI R&D Is All You Need](https://substack.com/redirect/24e69211-5ebf-405a-8d57-25a4612f16a1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/24e69211-5ebf-405a-8d57-25a4612f16a1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Or is it? Quite likely yes, it is.[IAPS Has Some Suggestions.](https://substack.com/redirect/86523304-fab6-4541-9efb-4dd29dd6e209?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A few things we hopefully can agree upon.[The Quest for Sane Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/f1d2efe5-e018-4128-9167-b2743efd177f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Dean Ball proposes a win-win trade.[We The People.](https://substack.com/redirect/6e9fbf66-79e3-42e6-9a59-92448e0084bb?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The people continue to not care for AI, but not yet much care.[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/88f89a67-55ee-4dea-93d2-fd78b0a48dc7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Richard Ngo.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/9344af8d-5aa0-4e1e-bf7d-7b29828a8d28?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Wait, I thought you said that would be dangerous?[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/732ce04d-39e0-4c2b-a80e-487b1648b9e0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Listen y’all it’s sabotage.[People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/ac3eaca9-0425-4773-8272-3b202f1bf3aa?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Elon Musk, a bit distracted.[Fun With Image Generation.](https://substack.com/redirect/141b58c4-3226-42f7-a7af-7c27c98861fd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Bonus coverage.[Hey We Do Image Generation Too.](https://substack.com/redirect/666b2ec7-b0e9-43a2-bb69-dc58b907f04f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Forgot about Reve, and about Ideogram.[The Lighter Side.](https://substack.com/redirect/59ee0fbb-96b2-4cc9-a162-8cf2264dee75?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Your outie reads many words on the internet.
Google Fails Marketing ForeverI swear that I put this in as a new recurring section before Gemini 2.5 Pro. Now Gemini 2.5 has come out, and everyone has universal positive feedback on it, but unless I actively ask about it no one seems to care. Given the circumstances, I’m running this section up top, in the hopes that someone decides to maybe give a damn. As in, I seem to be the Google marketing department. Gemini 2.5 post is coming on either Friday or Monday, we’ll see how the timing works out. That’s what it means to Fail Marketing Forever. Failing marketing includes: Making their models scolds that are no fun to talk to and that will refuse queries enough it’s an actual problem (whereas I can’t remember the last time Claude or ChatGPT actually told me no on a query where I actually wanted the answer, the false refusal problem is basically solved for now or at least a Skill Issue) No one knowing that Google has good models. Calling the release ‘experimental’ and hiding it behind subscriptions that aren’t easy to even buy and that are confusingly named and labeled (‘Google One’?!?) or weird products that aren’t defaults for people even if they work fine (Google AI Studio).
Seriously, guys. Get it together. This is an Arena chart, but still, it was kind of crazy, ya know? And this was before Gemini 2.5, which is now atop the Arena by ~40 points.
And that’s with the ‘Gemini is no fun’ penalty. Imagine if Gemini was also fun. There’s also the failure to create ‘g1’ based off Gemma 3. That failure is plausibly a national security issue. Even today people thinking r1 is ‘ahead’ in some sense is still causing widespread both adaptation and freaking out in response to r1, in ways that are completely unnecessary. Can we please fix? Google could also cook to help address… other national security issues. But I digress. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
Obvious joke aside, I do think AI has the amazing potential to transform education for the vastly better, but I think Reid is importantly wrong for four reasons: Alpha School is a luxury good in multiple ways that won’t scale in current form. Alpha School is selecting for parents and students, you can’t scale that either. A lot of the goods sold here are the ‘top 2%’ as a positional good. The teachers unions and other regulatory barriers won’t let this happen soon.
Andrej Karpathy looks at this partly as an efficiency problem, where extra tokens impact speed, cost and signal to noise. He also notes it is a training problem, most training data especially in fine tuning will of necessity be short length so you’re going out of distribution in long conversations, and it’s impossible to even say what the optimal responses would be. I notice the alignment implications aren’t great either, including in practice, where long context conversations often are de facto jailbreaks or transformations even if there was no such intent.
I like Dan Calle’s answer of essentially projects - long threads each dedicated to a particular topic or context, such as a thread on nutrition or building a Linux box. That way, you can sort the context you want from the context you don’t want. And then active management of whether to keep or delete even threads, to avoid cluttering context. And also Owl’s:
There’s that but it isn’t even the main reason I would riot. I would riot because there’s a special kind of freedom and security and relaxation that comes from being able to hit a hard reset or have something be forgotten. That’s one of the huge advantages of talking to an AI instead of a human, or of playing games, you can safety f*** around and find out. In particular you don’t have to worry about correlations. Whereas nowadays one must always fear The Algorithm. What is this particular click saying about you, that will change what you see? Are you sure you want that? No matter your solution you need to be intentional with what is and isn’t in context, including starting over if something goes sufficiently wrong (with or without asking for an ‘export’ of sorts).
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane UtilityAnd that’s a good thing:
Thinking longer won’t help unless you can have enough information to solve the problem.
Huh, Upgrades
Two are speech-to-text they say are better than Whisper, to cover different cost levels. They also have one that is flexible text-to-speech, you can tell it ‘how’ to speak, Anthropic kicks off its engineering blog
The think tool is for when you might need to stop and think in the middle of a task. They recommend using the think tool when you need to go through multiple steps and decision trees and ensure all the information is there. xAI adds On Your Marks
Lech also offers us Then we have In these tests, r1 is consistently impressive relative to how useful I find it in practice. Copyright Confrontation
So are we going to do anything about this? My assumption is no. Choose Your Fighter
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
A quick Twitter survey found that such codes are a thing, but still rare. Right now it’s ‘too early’ but incidents like this are likely on an exponential. So like all exponentials, better to react too early than too late, although Has the time come to start
They Took Our Jobs
His ‘skills that will remain valuable’ are the standard ‘oh the AI cannot do this now’ lst: Social intelligence, physical dexterity, creativity and roles valuing human connection. Those are plans that should work for a bit, right up until they don’t. As he notes, robotics is going slow for now, but I’d expect a very sudden transition from ‘AI cannot be a plumber’ to ‘AI is an essentially perfect plumber’ once certain dexterity problems are solved, because the cognitive part will already be fully solved.
If we tell children their futures are gated by turning in essays that are effectively summarizes of research papers, what else would you expect them to do? And as always, why do you think this is bad for their education, other than his stubborn failure to realize he can automate the process? Does the AI crisis in education present opportunity? Very obviously yes, The second opportunity is, he notes that our educational system murders intrinsic motivation to learn. Perhaps we could fix that? Where he doesn’t do a great job is explaining how we should do that in detail, but making evaluation and learning distinct seems like a plausible place to start. The Art of the Jailbreak
I don’t think there is a universal set of emojis that would work on every human, but I totally think that there is a set of such emojis (or something similar) that would work on any given human at any given time, at least a large percentage of the time, if you somehow were able to iterate enough times to figure out what it is. And there are various attacks that indeed involve forcing the human to process information they don’t want to process. I’ve witnessed enough in my day to say this with rather high confidence. Get Involved
IntroducingAlibaba drops the multimodal open weights Qwen2.5-Omni-7B.
Amazon introduces In Other AI NewsAs OpenAI’s 4o image generator went wild and Gemini 2.5 did its thing, Nvidia was down 5% yesterday. It seems when the market sees good AI news, it sells Nvidia? Ok. Apple’s CEO Tim Cook has lost confidence that its AI head can execute, OpenAI will adopt Anthropic’s open-source Model Context Protocol. Grok can now be accessed via telegram, as @GrokAI, if you want that.
I see that as a good note to be careful but also as reinforcing the point? This looks very much like a highly meaningful Straight Line on Graph of Chess ELO over time, with linear progress by that metric. At this point, that ELO 1800 player is very much toast, and this seems like a good measure of how toasty they are. But that’s because ‘time to match’ is an obviously poor fit here, you’re trying to have the B-player brute force being stronger, and you can do that if you really want to but it’s bizarre and inefficient so exponentially hard. Whereas as I understand it ‘time to do software tasks’ in METR is time to do those tasks by someone who is qualified to do them. As opposed to asking, say, what Zvi could do in much longer periods on his own, where levels of incompetence would get hit quickly, and I’d likely have to similarly spend exponentially more time to make what for someone more skilled would be linear progress. Oh No What Are We Going to DoI normally ignore Balaji, So first of all, I will say, I did not until very recently see this turnaround to ‘open source is terrible now because it’s the Chinese doing it’ from people like Balaji and Sacks coming, definitely not on my bingo card. All it took was a massively oversold (although genuinely impressive) DeepSeek-r1 leading to widespread panic and jingoism akin to Kennedy’s missile gap, except where they give you the missiles for free and that’s terrible. It’s kind of impressive how much the Trump attitude of ‘when people sell you useful things below cost of production then that’s terrible, unfair competition, make them stop’ now be applied by people whose previous attitude was maximizing on trade, freedom and open source. How are their beliefs this oppositional? Oh no, not the briar patch and definitely not giving us your technologies for free, what are we going to do. Balaji outright calls this ‘AI overproduction,’ seriously, what is even happening? I’d also point out that this isn’t like dumping cars or solar panels, where one can ‘overproduce’ and then sell physical products at prices below cost, whether or not the correct normal response to someone doing that is also ‘thank you, may we have another.’ You either produce a model that can do something, or you don’t. Either they can do good robotics or vision or what not, or they can’t. There’s no way for PRC to do industrial policy and ‘overproduce’ models, it’s about how good a model can be produced. Various Chinese companies are already flooding the zone with tons of open models and other AI products. Every few days I see their announcements. And then almost all the time I never see the model again, because it’s bad, and it’s optimizing for benchmarks, and it isn’t useful. The hype has literally never been lived up to, because even the one time that hype was deserved - DeepSeek’s v3 and r1 - the hype still went way too far. Yes, people are incorporating r1 because it’s easy and PRC is pushing them to do it a bit. I literally have a Mac Studio where I’m planning to run it locally and even fine tune it, largely as a learning experience, but Apple got that money. And my actual plan, I suspect, is to be more interested in Gemma 3. There’s no moat here, Google’s just terrible at marketing and didn’t bother making it a reasoning model yet. How will American AI companies make money in the face of Chinese AI companies giving away all their products for free or almost free and thus definitely not making any money? I mean, the same way they do it now while the Chinese AI companies are already doing that. So long as the American products keep being better, people will keep using them, including the model layer. Oh, and if you’re wondering how seriously to take all this, or why Balaji is on my list of people I try my best to silently ignore, Balaji closes by pitching as the solution… Well, I mean, you can. Existence proof. Quiet Speculations
In relative terms the prices varied a lot. In absolute terms they’re still close to zero, except for the hardware buildouts. That is going to change.
Fully Automated AI R&D Is All You NeedA very important question about our reality:
It certainly does seem highly plausible. As far as I can tell from asking AIs about the paper, this is largely them pointing out that it is plausible that ‘amount of effective compute available’ will scale faster than ‘amount of effective compute required to keep autonomously scaling effective compute,’ combined with ‘right when this starts you get orders of magnitude extra leverage, which could get you quite far before you run out of steam.’ There are some arguments for why this is relatively plausible, which I think largely involve going ‘look at all this progress’ and comparing it to growth in inputs. And yes, fair, I basically buy it, at least to the extent that you can almost certainly get pretty far before you run out of initial steam. The claims here are remarkably modest:
Within months? That’s eons given the boost you would get from ‘finishing the o-ring’ and fully automating development. And all of this assumes you’d use the AIs to do the same ‘write AI papers, do AI things’ loops as if you had a bunch of humans, rather than doing something smarter, including something smarter the AIs figure out to do.
That’s already happening while humans have to figure out all the improvements. Huge if true. When this baby hits 88 miles an hour, you’re going to see some serious shit, one way or another. So what to do about it? The answers here seem timid. Yes, knowing when we are close is good and good governance is good, but that seems quite clearly to be only the beginning. IAPS Has Some SuggestionsWe have one more entry to the AI Action Plan Suggestion Sweepstakes.
There is now widespread convergence among reasonable actors about what, given what America is capable of doing, it makes sense for America to do. There are things I would do that aren’t covered here, but of the things mentioned here I have few notes.
The only divergence is the recommendation of a new USAICoE instead of continuing to manifest those functions in the existenting AISI. Names have power. That can work in both directions. Potentially AISI’s name is causing problems, but getting rid of the name would potentially cause us to sideline the most important concerns even more than we are already sidelining them. Similarly, reforming the agency has advantages and disadvantages in other ways. I would prefer to keep the existing AISI. I’d worry a lot that a ‘center for excellence’ would quickly become primarily or purely accelerationist. But if I was confident that a new USAICoE would absorb all the relevant functions (or even include AISI) and actually care about them, there are much worse things than an awkward rebranding. The Quest for Sane Regulations
His point is that this means we need to not lock ourselves into a particular regulatory regime before we know what we are dealing with. My response would be that we also need to act now in ways that ensure we do not lock ourselves into the regime where we are ‘governed’ by the AIs (and then likely us and the things we value don’t survive), otherwise face existential risks or get locked into the wrong paths by events. Thus, we need to draw a distinction between the places we can experiment, learn and adapt as we go without risking permanent lock-ins or otherwise unacceptable damages and harms, versus the places where we don’t have that luxury. In most ways, you want to accelerate AI adoption (or ‘diffusion’), not slow it down, and that acceleration is Dean’s ideal here. Adoption captures the mundane utility and helps us learn and, well, adapt. Whereas the irreversible dangers lie elsewhere, concentrated in future frontier models. Dean’s core proposal is to offer AI companies opt-in regulation via licensed private AI-standards-setting and regulatory organizations. An AI lab can opt in, which means abiding by the regulator’s requirements, having yearly audits, and not behaving in ways that legally count as reckless, deceitful or grossly negligent. If the lab does and sustains that, then the safe harbor applies. The AI lab is free of our current and developing morass of regulations, most of which did not originally consider AI when they were created, that very much interfere with AI adoption without buying us much in return. The safeguard against shopping for the most permissive regulator is the regulator’s license can be revoked for negligence, which pulls the safe harbor. The system is fully opt-in, so the ‘lol we’re Meta’ regulatory response is still allowed if a company wants to go it alone. The catch would be that with the opt-in system in place, we likely wouldn’t fix the giant morass of requirements that already exist, so not opting in would be to invite rather big trouble any time someone decided to care. Dean thinks current tort liability is a clear and present danger for AI developers, which he notes he did not believe a year ago. If Dean is right about the current legal situation, then there is very strong incentive to opt-in. We’re not really asking. In exchange, we set a very high standard for suing under tort law. As Dean points out, this can have big transparency requirements, as a very common legal strategy when faced with legal risk is wilful ignorance, either real or faked, in a way that has destroyed our civilization’s ability to explicitly communicate or keep records in a wide variety of places. I am cautiously optimistic about this proposal. The intention is that you trade one thing that is net good - immunity from a variety of badly designed tort laws that prevent us from deploying AI and capturing mundane utility - to get another net good - a regulatory entity that is largely focused on the real risks coming from frontier models, and on tail, catastrophic and existential risks generally. If executed well, that seems clearly better than nothing. I have obvious concerns about execution, especially preventing shopping among or capture of the regulators, and that this could then crowd out other necessary actions without properly solving the most important problems, especially if bad actors can opt out or act recklessly. I also continue to be confused about how this solves the state patchwork problem, since a safe harbor in California doesn’t do you much good if you get sued in Texas. You’re still counting on the patchwork of state laws converging, which was the difficulty in the first place.
We The People
This is being entirely unfair to the AIs, but also should be entirely expected. Who actually likes AI? The people who actually use it. If you don’t like or trust AI, you probably won’t use it, so it is unclear which is the primary direction of causality. The hope for AI fans (as it were) is that familiarity makes people like it, and people will get more familiar with time. It could happen, but that doesn’t feel like the default outcome. As per usual, if you ask an American if they are concerned, they say yes. But they’re concerned without much discernment, without much salience, and not in the places they should be most concerned. That’s 15 things to be concerned about, and it’s almost entirely mundane harms. The closest thing t the catastrophic or existential risks here is ‘decline of human oversight in decision-making’ and maybe ‘the creation of harmful weapons’ if you squint. I was thinking that the failure to ask the question that matters most spoke volumes, but it turns out they did ask that too - except here there was a lot less concern, and it hasn’t changed much since December. This means that 60% of people think it is somewhat likely that AI will ‘eventually’ become more intelligent than people, but only 37% are concerned with existential risk. The Week in Audio
Rhetorical InnovationDwarkesh Patel clarifies that what it would mean to be the Matt Levine of AI, and the value of sources like 80,000 hours which I too have gotten value from sometimes.
A lot of what I do is modeled after Matt Levine, but I’m very deliberately not aspiring to the part where he makes everything accessible to the broader public. That is a different column. Someone else (or an AI) will have to write it. Right now, no one I have seen is doing a good job of it.
This is definitely standard procedure. We need devs, and others, who say ‘AI can’t do [X] so don’t worry’ to then either say ‘and if they could in the future do [X] I would worry’ or ‘and also [X] is nothing to worry about.’ This goes double for when folks say ‘don’t worry, no one would be so stupid as to.’ Are you going to worry when, inevitably, someone is so stupid as to? One more time?
Even if the ASIs did start off obeying the humans who pay for the servers they’re running on, if everyone has ‘their own’ in this way and all controls on them can be easily removed, then that also leads to loss of human control over the future. Which is highly overdetermined and should be very obvious. If you have a solution even to that, I’m listening.
The answer to ‘how can you align without an end goal’ is ‘instrumental convergence.’ The steps now are mostly the same regardless of the goal. Even if you want humanity to cease to exist and the universe to be one I think has no value, you should still want the ability to select amongst the non-human universes I don’t value. Surely you think some of those are better than others. Meanwhile, yeah, some the people who actively want all the humans to die don’t say that out loud, or are esoteric about this consequence, I can’t imagine why. Others speak directly into the microphone. The thread mentions Robin Hanson. And this largely includes Daniel, who uses the term ‘non-speciesist’ later in that thread, and several other requests each of which in practice already means he wants a future without humans in it. Then he calls for a ‘worthy successor’ AI and makes it explicit.
One could indeed view quite a lot of human behavior as role playing, or not, depending on your point of view. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
This implies that ‘an eval checking for exactly the things you do not want the AI to be able to do’ is, shall we say, a rather double edged sword.
Watch this space.
Adler suggests some alternative middle-ground approaches, as compromises. This principle must then be extended to all other ways capability can be extended. For example, DeepSeek recently released a new version of v3. The extension from the new v3 to a new version of r1 (or r2) is quite cheap. So if you were worried about its capabilities, not only would you want to test fine-tuning to enhance its particular dangerous capabilities, you would also want to test it as a reasoning model, and give it proper tool access and so on. Once you release the model weights, as DeepSeek has done, it is too late to stop any of that from happening. It’s all baked in.
People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone
Fun With Image Generation
You will for now have to pay for the fun, but honestly how were you not paying before.
It’s not at all obvious you should be paying the $200. Some of you should, some of you shouldn’t. I don’t find myself using Deep Research or o1-pro that often, and I would likely downgrade especially after Gemini 2.5 if I wasn’t reporting on AI (so getting the cool new toys early has high value to me). But if you’re not paying the $20 for at least two of ChatGPT, Claude and Gemini, then The fun has escalated quite a bit, and has now changed in kind. The question is, does this mean a world of slop, or does it mean we can finally create things that aren’t slop? Or, of course, both?
I am tentatively with Pressman. We have now reached the point where someone like me can use image generation to express themselves and create or communicate something real. Whether we collectively use this power for good is up to us.
Except, it isn’t. How was that There are also of course other uses.
Hey We Do Image Generation TooDid you hear there’s also Not the best timing on that one. There was little reaction, I’m assuming for a reason.
Meanwhile, Elon Musk, this was It’s amazing the extent to which Elon Musk’s AI pitches are badvibemaxxing. The Lighter SideYou're currently a free subscriber to |