---
subject: "AI Is GPT, & GPTs Go Slow"
from: "Robin Hanson from Overcoming Bias <overcomingbias@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-04-15 19:43:17
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Overcoming Bias", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8616244883382228708", "UNREAD"]
---
Back in the dot-com boom of the late 90s, many said a new economy loomed that invalidated all the old rules, and would soon cause big fast change. Economists or business experts who said otherwise just “didn’t get it”. Just before the year 2000 crash, economists Carl Shapiro and Hal Varian published an excellent book, These old school economists were basically right. While the internet did eventually have big impacts, it took a lot longer than enthusiasts said, and mostly took the forms that those old school experts suggested. Since 1900, the world has now seen four roughly synched cycles of boom then bust of both the S&P500 and enthusiasm for automation, stock booms ending roughly ’29, ’73, ’00, and soon. I left grad school in ’84 to join the second to last boom, as an AI researcher til ’93, gullibly swallowing the hype then. Now I’m older and wiser and watching this current boom from the side. But I feel pretty confident that this one will play out like the others, and that its GPT will take decades to have its big impact. While I’m not personally tracking the tech details as much as I did last time, that isn’t actually needed to see the big picture here. The big picture is that it will take decades for AI to have big econ impact. Yes even today millions are willing to pay roughly $10/mo, and many personal hours, to use LLMs. The question here is about vastly larger impact, for example enough to see noticeable effects on key GDP growth or workforce participation stats. As GPTs are general, it is hard to predict details of their future applications. But you shouldn’t be trying to use those details; look instead for robust predictions and policies, that depend less on details. For example, if there’s a risk of many losing their jobs all at once, set up robust Now there are some today who know about GPT econ, yet still claim AI will have big fast impact. For example,
But successfully adding econ value via AI requires lots more than using language and being available on the internet! Many have My view here is just common sense, using standard econ. But you won’t hear it much in MSM, social media, r keynote speeches. Those rewards go more to those who make more dramatic forecasts. As they have for centuries. Yes, we will likely eventually have transformative AI, and we might want to think about that in advance. Like I did in my book You're currently a free subscriber to |