---
subject: "Inciting Incident: Royal Enfield’s cult status is built on storytelling fundamentals"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-11-22 10:45:20
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
Inciting Incident
Fri, 22 Nov 24
Inciting Incident is our weekly newsletter about the most powerful tool of our age—stories. Stories told by businesses, leaders, governments..
Good Morning Ishan,
This Tuesday, I met a dozen CXOs of leading companies promoted by a venture studio at one of The Ken’s [narrative thinking workshops](https://the-ken.com/learning/). Two of them asked me an important question: why is it that many Indian companies that have been around for a while do not rely on storytelling very much. I had just showed them a number of examples of great storytelling by brands—most of whom were Indian startups and global companies.
I thought about that question all week, and I think the simple answer is: the vast majority of Indian companies born before the turn of the century relied primarily on more ‘tangible’ strengths to succeed. Capital. Distribution. Talent. Technology. Scale. Price. You get the gist.
The younger crop, forced to acknowledge the limits of differentiation by ‘conventional’ strengths, have had to learn the value of a compelling brand narrative and storytelling right from the get go. The level of competition they had to deal with left them no choice.
However, there are quite a few instances of ‘old’ companies coming to this realisation a lot sooner than their peers.
Today, I am going to write about one such example. An international success for decades and one that shows no signs of letting up.
What makes Royal Enfield’s story so resilient?
Yesterday, Goldman Sachs [decided](https://www.ndtvprofit.com/markets/eicher-motors-has-goldman-sachs-bullish-as-product-launch-momentum-accelerates) to be bullish about Royal Enfield’s parent, Eicher Motors. The investment bank believes that new Royal Enfield motorcycle launches have put the company in a favourable position. Goldman’s view is in line with most other brokerages, as highlighted by a [piece](https://www.business-standard.com/companies/news/eicher-motors-up-8-royal-enfield-rides-past-toughest-phase-analysts-124111400879_1.html) in Business Standard last week that said the company has ridden past the toughest phase of competition.
Jefferies said that the “toughest phase of the competition is behind” for Royal Enfield. Emkay, which also said competition was “largely behind”, upgraded the stock three notches to “buy” from “sell”. Demand for its motorcycles has sustained even after the October-November festive season due to successful launches of some of new premium models, Royal Enfield CEO B Govindarajan told analysts on Wednesday. The company, which gets most of its earnings from Royal Enfield, came under pressure last year after two-wheeler makers Hero MotoCorp and Bajaj Auto launched premium Harley Davidson and Triumph models, directly challenging some of Royal Enfield’s top sellers.
Royal Enfield is already making [plans](https://www.thehindu.com/business/eicher-motors-sets-aside-capex-of-2200-cr-capex-for-fy25/article68164728.ece) to launch new electric motorcycles and expand into more international markets over the next few years. And its success is only strengthening the belief that investors have in its business and products.
But things haven’t always been this good for the iconic brand—it has seen many highs and lows over the last century.
Royal Enfield’s story [begins](https://www.bbc.com/storyworks/south-pole-expedition/a-quickfire-history-of-royal-enfield) at an unlikely place: the original company—Enfield—manufactured sewing machines in the UK in the late 19th century, and only later diversified into making bicycles. But even then, the brand’s storytelling chops were strong.
Within a year the word Royal was added, and the Royal Enfield name was established. Along with the name came the tagline ‘Made Like a Gun’, hinting at precision manufacturing and reliability, attributes that would stand Royal Enfield in good stead later in its history… By the turn of the 20th Century, internal combustion was quite literally booming, and it was logical to add petrol power to the bicycles Enfield was already producing.
It didn’t take long for the company to start making motorcycles too. It was an innovator, and by 1932, its most famous model—the Royal Enfield Bullet—had arrived on the scene. After extensive use in the Second World War, the Bullet became a huge draw for motorcyclists in the next couple of decades, especially in countries like India.
One of its biggest, and first, challenges though arrived in the form of cheap Japanese rivals in the late sixties. This was a hard enough problem that Royal Enfield almost disappeared as a brand in the UK. But its India business saved it.
The late ‘60s was a tumultuous time for any British bike manufacturer. In short, Honda and the Japanese big three entered the market, cars were more affordable, and suddenly motorcycles were cheaper, more reliable, and faster than they’d ever been. The Great British biking industry struggled to keep up, Royal Enfield included. By 1970, all UK manufacturing of Royal Enfields had ceased. Thankfully business was booming in India and in a bizarre twist of fate, in 1977, Enfield India began exporting the 350 Bullet back to the UK for sale. As innovative as ever, Enfield carried on building motorcycles and building their fanbase.
This “[twist of fate](https://www.forbesindia.com/article/leadership/eicher-motors-ltd-a-journey-of-successful-turnarounds/93970/1)” aside, there was one other moment of existential crisis for the brand in the last century—one that it overcame by applying some of the most fundamental principles of great storytelling.
By 1999, Royal Enfield was once again a brand in crisis. It had been bought by the Eicher group in 1994, but business had steadily dwindled. The company’s factories were producing just 2,000 units a month, compared to a capacity of 6,000 units a month. And Eicher’s management had gotten to a point where they did not see much value in the brand.
Until 1999, when Siddhartha Lal, son of Eicher Motors owner Vikram Lal, decided to [revive](https://www.forbesindia.com/article/leadership/eicher-motors-ltd-a-journey-of-successful-turnarounds/93970/1) the brand. And in just a few years, things were starting to look really good again.
The following year, the brand opened its first concept store in Delhi, and its first exclusive store in London. In 2015, he acquired erstwhile collaborators, UK-based Harris Performance, and set up its first direct distribution subsidiary outside India, in North America. Royal Enfield North America is headquartered in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. By 2015, Royal Enfield was contributing 40 percent of Eicher Motors’ turnover and 80 percent of its operating profit (Ebitda).
There are many lessons in how Lal went about achieving this. But I think the most important one is—get your customer to [root for you](https://theprint.in/opinion/dashboard/royal-enfield-renaissance-is-an-old-story-here-is-whats-driving-the-brands-future/1521565/), and make their passion the driving force for your product.
Ask anyone in the motorcycling community and they will admit that a lot of Royal Enfield’s renaissance is due to the products that have been developed at this new centre in Leicestershire. But as Bertrand D’souza, Editor, Overdrive magazine and Chairman, Indian Motorcycle Of The Year (IMOTY) jury said, “They have not built their brand around technology, they have built their brand around passion. It is not that they make bad motorcycles, they make very good motorcycles. After all, Royal Enfield products have won three of the last five IMOTY awards, but the level of engagement that they drive with their community is incredible.”
Royal Enfield decided to make ‘understanding the customer’ the core of its business strategy.
There was a serious effort to solicit customer feedback, yes, but also, the company started encouraging its leadership to literally put itself in the shoes (or seats) of its customers. With Lal [leading](https://yourstory.com/2023/11/sidhartha-lal-royal-enfield-success-story) the way.
He spent a lot of time riding the bikes himself and found out they broke down a lot, were expensive to fix, and used old-fashioned technology. With this knowledge, he made two big changes. First, he changed the gear shift from the right side of the bikes to the left, which was what most other bikes had. This made Royal Enfield bikes easier to ride. Second, he decided to use aluminum to make engines to stop them from leaking oil. But Sidhartha knew that Royal Enfield was special for another reason: people loved it not just for the bike but for what it stood for—tradition, design, and a sense of adventure. So, he promoted Royal Enfield as more than just a motorcycle—it was a feeling and a part of history.
Lal also started participating in fan activities and adventures, like group road trips to Ladakh and Leh, which offer some of the roughest terrains in the country. In [a piece](https://www.financialexpress.com/life/lifestyle-reviving-from-the-brink-the-story-of-royal-enfield-india-and-how-siddhartha-lal-revived-it-from-bankruptcy-3195622/) last year, Financial Express went as far as to say that Lal had brought back Royal Enfield from the brink of bankruptcy both due to his relentless passion for motorcycles and his deep understanding of what customers want. The company’s fundamental strategic positions under Lal, it said, were “Living the buyer’s life”; “Behavioural designs for practical daily riding”; “Prioritising emotions”; and “Innovating without losing sight of the brand story”.
And all of those things, if you notice, are founded on empathising with the customer.
That’s a wrap for this edition of [Inciting Incident](https://the-ken.com/inciting-incident/). If you want to enrol your team in one of The Ken’s Narrative Thinking Workshops for Q1, 2025, please apply [here](https://the-ken.com/learning/).
I will be back in your inbox next Friday with another edition.
Yours,
Ruhi