---
subject: "A great investor is a great rejector"
from: "Seeking Wisdom <comment-reply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-05-13 00:53:59
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Jana V", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8135152689830330561", "UNREAD"]
---
I tend to grasp math concepts better from books written for other fields. Take linear algebra for example — I developed a stronger understanding and appreciation for it after reading the book [Modeling Life](https://janav.wordpress.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=15dc58c2b9a52241f6484a75f214d0c7a6bd737414867c706cbab7af0c797729&blog_id=8483731&post_id=8294&user_id=0&subs_id=225460721&signature=c9109bcb8ed0648a82eeaeb9ebd809a4&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly9tb2RlbGluZ2luYmlvbG9neS5naXRodWIuaW8v). Similarly, the investing book [What I Learned About Investing from Darwin](https://janav.wordpress.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=5f8e05b1ec198a5a36168ea2895085e0cb22dd7082af5bb3012b12e28d114183&blog_id=8483731&post_id=8294&user_id=0&subs_id=225460721&signature=ddcf53f98035c77451d58d98f3a1bacf&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYW1hem9uLmNvbS9XaGF0LUxlYXJuZWQtQWJvdXQtSW52ZXN0aW5nLURhcndpbi1lYm9vay9kcC9CMEJHOTlXUzMx) gave me deeper insights on how base rates, sensitivity, and specificity interact to affect an outcome.
I wrote this post as a prequel to my next post, which will connect p-values and Bayes' theorem. While working on that, my associative memory reminded me of an interesting question posed by Pulak Prasad in his excellent book [What I Learned About Investing from Darwin](https://janav.wordpress.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=5f8e05b1ec198a5a36168ea2895085e0cb22dd7082af5bb3012b12e28d114183&blog_id=8483731&post_id=8294&user_id=0&subs_id=225460721&signature=ddcf53f98035c77451d58d98f3a1bacf&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYW1hem9uLmNvbS9XaGF0LUxlYXJuZWQtQWJvdXQtSW52ZXN0aW5nLURhcndpbi1lYm9vay9kcC9CMEJHOTlXUzMx).
A star investor claims to be right 80% of the time in their investment decisions. When presented with a good investment opportunity, they will identify it correctly 80% of the time. Similarly, when faced with a bad investment, they will reject it 80% of the time. If this star investor makes an investment decision, what is the probability that it is a good investment?
The quick answer that comes to many is 80%. However, that is an incorrect answer. The right answer is 57%. Why is that the case? We cannot answer this question without knowing the base rates, which tells us what percentage of potential investments available to the investor are good business opportunities.
Suppose there are 5,000 publicly traded businesses listed on US stock exchanges, and let's say the base rate of good investments is 25%. This means that 1,250 (5,000 x 0.25) are good investments, and 3,750 (5,000 x 0.75) are bad investments.
When presented with a good investment opportunity, the star investor correctly identifies it 80% of the time. This is known as sensitivity, or the ability to recognize good investments when they arise. Therefore, out of 1,250 opportunities, they will accurately identify 1,000 (1,250 x 0.8) as good. However, they will also mistakenly reject 250 good investments (1,250 x 0.2), which are termed false negatives (Type II error). These false negatives are calculated using the formula 1,250 * (1 - sensitivity).
When presented with a bad investment opportunity, the star investor correctly rejects it 80% of the time. This measure is called specificity, which refers to the ability to recognize and reject bad investments. Thus, out of 3,750 such opportunities, they will accurately reject 3,000 (3,750 x 0.8). However, they will mistakenly accept 750 bad investments (3,750 x 0.2), known as false positives (Type I error). These false positives are calculated using the formula 3,750 * (1 - specificity).
The table above clearly illustrates that the probability of the star investor making a good investment is 57%. It’s the presence of false positives that brings down the investor’s success rate by adding 750 bad businesses to the denominator.
Fish where the fish are: Base rates matter. They indicate the percentage of potential investments available to the investor that are good business opportunities. The chart below illustrates how the success rate goes up with increasing base rates while keeping sensitivity and specificity constant. The key takeaway is this — between two markets or industries, always select the one with more good businesses, as indicated by higher base rates.
Avoiding bad investments is more important than identifying good investments: The success rate continues climbing as the investor enhances their specificity (the ability to recognize and reject bad investments). While the success rate also rises with greater sensitivity (the knack for identifying good investments when they surface), it plateaus after a certain threshold, as illustrated in the image below. The key takeaway is this — to increase your investment success rate, you must reject opportunities (say "no") more often than accepting them (saying "yes").
A dramatic improvement in investment performance occurs when the rate of Type 1 errors (false positives) is reduced. This happens when we minimize the error of making bad investments. We can clearly see this in the table below. Buffett is the best investor in the world because he is the best rejector in the world. A great investor is a great rejector.
| Type I error | Type II error | Success rate |
| 20% | 20% | 57% |
| 10% | 20% | 73% |
| 20% | 10% | 60% |
| 10% | 10% | 75% |