---
subject: "Citrini's Scenario Is A Great But Deeply Flawed Thought Experiment"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-02-24 15:33:15
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
So fine, let’s talk. It’s an excellent work of speculative fiction, in that it: Depicts a concrete scenario with lots of details and numbers. Introduces a bunch of underexplored and important mechanisms. Gets a lot of those mechanisms more right than you would expect. Provides lots of food for thought. Takes bold stands. Is clearly labeled as ‘a scenario, not a prediction’ up at the top. Is fun to read and doesn’t let reality get in the way of exploring its ideas. The Efficient Market Hypothesis is false, whoo!
It is still a work of speculative fiction. It doesn’t let reality get in the way of its ideas.
I’d much rather read and analyze a scenario that goes a little too fast than those who, Thus, it has severe problems that many rushed to point out: The pace of capabilities advancement and diffusion here are super duper fast. Indeed, diffusion is Can’t Happen levels of fast due to lack of available compute. The scenario forces a singularity and other things way, way more important than anything described in the essay, so you have to set all that aside. Even if you ignore the whole ‘superintelligence’ angle and the whole ‘we probably all die’ and ‘AI will take over’ angles, there are a lot of other things going on in the scenario that are vital and unconsidered, too. Given what is described, a lot of the impacts are remarkably tiny in size. They greatly underestimate the stimulating effects of what is happening. The government sits there and does nothing in ways that aren’t realistic. The discussions on various particular sectors can be somewhat half baked.
I love (read: dread) how the finance and economist types think these are the AI ‘tail risks.’ You have to set aside ‘we probably all die’ and try to take this seriously, because in the world described we probably all die, even if we accept their premise that during 2026 all of the problems in AI alignment and AI reliability are solved at the level of a superintelligence. I can’t avoid reminders of such things, but this response essay tries its best to accept the absurdities in the premise. The Headline DestinationThe scenario is ‘AI destroys a lot of company margins and white-collar jobs without replacing them or buying anything outside the sector, resulting in high unemployment, a large fall in aggregate demand and cascading failures of financial instruments whose underpinnings are gone.’
Printing 10.2% unemployment in an AI boom that quickly would be a surprise, but once you see the rest of their scenario the number is highly conservative. A cumulative drawdown in the entire S&P of 38% is not crazy either, except that in this scenario the S&P doesn’t ever cross 8,000, when it’s at 6,847 as I type this. Even the NASDAQ only goes up 32% from now to their peak. That’s it?
The scenario plays out absurdly fast and bullish on AI. This is a crazy amount of practical capability gains and a crazy amount of diffusion, both well in excess of my expectations. But those who think this will stay ‘contained’ or ‘sector-specific’ are fooling themselves to an absurd degree. The baseline scenario just takes somewhat longer. We get initial ‘human obsolescence’ waves in Early 2026. By October 2026 NGDP is already printing ~7%, productivity and real output per hour booms while real wage growth collapses. The amount of real wealth being produced is rising rapidly. …And That’s TerribleAnd yet, they report, all of this is terrible.
That’s what happens to the human workers at first in a slow takeoff recursive self-improvement scenario with (honestly kind of ludicrously?) rapid economic diffusion, except without any real wealth or efficiency effects or other adjustments. The key claim here is that this would be bad for the economy rather than good.
Even if this is indeed what you’ve chosen to worry about, white-collar productivity growth in this scenario is excellent. It’s just that white-collar labor negotiating power and demand for such labor went to hell, and thus incomes are down across many domains. Labor income drops would then quickly (as they note later) spread everywhere else, with the refugees from those professions flooding into everything else. Prices should then drop to match and quality of goods and services should improve, across the board, for this reason and also other reasons described later. That’s even if we presume the government is paralyzed and does nothing. The only way to avoid that conclusion is if the spending on AI to provide such services is a large fraction of all the savings, both from labor and from frictions and also from other efficiency gains. Given AI costs drop dramatically over time, and the scenario involves AI cheap enough that everyone is constantly running always-on agents, and the amount of cost advantage required to drive sudden diffusion, this is overdeterminedly not the case. You don’t replace $100 in human labor with $70 in AI spending for more than a month or two at most, you replace it with $7 and then $0.70. SaaSpocalype NowThe first sector up in their scenario, as the first result of agentic coding getting way better super fast, is a proper SaaSpocalypse at warp speed, as doing any given tool in-house becomes an option. This is a transfer from SaaS firms to their B2B customers, with net gains from trade since in many cases the new software is more customized and therefore better. It also erases all the deadweight loss gains from price discrimination, which are large. You used to not buy various services to save money, now you get anything you want. SaaS is a tax on business. Taxes went down. Corporate tax cuts are highly stimulative. The SaaS companies pivot to even more AI on the intensive margin. Sure.
|