---
subject: "The Monday Media Diet with Naomi Zeichner"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-06-09 11:02:40
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Naomi (NZ) is a woman of taste. She has a Tell us about yourself. I’m Naomi and I live in Brooklyn with my fiance Describe your media diet. Before I get up for the day or when I’m going to sleep, I listen to podcasts. My partner is a saint and a scholar because he endures the whole suite. Journalism is worth paying for and I believe subscription is the way forward for many news organizations, whether they’re On the way to the office, I listen to music. I started writing about music 15 years ago and I’ve been finding songs to burn to little I’m sad that Choire’s I look at Instagram all through the day and night. Recently I’ve been hot on bookmarking inspiration for a folder called ‘doghouse,’ which is an idea for a bar. I also have a TV at home for the first time in many years, so we’re streaming abundantly. The Pitt and Top Chef (of course I What’s the last great book you read? I prefer books that need to exist in print because you physically reach for them in particular situations, like What are you reading now? I recently enjoyed Josh Duboff’s What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication? First I’m looking into the most distractingly salacious headline or eye-candy design package. Then I’m backing up to appreciate the big picture: How did the features come together, and what role do the other pieces play? If there’s an editor’s letter, what conclusions does it offer? What’s implied by the final page, or the masthead? All that said, I don’t expect or assume most readers will come to magazines with Harriet the Spy-type curiosity. When you create content, whether for print or digital, it’s essential to remember that part of the job is providing thoughtful service even to someone who’s just scanning for a few seconds. Holding their attention requires humility and a billion layers of consideration. Who should everyone be reading that they’re not? I keep an eye on reporting from What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone?
Plane or train? Mostly I’m just eager to get where I’m going. I am absolutely a fan of any fast, comfortable train that runs on time. The New York City Subway doesn’t always hit those marks and it’s still one of the main reasons I wanted to live in New York, or stayed here so long. What is one place everyone should visit? Everyone has unique needs, but it’s easy to have a great time in Tokyo, Paris, and New York freaking City. In researching and In starting to plan a wedding, a decision I feel tentatively good about is asking my friends to visit my hometown, Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into.
You're currently a free subscriber to |