---
subject: "String of Pearls Theory, Creative Genius, & More"
from: "\"Sahil Bloom's Curiosity Chronicle\" <sahil@sahilbloom.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-02-24 14:09:40
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Sahil Bloom"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_1989028747625928812"]
---
String of Pearls Theory, Creative Genius, & Moreread on read time 4 minutes Here are 5 interesting ideas to spark your curiosity heading into the weekend. Today at a Glance:- Quote: Risking failure.
- Framework: The String of Pearls Theory.
- Tweet: Creative genius.
- Article: Choose good quests.
- Podcast: Timeless lessons for life.
Today's Newsletter is Brought to You by The world's first and only vacation rental REIT Spend your time away in the ultimate luxury vacation home with Wander. They provide inspiring views, modern workstations, restful beds, hotel-grade cleaning and 24/7 concierge service. But why settle for a one-time stay when you could own a piece of this magical portfolio? Wander recently launched Atlas - a first-of-its-kind vacation rental REIT which gives accredited investors the chance to earn income and diversify their portfolio without having to buy, rent or maintain properties themselves. Plus, right now, new Atlas investors may get the chance to invest in Wander’s next round of funding - so don’t wait any longer.
One Quote:"I want to risk hitting my head on the ceiling of my talent. I want to really test it out...I don't ever want to fail, but I want to risk failure every time out of the gate." - Quentin Tarantino Without risk of failure there is no glory of success. Do hard things. One Framework:String of Pearls TheoryStutz is a 2022 Netflix documentary directed by actor Jonah Hill that takes a deep dive into the life and teachings of his therapist, Dr. Phil Stutz. The film has a very rare 100% rating on Rotten Tomatoes for good reason—it is exceptional in its exploration of a variety of tools and frameworks on life and career. One very interesting theory covered: the String of Pearls. Stutz draws a string of pearls on a piece of paper. Each "pearl" is an action taken, with each action having equal value. No action is more or less valuable than any other—all actions are to be celebrated as an important part of creating the string of pearls. The important point here is just creating an identity around taking the action: "I am the person that puts the next pearl on the string.” Just as we learned from the Parable of the Farmer and the Horse, we don't need to place judgement on whether any action is "good" or "bad"—we just need to take the action and let it be. No action is completely perfect—no action is completely imperfect. Every action has the same value. Every action is a pearl on your long, ever-expanding string of life. Lesson: Each and every single day, add one perfectly imperfect pearl to your string. One Tweet:There is something special about seeing a creative genius in flow.
The most important lesson from watching this video: Creativity doesn't magically appear, it is a byproduct of movement and creation. Start moving and good things will happen. One Article:Really neat piece that breaks down the need for smart, capable people to pursue "good" quests in life. They define good quests as follows: "In the most simple terms possible: a good quest makes the future better than our world today, while a bad quest doesn't improve the world much at all, or even makes it worse." I love videogame-life analogies, so this article stood out. While I don't agree with everything the authors said—I think it's up to YOU to determine what is a "good" quest for your life—I love the general concept of gamifying life and pursuing exciting journeys and missions. So what quest are you embarking on today? One Podcast:Timeless Wisdom for Leading a Life of Love, Friendship, & Learning Terrific conversation from 2021 between Leon Kass and David Brooks. Leon Kass is a biologist and philosopher who has studied one question throughout his career: What does it mean to live a meaningful life? Lots of interesting insights in this one, including on the topics of career, friendships, romance, and higher purpose. Worth your time if you're searching for your next good quest. Listen to it Sahil's Recommendation ZoneNail your 2023 health goals with I get asked frequently, “What is the one supplement you can't live without?” My answer is always I started taking it in 2011 after spending time with the founder and have been hooked ever since. It replaced an entire cabinet of supplements for me in one daily scoop—seriously, its latest iteration covers a multivitamin, multi-mineral, prebiotics, probiotics, adaptogens, greens, and more. Today, Athletic Greens is offering Curiosity Chronicle subscribers an exclusive deal: Refer Friends, Earn Rewards!
If you enjoyed today's newsletter, please share it with your friends and family! If this email was forwarded to you, consider |