---
subject: "Klarna and the Two Pivots of 2022"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <the-diff@ghost.io>"
to: ""
date: 2025-03-17 14:19:56
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
In this issue: - Klarna and the Two Pivots of 2022—Klarna's a good reason to revisit the Buy-Now-Pay-Later model. The company's results are impressive, and, while they are benefiting from AI, there was another factor at around the same time that also accelerated their revenue
- Crypto Adoption—You can probably guess who's most excited about transactions that don't require trusted third parties.
- Art Margin Calls—The real collateral isn't on a canvas.
- Liquidations—Scale wins in commodity businesses.
- Corporate Espionage—A sting catches a corporate spy and eliminates a popular excuse.
- DeepSeek—Consider the scale.
Klarna and the Two Pivots of 2022Buy-Now-Pay-Later companies serve a very helpful didactic purpose, in that they illustrate that "payments" and "credit" are really the same business. At some level of precision, money changes hands at a different time than goods do, and any intermediary who affects the perceived timing of this is taking some kind of credit risk. When credit is offered in bulk—in a bond underwriting, for example, or a loan—the borrowing is often separate from any one purchasing decision. At a consumer level, though, credit is often directly connected to a purchase, and the overall availability of credit, coupled with the exact structure of the credit (and even the number of clicks, taps, and characters typed in order to access it) all affect whether or not a transaction happens. Credit has been a part of retail for a long time, and has always been a lever to get a little more spending and perhaps some loyalty, too. BNPL is a comparatively recent entrant into this business, very much a creature of the post-crisis period of constrained consumer spending and caution about debt. Over time, it's converged a bit with its competitors, but a new organization built around a new-ish product will tend to come out of such a convergence process with a faster operating cadence and some unique advantages. Now that Klarna has Klarna's prospectus opens with the now-traditional letter to investors. The usual formula for this one is to throw in some modesty upfront and then get more bombastic over time.
And then they go on to say that Klarna is equally guilty, that they were born as, basically, a traditional bank that marketed itself online rather than through a branch network, but with no fundamental change to the business model. The fundamental BNPL model is probably well-understood at this point (see The Diff's Klarna talks a bit in the prospectus about network effects, and these are always relevant for a payments company. More users onboarded means a higher likelihood of accurate underwriting, which lowers the fee they need to charge merchants in order to turn a profit. But there's a bit more to it than that:
Controlling more of the transaction is a capital- and operationally-intensive proposition, but it's also a way to be a bit more than just a payment service. There's a common pattern where companies get big enough to become banks, but the natural counterpoint is that bank-like businesses can amass enough first-party purchase data to be very good ad platforms, especially for long-tail merchants. Of course, all of this is pointless if they don't make good loans. There's a lot of fun data science involved in underwriting, and for the right personality type it's a rush to find just the right signal to cut defaults by a basis point, or to figure out the perfect subset of hard-to-lend-to customers who are worth doing business with. But to have that kind of fun, you need to figure out the relatively less stimulating business of getting a big enough sample size. But there are different kinds of sample sizes: swipe a credit card at a physical store, and Chase is just guessing how you got there, what items you considered but didn't buy, etc. Klarna knows, so their useful-bits-per-dollar-of-spend ratio is a bit higher. They actually give some detail on this, noting that their Gini score (a measure of how closely their credit model's ranking of creditworthiness corresponds to realized default rates) rose in the US from 0.36 to 0.72. And, to their credit, they don't point out that this happened after they tightened lending standards in mid-2022, a move that would restrict the range of potential borrowers and thus lower the expected Gini score. 2022 was actually a very important year for Klarna, in two ways. One of these, they're happy to talk about at length. They gave less attention to the other, even though it also had a big impact. The two big macro stories of 2022 were, in retrospect: - The inflationary wave that had picked up earlier reached unexpected heights, leading to central banks raising rates from a near-universal near-zero, crushing the value of both long-duration fixed-income products and implicitly long-duration growth stocks, and
- OpenAI slapped a nice frontend on a model they'd released seven months earlier, turning it into the fastest-growing consumer product in history.
Klarna has a great AI story: they are, of course, a business with a vast amount of data of varying degrees of structured-ness. They have a large base of customers who will periodically misunderstand something about their bill, and it's easy for a single customer support call to be the difference between profit and loss when the loan in question is for $80 or so. They estimate that they saved $39m/year by moving more of their customer service over to an AI model (they note that the bots are, depending on the metric, equal to or better than their human customer service employees). They've been able to cut marketing spend almost 40% since 2022, while still growing revenue, and they attribute some of that to AI as well. And the quantitative kicker for all of this is that their revenue per employee rose from $344k in 2022 to $821k in 2024. Which is incredible! Both in the sense that it's an objectively impressive result and in the sense that it is just not credible that AI did all of that. Klarna's prospectus is going to be trotted out a lot in the coming months as an example of how quickly AI can drive business efficiencies, if you just know how to use it right, and it's true that they've done that. But it's also true that in 2022, both Klarna and the broader economy changed in ways that would ramp up revenue per employee even if GPT-2 were state-of-the-art. Here's what they say about the adjustments they made once the equity financing available to high-growth companies was suddenly a finite sum:
One reason for the shift in sentiment that forced them to get religion on underwriting standards, and to dial down their growth: interest rates went up in 2022, by a lot! Klarna is a bank, and digital banks tend to have a higher deposit beta—their customers can easily move, and have a very easy time comparison-shopping, so Klarna's cost of capital rises quite quickly when rates go up. (To their credit, they actually run a reverse duration gap: they lock in funds for an average of 280 days, and make loans that mature in an average of 40 days. But that also means that, over the course of a year, their cheap funding mostly rolls off and their loans need to be renewed. And even though these loans are mostly zero-interest in an accounting sense, they still charge economic interest paid for by the merchant. So, of course Klarna's revenue per employee went up when rates went up: the thing they're selling is money, and the price of money spiked starting in 2022! That said, they've managed the transition gracefully, and they are in fact reporting GAAP profits now, with improving unit economics everywhere you'd care to look. Both ServiceTitan and DoorDash note in their S-1s that their founders' parents worked in the same industry the companies sell software to (the trades and food service, respectively). It's a fun kind of upward mobility, where mom and dad scrimp and save in a low-margin industry so their kids can go to Stanford and figure out how to dominate a scalable slice of the same business. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/0088b8f7?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)It's a good idea to temper this criticism a bit. Banking stability is important, and consolidation is not necessarily a bad thing; a key measure of a financial system's stability is how much of it Jamie Dimon is personally responsible for. All those fees are annoying, of course, and they hit people who very much care about paying an incremental $20 penalty the day before rather than the day after payday. But another interpretation of this is that it's the only way to get the private sector to care about access to banking. The customers who are in danger of these fees are not the ones doing lucrative things like generating steady interchange fee revenue from their credit cards or taking out large mortgages—for those customers, free checking, a slick app, and a comprehensive branch network are useful loss-leaders. Instead, these customers are basically a cost and a risk, with fees functioning as an incentive to push their financial decisions closer to the more lucrative and less troublesome middle-class norm. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/78d3444e?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)Klarna customers have an average outstanding balance of $87 versus $6,730 for credit cards in the US. Of course, credit cards are used for a much wider variety of purchases. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/b472842f?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)This is very close to how credit card rewards work: the consumer gets an interest-free loan, but the lender gets a cut from the merchant (and then delivers a cut of that interchange back to the customer as rewards—a legally-sanctioned and positive-sum kickback). That transaction-driven revenue fills the same economic role as interest, in that it's a payment made in exchange for renting a very small portion of a bank's balance sheet for a very short period. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/aa529911?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)If accounting perfectly reflected economic reality, some fraction of credit losses would actually be booked as R&D. The only way to get enough information to underwrite effectively is to do what first-person shooter aficionados call "face-checking," i.e. barge in and locate the enemy by noticing where you're getting shot from. (As with gaming, this can be a reasonable strategy if you have a surplus of hit points and a deficit of useful information.) Some of it would also go down as marketing: Klarna's first loan to a customer is a loan to a total stranger, and they expand their customers' credit limits over time. The path to having a cohort of customers who churn through $5k/year in GMV starts with a bunch of $50 loans, some of which will not get paid back. (Of course, even if this is how the economics work, it would be a terrible idea to let companies prepare their own accounting this way. Losses don't always teach lessons, and the slow learners would be able to show a remarkably valuable intangible capitalized R&D and marketing asset, consisting of the book value of lessons they haven't learned and the cost of acquiring customers who will only cost them money.) [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/42de6df2?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
You're on the free list for The Diff. Last week, paying subscribers read about Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. See a sampling of current open roles below: - An OpenAI backed startup that’s applying advanced reasoning techniques to reinvent investment analysis from first principles and build the IDE for financial research is looking for a product engineer with experience working on intuitive data-intensive interfaces at a product focused company like Notion, Figma, Stripe, etc. (NYC)
- Well-funded, fast-moving team is looking for a full-stack engineer to help build the best AI-powered video editor for marketers. Tackle advanced media pipelines, LLM applications, and more. TypeScript/React expertise required. (Austin, Remote)
- A well-funded startup ($16M raised) that’s building the universal electronic cash system by taking stablecoin adoption from edge cases to the mainstream is looking for a senior full-stack engineer. (NYC, Singapore)
- A Google Ventures-backed startup founded by SpaceX engineers that’s building data infrastructure and tooling for hardware companies is looking for full-stack and front-end focused software engineers with 3+ years experience, ideally with data intensive products. (LA, Hybrid)
- A company building the new pension of the 21st century and enabling universal basic capital is looking for a mobile-focused engineer who has experience building wonderful iOS experiences. (NYC)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. ElsewhereCrypto AdoptionRussian oil companies are apparently Art Margin CallsAny time there's a business with exclusive access to big-ticket consumer purchases, there's an opportunity to turn it into a more lucrative business by financing that transaction, or selling the leads to someone who will. This extends to the market in fine art, where LiquidationsTwo crypto ETFs Corporate EspionageHR software company Rippling has
There's a default form of internal transparency where young companies don't set up elaborate access rules and logging until they're either dealing with customers and investors who expect it or have some kind of incident. All of those rules create annoying friction and slow the pace of shipping, and the younger a company is the less likely it is to have any information worth stealing. But if they don't tighten up security until it's too late, the next best thing is to execute corporate counterespionage with a bit of panache: if the complaint is accurate, Rippling wasn't just able to identify the mole, but also to narrow down the list of who knew about them. A classic way for companies to deflect bad behavior is to say that it was done by junior employees without C-level knowledge. Rippling made sure that would be a difficult claim to make. DeepSeekDeepSeek's models |
||||||||||
|
|
|
||||||||||
|