---
subject: "The Monday Media Diet with Ogheneochuko Akpovbovbo"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-07-15 11:00:35
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Ogheneochuco (OA) writes a great business and culture Substack called Tell us about yourself. I write a newsletter about business, culture, and gen z trends Describe your media diet. I moved to America for college when I was 18, and even though I’d been living in Canada for two years before that and had been consuming American media all my life, I still felt behind. It’s like I knew all the pop culture stuff, but I didn’t know the history or context behind them. Or how they were all connected. And so I started to read. I read everything then and I read everything now. So the usual stuff like The Times, The Post, WSJ and The New Yorker, FT, Bloomberg. I like The Cut a lot and The Hollywood Reporter. Then there’s the newish newsletters like Puck and Semafor which are pretty sacred to me, and of course I’m always on Substack. I’ll subscribe to anything vaguely interesting but only read a few regularly. I have a whole slew of pretty niche publications I’m subscribed to as well. If I meet someone I think has a really cool or weird job, I’m going to ask them what people at their office read. And then I’ll start reading it too. So I have a special email where all this stuff comes to. I wake up each morning and there’s like 300 emails in there. In an hour my inbox is back to zero and I have like a million tabs open. Because I write a links heavy newsletter, I’m always saving stuff. I’m pretty militant about it too. So even if I don’t use it that day, or week, I can always refer to it. My little party trick is that I never forget a headline, so I’m that girl that always has a reference ready. I show my receipts. People are always surprised when I say this, but I spend very little time on social media. I have one account that's my personal account but I barely post there. Not as a matter of principle but because it stresses me out. Then I have my bookstagram account which is my happy place because books are everything to me. If I’m in a bad mood, I think of all the unread books on my shelf and I always feel at least a little bit better. Then I have a special “work account”, where I follow a bunch of brands and publications and random stuff. This is where I get content for my newsletter. My algorithm is locked in. Very proud of what I’ve created there. I also listen to a lot of podcasts I guess, but these days I’m enjoying that less. And I talk to people a lot. Because I’ve lived in a few different countries and done a few different things, I have all these friend groups that are pretty distinct in their interests and lifestyles. So I’m always saying to them, what's on your mind lately? What's on your feed? What’s interesting you? What are you hating? I also like when they send me TikToks because wow that app is the worst. And the best. Which is why it’s the worst! What’s the last great book you read? According to The New York Time’s What are you reading now? Right now I’m reading What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication? Going to out myself as Gen Z here and say I haven't done this since I was a child. Who should everyone be reading that they’re not? Everything Puck publishes. And Irish literature. So good. What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone? Storygraph. Beats Goodreads any day. Plane or train? Train. Did I mention I lived in Germany? Trains all the way. What is one place everyone should visit? Lagos. It’s where I’m from and there’s nowhere like it. Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into. So Nigeria has 36 states but nearly 400 different tribes with distinct languages and cultures. Because I went to a British high school for the years I lived in Nigeria, I had stunningly little formal education about my country. So a while ago, I became mildly obsessed with learning little facts about each of these tribes. It was really fun and gave me a lot to talk to my parents about. And then there’s this state in Nigeria called Ebonyi and for the life of me I couldn't find anyone I knew who came from that state, and no one I knew knew anyone from there. So I convinced myself the place wasn’t real. Until I found someone who knew someone who worked there and now I guess I believe in its existence. (OA) Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Ogheneochuko (LC) —
Invite your friends and earn rewardsIf you enjoy Why is this interesting?, share it with your friends and earn rewards when they subscribe. |