---
subject: "The Supply Chain of Talent"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <the-diff@ghost.io>"
to: ""
date: 2024-07-01 13:56:04
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
In this issue: - The Supply Chain of Talent—Why's it suddenly hard to get a good job as a junior developer? And why, a few years ago, did these roles pay so well?
- Getting the Cycle Right—Lumber prices spiked during the pandemic, partly because of demand and partly because the industry hadn't invested in new capacity. But that capacity decision turned out to pay off.
- Regulatory Arbitrage in E-Commerce—It's not enough to save money on tariffs; you also have to find a different way to sell those tax-advantaged goods.
- Dry Powder and Meta-Stability—The Central Banks' Central Bank suggests higher rates.
- The Split Market—You can always exclude a handful of sectors and see a flat market.
- Transmission Mechanisms—Transferring money to indebted sectors of the economy will help them recapitalize, but won't lead to much growth.
The Supply Chain of TalentThere are two main reasons The Diff is a recruiting service and One such change I've noticed: I started recruiting actively in 2021, which was a great time to be a) getting paid to find engineering talent, and b) getting paid a percentage of what those engineers were making. 2022 was not like that, to put it mildly. And then, in 2023, companies showed up with newly-reset plans, realistic growth expectations, and roles that needed filling. But this round, there was a big difference: much, much less willingness to hire junior developers. That's anecdotal, but it pairs nicely with an anecdote I’ve heard a lot lately: people who have a few impressive internships, and a degree in a technical field from a reputable school, are having a surprisingly hard time landing that first entry-level developer job. But talking more about this problem raised another question: why were there so many of these jobs in the first place? Engineers are expensive, and that means training has a high opportunity cost. If the existing engineers are training the newest team members, that's a big investment that comes at the expense of whatever else they could be working on. In many fields, there's a tacit division of labor: schools do the initial selecting, teach students theory, and give them a chance to network that they may or may not take. Their first real-world job is their first mandatory dose of practical training. That pattern doesn't seem to exist in tech, where there's already a norm of high turnover. Instead, companies seem to tolerate the fact that they're making entry-level employees far more valuable and then seeing them walk to somewhere else. That's a stable norm, though there are tweaks around the edges—waiting a year to vest, having staggered vesting, or otherwise deferring compensation can make the retroactive cost of hiring someone lower if they quit and higher if they stick around, which is a trade many companies are willing to make. The very biggest and very smallest tech companies have additional tools to boost retention: - The biggest companies will have enough
[internal software](https://www.thediff.co/r/55cb8dd0?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)that some fraction of the skills they impart to new employees are less marketable outside that company. If you're using a custom text editor to glue together custom libraries, following particular coding style guidelines, with the end goal of making a contribution that isn't even legible to someone who doesn't deeply understand the product you're working on, that can open up a six-figure wedge between what you're worth to your current employer and what you'd get from going somewhere else. (How much of that gap accrues to the employer and how much to the company is a separate question.) - Equity compensation from a private company is basically locked up unless the company does well, and if it is doing well, employees have an economic reason to stick around, since they want to keep an eye on the biggest contributor to both the sum of their net worth and its future variance. Stints at these companies are also less marketable—there's generally a short list of startups whose imprimatur is valuable to someone who isn't directly familiar with them, and a longer list of companies, many of which may in fact be better and more selective employers, who are illegible.
Companies in the middle are in a tougher position: they'll be using more technologies that cleanly transfer to other jobs, but they're big enough that employee comp is more heavily weighted to cash and liquid equity, so there's less friction from switching jobs. The biggest companies have slimmed down a bit, and because they overhired in 2020-21 and then overestimated attrition in 2022, they've wound up with a decent surplus of employees who have a few years of experience and don't have much pressure to rapidly grow headcount. Meanwhile, rounds are smaller than they used to be, and companies are more judicious about hiring—if you're going from twenty employees to forty over the next year year, it's perfectly reasonable to accept some variance. But if the increase in headcount is more like five people, it makes sense to make lower-risk hires. (It also means that the existing team will spend less time interviewing candidates and answering questions once they start work.) The nature of the work has also changed. The classic kind of task junior developers get assigned is something that's straightforward to describe, but a bit of a pain to actually do, and then straightforward to evaluate when it's done. The going rate for a developer who can do this is $20-40/month in the form of Claude/ChatGPT or Github Copilot. There are three ways to hit a sustainable equilibrium: - A wider gap between first- and third-plus-year compensation for computer science majors, driven mostly by a drop in first-year comp.
- A shift towards real-world skills in schools. This leads to a tradeoff, though: in both the finance and CS examples, the biggest companies have organized themselves around the need to get a large number of twenty-two-year-olds up to speed on their jobs. So this would have negative signaling value: it's essentially a way for people with top-tier credentials to increase their odds of getting non-top-tier offers, and of course employers will know this. There are already trade schools for programmers, and Excel/modeling prep courses for finance people, so it's also hard to see this as a new offering rather than a redesigned bundle.
- A change in the nature of compensation, where more entry-level employees are paid disproportionately in equity or have some of the cash component of their pay held back.
In the long run, one feature of growing industries is that the biggest pay premium they pay in absolute terms is to more senior people, who have developed plenty of unique skills, equity, personal connections, and have survived the inevitable career attrition of high-growth fields. But the biggest relative pay increase they offer—the place where there's the biggest percentage gap in compensation purely based on chosen career track—happens at the start. It's easy to overpay if you're confident that it positions you to be the high bidder for talent later on, when there's more certainty about what they're worth. Those early-career employees are a cheap call option on talent that's expensive to acquire later. When hiring slows down, that variance compresses, and the option value of the early hires takes a big hit. Adjusting takes time, for employers and employees, and sustained AI-driven growth in demand for developers might defer it. But that's eventually the direction such jobs go in: they still pay well, but part of what employers were paying for is an option they no longer need. It's analogous to the quantitative approach of having multiple signals that don't earn a profit after transaction costs, but which can be profitable in total if the same trade happens because three different signals say it should. The same hour of research can be meant to better understand a role someone's recruiting for, figure out the dynamics in an industry where a promising company is raising funds, and then turn into a newsletter issue. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/b9274051?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)In tech and finance, there are plenty of people who get hired without having done directly relevant work, but the best hires tend to be people with hobbies. They're just different hobbies. Launching a failed app and losing all of your savings trading soybean futures are two sides of the same coin—they're both demonstrations of an interest in the practicalities of the job, not just the knowledge taught in schools. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/2fdae110?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
You're on the free list for The Diff. Last week, paying subscribers read about Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. See a sampling of current open roles below: - A startup building a new financial market within a multi-trillion dollar asset class is looking for a junior ML engineer, especially someone interested in using LLMs to make unstructured data more tractable. (US, Remote)
- A blockchain-focused research and consulting firm is looking for an infrastructure engineer to secure their clients’ networks. Deep experience in DevOps, Linux systems, and Infrastructure-as-Code required; previous crypto experience preferred. (Remote)
- A CRM-ingesting startup is scaling its LLM-powered sales software, and needs someone with data science and engineering experience to get customers on-boarded. (NYC)
- A company building the new pension of the 21st century and building universal basic capital is looking for a senior frontend engineer. (NYC)
- A fintech company using AI to craft new investment strategies seeks a portfolio management associate with 2+ years of experience in trading or operations for equities or crypto. This is a technical role—FIX proficiency required, as well as Python, C#, and SQL. (NYC)Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up.
If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. ElsewhereGetting the Cycle RightIn late 2020 and early 2021, lumber prices roughly tripled as a rates-driven homebuilding boom coincided with a long period of underinvestment in sawmills. This ended up feeding into a supply-side inflation debate—maybe the impact of high deficit spending and zero rates would have been smaller in a world where companies spent more on capex and less on dividends and buybacks. But those recalcitrant reinvestors were ultimately vindicated: Regulatory Arbitrage in E-CommerceOne bear case on Amazon is that they can't match the price offered by Shein and Temu, which take advantage of Disclosure: Long AMZN. Dry Powder and Meta-StabilityThe Bank of International Settlements has the enviable job of publishing interesting research, holding conferences, and sometimes lecturing central bankers. They're doing a bit of option three by The Split MarketThe WSJ has a Transmission MechanismsOne place where it is very useful to think about constituents rather than aggregates is in measuring the impact of some policy effort to increase consumer spending. In China right now, |
||||||||||
|
|
|
||||||||||
|