---
subject: "The Nutgraf: Swiggy and Timidity"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-04-20 05:35:32
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Okay. Wow.
What exactly was the sequence of events that led to Swiggy’s decision across both these initiatives? A lot of you are probably imagining that there was a high-level meeting among Swiggy’s leadership which concluded with, “Right, so we’ve decided that we’re going to make our delivery partners hunt for lost dogs and cats… but if they waste too much time and can’t deliver orders, we are going to take away their health insurance. Super. Lunch?”
Of course, that’s probably not what actually happened. Swiggy is a large, complicated company with multiple people working on several things at the same time, usually without the knowledge of each other. In fact, they are probably consoling themselves that the timing screwed them over—it was bad luck that both these pieces of news broke in the same week.
In some ways, that’s true. But I’ve also worked at tech companies and seen how teams and leaders make decisions that lead to all kinds of unintended consequences. So my diagnosis is different from just poor PR or bad timing. Swiggy has all the classic symptoms of a much more serious problem for an organisation—timidity.
Timidity isn’t really discussed much, especially in Indian businesses. Broadly, it’s when a company chooses to be conservative by default, and prefers slow and decisive over fast and unconventional. Timid companies prize consensus over conflict. They believe that it’s better to be safe and dull than sharp and distinct. These values manifest across all aspects of the company—its products, marketing, and organisational decisions.
If this definition feels a bit broad, it’s because we’re still figuring this out. Just last month, Harvard Business Review published an article titled ‘The Curse of the Timid Retail Transformation’. In it, the author describes timidity as an affliction prevalent in offline retail chains in the US and defines it as, “defending the status quo… often breathlessly extolling various and sundry new initiatives, while also closing hundreds of stores and cycling through many rounds of cost reductions”. That doesn’t sound too different from what Swiggy is doing. Just last month, my colleague, Gaurav, [wrote a wonderful story](https://the-ken.com/story/swiggy-used-to-be-a-playground-for-innovation-now-its-a-graveyard/) about how Swiggy has prioritised profitability over innovation, and what it means for the company.
Because Timidity is hard to measure, most companies ignore it entirely or write it off as a fanciful opinion. Which makes sense—because timid companies usually prize data over everything else (more on this later). However, timidity is quite easy and apparent to those outside a company, and even inside it. It’s hard to describe its constituents accurately, but it’s a combination of the company’s marketing, its CEO’s external presence, the environment, and possibly its business performance. And despite the fact that it cannot be measured, there’s a striking amount of consensus—everyone can agree which companies are timid and which ones are not.
A few times a year, my colleague Ruhi and I conduct leadership workshops with executives at top companies in India. One of the exercises we do is to present a list of companies and ask participants to describe the emotions they make them feel. There’s a lot of consensus around timidity. It’s an inherent trait of companies. And often, it shows up for companies that don’t evoke any specific emotion. They are unremarkable. Ask anyone which is the timid company—Paytm or Phonepe—and most people will choose Phonepe. Meesho is less timid than Flipkart, which is less timid than Amazon. Zomato, Dukaan, and Boat are almost never described as timid companies. A notable exception is Cred, which has done such a fabulous job of being loud and flashy that people forget how timid it actually is. Cred is like that friend that’s aggressively dancing with all the drunk people at the house party, but is actually stone sober. You can try this out with your friends. The results are consistent. We all know timid companies when we see them, even if we can’t precisely describe them using a model or a framework.
Which brings us to an important question—is timidity an inherent feature of a company?
In some ways, it’s a conscious choice, but it’s also driven by circumstances.
I’ve worked at companies that turned timid and conservative. Whenever this has happened, it’s usually after a big leadership churn. A new set of leaders get hired from the outside to replace those who’ve just left. When these new leaders walk in, they don’t quite understand the business, nor what the company stands for. They also don’t quite know each other or who their allies are. Their positions aren’t quite cemented, and so they choose to be conservative. They don’t make crazy, difficult decisions. They prefer doing safe things with consensus and don’t want to paint a target on their back. Over time, the teams below them imitate them, and timidity goes from being temporary to permanent.
Incidentally, here’s what’s been going on at Swiggy...
This is an abbreviated version of The Nutgraf emailed to Free Users.