---
subject: "Monthly Roundup #32: July 2025"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-07-21 11:52:15
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Welcome to the monthly roundup of things that don’t fit into other categories and don’t rise to the level of their own posts. Bad NewsWhen people tell you who they are, believe them (with obvious exceptions). In particular, Did you know
This does seem like a good heuristic:
There are cases where the person is actually asking nicely and they clearly are hoping you tell them yes, as in ‘have you done this procedure before?’ or ‘are you familiar with [X] method?’ That’s different. When someone says this in a way that clearly implies that they think the answer is no and they are using that to dismiss you, then yeah, doesn’t matter, it will change nothing, and you should likely write them off whether or not you can answer yes. Government WorkingI am doing my best to avoid commenting on politics. As usual my lack of comment on other fronts should not be taken to mean I lack strong opinions on them. Yet sometimes, things reach a point where I cannot fail to point them out. If you are looking to avoid such things, I have split out this section, so you can skip it.
Which demands the obvious question, why the hell are we only doing this now? As per
It doesn’t have to be game designers. Ordinary capitalists should be fully equipped to reason this out. Click-to-cancel, which I agree with Sheel Mohnot was by far the best thing Lina Khan did at the FTC,
Sir, when she had a job you complained, how you complain again, please make up your goddamned mind. Also offer me a click so I can cancel.
Jones Act Watch
Meanwhile, you know how the Jones Act was supposed to promote American shipbuilding? Instead, the beneficiaries of the Jones Act, via owning existing Jones Act ships, have enlisted the government to actively sabotage American shipbuilding even further.
I’d say ‘mask off moment,’ but it’s not. What mask?
That’s right. We literally got an offer to invest $20 billion in US shipbuilding, and the Trump administration said no, we won’t support that. No non-US-built ships can be used, and also no US ships can be built. Also tariffs on things like steel. So, no ships, then. Except the handful that exist, which get to profit. The corruption is staggering. It can always get worse. Prize Fund
The answer is (as always) transaction costs. At one point, I coordinated with Paul Christiano to put out an AI Alignment Prize. On a per dollar basis, I am confident we generated and highlighted excellent work. However, we also had to put in a ton of time evaluating all the entries. A lot of other would-be prizes will have a similar problem, and once you announce a prize people can get very persnickety about details. Also you have to use part of your social bandwidth to communicate the prize. However, yes, you should be doing it more. And I should be doing it more. One cool variant is to Dining Out
By comparison, on Caviar, I tested out a similar sized order, subtotal was $94, sales tax was over $8 and total charge was $109.03. I mean, you can be an idiot and press the Pay More button if you want, I suppose.
So I think this is still a mystery, that likely has more to do with how people rate restaurants when they are being charged a lot and are travelling? As in, you’re always happy to eat something at all, always frustrated by the price and options and conditions, so you end up around 2.5-3 star averages almost no matter what? I guess?
My understanding can be summarized this way: No matter where you go, average quality of food is way, way up. No matter where you go, the best available food is way, way up. No matter where you go, variety of available food or good food is way, way up. The average place is still far behind the better places, almost everywhere. You can eat fine basically everywhere there are people, at this point. This is all true regardless of your price level. The average and best available options still vary a lot from place to place. This difference matters, and can matter a lot. NYC is awesome here.
While I Cannot Condone ThisYes
Perhaps the supposedly ‘normal’ humans should also be doing more systematic study of how to do you do, fellow humans? They seem to have skipped over some things.
The parties like this were taken from me at the time (in the 90s and early 00s) and I never experienced them, but I did understand they existed and I was sad about this.
I strongly agree that the best way to get good results is to set things up to be easy, and that anyone who says any form of ‘you don’t need [X] you only need willpower’ is usually the asshole in a given situation. Engineering solutions are great. I still think the post goes too far in treating willpower as a non-useful concept. Willpower is a highly useful handle for an important tool that one can and should cultivate and learn how to use wisely. You can also choose to call it something else, if you prefer.
I too am strongly against lying but there are exceptions and this is one of them. Technical attestations with no legitimate purpose or ability to be enforced, and no person who is relying on them in any way to be accurate, don’t count. What are protests actually for? I think this model goes too far but is essentially correct, with the caveat that you can also credibly threaten things other than violence, but you have to credibly threaten something.
These are terrible examples. Clark Kent does not have an underconfidence problem with his powers at any point that I can see. He has a lack of control problem, which is a very real issue. He does have regular person underconfidence problems as Clark Kent, but that’s different. Peter Parker, in every example I have seen, is initially radically reckless and overconfident. He does things that risk getting him killed if he lacks Required Secondary Powers he has not yet verified.
Something to watch out for:
Good News, Everyone
He also highlights a comment from there noting that
The true gambling kings do remain Robinhood and Coinbase.
Opportunity Knocks
Antisocial MediaI strongly endorse this, although I doubt we’ll get it. AI parsing for topics is a bonus.
Indeed. I can think of a number of accounts where I highly value their opinions on [X], usually things like games or AI highly relevant to my interest, and very much do not value their comments on [Y], often political but sometimes simply something boring.
One did not simply post to classic LessWrong. It was so intimidating that I at the time was worried to post there, which I shouldn’t have been, but if you weren’t ready the response was super harsh, you would be effectively shown the door. There was tons of filtering. Even if you weren’t shown the door, you wouldn’t get to be a true part of the community, although you could still have for example gotten an early line on Bitcoin. There were also strong attractors. If you were the type of person who could be there, there was a substantial chance you ended up there. It’s true that there is a ‘invisible graveyard’ of other LessWrong people that would have been right at home and never found it, but I don’t think it is that much larger than the actual group. Same with MIRI. Going forward, for future groups, I expect the effects will be similar, so long as it remains humans who are shaping our future. Let’s hope that lasts.
I wonder about this situation, and what is really going on. As in, a good portion of those who see Brah’s post are going to notice that Freiman’s post saying ‘constant 2022 dollars’ right there in large friendly letters. I do think the true situation is more complicated than the chart suggests, but yes people are getting richer by these measures.
The solution is to rely instead on other markers. Stick almost entirely to curated following-or-listed-only feeds (did you know even YouTube, Facebook, Instagram and TikTok let you do this, if you dare go to all such places?), except where algorithms are very good. Social media likes and views are still a very rich indicator, but you have to control for circumstances, starting with the account posting but also the subject and the way it is constructed. With enough skill you can still get benefit out of them but it’s tricky. Technology Advances
In ‘it’s worse than you know’ news:
That is how badly it performs in a non-adversarial situation. This is how your age verification works when everyone is scanning their actual faces with no attempt to fool the system. If you’re facing kids who want to fool the system? I mean just give up, even if you mysteriously ruled out the ‘hey other kid can you do the verification for me’ strategy. Sonnet thought you could probably just literally use a fake mustache. I do not understand this either:
Also, really, Safari?
|