---
subject: "Markers for Truth"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-06-25 03:34:05
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
I have an interesting tool to share with you today. One that will fundamentally change how you see the world.
Before that, let me tell you about two events.
As a fresh graduate looking for work, I moved to Noida in 2022. I did get one, but it was a low-paying internship. Naturally, affordable metro trains became my preferred mode of conveyance. When times didn’t allow that, I would book a bike on Uber or Rapido.
On one of such rides, I got talking with the bike taxi driver. Linguistic sparks flew. We connected. Enough for him to open up about his life’s problems, including the particular app’s “high” commission rate.
While my ride fare was Rs 100, he received only Rs 82 when the ride ended. Seeing this, I paid him an extra Rs 20—with visible sympathy (and invisible ego). He thanked me. Our relationship ended there.
Then, on my way to my PG, I noticed a couple of ice-cream stalls and inquired if they had a Rs 10 chocobar. Neither of them had one at that price but at a minimum cost of Rs 20.
I didn’t think it was worth spending Rs 10 more, even though I had offered an extra Rs 20 to someone just five minutes before. When seen in isolation, the events project different realities.
The first event portrays me as a person from a “well-to-do household”. But, the second one makes up for an excellent nugget of my “struggling days” I could tell my kids in future about.
Both, however, don’t accurately reflect the truth. After all, the truth is elusive. We can only find the markers closest to it. A person’s purchases, wardrobe, etc., may be good markers of truth about their financial status. Or they may not, as evident in my examples above.
Similarly, the mark of a great reporter is when they identify the closest marker. And The Ken takes pride in having many such reporters. Take Arundhati, for one.
In September last year, when Byju’s claimed that its yet-to-be-released FY21-22 revenue was Rs 10,000 crore, she was sceptical. This week, hours before her [explosive](https://the-ken.com/story/its-now-indian-lenders-turn-to-pile-misery-on-byjus/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) story was to be published, a Byju’s spokesperson told her it was Rs 9,000 crore.
But Arundhati had already identified the closest marker to the truth. Her sources, which included Byju’s current and former employees and an edtech investor, pegged its revenue closer to Rs 7,000 crore. If you’ve been trying to figure out why Byju’s is in the news again, this is a must-read.
My other colleagues found the closest markers, too, on different subjects this week.
Gaurav [reported](https://the-ken.com/story/https-the-ken-com-story-sachin-bansals-flipkart-baggage-weighs-navi-down/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) how Sachin Bansal’s Flipkart baggage is weighing his fintech, Navi, down. Bansal’s refusal to allow VC money into Navi due to his Flipkart experience is presenting Navi with capital constraints no other Indian fintech has faced yet.
Nadine [brought](https://the-ken.com/story/indonesias-vcs-learn-to-ditch-global-tax-havens-for-local-roots/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) her conversations with various venture capitalists (VC) to the table. Growing uncertainties in the global VC industry are reigniting the call for a robust local VC industry in Indonesia.
Seema brought to light Recykal’s Abhay Deshpande, who believes w-commerce can be bigger than e-commerce. Now, Recykal has invested Rs 100 crore in a method that, says Deshpande, can change India’s waste industry forever. Find out how [here](https://the-ken.com/story/turning-indias-trash-into-cash-is-not-a-clean-business-recykals-abhay-deshpande/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter).
Van [reported](https://the-ken.com/story/india-to-vietnam-apples-online-store-strikes-resellers-again/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) how Apple’s entry into Vietnam with its official online store is threatening the businesses of local Apple-authorised resellers in the Apple-loving country—drawing parallels from what happened in India almost three years ago.
To wrap things up, as a close marker to the truth about an individual’s financial status, I’ve found, is [this tool](https://wid.world/income-comparator) developed by the World Inequality Database, which reveals where you stand on the entire spectrum if you enter your income or wealth. I found it in this insightful [piece](https://caravanmagazine.in/economy/india-inequality-denial-middle-class-one-percent) by the economist Reetika Khera. Do check them out and let me know what you think.
Regards,
Rahul
[rahul@the-ken.com](mailto:rahul@the-ken.com)
What you just read is the personalised daily introduction to The Ken's story. Written by a different person each day. Often insightful, sometimes witty, and very rarely boring. Someone sent this to you? [Sign up for free](https://the-ken.com/?modal=register&utm_source=footer&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=morning_email_ind_recap). [Dont like these? You can unsubscribe](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/unsubscribe/?user_id=2349339&data=KPpRuXLvxn_SQiRv3SvI6QqTSe-52LASIpAO3m1u0JZoMDAwdTAwMBxpfl8yk_IcB39u6h9zUvIlevTaWMRgOQYY1_UsB19TTw6wypW5UgrZsVA1grS4D1_vYcJ8WHBu3Bjj2m_eyVwEev67GD9npqEr-Jsa2pzdnALuJPD1xHnh1Mcb5dN0r8hd6BnLNmrQ20YIUXzmuQbDkdeHHrLc7y0knPTipJvsAKnzQBB1Rh-rpOBKY-soqOLqLSqM8ro-JnouKH3SJSqS6rNoPGRY-ful2QR0OIM-RGSB8ffr-85rRUBeytSbhhiOnDax-TUZT6qyKDp5QtGytsVwZpQJLvT6TGYo2-f-KBsAiXo9_qkbYAhUOW5PJaZfSNu4dKNR_aPGJnrwpKk6vyIXs3pN1SZrgvfNzWrJzkZbxit57jWjuXbbTAuBLlKfJwnBA-PZHD6ukflLXf6Z8OzRNsnyvIKDenopyMF6DkCr0pCMvU-IZjBvqBhmTBAMMTlzWFWmyGzqeWoWrb59gCoBsNVI8_F9s-v8uh1Q2CPl4zGss62TE2lyPuHCvrjqJwZWDVNlWlGfGn-yV_0=) Dont want to hear from us again? [ Unsubscribe from our emails here](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/?user_id=2349339&data=DAtukIcxNpDTff6EN4hB33BMLNm6EtGIaakUeDFh7KpoMDAwdTAwMJOOjSzy-6QdB74Noz8YWLjsNdIg5JGOK5lnC1yuicbZaN3a8I9ChXccGiy9T5lws-4b4skwe97JXkstEjAFsBdfNG0_D1w6n2QZ3bo7UHOoveL2mQE9zwuwe72fu88NFYq0A8HYDtIgOkqraci7rQgsm8UyY75UyeP6HSvJ94Hbug-MVKeegKbZma-IeSXrzp4TqXZCCLcLo22NuQjGvD1eJLSS1gMUMvY_GStPv7xmn-4cERoC-0CakRxL3RII7ah-vAKURnsVCMlddfJcGtu5hNi_6tI6S0pSo_NM9P3-tvwtHn48j7FVV2SwtcQg66zkArXwp4bQLa6ajSHlHzEm6Rgnlt8MGZT8wY0tVoh8nzmVv3ebPxNiGoYnJBUReb1_lTRXy5yRrzzvlHQPum7HJ5JNNtXtasvskydw5h9luGSXRAnRwHRWkOypnmaFS9trLJB0E0B_58ehOI5SktqMCiadt3m1gEsPJZhZxMfMzNXKHmqUZsrZKoWcK6jnmQ==).
Something wrong? Tell us at [support@the-ken.com](mailto:support@the-ken.com)