---
subject: "The Nutgraf: AI sells swords at dawn and shields at dusk"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-06-28 04:32:05
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
I’m writing this week’s edition from the hills of Meghalaya, in Cherrapunji. Yesterday, I trekked to one of the more famous living root bridges in the area—this one was a double-decker. To get there, I had to descend an endless series of thousands of steps into a valley (I have blanked out the pain and agony of the return journey).
In the end, it was all worth it, because we got this incredible view mostly all to ourselves.
Oh, also, we had an incredible event at the Bangalore International Centre on fitness and health last Saturday. Viren, Nisha, and Abby—our wonderful panelists—were warm, funny in the discussion, and gave thoughtful answers to the questions posed by the attendees. I think this was easily the most engaging of the three events we’ve done so far.
A lot of subscribers have written in, asking us to livestream our events. Maybe someday we will, but right now, we’re trying to make the event experience work physically, before figuring out how to make it engaging for those who are not at the venue.
Our next event is in July, and if you’re in Bengaluru, I hope you can attend.
Let’s just say it’s about a topic that’s close to my heart and career, and something I’ve written about several times in The Nutgraf.
With those updates, on to today’s edition.
Around a couple of weeks ago, I put up a job opening at The Ken for a Product Designer. I did the usual thing—wrote a job description, promoted it on Linkedin, and added a few screening questions to help identify which applicants needed to be shortlisted for subsequent interviews. I’ve done this countless times while hiring.
At The Ken, we’ve learned (mostly the hard way) how to filter out non-serious applicants: by writing better job descriptions and crafting sharper screening questions. Nothing too crazy—for instance, for the Product Designer job, we ask candidates stuff like what their favourite product is, why they love it, and what they would change about it. Standard questions. Because the first step demands real introspection and clarity, only a handful apply—but they tend to be serious, high-quality candidates.
This time, though, something changed.
We got way more applicants than we expected—probably 10X the usual. As you’ve probably guessed by now, artificial intelligence (AI) is responsible for this. What were once screening questions are now just ChatGPT prompts. The “friction” which prevented anyone from shooting off an application has gone away, so obviously, this has led to a surge in applicants. In the past, I’ve written about how AI-generated text was easy to identify, arguing that humans would develop a heightened level of sensitivity and awareness for “human-like” attributes in content.
The Ken’s premium audio experience is here!
From original podcasts to writer-narrated versions of our subscriber newsletters, you can now listen to The Ken each day. Discover them all at [the-ken.com/podcasts](http://the-ken.com/podcasts).
Existing Premium subscribers? You already have FULL access to ALL of our premium audio. They are available exclusively via our subscriber apps. If you don’t have them, just download one and log in to unlock everything. Premium subscribers on the app can listen to the latest episode of The Nutgraf here.
Not a Premium subscriber? You can subscribe to [The Ken Premium](https://podcasts.apple.com/in/channel/the-ken-premium/id6744577070) on Apple Podcasts for an easy monthly price (Rs 299 in India). The channel will include ALL our premium podcasts and audio.
That was two years ago. The technology has gotten better since then and has started to mimic humans more closely. So I’ve changed my approach too. Instead of trying to look for the telltale signs of whether what I’m reading is written by AI, I tried to judge the answer on its merit, i.e., is it sharp, original, and worth reading?
For the past two weeks, my daily calendar has included a recurring task: read through dozens of applications from the day before, spend an hour or two reviewing their screening answers. Out of the 700 applications, I’ve already rejected 630 candidates based solely on their screening question responses. That’s a 90% rejection rate before a single interview round.
A few days ago, while dutifully slogging through screening responses and disqualifying candidates, I caught myself thinking, “This is exactly the kind of thing an AI should be doing.” I figured I could train an AI to filter for responses that met my bar for being sharp, interesting and authentic, and let it eliminate the rest.
The more I think about it, the more I’m convinced this is the future of content.
Long-time subscribers of this newsletter know that I have a considerable amount of AI skepticism. My skepticism isn’t about what AI can or cannot do as a technology —it’s about whether any of it will actually make our lives, or the world, meaningfully better as a society.
Sure, there may be some areas where AI can do things that are actually useful, but nowhere is my distrust of AI more pronounced than for content creation. And there’s a simple reason for that: AI makes everything about content creation worse.
Broadly, I classify content creation as all forms of media: newsletters, books, articles, podcasts, video, movies, essays, Linkedin posts, and so on. All of these are going to get (this has already begun) much worse thanks to generative AI.
When people wonder why this is happening, it’s because there’s a straightforward explanation at the heart of it—technology’s purpose is to eliminate inefficiencies. Computers made sending information from one place to another much easier and faster. Social networks made it much more efficient for us to find out what our friends were up to. Mobile phones made it easier for us to communicate with anyone, to buy things or call cabs to our location. These are real inefficiencies in the world, which technologies solved for us. Sure, solving for these inefficiencies led to other outcomes like screen addiction, anxiety, depression, but the purpose of the technology was to address an existing inefficiency, which it more or less did.
Content creation is different. In content creation, the only inefficiency is the time it takes to create something, which isn’t a bug, but a feature. In eliminating the inefficiency, AI ends up killing the very product it’s meant to improve.
If you are still unconvinced, ask yourself: what inefficiency does AI address in content creation?
It’s certainly not volume. About 500,000 hours of video is uploaded on Youtube everyday. If you watched it back to back, it would take you about 60 years. There have been about 130 million books ever written, with about three million new books published every year. You could spend hours scrolling Instagram reels, and still never come across the same one twice. Go and check out the number of unlistened podcasts on your feed. Or newsletters that you’ve bookmarked to read sometime. Or the ever-growing watchlist full of movies and TV shows you swear you’ll get to—one day.
That’s an absurd volume of content.
It already feels infinite, even though it’s all still made by humans
Now imagine what happens when AI enters the picture.
One possibility is that AI’s utility isn’t about quantity, but quality, i.e., it will make all content better. I doubt it. If generative AI is fundamentally trained to predict the next most probable word or phrase, why should we expect it to create things in completely unexpected ways? Also, exactly what content is not being consumed right now because of poor quality?
Once you eliminate everything, you are left with just one option—AI’s only utility is to kill the discomfort and the thinking part of content creation, making it easy for anyone to create any kind of content. Previously, it required a certain amount of discipline to write a book, even a bad book. Now anyone can write a book during their lunch break. In fact, Amazon is already swamped by people selling completely AI-generated books.
Humans took content and made it practically infinite.
AI will simply make it even more infinite.
A tidal wave of content is headed straight for us, and most people have no idea what’s about to hit them. Soon, Instagram will be able to autonomously create, edit, and upload reels of your favourite creator, even in their absence. The Linkedin thought pundits can increase their throughput to infinity overnight. If you thought there were a lot of videos on Youtube, wait till the machines take over.
When content creation explodes, I think the real utility of AI in content won’t be in its creation, but in defending humans against the deluge of content that’s coming their way. Some people call this “content curation,” but I think “content firewall” is a better way to think about it.
First, AI is used to remove every obstacle to human creation—including humans themselves—to generate infinite content. Then, ironically, AI is deployed again to shield our time and attention from that very flood.
There’s already evidence that this is happening today. Today, millions of companies now use AI to exponentially scale their sales outreach: more calls, more emails, more attempts to sell personal loans, car insurance, and everything in between. And on the flip side, consumer-facing platforms use AI to filter and protect humans from the overwhelming wave they’ve helped unleash. As an example, Airtel launched a spam detection feature a few months back, which was…powered by AI. This is the future.
All of this sounds like my favourite science-fiction stories coming true, but in a twisted way. In the Terminator movies, humans sent back reprogrammed machines to protect humans from machines who wanted to kill them. In Pacific Rim (another of my favourite movies), to fight monsters, humans created monsters of their own.
I’ll go back to the example I originally shared—that of my Product Designer hiring. In an earlier world, I’d get 50 applicants, eliminate about 30 of them, and interview maybe 20. Today, I get 500 applicants, use AI to eliminate about 480 of them, and interview… 20 candidates. I’m back where I started, except both the candidates and I have paid AI companies for something neither of us signed up for.
The tragedy is that AI companies profit from both sides of the world they’ve created. On one hand, they’ll charge people to create huge volumes of cheap, low-quality content, and then they’ll charge humans to protect them from it.
Net-net, we’ll end up in a world that’s not much different from earlier—except that there’s a tax paid on both sides.
AI companies will sell swords at dawn and shields at dusk.
Regards,
Praveen Gopal Krishnan
P.S. By the way, I’m still hiring for a great Product Designer, so if you know someone, do send them this [link](https://the-ken.com/jobs/product-designer/) and ask them to apply? Every application is (for now) read and evaluated by humans.