---
subject: "Old things, new shapes"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-07-16 03:32:08
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
Scams and scamsters are one of those human civilisational constants, I think. Like trade. Or taxes. In fact, I bet the first time a bunch of homo sapiens got together to do “team things”, there were already people in the group trying to do all three.
Example: before 21st-century Nigerian princes started offering us diamond mines in exchange for pocket money, there were already ‘wealthy Spanish prisoners’ in 18th-century Europe offering fortunes in exchange for emergency ‘bail’. This particular scam may even trace its origins further back in time, according to [this 1898 article](https://www.nytimes.com/1898/03/20/archives/an-old-swindle-revived-the-spanish-prisoner-and-buried-treasure.html) from The New York Times.
As for financial fraud, the first recorded instance goes all the way back to 3rd-century BCE Greece, when a couple of Greek sailors took out insurance on their cargo and then tried to sink an empty boat and cash out. They got caught. (The event is detailed in Alick R W Harrison’s [The Law of Athens](https://books.google.co.in/books/about/The_Law_of_Athens.html?id=U6YLAQAAIAAJ&redir_esc=y).)
Scams. Trade. Taxes. They were around thousands of years ago. They’re around now.
Take our Monday story by Pratap. He details how cybercrime syndicates in India pay and manipulate advertising platforms such as Google’s and Meta’s to scam and extort users. Right now, Indian laws allow such platforms to take shelter by designating them as “intermediaries”, but [given that they get paid](https://the-ken.com/story/google-facebook-wrestle-with-crime-syndicates-unending-love/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) for posting ads, there are calls to hold them directly accountable.
On Tuesday, Kaushal wrote about how the Indian government is tightening the tax screws on royalties sent to foreign parent firms by their Indian subsidiaries. The quantum of royalty payments sent by Indian firms overseas has not gone down well with minority shareholders and proxy advisory firms. But companies defend them as [a business necessity](https://the-ken.com/story/mncs-easy-access-to-payments-from-india-units-faces-tax-hurdles/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter).
Wednesday’s story by Isabel, meanwhile, details how an incurable disease is ravaging the Philippines—not one infecting humans, but banana crops. Estimates made by a local industry body suggest that up to 40% of banana plantations in the country—Asia’s top banana exporter—have already been affected by the Panama wilt. The Philippines is scrambling to develop ways to contain its spread, [turning to](https://the-ken.com/story/in-war-1-fungi-destroyed-philippine-bananas-in-war-2-ai-robots-try-to-save-4b-industry/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) tech-like robots and artificial intelligence.
On Thursday, Seetharaman and Anand wrote about Reliance Retail and the dashed hopes of investors who had picked up the company’s unlisted shares on the grey market. The company would eventually go public, some investors believed, making them quite a profit. But [that’s not what has happened](https://the-ken.com/story/reliance-retail-goes-from-poster-child-for-unlisted-shares-to-cautionary-tale/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter).
And for our final long-form story of the week, on Friday, we had Gaurav write about how India’s venture-debt market is becoming an increasingly attractive proposition for startups looking for cash amidst the VC funding slump. Intensifying competition has spurred venture-debt funds to not only collaborate but also align on deal terms such as interest rates. But the relaxation of certain thumb rules makes it more difficult for startup founders and funds [to strike agreeable terms](https://the-ken.com/story/venture-debt-funds-step-in-to-bridge-vc-gap-terms-and-conditions-apply/).
That’s a wrap for this week. We’ll be back tomorrow with a brand-new deep dive piece.
Take care.
Regards,
Jonathan Ananda
[jonathan@the-ken.com](mailto:jonathan@the-ken.com)
What you just read is the personalised daily introduction to The Ken's story. Written by a different person each day. Often insightful, sometimes witty, and very rarely boring. Someone sent this to you? [Sign up for free](https://the-ken.com/?modal=register&utm_source=footer&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=morning_email_ind_recap). [Dont like these? You can unsubscribe](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/unsubscribe/?user_id=2349339&data=mwLZcj-x5dcDqsquNqXS4_EnXPEt75IeTIegmthSYZRoMDAwdTAwMKYBxmZgV9zP-4kAHVG-eb6LghG--JFqLSt00gwQF8SN2HMesX-xvTikuIgTv5RRDW7t3ev73-YkaBp1vgwS4vSn9ogZFM74iXEPSj6VCU1cqON3XyrDFZOBlXHOl15oCtUuNF3sjwl5IJBxa1l62Su-X1tQDtePauXHorPwBTJZtIwwED1dOofcF3MAxJmO8CmmSvDnV5iWQ0cbDdgxWmXJipgGk597u8KhboVoiXVfeObjxnbNrYaOA3NMi-39iuk9-hWH0Fg0s0LU3qHjRyS7APUlS1iOSOLGXyI-VUuygybgPmUmQqB9aiXShevxthdhW_N9uLFkoCfFMRyi6BxxUlX6XduIn-uaQBh1wjUodNoO1VR_Di4OsV39c6iYFcoE1pqEX4Ub3rvcHA2psgP3plVS1jLQPW4jcvT5dOk919R9Obw4mEFFXF4U_HvKtz7uekGYr6QN3Q4V80G1cb7ZeFVp0yhqqdI9fYVBcRK3vQ8tTOV-6nRA8IuWk8iGVar4J2Fc-tjzsFiuUV1MYbI=) Dont want to hear from us again? [ Unsubscribe from our emails here](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/?user_id=2349339&data=QX5L4gzdk71UUJPw75hkgn1nW55KxgZxeVK2qsRLnptoMDAwdTAwMNtTDslLhbd8APxWLCIQfqL3y0fICfiNQqnRpEJfZvtNVM5FilXr9Nys-1GndwdWpOmeaXDu-KntWeSsS_Z2-QXHPt-ii0bXlkUR1l20y5jr0OZSQFSqPqttU73oKo-RvkMH_yJa0lVcqu78XYEOmCzgx34JnmGPSOJuoCF7VBfTgebN5ZQgSdE69iN6H4N0sjWjdYjT7FgL2S31YCyv68oPDBN0Bt5OyD2BigpxvIU-edEJdt0chfKcf_EzGUyv-9lq6-UI-jtIuwgggXcLBQ7vE0wSfP977hvQ-w4hxT8ONHJ-1rEsVl2aYQ5-FREkdGvr9JE0GdydXMCDrwuzBwOsP6app63V0t_NfexW0nwU3IxvhtzTOvp9BEtSmJ5oC4dMgS6c-JoRoYA_3QyZmtarOg2rdJ0nwjKtwmW62GkedffW6JZZBwHSnGZmR0j-X5DCfAQNYLKKgcGVjxXZbocpS_ztw4LdWBoABdk0hwyjayrJXq6MiyO_-7X6R6fj6Q==).
Something wrong? Tell us at [support@the-ken.com](mailto:support@the-ken.com)