---
subject: "Spirits of the Republic"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-07-06 13:00:59
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
The United States Constitution has been through all sorts of difficult tests in its two and a quarter centuries. It weathered the Nullification Crisis, in which South Carolina refused to comply with federal tariffs; the Civil War, which tore the country apart and killed 600,000 Americans; and the elections of 1824 and 1876, when the Electoral College failed to deliver a clear winner and winners were chosen through “corrupt bargains.” And future historians will, hopefully, think of the last decade as another set of crises that the Constitution has survived. The very first test of the Constitution came when the document’s ink was barely dry. In 1794, hundreds of armed insurrectionists in Pennsylvania tarred and feathered tax collectors and burned down a government official’s house. In response, George Washington ordered thousands of militiamen to march against the rebels. The rebellion quickly crumbled, but it was an important moment in American history. It turned out to be one of the first rounds in our eternal national debate over how strong the federal government should be. In this case, federalists like Alexander Hamilton won out over anti-federalists like Thomas Jefferson. What made Pennsylvanian farmers angry enough that they were willing to rise up in an insurrection? The government was coming after their whiskey. This weird illustration, dating to 1791, shows what Americans were willing to do to protect the whiskey trade — on the right, a tax collector has seized some barrels of whiskey from farmers; on the left, the farmers are hanging him — and blowing up a keg of whiskey underneath him for good measure (and, well, in the middle, an odd little monster hooks him like a fish. I didn’t say it was a realistic depiction of events). The Whiskey Rebellion of 1794 was an early salvo in the battle over how powerful the federal government should be, but that’s not why I want to talk about it today. That short-lived insurrection also showed how important alcoholic beverages were to American culture and economics. When we think about the history of alcohol in America, we tend to focus on Prohibition, which was, to be sure, a fascinating moment in American history. But Prohibition didn’t come out of nowhere. So this week, we’re going to look back further. Since our founding, Americans have been a nation deeply conflicted about alcohol — many of us consume the stuff in immense quantities, but there’s always been an uneasiness about the role that alcohol plays in American life. The first thing to know is that early America was awash in alcohol. Even the Puritans, abstemious about so many things, drank all the time and considered alcohol to be a gift from God. In fact, the Mayflower only ended up in Massachusetts because the ship was running out of beer. The sailors, who had to make a return trip across the Atlantic, As Bruce Bustard
Even though some of the alcoholic beverages they drank weren’t as strong as they are today, early Americans
There were two reasons for the prevalence of alcohol in early America. First, plain water was often unsafe to drink, and people distrusted it (this was especially true on ships like the Mayflower, where the water would stagnate and fester for weeks on end). But it was also true that life for most people was pretty boring, and the work they did was repetitive and painful. Alcohol made life easier and provided calories to boot. But from the very beginning, Americans had a love-hate relationship with alcohol. Increase Mather
George Washington was one of Virginia’s most important whiskey makers. He won elections and kept his troops happy by giving out alcohol liberally. But he also understood its drawbacks. This
Washington wasn’t the only founder to have suspicions about alcohol. Benjamin Franklin wrote,
He published the “
Benjamin Rush, a Philadelphia physician who signed the Declaration of Independence, became one of the early champions of what would later be called the temperance movement. In 1785, he wrote an essay called “An Inquiry Into the Effects of Ardent Spirits Upon the Human Body and Mind,” which included a “thermometer” to measure the effects of various beverages. As you can see below, water and milk bring health, wealth, and serenity. Cider and wine induce cheerfulness and strength, while the hard stuff — much of which is delightfully named: toddy, crank, grog, flip, shrub, hysteric water, etc. — can cause anything from idleness to epilepsy to “SUICIDE,” “DEATH,” and the “GALLOWS.” John Chapman was born just before the American Revolution in Massachusetts, but he seems to have been lured west from an early age. At 18, he took his 11-year-old half-brother across the Appalachian frontier to live a nomadic lifestyle. Chapman devoted much of his life to spreading a single crop across the American heartland. Because he was responsible for planting countless apple trees in Pennsylvania, Ohio, Indiana, and other states — sometimes just scattering seeds wherever he walked — he entered American folklore as Johnny Appleseed. Unlike Paul Bunyan and other subjects of American tall tales, Johnny Appleseed was a real person who had a real impact on the growing country. Apples did not exist in the New World before people like Chapman planted them. When I learned his story as a kid, I assumed the apples he planted were for eating — but it seems that they were for drinking. He was planting varieties of apples that would only be useful for fermenting. Apple cider was the Mount may have made this image as a bit of political commentary. The 1840 presidential election was all about hard cider. The Democrats attacked the Whig candidate, William Henry Harrison, for being an old and simple frontiersman. Harrison leaned into the depiction, presenting himself as a humble farmer who preferred log cabins and hard cider to fancy Washington life (this was a bit of political spin — he really lived in a Soon, publications were full of images of Harrison tapping barrels of hard cider: Hard cider marked Harrison as a man of the people, in contrast to the aloof Martin Van Buren. Harrison won the election quite easily. Associations with alcohol weren’t good for every presidential candidate. Franklin Pierce was a notorious drunk, and was mocked as such in this 1852 cartoon. In the illustration, a Quaker from Maine — which by this point had passed a state prohibition of alcohol — tells Pierce: “That tree looks as if it was old enough to stand alone--Thee needn't hold it up any longer." Pierce responds by toasting him. By the way — notice the barrel of hard cider on the Quaker’s horse? It’s probably a reference to the Whigs’ campaign of 1840, and perhaps a hint that Maine prohibitionists weren’t on the up-and-up. By the middle of the 1800s, as we have seen, there was plenty of discourse about alcohol. Most Americans drank heavily, but these habits worried people who feared that a country awash in alcohol would be morally and economically weak. A temperance movement sprang up, pushing for laws like the one in Maine. In the 1830s, anti-alcohol activists formed the “Cold Water Army,” in which they recruited children to take a pledge to abstain from alcohol: Temperance activists used a number of clever concepts to persuade their fellow Americans to give up drink. Nathaniel Currier published “The Drunkard’s Progress” in 1846, in which the road to ruin begins with “a glass with a friend” and ends with crime, suicide, and a bereft family: Others used botanical imagery. This 1855 “tree of temperance” bore fruit like contentment, industry, and morality: While the tree of intemperance offers up arson, famine, incontinence, and more. A devilish serpent encircles the tree with an apple in its mouth and a crown of beer on its head. Currier & Ives made a prettier version of these trees a few years later: Perhaps my favorite visual representation of the effects of alcohol is this map by John Wiltberger, published in 1838. The lands of “Inebriation” feature landmarks like the Penitentiary River and Gloom Point, which looks out over the Sea of Anguish: Meanwhile, take a trip on the Tee-Total Railroad into the lands of “Self-Denial,” and you will reach Friendship and Serenity. And who knows — you might find yourself in the College Hills! I also quite like this 1871 anti-alcohol “ad” for the “Dead River” railroad, which stops at Sneakville, Cursington, Thieves Gully, Murderer’s Gulch, and Delirium Falls. By the time the fake railroad ad above was posted, the American debate over alcohol was growing in volume and vociferousness. The temperance movement was gaining steam — by 1850, This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are three ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: You can share the newsletter with others: You can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week! You're currently a free subscriber to |