---
subject: "The Plastikman Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-12-06 13:07:47
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Colin here. When you’re looking at the history of techno music, there’s no shortage of innovation. It’s a genre that was born from bold thinkers, incredible musicians, and cross-pollination—evolved as a global dialogue bridging places like Detroit, Berlin, London, Tbilisi, and beyond. But within the evolution of techno, there’s one figure that stands out as driving the culture and sound forward, as well as audio-visual experimentation: Richie Hawtin. WITI Classifieds: We are experimenting with running some weekly classifieds in WITI. If you’re interested in running an ad, Nudge, get customer insights with ease. Royal Braun connects cutting edge companies with key creative talent. Coaching for creative professionals who want deeper personal insight, a conviction in their work, and to make waves in the art world. You like interesting things: come check out Nautilus. Science storytelling with style. Also, a holiday gift for the brightest you know. Originally from Windsor, Ontario, he brought massive creative energy to the second wave of Detroit's techno scene and has since grown into an ambassador of the form. He’s had an incredible impact, both with the music he’s created under countless guises (including the super reductionist Plastikman), the music that he’s released from the Minus label, as well as the One of his recent songs, a collaboration with noted pianist Chilly Gonzalez, stopped me in my tracks while driving. I heard the familiar tones and textures of Plastikman: moody, brooding, and elegantly reductionist. But, in what I thought was an accident or a DJ blending tracks, there was also a delicate, beautiful piano playing across the top. It just worked, in the most delightful and unexpected way. It was gentle, dissociative, and quite simply, inspired. Why is this interesting? Turns out this was the entire idea! According to the
The juxtaposition of Chilly Gonzalez and his beautiful piano playing, and Hawtin’s bare-bones, lumbering techno just managed to work. According to the
The piano sits atop the original composition so gently, and so beautifully, that it seems like it was there from the start. The magic here is one musician instinctively reacting to—and finding space within—another producer's already completed work. And in doing so, something new and immensely interesting is created. Listen to the track here. (CJN) |