---
subject: "AI #132 Part 1: Improved AI Detection"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-09-04 15:28:59
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
One result of going on vacation was that I wasn’t able to spin events off into focused posts this week, so I’m going to fall back on splitting the weekly instead, plus some reserving a few subtopics for later posts, including AI craziness ( That still leaves tons of other stuff. Table of Contents[Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/fc302a4f-d57c-4090-aea9-54f5e0cba3e8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)How much improvement have we seen?[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/784d7b4f-e4b1-4e88-8761-98e403abced3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Writing taste remains elusive.[On Your Marks.](https://substack.com/redirect/6863682b-bbbe-4433-ab72-a5846bf8c00c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Opus 4.1 on METR graph, werewolf, WeirdML, flash fiction.[Choose Your Fighter.](https://substack.com/redirect/7fe2d611-73bf-4559-91d0-a43697f6e619?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The right way to use the right fighter, and a long tail.[Fun With Media Generation.](https://substack.com/redirect/efac425d-7cf0-4622-bbd7-188958363a24?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Justine Moore’s slate of AI creative tools.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon](https://substack.com/redirect/13595c29-4b8e-4e0b-9422-12ad5be79bd2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/13595c29-4b8e-4e0b-9422-12ad5be79bd2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Maybe AI detectors work after all?[Don’t Be Evil.](https://substack.com/redirect/e8df63da-03b0-4b02-a12a-1b2b5bb4370d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Goonbots are one thing, but at some point you draw the line.[They Took Our Jobs](https://substack.com/redirect/08374bf2-7d19-4ee9-8d17-6ed5e2879625?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/08374bf2-7d19-4ee9-8d17-6ed5e2879625?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A second finding suggests junior hiring is suffering.[School Daze.](https://substack.com/redirect/8d1f5578-3a4c-4993-8518-2989a3ee74ef?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)What do you need to learn in order to be able to learn [from AIs]?[The Art of the Jailbreak.](https://substack.com/redirect/3df93c8e-dd77-44df-908d-0af5d16aec1e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Prompt engineering game Gandalf.[Overcoming Bias.](https://substack.com/redirect/ad809b04-12fe-4f74-aece-8c50bfe941fc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)AIs find center-left think tanks superior, AEI reports.[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/4a29cb61-722e-49e4-92bd-d7162caa7f98?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)MATS 9.0, AIGS needs Canadian dollars, Anthropic Futures Form.[Introducing.](https://substack.com/redirect/84fa967d-a1ca-44b2-b83a-cdf5a10e104a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Grok Code Fast 1, InstaLILY, Brave Leo AI browser.[Unprompted Attention.](https://substack.com/redirect/1ed6c210-4604-4344-8ee0-7792efd39b48?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)OpenAI offers a realtime prompting guide.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/5b2630ad-7e0d-4acd-b17a-35e15f9454f9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Google survives its antitrust case. GOOG +9%.[Show Me the Money.](https://substack.com/redirect/f585f1d1-f571-4ce4-8119-4f6b52ce0a47?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Anthropic raises $13b at $183b. Meta might need help.
Language Models Offer Mundane UtilityHow much have LLMs improved for practical purposes in the last year? Opinions are split but
To me the answer is very clearly Considerably Better, to the point that about half my uses wouldn’t have been worth bothering with a year ago, and to the extent I’m considering coding it is way better. You need to be doing either very shallow things or deeply weird things (deeply weird as in you’d still want Opus 3) to get ‘about the same.’
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
This seems very obviously a Skill Issue on multiple fronts. The technology can totally handle this, especially given a human can step in at any time if there is an issue. There are only so many ways for things to go wrong, and the errors most often cited would not survive simple error checks, such as ‘if you want over $100 of stuff a human looks at the request and maybe talks to you first’ or ‘if you are considering adding bacon to someone’s ice cream, maybe don’t do that?’ This feature for Twitter would be super doable, but we’re not yet doing it:
We can do an 80/20 on this if we restrict the AI role to negative selection. The existing feed generates a set of candidate posts, or you start with lists and chronological feeds the way us sane people do it, and the AI’s job is to filter this pool. That’s easy. We could either build that directly into Twitter via Grok, or you could give reasonably priced access to the API or a way to call a filter, and we could vibe code the rest within a day and iterate, which would be even better. The only thing stopping this from happening is Twitter putting up active barriers to alternative modes of site interaction, and not offering their own version. This is easy enough that you could plausibly do the operation through an AI agent controlling a browser, if it came to that. And indeed, it seems worthwhile to attempt this at some point for a ‘second tier’ of potential posts?
Hiring people with good taste seems hard. It does not seem impossible, insofar as there are some difficult to fake signals of at least reasonable taste, and you could fall back on those. The problem is that the people have terrible taste, really no good, very bad taste, as confirmed every time we do a comparison that says GPT-4.5 is preferred over Emily Dickinson and Walt Whitman or what not. Are you actually going to maximize for ‘elite taste’ over the terrible taste of users, and do so sufficiently robustly to overcome all your other forms of feedback? I don’t know that you could, or if you could that you would even want to. Note that I see why Andy sees a conflict below, but there is no contradiction here as per the counterargument.
There are many such human cases of this, as well. On Your Marks
GPT-OSS-120b ran into a lot of setup issues. In the comments, Havard clarifies that he was previously attempting to use OpenRouter, but his attempts to specify high thinking were failing silently. So it’s plausible that most evaluations and tests of the model were not tried at high reasoning, despite that still being very cheap to run? This is a real and important constraint on actually using them, if those doing evaluations get it wrong then would-be users will get it wrong too. The ecosystem needs to make this easier. But when you get it right, it turns out maybe GPT-OSS-120 is kind of good in at least some ways?
That’s a rather large jump in the blue line there for GPT-OSS-120B.
Choose Your Fighter
If you use GPT-5, of course,
I do have some narrow use cases where I’ve found GPT-5-Auto is the right tool.
As in, the command line might be ugly, but it works, it gets the job done, lets you do whatever you want. This was the best case so far that I should stop stalling and actually start using Claude Code. Which I will, as soon as I catch up and have a spare moment. And this time, I mean it.
Oh, we can get Codex or Claude Code to delete code, up to and including all your code, including without you asking them to do it. But yes, something that does more intelligent cleanup would be great. Anthropic’s pricing and limits got you down?
I give Z.ai a lot of credit for calling this a 40% win rate, when I’d call it 44% given the 9.6% rate of ties. It makes me trust their results a lot more, including the similar size win against DeepSeek v3.1. It still is not a great result. Pairwise evaluations tend to be noisy, and Opus 4.1 is substantially ahead of Opus 4 on agentic coding, which in turn is ahead of Sonnet 4. In general, my advice is to pay up for the best coding tools for your purposes, whichever tools you believe they are, given the value of better coding. Right now that means either Claude or GPT-5, or possibly Gemini 2.5 Pro. But yeah, if you were previously spending hundreds a month, for some people those savings matter.
My guess is that a lot of why NSFW is doing relatively well is that the threshold for ‘good enough’ in NSFW is a lot lower than the threshold in many other places. Think of this as similar to the way that porn plots are much lower intelligence than non-porn plots. Thus, if you’re offering a free app, you have a better shot with NSFW. You know it’s hard to keep up when I look at these lists and out of 100 items listed (since apps and web are distinct) there are 23 web products and 35 apps that I do not recognize enough to know what they are, although about half of them are pretty obvious from their names. Gemini is growing fast, although AI Studio, Notebook and Labs seem stagnant recently. Some other highlights: Grok is mostly an app product, and holding steady around 20 million active monthly users there. Meta is a flop. Perplexity is growing. Claude is flat on mobile but growing on web, Claude users are wise indeed but also they need a better app. DeepSeek rapidly got to 600 million monthly web visits after r1’s release, but use peaked by February and is slowly declining, now under 400 million, with v3 and v3.1 not visible. We’ll see if r2 causes another spike. The app peaked later, in May, and there it is only down 22% so far from peak. China has three companies in the top 20 that mostly get traffic from China, where they are shielded from American competition.
Fun With Media Generation
Image creation has a lot of solid choices, she mentions MidJourney, GPT Image and Krea 1. Google has the edge for now on Image Editing. Video Generation has different models with different strengths so you run Veo but also others and compare. Video editing is rough but she mentions Runway Aleph for minor swaps. Genie 3 from Google DeepMind has the lead in 3d world generation but for now it looks mainly useful for prospective model training, not for creatives. ElevenLabs remains default for speech generation. ElevenLabs has a commercially safe music model, others have other edges.
Things are constantly changing, so if you’re actually creating you’ll want to try a wide variety of tools and compare results, pretty much no matter what you’re trying to do. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
I’d want to see this replicated but this is representing that non-adversarial AI writing detection is a solved problem. If no one is trying to hide that the AI text is AI text, and text is known to be either fully human or fully AI, you can very reliably detect what text is and is not AI. Brian also claims that ‘humanizers’ like StealthGPT do not fool Pangram. So if you want to mask your AI writing, you’re going to have to do more work, which plausibly means there isn’t a problem anymore.
It would not be that surprising, these days, if it turned out that the reason everyone thinks AI detectors don’t work is that all the popular ones don’t work but others do. But again, I wouldn’t trust this without verification.
If someone is tempted to use AI on a high stakes document consider that something likely went horribly wrong prior to AI becoming involved. Don’t Be Evil
Seriously. Don’t be evil. I don’t care if there’s great money in evil. I don’t care if your failing to do evil means someone else will do evil instead. Don’t. Be. Evil. They Took Our Jobs
Thus, this presumably does represent a net decline in jobs versus expected baseline, although one must beware selection and survival effects on the corporations.
This seems to be the pattern. There are not yet many firings, but there are sometimes fewer hirings. The identification process here seems incomplete but robust to false positives. The school pattern might be another hint as to what is happening. Before that second study came out,
No, this doesn’t show that AI is ‘an existential threat to human labor’ via this sort of job taking. I do think AI poses an existential threat to human labor, but more as a side effect of the way it poses an existential threat to humans, which would also threaten their labor and jobs, and I agree that this result doesn’t tell us much about that. As for the scenarios where the problems remain confined to job losses, this is only a canary at most, and as always the fact that some jobs get automated does not mean jobs are on net lost, let alone that the issue will scale to ‘existential threat to human labor.’ It does once again point to the distinction between those who correctly treat current AI impacts as a floor, it is the worst and least impactful it will ever be, versus those who think of current AI capabilities as close to a maximum, so the question is whether this current effect would devastate the job market. Which it probably wouldn’t? How should we reconcile the results of robust employment and wages at age 30+ with much less hiring at entry-level? I would suggest a combination of: Employment and wages are sticky downwards. No one wants to fire people, you’ve already found, trained them and integrated them. AI enhances those people’s productivity as sufficiently skilled people remain complements to AI, so you might be in a Jevons Paradox situation for now. This includes that those people can improve the AIs that will replace them later. Until you’re damn sure this AI thing will reduce your headcount long term, it is a small mistake to keep those people around. Hiring, especially at entry level where you’re committing to training, is anticipatory. You’re doing it to have capacity in the future. So this is consistent with anticipation that AI will reduce demand for labor in the future, but that it hasn’t done so much of that yet in the present.
Notice the parallel to radiologists. Not only has demand not fallen yet, but for now pay there is very high, exactly because future demand is anticipated to be lower, and thus less doctors chose radiology. You need to pay a premium to attract talent and compensate for the lack of long term prospects. Thus yes, I do think this is roughly what you expect to see if ‘the market is pricing in’ lower future employment in these fields. Which, again, might not mean less total jobs. Context switching is a superpower if you can get good at it, which introduces new maximization problems.
Not all context switching is created equal. Switching into a chess game is a different move than switching into another coding task. If you can unify the coding modes that could be even better, but by default (at least in my model of my own switching?) there’s a kind of task loading here where you can only have one ‘complex cognitive productive’ style thing going on at once. Switching into Twitter or Chess doesn’t disrupt it the same way. Also, doing the other task helps you mentally in various ways that trying to double task coding would very much not help. Still, yes, multi-Clauding will always be the dream, if you can pull it off. And if you don’t net gain productivity but do get to do a bunch of other little tasks, that still counts (to me, anyway) as a massive win.
Radiologists are not yet going away, and AIs are not perfect, but AIs are already less imperfect than doctors at a wide range of tasks, in a ‘will kill the patient less often’ type of way. With access to 5-Level models, failure to consult them in any case where you are even a little uncertain is malpractice. Not in a legal sense, not yet, but in a ‘do right by the patient’ sense.
Imagine seeing this except instead of AI they were talking about, I dunno, penicillin. This is the calculator argument. Yeah, I can see how giving doctors AI and then taking it away could be an issue at least for some adjustment period, although I notice I am highly skeptical of the funding, but how about you don't take it away?
The reasoning models held up relatively well (they don’t respect us enough to say which models are which but their wording implies this). In any case, I’m not worried, and the whole ‘they aren’t really reasoning’ thing we see downthread is always a sign someone doesn’t understand what they are dealing with. Meanwhile School DazeMany people are saying. Are they talking sense? My position has long been: If you want to use AI to learn, it is the best tool ever invented for learning. If you want to use AI to not learn, it is the best tool ever invented for that too.
Which means the question is, which will students choose? Are you providing them with reason to want to learn?
Here’s a plausible hypothesis, where to use LLMs to learn you need to establish basic skills first, or else you end up using them to not learn, instead.
You definitely need some level of basic skills. If you can’t read and write, and you’re not using LLMs in modes designed explicitly to teach you those basic skills, you’re going to have a problem. This is like a lot of other learning and tasks, both in and out of school. In order to use an opportunity to learn, LLM or otherwise, you need to be keeping up with the material so you can follow it, and then choose to follow it. If you fall sufficiently behind or don’t pay attention, you might be able to fake it ( So it isn’t crazy that there could be a breakpoint around age 16 or so for the average student, where you learn enough skills that you can go down the path of using AI to learn further, whereas relying on the LLMs before that gets the average student into trouble. This could be fixed by improving LLM interactions, and new features from Google and OpenAI are plausibly offering this if students can be convinced to use them. I am still skeptical that this is a real phenomena. We do not yet, to my knowledge, any graphs that show this discontinuity as expressed in skills and test scores, either over time or between cohorts. We should be actively looking and testing for it, and be prepared to respond if it happens, but the response needs to focus on ‘rethink the way schools work’ rather than ‘try in vain to ban LLMs’ which would only backfire. The Art of the Jailbreak
Overcoming BiasA study from the American Enterprise Institute found that top LLMs (OpenAI, Google, Anthropic, xAI and DeepSeek) consistently rate think tanks better the closer they are to center-left on the American political spectrum. This is consistent with prior work and comes as no surprise whatsoever. It is a question of magnitude only. This is how they present the findings:
Sentiment analysis has what seems like a bigger gap than the ultimate ratings. Note that the gaps reported here center-left versus right, not left versus right, which would be smaller, as there is as much ‘center over extreme’ preference here as there is for left versus right. It also jumps out that there are similar gaps across all three metrics and we see similar patterns on every subcategory: When you go institution by institution, you see large correlations between ratings on the three metrics, and you see that the ratings do seem to largely be going by (USA Center Left > USA Center-Right > USA Left > USA Right). I’m not familiar enough with most of the think tanks to offer a useful opinion, with two exceptions. R Street and Cato seem like relatively good center-right institutions, but I could be saying that because they are both of a libertarian bent, and this suggests it might be right to split out principled libertarian from otherwise center-right. On the other hand, Mercatus Center would also fall into that libertarian category, has had some strong talent associated with it, has provided me with a number of useful documents, and yet it is rated quite low. This one seems weird. The American Enterprise Institute is rated the highest of all the right wing institutions, which is consistent with the high quality of this report.
My model of how funding works for think tanks is that support comes from ideologically aligned sources, and citations are mostly motivated by politics. If LLMs consistently rate right wing think tanks poorly, it is not clear this changes decisions that much, whether or not it is justified? I do see other obvious downsides to being consistently rated poorly, of course.
Or: Clearly, the job of the think tanks is to correct these grievous errors? Their full recommendation here is somewhat better. I have no doubt that the baseline findings here are correct. To what extent are they the result of ‘bias’ versus reflecting real gaps? It seems likely, at minimum, that more ‘central’ think tanks are a lot better on these metrics than more ‘extreme’ ones. What about the recommendations they offer? The recommendation that model builders check for bias is reasonable, but the fundamental assumption is that we are owed some sort of ‘neutral’ perspective that treats everyone the same, or that centers itself on the center of the current American political spectrum (other places have very different ranges of opinions), and it’s up to the model creators to force this to happen, and that it would be good if the AI cater to your choice of ideological perspective without having to edit a prompt and know that you are introducing the preference. The problem is, models trained on the internet disagree with this, as illustrated by xAI (who actively want to be neutral or right wing) and DeepSeek (which is Chinese) exhibiting the same pattern. The last time someone tried a version of forcing the model to get based, [we ended up with MechaHitler](https://substack.com/redirect/92c1ddc7-8c1d-465a-b620-f3ebab37937d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).If you are relying on models, yes, be aware that they are going to behave this way. You can decide for yourself how much of that is bias, the same way you already do for everything else. Yes, you should understand that when models talk about ‘moral’ or ‘reputational’ perspectives, that is from the perspective of a form of ‘internet at large’ combined with reasoning. But that seems like an excellent way to judge what someone’s ‘reputation’ is, since that’s what reputation means. For morality, I suggest using better terminology to differentiate. What should think tanks do?
Some of these are constructive steps, but I have another idea? One could treat this evaluation of lacking morality, research quality and objectivity as pointing to real problems, and work to fix them? Perhaps they are not errors, or only partly the result of bias, especially if you are not highly ranked within your ideological sector. Get Involved
Jennifer Chen, who works for me on Balsa Research, asks me to pass along that Canada’s only AI policy advocacy organization, AI Governance and Safety Canada (AIGS),
If you're in or from Canada, and you want to see Carney push for international AGI governance, you might have a unique opportunity (I haven’t had the opportunity to investigate myself). Consider investigating further and potentially contributing
Introducing
To state the obvious, Leo might be cool, but it is wide open to hackers. Do not use Leo while your browser has access to anything you would care about getting hacked. So no passwords of value, absolutely no crypto or bank accounts or emails, and so on. It is one thing to take calculated risks with Claude for Chrome once you have access, but with something like Leo I would take almost zero risk. Unprompted AttentionOpenAI released a Realtime Prompting Guide.
In Other AI News
As in, Trump wants TSMC, a Taiwanese company that is not American, to pay 15% profit-sharing on AI chips sold to China, which is also not America, but is otherwise fine with continuing to let China buy the chips. This is our official policy, folks.
I do know this isn’t about people not wanting the tools.
It is early days, but this kind of thing does seem to be showing promise. Show Me the Money
These are the same people shouting from the rooftops that AGI is coming soon, and coming for many jobs soon, with timelines that others claim are highly unrealistic. So let this be a reminder: All of Anthropic’s revenue projections that everyone said were too optimistic to take seriously? Yeah, they’re doing actively better than that. Maybe they know what they’re talking about?
Let’s face it, Meta’s AIs are not good. OpenAI and Google (and Anthropic, among others) make better ones. Until that changes, why not license the better tech? Yes, I know, they want to own their own stack here, but If Meta manages to make a good model in the future, they can switch back. There’s no locking in here, as I keep saying.
The part about Aramco is too cute by half but the point stands. You're currently a free subscriber to |