---
subject: "Hayek's Abstract Logic 9000"
from: "Maxim Raginsky from The Art of the Realizable <realizable@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-02-01 04:55:55
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Maxim Raginsky", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3440436245007788095", "UNREAD"]
---
Friedrich von Hayek, in the time free from arguing that social democracies are a In a way, Hayek’s ideas anticipated the so-called However, we should go a bit deeper into how Hayek thought about the fundamental role of rules and abstraction. While all of these ideas can be found in The Sensory Order, it is better to turn to Hayek’s paper entitled “The primacy of the abstract,” which he presented at the 1968 Alpbach Symposium organized by
This is a very sophisticated view, positing a layered cognitive architecture making use of abstraction and virtualization based on pattern classification. What Hayek calls abstractions are essentially labels for behavioral strategies (“dispositions”) that codify the organism’s tendencies for taking various actions that are determined partly by the organism and partly by the environment. These routines involve adaptive sensing, trial-and-error, internal simulation, and various feedback loops. Hayek gives the example of a lion about to attack its prey, where the particular movements of the lion will be determined by various external attributes (of the prey, the terrain, the ground, etc.) and internal variables (the lion’s proprioception, state of alertness, and physical fitness). So, in Hayek’s terminology, rules are abstractions — they abstract away the whole infrastructure supporting and facilitating a given kind of action in response to a given kind of stimulus. In other words, the mind projects itself onto the world, and the actual state of affairs is determined by the specifics of the coupling of the organism and the world. (In support of this view, Hayek cites Hermann Helmholtz, the Gestalt psychologists, J.J. Gibson, and Maurice Merleau-Ponty, among others.) He goes on to say that
Let us now get back to the Chinese Room. Hayek’s point about the primacy of the abstract obviously applies here: The person confined to the room does not receive an unstructured stream of sensory impressions. Being sequences of Chinese characters, they are highly structured. Moreover, the operator of the room can use all of his senses, memory, and other cognitive abilities. Thus, just as Hayek says, the abstract precedes the concrete in the sense that there is already a kernel of basic rules and sensory strategies standing ready to be deployed. The operator can recognize, classify, and act upon observed patterns in the external inputs, the instructions in the rulebook, and the external outputs prescribed by the rulebook. On the basis of this experience, he will hone his repertoire of different types of action, and (assuming sufficient variety in the queries coming from the outside) this repertoire will evolve and grow richer. With time, the inhabitant of the Chinese room will be able to make predictions about which sequences of characters are likely to follow certain other sequences, and will be able to anticipate, to plan, and thus to interact with the environment more effectively. This evidently constitutes a form of understanding, and can we even argue that this is not how we should think about understanding and knowledge in general? Indeed, this is exactly what Hayek says:
Frank Rosenblatt, the inventor of the perceptron, acknowledged Hayek’s influence on his thinking. We also can recognize the Hayekian evolutionary metaphor in Gerald Edelman’s neural Darwinism. The closing paragraph of “The Primacy of the Abstract” will surely resonate with those of us who appreciate
Do large language models possess knowledge and understanding in this Hayekian sense? They are obviously extremely complex “systems of … rules conjointly determining particular actions.” They are getting better at classifying and categorizing their inputs, and their context-conditional probabilities jointly determine the repertoire of outputs. Models like Claude Code produce programs, i.e., outputs that are themselves functions with some arguments left free for the environment to fill in. More sophisticated capabilities for perception and action are not far behind, although for that we need to finally
The Art of the Realizable is free today. But if you enjoyed this post, you can tell The Art of the Realizable that their writing is valuable by pledging a future subscription. You won't be charged unless they enable payments. |