---
subject: "The Skate Gaze Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-12-22 12:22:29
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Re-running an all-time fave today. - Noah (NRB) Ben Dietz (BWDD) is a longtime friend of WITI and the person behind the excellent newsletter Ben here. To say I’m a skateboarder at this point in my life is to beggar belief, given that I’ve been out on a board maybe three times in the last year. But by the same token, the older I get the more clear it is to me that once you’re a skater, you can’t ever not be one. This is down to what I call (tongue firmly in cheek) “the Skate Gaze”. The idea, essentially, is that anyone who has become a skateboarder from roughly 1985 onward (and arguably even earlier—since the I think skaters look at everything with yet to be defined possibilities. Nothing that is skated in the streets was ever creating for skating, a bench and rail, a bank, a wall...but a skater saw it and saw something else was possible there. As a skater you move through the city looking at things differently, thinking about other possibilities. And as you move into other things you want to do, that perspective just stays with you. Nothing is what they say it is supposed to be. It’s supposed to be whatever you see is possible. Why is this interesting? This “skate gaze” worldview is a post-postmodern phenomenon, and as such it’s only now being recognized. But considering that skateboarding is one of the most popular sports in the world (between #3 and #10 depending on who you ask), and people of all ages are staying on board longer, it’s clear that the skate gaze has implications far beyond skateparks and skate companies. As skaters age and proliferate, we can see that what Spike described as “looking at things differently” extends to every aspect of global culture. Take When WITI Classifieds: We are experimenting with running some weekly classifieds in WITI. If you’re interested in running an ad, Exhibit B. Books: true crime told and sold Why is your family interesting? With Storyworth, record their stories one weekly email at a time, and gift them a beautiful printed book. Beyond this, there’s a new appreciation for the skate worldview, driven by the proliferation of skate videos on platforms from Youtube and Instagram to Tiktok. In the words of Kevin Imamura, a lifelong skater and one of the proponents of NikeSB’s push into skateboarding, “In urban areas across the globe, the amount of interaction with non-skaters feels like it is at an all-time high: average pedestrians, homeless people, security guards, etc … you see people stopping and watching what skaters are doing. They will stop and clap. The cops will allow [skaters] to finish and get the clip before they kick them out.” Why is this, Kevin asks? Perhaps it’s because of the dual acknowledgment by skaters and by the powers that be, that neither is going away, and both have something to learn from the other. Skaters not only see physical space differently, they cause non-skaters to do so, too. There are examples of this developing around the world—as presaged by Iain Borden’s 2001 book
Or perhaps it’s to do with what Chris Nieratko, former editor of seminal 90s skate-prank magazine I’m not sure. I agree with Chris that the skate gaze is singularly-focused. And I also agree that there are no shortage of people on the spectrum drawn to skateboarding—a culture that the ex-Supreme creative director and founder of skate-inspired clothing brand Noah, Brendon Babenzien, — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Ben (BWDD) —
|