---
subject: "The Monday Media Diet with Christine Kakaire"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-03-20 10:01:24
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Christine Kakaire (CK) is music & culture journalist, critic, teacher and editor based in Berlin, Germany. Have a great week. -Colin (CJN) Tell us about yourself. I’m a Berlin-based, Ugandan-Australian creative person. I’ve had a lot of different jobs in the music industry over two decades, but what suits me best is being a culture journalist, writer, critic and teacher. My sweet spot is any point where Black critical and feminist thought, nightlife subcultures, popular music and my studies in cultural anthropology are able to converge. I’m the person behind the Describe your media diet. My media diet was irrevocably changed in 2020. My ability to be still and concentrate on media of length essentially vanished that year. My appetite for news media and films and books and DJ mixes only recently started to return, so in the meantime my diet has consisted almost exclusively of academic papers, podcasts, newsletters and YouTube. My go-to G.O.A.T. podcasts will forever be On YouTube there's a generation of young BIPoC female and non-binary creators who put together beautifully researched, entertaining and incisive video essays. What’s the last great book you read? The one book I’ve been able to devour in the last year is the only self-help book I’ve ever purchased: What are you reading now? Last year a dear friend, the brilliant author and historian of science WITI Classifieds: We are experimenting with running some weekly classifieds in WITI. If you’re interested in running an ad, Coefficient Capital and The New Consumer have teamed up to bring you fresh new insights in F&B ahead of Expo West! The BrXnd Marketing X AI Conference is happening on 5/16 in NYC. Early Bird tickets are 20% off until the end of the month. What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication? I don’t buy print magazines frequently as it’s an expensive habit to maintain as a freelancer, so when I do pick one up my approach is ridiculously ceremonial: I need silence, I have to be comfortable. Socks, blanket, cushions fluffed and arranged for maximum comfort. I’ll do one complete scan through, cover to cover. Then as time and attention span allows I'll read whichever features have sparked the most interest. I’ll keep it close to hand over the next few days so I can pick it back up and read the rest in phases. Who should everyone be reading that they’re not? For anyone like me who is still figuring out how to healthily engage with news media, I’d suggest following journalists who specialise in the topics you care the most about. Recently I’ve been enjoying the work of Palestinian writers, including journalist and political commentator What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone?
Plane or train? Train, no question. I live in Germany, and although it’s convenient to bop around the continent by plan, the hurry-up-and-wait nature of flying just melts my head. It might only be a 60 minute flight, but there’s still four door-to-door hours of standing in queues and waiting in holding pens. I’d rather plop my stuff down on a train for four hours, get comfortable, look out the window at the changing landscapes, wander to the buffet car when I feel like it, check email if I feel like it, stream a show if I feel like it. What is one place everyone should visit? This is very basic, but any coastline where you can gaze out onto a peaceful, unbroken sea horizon. Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into. My entire life is a rabbit hole, but I can tell you about one that I’m fighting off right now: Ancient Rome. I’ve always only been interested in modernity, at school I hated ancient history and dropped it as soon as I could, so I don’t know where this sudden interest has sprung from. I’m resisting it because Ancient Rome is an information void that I fear I’ll never be able to escape. To try and get past it I’ve allowed myself just one source of information, — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Christine (CK) —
|