---
subject: "Aleo: Can You Keep a Secret?"
from: "Not Boring <notboring@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-12-13 13:55:08
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Not Boring", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2982495070691762429", "UNREAD"]
---
Welcome to the 1,252 newly Not Boring people who have joined us since our last Monday post! If you haven’t subscribed, join 176,385 smart, curious folks by subscribing here: 🎧 For the audio version, subscribe on Hi friends 👋, Happy Tuesday! This post is coming to you a a day late because it’s the longest I’ve essay I’ve ever written about the most complex subject I’ve ever written about. There have been many times in Not Boring’s brief history when I’ve realized just how lucky I am to get to write for an audience of smart, curious nerds like you. It takes a special kind of nerd to read multi-thousand word deep dives on topics ranging from blockchains to robots week after week. One of those times that stands out in my memory was in June 2021, when Zero-Knowledge Proofs are wonky. For the first thirty or so years of their lives, they existed only deep in the research labs of academic cryptographers. They involve math that I couldn’t begin to understand, let alone explain, and when we wrote that piece, their use cases were still almost purely speculative. Despite that, and despite the fact that there were only 56,891 of us here at that time, Zero Knowledge has been viewed 113k times and was our most popular piece of the month by a landslide. In the piece, we gave an overview of Zero-Knowledge Proofs, and predicted that you’d be hearing a lot more about them over the next five years. Fast-forward 17 months, and the zero-knowledge zeitgeist is upon us. Starkware, zkSync, Aztec, Espresso, ImmutableX, Polygon’s zkEVM, and Aleo are either live on mainnet or in various stages of testnets. If they hit their timelines, Zero Knowledge Proofs could be one of the breakout technologies of 2023. Today, we’re going to go deep on one of the most promising companies in the zero-knowledge space: This essay is a Sponsored Deep Dive. While the piece is sponsored, these are all my real and genuine views – there’s no perfect blockchain; it’s all about making the right trade-offs to serve the target audience and use cases. I expect to write about other L1s and L2s, including zk Rollups, in the future. I am a maximalist minimalist. You can read more about how I choose which companies to do deep dives on, and how I write them Please, please for the love of God note that this is not investment advice. Aleo doesn’t have a token live, but it will at some point. When that time comes: please do not look back at this piece as investment advice. I am a terrible trader. This is a sponsored piece. a16z, where I’m an advisor, is an investor in Aleo. I have no idea where Aleo Credits will be priced when trading starts. I’m just fascinated by the technology and the potential applications of zero-knowledge proofs. K? Let’s get to it. Aleo: Can You Keep A Secret?Imagine a Bizarro Internet that’s exactly like the internet you use today except for one detail: everything you do, send, or store on this Bizarro Internet is totally public. When you buy a new pair of underwear on Amazon, your purchase is posted to a website that anyone with the desire and some basic skills can search. Your balance at Bank of America is right there, too, for anyone to see. You saddle up to the online poker table only to realize that you can see everyone’s cards… and they can see yours. This game sucks. You message your wife and tell her you’ll be up for dinner soon and, of course, anyone who wants to see that you messaged your wife can. Before you forget, you schedule a doctor’s appointment to get that thing checked out, and fill out an intake form online and, you guessed it, now anyone can peep that form in all its gory detail. This Bizarro Internet would be practically unusable for anything besides public forums and showing off things that you don’t mind if other people see. This Bizarro Internet is web3 as it stands today. For most of the applications built on web3 to date, that level of transparency is fine, and even novel and good. If you own a CryptoPunk, you want people to know that you own a CryptoPunk. If you’re trading on a DEX, you’re mostly fine with people knowing what you bought and when. If you’re casting on Farcaster, you want that to be public anyway. But that’s a bit circular. The web3 products built to date are almost definitionally the ones for which privacy isn’t a big deal. Zoom out to the broader internet, and you’ll find privacy at the core of every product that touches money or personal information. If web3 is going to grow beyond these early experiments, and if decentralized networks are going to come to replace more centralized services, adding in a bit of privacy would be helpful. That’s where Zero-Knowledge Proofs (ZKPs) come in. A zero-knowledge proof is a type of cryptographic protocol that allows one party (the Prover) to prove to another party (the Verifier) that they know a certain piece of information, without revealing any information about the actual content of that information. ZKPs are a way to prove that you know something, own something, or have done something without revealing any information about that something. They’re a valuable primacy primitive that were too theoretical and expensive for practical use until very recently. As people survey the crypto wreckage, zero-knowledge proofs are a bright spot. Good bubbles leave infrastructure in their wake for the next wave to build upon, and ZKPs seem to be a treasure in the bubble’s rubble.
|