---
subject: "AI in 2026"
from: "Tomas Pueyo from Uncharted Territories <unchartedterritories@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-01-24 13:02:16
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tomas Pueyo", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_28238133486362596", "UNREAD"]
---
Note: the last article updating on robotaxis (from two days ago) has new data that changes the conclusions. Read it Things are moving so fast in AI, and there’s so much to digest, that it’s hard to write a good article on it, but that’s why it’s so important. Here’s my update on the most important trends right now, to cover who might win the AI bubble, how fast progress is going, how we’re doing on AI self-improvement, the emergence of consciousness, and the impact on jobs. Next up in AI: Can algorithms keep improving? Blockers to AI progress Can we make AIs aligned to our goals, or will they kill us all? How should we manage a world after AGI? Is AI changing our culture?
At night, a group of friends is drinking and laughing at the bar, with its warm light flooding the street. They are enjoying their Friday night together, as they have every week for over a decade. On the other side of the street, behind metal detectors, security passes, gated doors, and closed rooms, another group of people is huddled around a computer screen. They’re all still, listening as the AI researcher has an existential crisis:
Silence falls over the room and the group, murmuring, slowly disperses. One of the engineers takes his badge, passes the three security gates, and leaves the building. He looks to the other side of the street and thinks:
AI Bubble?AI is now so big that its mental structure can be seen from space: These are the revenue projections for OpenAI and Anthropic: Anthropic’s optimistic forecasts are higher than the most optimistic ones from 2024! And look at OpenAI’s! $100B in revenue! As a result, it’s planning this in terms of spending and investments: OpenAI expects its cloud spending to reach hundreds of billions per year! It will have to raise tens of billions of dollars every year until 2030, when free cash flow might finally compensate for the cost of cloud compute. Staggering. The danger, though, is that a lot of this demand is subsidized. A task might cost them a few dollars but nothing to you. This only works if our demand for AI keeps increasing and their costs decreasing. Will it? Builders are certainly using it like never before to create more and more apps. Who Wins in the AI Bubble?
This is one of the reasons I don’t have all my money invested in NVIDIA.¹ I can see the demand continuing to grow tremendously, but I can’t see NVIDIA always being in the near-monopoly situation it has been in until now. More on this when we discuss potential blockers in a future article. Rate of ProgressThe key is the rate of progress. It’s been running very fast, but for how long can it be maintained? In the As a result of this and algorithmic improvements, models keep improving at an incredible rate. The cost per task has shrunk by 300x in one year, and scores on the very hard ARC-AGI-2 test² are now up Frontier AI capabilities have not just continued progressing. Over the last 2 years, they’ve accelerated! The applications are crazy. This elite astrophysicist observed how ChatGPT was able to match his level in an obscure, unpublished question. AI In But can we do better than 50% mistakes after 5h tasks? But one AI stands out, and it might well be AGI... Keep reading with a 7-day free trialSubscribe to Uncharted Territories to keep reading this post and get 7 days of free access to the full post archives. A subscription gets you:
|