---
subject: "Declining Sperm Count: Much More Than You Wanted To Know"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-02-17 04:48:07
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX"]
---
Is Sperm Count Declining?People say it is.
The “et al” includes Dr. Shanna Swan, a professor of public health who has taken the results public in the ominously-named Count Down: How Our Modern World Is Altering Male and Female Reproductive Development, Threatening Sperm Counts, and Imperiling the Future of the Human Race. Is Declining Sperm Count Really "Imperiling The Future Of The Human Race”?Swan’s point is that if sperm counts get too low, presumably it will be hard to have babies (though IVF should still work). How long do we have? This graph ( An average ejaculation is 3 ml, so total sperm count is 3x sperm/ml. Since sperm/ml has gone down from 99 million to 47 million, total count has gone down from ~300 million to ~150 million. 150 million is still much more than 30 million, but sperm count seems to have a wide distribution, so it’s possible that some of the bottom end of the distribution is being pushed over the line where it has fertility implications. But Willy Chertman has a long analysis of fertility trends Levine et al model the sperm decline as linear. If they’re right, we have about 10 - 20 more years before the median reaches the plateau’s edge where fertility decreases, and about 10 years after that before it reaches zero. Developing countries might have a little longer. It feels wrong to me to model this linearly, although I can’t explain exactly why besides “it means sperm will reach precisely 0 in thirty years, which is surely false”. The authors don’t seem to be too attached to linearity, saying that “Adding a quadratic or cubic function of year to meta-regression model did not substantially change the association between year and SC or improve the model fit”. Still, the 2022 meta-analysis found that the trend was, if anything, speeding up with time, so it doesn’t seem to be obviously sublinear. How Long Has This Been Going On?The first recorded claim about declining sperm counts was in See the next section for some problems with this story. How Sure Are We That This Is Even Real?Not too sure. The authors of these studies are well-respected scientists - yes, even the one who wrote the book about imperiling the future of the human race - and they seem to be doing good statistics. But an argument against might start with this graphic: Each circle is an individual study examined in Levine’s first meta-analysis. I notice two things: Yes, okay, that line is pointing very slightly down, and apparently this is statistically significant. But also, the data are very noisy. Some studies from 2005 show higher sperm counts than most studies from the 1970s. The biggest pre-1980 study shows sperm counts very similar to today’s.
It looks like a lot depends on why these sperm count studies are so noisy, and how much we can trust their methodology. Here the best source is Auger et al,
Instead of comparing studies from all over the world, it might be safer to look at single-center studies, ie where a single hospital or lab has been recording sperm counts for decades, presumably using the same methods for the same population. The authors were able to find about seventy such studies. Unfortunately, they were pretty contradictory:
Why such variable results? Here are some common confounders: Where are sperm samples coming from? Some people give samples because they are sperm donors, others because they are infertile and want to figure out why. Infertile men may be infertile because they have unusually low-quality sperm. If something changes the fertile/infertile balance among sperm sample givers, or changes when people start worrying about fertility enough to give sperm samples, then data will be confounded. Especially the rise of IVF during the period under study has increased the degree to which infertile men might give sperm samples. In the old days, when this was groundbreaking research, most studies were done in cutting-edge research centers in wealthy regions of advanced countries. These places tend to be healthier and have higher sperm counts. Now that this line of research has caught on, everyone is doing it, and that means more underdeveloped areas with worse health and lower sperm counts are in the dataset. Sperm count is affected by age - if your area’s population is aging, that will change its average sperm count from year to year. Different countries (and, in the US, different races) seem to have different sperm counts. If your community’s demographics are changing (eg immigration), that might change its average sperm count. After ejaculation, sperm count decreases and takes a while to build back up again; if your community’s ejaculation frequency is changing (eg people have gained access to online porn), that will change its average sperm count.
But beyond all of this, collecting sperm is hard. Here’s Auger et al:
However, Auger identify six (of their original seventy) studies that they say are extremely well done and suffer from none of these potential confounders. They say five of the six still show declining sperm counts, and believe that the effect might be real (they say there is no evidence it is global rather than limited to these five regions but I think if an effect happens in five regions, and there is only one region where it is not happening, it is fair to wonder whether it represents a broader trend). I interpret their conclusions as very cautiously pro-decline-hypothesis (Fisch remains against). There is also a Did The Hypothesis Start By Mistake?One interesting corollary of these studies being so noisy: as far as I can tell, basically every person who proposed this hypothesis before Levine et al was mistaken, and had no right to conclude this from their small samples. If they were right, it was only by coincidence. Consider But the hypothesis only reached the scientific mainstream in 1992, after the publication of the Unless I’m misunderstanding this, it seems like to support sperm count decline, you’d have to claim that everyone who argued about it for the first forty years or so was working off of useless data, but by coincidence they happened to be right anyway. There’s no reason this can’t be true, but it makes me suspicious. Where Is The Decline Most Pronounced?Levine et al don’t officially compare developed vs. developing world counts, but unofficially it looks like sperm count is declining faster in the developed than in the developing world. I can’t tell whether the difference is significant, and the decline in the developing world is either just above or just below traditional statistical significance depending on how you measure it. Auger et al report that they found declining sperm count in: 83% of South American studies 64% of European studies 50% of Asian studies 40% of Australia/New Zealand studies 33% of US studies
Just eyeballing it, Scandinavian countries have less sperm decline than Central European, and Japan/Korea have less sperm decline than China. Chinese data showed some extraordinarily fast declines over the space of just 5 or 6 years, although China is sometimes known for having bad studies that prove overly interesting things, and other Chinese studies found no change.
A In the US, black people Given how hard it is to find this effect at all, we should be suspicious that all of these differences are fake, and that actually we don’t know anything about where sperm decline is faster or slower. What About Animals?Many farm animals are bred through artificial insemination. That means we have extremely good data on farm animal sperm over long periods of time. Some articles try to vaguely suggest animals have lower sperm count, citing studies on related topics that never quite get around to finding animals have lower sperm counts, for example this one from Actual animal studies tend to find inconsistent results. For example, Overall there doesn’t seem to be convincing evidence this is happening in animals, although given how noisy human studies are I don’t know if we should conclude anything from just three. A commenter who works with farm animals says that as artificial insemination has become more popular, breeders have selected bulls more and more heavily for excellence at semen production, which potentially confounds these results. If Sperm Count Is Declining, What Could Be Causing This?The hypotheses I’ve seen are: Plastics Pesticides Sunlight and circadian rhythm Diet and obesity Porn
Going in order: Plastics are sometimes “endocrine disruptors”. They mimic reproductive hormones, causing the reproductive tract to be getting random signals all the time and develop incorrectly. This is probably the most commonly cited hypothesis. (a plastics engineer in the comments wants me to clarify that most of the offending chemicals are technically plasticizers - substances added to plastic to change its properties - and not the plastics themselves. Phthalates are an example of this; BPA is a counterexample). I can’t find any great studies testing this hypothesis, although there are a few weak ones with very small sample sizes finding effects of plastic exposure on sperm motility. If sperm counts really did decline between 1951 and 1974, as the This is Pesticides can also be endocrine disruptors. This is a good match for the “Missouri is worst US state” result, and in fact They find that “cases” with lower-than-average sperm concentration have more than twice the blood level of some pesticides than “controls”, p = 0.0007. But this is in a sample of only 50 people, all in Missouri. Two meta-analyses ( Compare people occupationally exposed to pesticides (eg farmers) with people who aren’t Compare sperm quality with pesticide metabolites detected in the blood. Compare sperm count in [people who eat a lot of fruit](https://substack.com/redirect/616647d6-0c14-431f-881e-9ab6720621d8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)to people who eat very little.
There is probably publication bias in this literature, and nobody has done even basic tests to look for it, but overall I find it pretty suggestive. Sunlight and circadian rhythm are known to affect sperm count (did you know that Sperm quality displays a classic pattern where it Only one team did Obesity and bad diets Porn hasn’t actually been proposed as a cause of declining sperm count as far as I know, but I found myself wondering about it when writing this piece. Doesn’t frequent masturbation decrease sperm count?
There is Other things that don’t get their own paragraph: Marijuana decreases sperm count and people use it a lot more recently Sitting decreases sperm count and more people have sitting jobs Cell phone in your pocket Heat is known to decrease sperm count, are we getting more of it for some reason? Global warming? Heated buildings? Laptop on your scrotum? Women are using hormonal birth control, and men are either absorbing it through the water supply, or missing cues of fertility that would otherwise increase sperm production through to some galaxy-brained evo psych daisy chain.
Conclusions And PredictionsTo grind my usual axe: this is the kind of complex issue that makes me wary of If it turns out this was real all along, people will point to the hundreds of studies demonstrating it and prestigious scientists pushing it. Doubters will be compared to global warming denialists, ignoring science in order to continue their fantasy of consequence-free pollution. And if it turns out this was totally fake, people will talk about how this was a classic panic of fragile masculinity (“our precious bodily fluids!”). They’ll place it alongside ivermectin in the annals of “don’t trust small noisy studies”. In retrospect, it will feel obvious that one side was right all along and the other was laden with junk science, biases, and all the classic red flags for conspiracy theories. We’ll be told we should have “trusted the experts” - either experts like Levine and Swann saying it’s real, or experts like Auger and Fisch saying it’s overblown. But right now, not knowing which side is right, we don’t have any of these easy outs. We have to actually reason under uncertainty! I’m not actually very good at this in this situation, and I’m pretty split about how concerned to be. Trying to turn this into concrete predictions, with a market for each: 1: In twenty years, the best evidence will suggest that sperm counts have been substantially declining across most of the world: 50% Auger and Fisch make great points about confounders and measurement difficulties. Nobody denies how noisy these data are. I think the case in their favor is that there are so many studies that you’d need a strong directional bias to explain the strong directional finding - plus the sheer magnitude of the effect, from counts of 100 million + in the Fifties to ~40 million today, is impressive. I wrote this post at the same time I wrote my response to Alexandros Marinos on ivermectin. If I applied the same hyper-skeptical eye to these studies that I apply to the ivermectin studies, they fail. But I admitted I was more cynical than usual about the ivermectin studies because of the many large RCTs that found no effect. Should I be more forgiving here? I’m not sure. 2: In twenty years, the best evidence will show very substantial (>one quarter) declines in fertility rate (relative to couples trying equally hard to conceive in the past) due to decreasing sperm count, in at least one country: 20% If sperm counts are declining as fast as Swann and Levine think, this should definitely happen. So why is my number for this prediction so much lower than for the one above? Partly because the decline could be sublinear. Partly because the decline could stop - either because we identify the cause and correct it, or for more mysterious reasons. But partly it’s just an unjustifiable penalty for something that it seems very hard to imagine happening. 3: Conditional on a consensus 20 years from now being that sperm count was declining, scientists will believe the most important factor is: Plastics: 25% Pesticides: 30% Sunlight and circadian rhythm: 2% Diet and obesity: 13% Porn: 5% Something else: 25%
Pesticides mostly going off the many studies supporting this hypothesis; plastics mostly going off superficial plausibility and the number of scientists talking about it. [Thanks to You're currently a free subscriber to |