---
subject: "The Age of the Great Picture"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-09-07 11:14:19
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
I am well aware of the irony here. You’re about to read a post about giant, breathtaking images on your tiny little screen. This may tell us something about the age we live in, in comparison to the age I’m going to write about — the 18th and 19th century. Today, we have access to pretty much everything all the time. You can pull up any of the world’s great works of art on your phone in a few seconds. You can watch any movie or read any book, too. I suppose I’m grateful for the fact that I can look at The Last Supper any time I want. I’ve never been to Milan, where it actually resides, but I’ve seen that painting so many times that I can see a version of it in my mind. But anybody who’s stood in front of a great painting knows that the pixellated version pales in comparison with the real thing. With some paintings, it’s the size, which can never be replicated on a screen, that blows you away. Sometimes it’s the detail that you can only really see from a few inches away. Personally, I’m a sucker for the three-dimensionality of paintings; I love the way artists like Van Gogh mounded paint up on their canvases. The infinite availability of everything also tends to make art less special. I very rarely go to the movies anymore — why would I, when I have a big TV in my house and an essentially unlimited catalog to choose from (plus, I never have to listen to people talk over the movie or crunch popcorn while I’m trying to pay attention to what’s happening)? But I recognize that I’ve lost something there, too — I remember going to see movies with friends on opening night, full of anticipation. Movies used to be an event, and now they’re not. Great art, even if you go see it in person at a museum, isn’t really an event these days, either. There are a couple of paintings that people will It hasn’t always been that way. In the 19th century, the unveiling of a “great picture” was a happening, characterized by intense hype and huge crowds. What made people clamor to see a mere picture? And why did they stop? The grand unveiling of a highly anticipated work of art goes back at least as far as the Renaissance. Crowds piled in to see Michelangelo’s paintings on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel, for example, after he had spent four laborious years creating them. Michelangelo’s contemporary Giorgio Vasari But the true era of the painting as an event came a little later, in the 18th and 19th centuries. It all started with the Paris Salon, the premier art event of the Enlightenment Era. The Salon started like many artistic endeavors did in the late 1600s — as a way to glorify the monarchy. The royal family held this biannual exhibition in odd-numbered years at the Louvre Palace, drawing the attention of sophisticated Europeans to the taste, wealth, and influence of the kings of France. It was hard to get your painting into the The Salon was a high-society event where the wealthy would come to see and be seen, but it was also open to the public. In an era before The Salon was designed to be a bit overwhelming: paintings were hung to cover every inch of the walls. The attendees were bombarded by art, as these drawings from the late 1700s show: The judges for the Salon had a strict and conservative set of ideas about what made a great painting. They mostly liked gigantic paintings that depicted historical events, especially ones from ancient history. This painting of King Charles X handing out awards at the 1824 edition gives a sense of what did well at the Salon — huge paintings of guys on horses, Biblical scenes, and classical allegories: At the Salon, these big, splashy, historical paintings were known as “grande machines,” and some became important cultural touchstones. Jacques-Louis David’s Oath of the Horatii, for example, captured something of the spirit of the years before the French Revolution with its depiction of three brothers willing to sacrifice their lives for the nation. The painting was first exhibited in a less-than-ideal spot at the 1785 Salon, but the crowds that came to see it prompted organizers to display it more prominently: Paris wasn’t the only place where grand historical paintings could cause a sensation. A few years before David’s Oath of the Horatii captivated France, a more unconventional work first scandalized, then attracted, large audiences. Benjamin West’s Death of General Wolfe attempts to capture a dramatic moment from the 1759 Battle of Quebec, in which General James Wolfe died just as the battle was being won by his troops. The painting was a standard historical painting — lots of things happening, a dramatic scene, a huge canvas — with one twist: it showed something that had very recently happened. Up until this point, painters had stuck to scenes from Biblical or ancient history; even more contemporary figures would have been clothed in classical clothing. But West ignored his friends’ advice to follow convention and put everyone in 18th-century clothing. The painting wasn’t terribly accurate — Wolfe is made out to be a Christlike figure and the scene is arranged for maximum pathos — but it was a huge step toward historical accuracy at the time: King George III initially declined to buy the painting because West had defied convention. But it was shown at the Royal Academy in 1771, and people went wild for it. The demand to see West’s painting was so great that Another painting that attracted tens of thousands of people was Theodore Gericault’s 1819 The Raft of the Medusa, which attempted to capture the plight of the survivors of a shipwreck off the coast of Africa. The painting was controversial for several reasons — it depicted a recent horrible event (some survivors engaged in cannibalism) and centered enslaved people as a challenge to the slave trade. It was also massive, stretching 23 feet by 16 feet. When it was exhibited at the Paris Salon, the painting divided opinion. Some were captivated by it, while others found the depiction of such suffering unpleasant. It was also hung at the very top of the Salon, making it hard to see: But the appeal of the artwork grew over time. After the Salon, the Egyptian Hall, a London exhibition space, displayed it for six months, and more than 40,000 people paid to see it (The Egyptian Hall would go on to make a business of displaying huge historical pictures). The Raft of the Medusa moved on to Dublin in 1821, but it found itself up against stiff competition there — a panorama. While members of the public flocked to big historical paintings, they wanted something even bigger — and that’s where truly massive paintings came in. Panoramas were a way for people who couldn’t afford travel to immerse themselves in a different part of the world. Panoramas (and their cousins, dioramas) were, as Miriam Bibby puts it, the “ The panorama was invented by an Irish painter, Robert Barker, in the 1780s. His goal was simple but ambitious: to create a scene so big and detailed that the viewer would be lost in it. He specialized in cityscapes, starting with Edinburgh. I’m sure you’d like to see it — and so would I. But a lot of these panoramas have been lost; they sometimes required a dedicated building and were discarded over time. These entertainments became immensely popular— London alone hosted over 100 of them in the early 19th century. Some observers called the craze “ You can get a sense of the scale of these paintings from this cross-section of the building where a 360-degree panorama of London was exhibited in 1801: The Gettysburg Cyclorama, which was painted in 1883 and can still be viewed at the battlefield, is one surviving example of the genre: There’s also a 165-foot-wide panorama of Versailles on display at the Met in New York: Enterprising entertainers soon improved upon the panorama. Louis Daguerre invented the diorama, which allowed viewers to remain stationary and watch moving scenes. Dioramas involved moving screens, props that appeared in front of the paintings, narration, and lighting and sound effects. Viewers could watch the seasons change in a landscape or hear the church bells in a city. Dioramas required a very complex building: In the United States, especially, there was a craze for something a little different — a moving panorama painted on a huge unspooling canvas. Audiences would sit and watch the painting cross the room in front of them while musicians played and narrators explained the scene. The most famous of these was a “three-mile-long” (really about a Banvard toured his picture all over the country and eventually took it England, where he demonstrated it for Queen Victoria in 1849: The painting was eventually divided into a bunch of smaller pieces and is now lost. So what led to the decline of the “great picture,” of art as an event? Cultural factors played a part. The Paris Salon, which had started it all, began to lose its influence as a new generation of impressionist artists challenged the primacy of big, realistic historical paintings. People got tired of panoramas and the like, too — you might go see one or two of them, but you weren’t going to go every weekend. Public museums allowed people (those who lived in big cities, at least) to see great works of art whenever they wanted, lessening the excitement around paintings. And finally, more middle-class people were able to travel, either to see museums in other cities or to see the cities themselves, making panoramas redundant. Technology changed things, too. Louis Daguerre undermined his own diorama business by helping to invent photography. It simply became impractical for artists to labor over canvases to realistically depict what a camera could capture in seconds. And moving pictures emerged in the late 1800s, providing audiences with a much more immersive spectacle. By the early 1900s, the era of the “great picture” was over, replaced by other forms of entertainment. Now, of course, you can see whatever you want whenever you want — as long as you are willing to pinch and zoom. It kind of makes me long for the days of the panorama. This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: Or you can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week! You're currently a free subscriber to |