---
subject: "The Monday Media Diet with Laura Mayer"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-07-18 10:19:25
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Laura Mayer (LM) was introduced to us by Reilly Brennan who burned down the Internet with his Tell us about yourself. My name is Laura Mayer. I’m a longtime podcast producer and executive (yes, that is a thing). I’ve been around Big Podcasting for awhile, developing or producing shows like the first season of Malcolm Gladwell’s Revisionist History, Happier with Gretchen Rubin, The Dream, The Just Enough Family, and Bad Blood: The Final Chapter, to name a few. I went out to work for myself in February. This is to say: I’ve produced many podcasts and exactly one human child, Joanna, pictured above. A lot of my friends (and a few of my enemies) got rich, rich, rich over the last few years via podcasting. I managed to somehow miss that particular opportunity. But! I’m making my own luck with my new podcast Describe your media diet. I listen to a lot of podcasts. My non-work listening tends to skew chat. My favorite show right now is During the initial COVID lockdown I came across this show called I read a lot of Substacks. “ I am on Twitter a bit. I really like it when people tweet jokes. What’s the last great book you read?
What are you reading now?
What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication? Okay, so my reading device is an iPad mini. I love the damn iPad mini. I love that it’s so small. I love that it asks for so little. I love that it gives me so much. This is to say, I’m ashamed to say I haven’t bought a physical magazine since before Covid. I still maintain a ritual I’ve had since middle school as it relates to magazines (I technically have a degree in “Magazine Journalism” - a Bachelor of Science! So I am an EXPERT): That’s taking a Benadryl (my drug of choice) and reading the latest issue of Vanity Fair from “cover-to-cover.” Or, as far away from one cover as I can get given the Benadryl. Who should everyone be reading that they’re not? Consumer Reports! It’s a very useful magazine. I’m sure people read it – it’s thick with ads – so perhaps this isn’t the best response. But, I don’t hear people talking about Consumer Reports a lot on TikTok or whatever, that’s for sure. My husband and I have one main goal as parents: to try to keep the kid alive. Having a child has been an exercise in buying stuff. Consumer Reports allows us to stay up to date on any recalls (or other consumer reports) that are relevant (or deeply irrelevant) to our lives. Right after we had the kid, a little over a year ago, my husband opened up Consumer Reports and saw that our dresser had been recalled due to it being a tipping hazard. He HATED that dresser anyway. But, it gave him a good excuse to get a refund for it. Also, “The Farmer’s Almanac.” On Christmas my dad sent my daughter a copy with the note: “Every baby needs a Farmer’s Almanac for their first Christmas.” Can’t argue with the truth. What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone? The way for me to really turn my brain off is by playing repetitive, time management games. Your Diners Dash, your Overcookeds etc. A few months ago, right after the baby started sleeping at night, I downloaded this game called “Delicious World.” Note: this game is not good. But it does allow me to gin up, and then zap out, a huge amount of anxious energy as I serve croissants to crowds of increasingly angry videogame customers. Plane or train? Train for getting work done. Plane for getting scared and having anxious access to the Hudson News. What is one place everyone should visit? I have gone basically nowhere in my life, physically. I went to a very good, very … um, family-run…zoo in Indiana once. I got very close to some kind of huge cat. I was too young to realize that that family-run zoo shouldn’t have had a panther or whatever it was. Being face to face with a panther as a kid seems like something everyone should do? Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into. You may remember the This isn’t the rabbit hole. The rabbit hole is: When the giraffe was born the advertisement in the lower right of the screen switched from “Toys R Us” to “Babies R Us.” I recently spent several hours trying to understand the various ads they sold on that livestream, how they measured the CPM, and whether I should try to book whoever sold those ads on my podcast. (LM) WITI x McKinsey: An ongoing partnership where we highlight interesting McKinsey research, writing, and data. Saying no could advance your career. When was the last time you were asked to take on non promotable work? Handling tasks or assignments that help your organization but not your career can have a profound effect on women’s jobs and lives. In a new Author Talks interview, Lise Vesterlund explains why women so often agree to it—and — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Laura (LM) —
You’re a free subscriber to |