---
subject: "The Premier League TV Blackout edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-08-17 10:16:39
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Matt here. We’re two weeks into a new English Premier League football season, and it’s shaping up to be a cracker so far. Liverpool—part of a duopoly with Manchester City that has dominated the League in recent years—have drawn two games that they should have won, and Manchester United look like they have finally hit rock bottom after multiple seasons of overspending and underachievement. The WITI collective has chosen Why is this interesting?
The English Football league structure is almost unique in world football, in that it’s structured around a pyramid that connects every club in the country in an unbroken chain of promotion and relegation. There are no franchises in English football—every year, all the clubs have to play for the right to stay in their league. The top squads get promoted to the league above while the bottom are relegated to the league below. The pyramid gives fans the dream that, with the right investment and recruitment, their team could progress to the top of the pyramid and reap the financial rewards of the Premier League. Brentford achieved this in the 21/22 season, getting back to the top flight of English football after The playoff game that decides which team from the Championship gets promoted to the Premier League is now reckoned to be the most But the same pyramid is the reason why the English football teams leave money on the table by having a 3pm Saturday blackout. On 22nd August, 1964, the BBC Most opposed to the broadcast was A soccer game on a 1970s television as imagined by DALL-E Over the nearly 60 years since the blackout started, there has been little evidence that TV has affected football league attendance. In 1964, the With so much potential money from those 3pm games left on the table, will we ever see Bob Lord’s TV blackout lifted? There was a reprise during COVID, when clubs were banned from having fans in the stadiums. For a brief, wonderful moment, fans could legally watch every game their club played, assuming they had the right VOD subscriptions. But as soon as the COVID ban was lifted, the 3pm blackout returned. Perhaps in 2024, the 60th anniversary of football broadcasting, it will finally be time to let people watch any match they want. (ML) WITI is now a Brentford Fan Account link of the day: The Quick Links: The first ever broadcast of [Match Of The Day in 1964 is on Youtube](https://substack.com/redirect/81fe1292-6328-44af-b7d9-0a9ef8bcc348?r=8o54n)A great thread showing how [Premier League teams performed in the 2021/22 season](https://substack.com/redirect/821fbf31-d406-4450-803f-358c16967eeb?r=8o54n)based on multiple financial criteria. Brentford come out on top of a lot of them!. (ML)Although of course, the only league table that counts is this - [which club in the Premier League has the best food?](https://substack.com/redirect/7809c757-bda2-4ff3-bc39-9dd4c2aa7f6d?r=8o54n)(ML)
— WITI x McKinsey: An ongoing partnership where we highlight interesting McKinsey research, writing, and data. Sustainability and innovation in fashion. The leader of a cutting-edge institute talks about innovative new materials that “eat” carbon and may enable cotton to grow without irrigation, as well as the potential for building the world’s shortest supply chain in two 40-foot containers. — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Matt (ML) —
You’re a free subscriber to |