---
subject: "On Power and Stupidity"
from: "Brian Klaas <brianklaas@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-03-27 10:41:46
labels: ["Brian Klaas", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_1599487573263287548", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Thank you for reading The Garden of Forking Paths. Part of this edition is for paid subscribers, so to unlock it, gain full access to 190+ essays, and support my writing, please consider upgrading to a paid subscription, for just $4/month. I rely exclusively on reader support. Alternatively, support my work by buying my new book, When the fools leading the world’s most powerful country accidentally text war plans to a journalist, it’s time to ask an obvious question: Why do so many idiots end up in power? Bertrand Russell took up that question in 1946—shortly after an alarmingly large number of powerful and malicious idiots killed around 85 million people across the globe. Russell offered a concise insight: “The fundamental cause of the trouble is that in the modern world the stupid are cocksure while the intelligent are full of doubt.” Nowhere were the world’s powerful but cocksure fools more exposed than in the metastasizing Signal scandal, in which America’s ever-swaggering and perfectly-coiffed texters spent more time checking their hair than checking whether their little fingers were sending classified intelligence to the wrong person before they Once exposed, they then racked their big brains for how to limit the damage from their boneheaded mistake and came up with another ingenious idea: what if we lied about it by falsely claiming that none of the information being shared was classified? Surely nothing bad could happen next! It never occurred to them, it seems, that the inevitable outcome of that lie was for the journalist, The Atlantic’s Jeffrey Goldberg, to “You say it was no big deal and wasn’t classified? Okay, then, here it is!” (For the record, if sharing specific attack plans, with specific weapons systems, and specific targets before an airstrike isn’t classified, it’s hard to imagine what is). Beyond the flagrant danger of being so careless with critical military intelligence and the blatant nefariousness in There is no The most powerful people in the world are both stupid and incompetent. This is a rather depressing state of affairs, which would be mildly amusing if it wasn’t so chillingly destructive. The incessant clicking noise you hear in your mind when you read the news these days is the Ticking Time Bomb of Imbeciles.™² Alas, there seems to be nobody around who can defuse it. (Even if there were someone with the requisite technical expertise, they were These are the same people, mind you, who work for the man who claimed you needed an Trapped in a burning theatre of the absurd as we all are, it brings to mind some of the opening lines of The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy, in which Douglas Adams opines on the frequently dire blunders of our maddeningly flawed species:
I have, for better or worse, devoted quite a lot of time and a considerable number of brain cells to contemplating Observation 1: Humans confer power based not on whether someone would be good at wielding power, but on whether they are good at getting power. Observation 2: Increasing social complexity creates greater capacity for boundless stupidity and a higher risk that some of us will be hoodwinked by charismatic imbeciles. Observation 3: Idiocy, carelessness, and incompetence frequently change history in consequential ways, but it’s far easier to break things than to fix them. Observation 4: Because we like to imagine that people in power are clever and know what they’re doing, we feel compelled to perform intellectual gymnastics in pursuit of sticking rational explanations onto egregious stupidity. These dynamics of power do not work in obvious ways, so we must turn to scientific studies, to history’s great political blunders—from Four Seasons to Four Pests—and to exploring why systems of modern power have launched us all on a rapidly leaking voyage, all aboard the Ship of Fools... Keep reading with a 7-day free trialSubscribe to The Garden of Forking Paths to keep reading this post and get 7 days of free access to the full post archives. A subscription gets you:
|