---
subject: "Will The EU Choose to Compete?"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <the-diff@ghost.io>"
to: ""
date: 2024-09-16 13:45:12
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
In this issue: - Will The EU Choose to Compete?—Mario Draghi has produced a detailed report that is unsparing in its assessment of the EU's policy mistakes, and surprisingly pragmatic about solutions. Some of them will take time to implement, but in a few cases there's potential for immediate shifts.
- Unit Economics—The rise of the three-mile train.
- CoreWeave and Capital Structure Arbitrage—CoreWeave as a well-structured trade.
- AI and the Distribution Problem—Some of the best use cases for AI only work if they're implemented by the biggest platforms.
- Markets and Narratives—An easily-explained move in Chinese bond prices leads to conspiratorial thinking.
- Convergence—PE as an accidental way to build a better bank.
Today's issue of The Diff is brought to you by our sponsor,
Will The EU Choose to Compete?A popular topic in American tech circles is Europe's inability to compete. There are some cheap shots here, of which I'm guilty, but there are some policy decisions European countries have made that, whether as an unintended consequence or as an accepted policy tradeoff, have made Europe a worse place for growth companies. And that's contributed to making Europe a slower-growing economy: A good place to start is to quickly review some long-term policy choices, by the EU and other countries, that got us close to the recent status quo: First, rich countries other than the US tend to consume more leisure as their GDP rises. That takes the form of shorter hours, more vacations, and earlier retirements. The US is an outlier in that respect (as of a few years ago, But in a steady state, the impact of those two is different: lower work hours will reduce output and almost certainly reduce growth (at least some of individuals' productivity growth comes from deliberate practice; increase your work hours 10% and you're getting 10% more practice at whatever you do, and even if your skill peaks, it peaks earlier—and you have more time in your career to transfer skills to more junior people). But the impact of earlier retirement is actually mixed. If people in your country retire at 60 rather than 65, then at a given level of output per worker they'll consume less per year, both while they work (because they're saving) and when they retire (because the consumption patterns post-retirement are anchored to their existing consumption). But that output still exists, and if it isn't being consumed then it's being saved instead; over their working life they’ll save more money, and over the course of their retirement their average savings balance will be higher because they’re starting with more and spending it at a slower pace. If there are high-return investment opportunities, earlier retirements can actually lead to more growth, since they mean that more output is invested rather than consumed. A second issue, more specific to Europe, is trying to provide labor market stability at the transaction level rather than in the aggregate. There's a natural case for making it hard to fire workers; a company with 500 people is not going to be put out of business if it suddenly has to work with 499 instead, but a worker who loses their job can end up in a tough spot. Similarly, a landlord who jacks up rents can afford the occasional vacancy better than their tenant can handle being suddenly homeless. But the equilibrium from codifying this in law is that it's a tax on providing jobs or property, and that tax isn't always offset by subsidies elsewhere. The US has more or less decided that this kind of friction is okay. And this collides with a third problem: while the US government's immigration policies are a mess, the US's growth industries are Meanwhile, European tech protectionism often takes the form of punishing outside companies retroactively for their success instead of proactively encouraging local ones to grow. And this is true even of superficially neutral rules like GDPR: a fine levied based on global revenue is an implicit tax on companies that do business outside of Europe, relative to the ones that do all of their business locally. Draghi's report actually makes some cautiously negative remarks about such rules ("while the ambitions of the EU’s GDPR and AI Act are commendable..."). The report indirectly contrasts this with China's approach of subsidizing local companies while making it hard for foreign ones to do business there, especially for certain strategic inputs: China doesn't have dominant share in extracting many metals and minerals, but they have over 50% share of processing facilities for cobalt, lithium, and rare earth metals, and for graphite their processing share is 100%. This points to one of the most insightful frameworks from Draghi's report. Part of the reason the US has grown so much faster than Europe is a story of volatility exposure in two places, first in energy and second in strategically important technologies. In the early 2000s, the US was basically short energy volatility, which meant being short geopolitical volatility. If the world got crazier, to the upside or the downside, US consumers suffered: a crazier-upside world was what we mostly got, with China's growth putting constant upward pressure on the price of commodities, most importantly oil. That meant that globalization was a drag on US consumers' spending power, which was offset for most of that period by continuous appreciation in assets, especially real estate, and advances in the financial technology that turned housing appreciation in Phoenix into demand for imports and trips to Disney World. This was obviously unsustainable, but, fortunately, it flipped around due to fracking. Volatility matters, but levels matter, too; natural gas is much more expensive to transport in liquified form than through pipelines. For a while, this was fine for Europe, since they were getting plenty of it from Russia. That's no longer the case. And as a result, the report notes that gas prices in Europe are 3-5x the US level. And Europe has some energy-intensive industries, like steel, cement, and chemicals. Europe also charges higher carbon taxes than other places, which would be noble if they had otherwise lower costs, but in effect means that they're paying for the frictional cost of moving emissions elsewhere. The report proposes a few solutions to this (yes, like American wonks they would strongly prefer a more streamlined permitting process for new investments in renewables and electricity transmission; there's also a suggestion that environmental directives be weakened when they interfere with renewables). But they also propose some bolder moves. One plan is to use some of Ukraine's natural gas storage capacity to have bigger reserves, blunting the impact of price swings. (The report proposes "counter-guarantees to de-risk gas storage in Ukraine," though it's unclear what these counter-guarantees might be.) It also suggests a sort of Organization of Natural Gas Importing Countries, where the EU would collectively bargain for long-term access to natural gas at more fixed prices. A collective buying organization would avoid some bidding wars between countries, but it wouldn't change the fact that natural gas prices are intrinsically volatile, and there's a reason long-term agreements are usually benchmarkedto market prices rather than fixed. What they could do is buy LNG at the usual variable cost structure, and sell it to domestic firms with longer-term fixed-price contracts, and issue EU-wide bonds (a precedent they One of the surprises in the report is on telecoms. This is partly a surprise because they don't seem that indispensable to long-term growth. Yes, we all use more bandwidth as we get richer, and sure, smart cars and smart industrial devices will need a lot more. But the other surprise is how the report analyzes them, which has the flavor of a sort of global macro activist banging the drum that Europe would get a great IRR from restructuring its telecom industry. There's literally a The reason for this is another policy choice: the EU encourages competition in telecommunication, and tends to have more small firms offering it, especially small companies serving small countries. This keeps rates low, but it also keeps investment low, and eventually means that Europe is the single best place to get mediocre service at a great price. If there's a ceiling to the economic utility of providing more bandwidth, that's a sound policy aim, but it's also a bet against progress. (Somewhat surprisingly, this report doesn't seem to have moved the share prices of many tiny European telcos—of which, again, there are just far too many. In the aggregate, European telcos with enterprise values under $5bn trade at 6.2x EBITDA, below any of the big US carriers, and there are plenty with a low single-digit multiple. Later this week, paying subscribers will get a more detailed look at some of the opportunities here.) It's a very Of all of the proposals in the report, loosening up M&A restrictions on telecommunications sector mergers sounds like the easiest to implement. Draghi's proposals have a sensible, technocratic flavor to them: if the EU is one market, then competition among mobile carriers should be considered EU-wide, and it's fine for tiny countries to have fewer of them. If anticompetitive mergers are a problem, regulators should deal with that after the merger has that effect, rather than beforehand. And if a merger reduces consumer choice, but also gives the buyer an incentive to invest in better infrastructure and in R&D, maybe giving consumers a smaller number of better choices is the right move. The report highlights some bright spots, like space, where European firms are doing well, and defense, where Europe's problem has been demand-side rather than supply-side—they're making weapons, but exporting almost 40% of them. Pharma is another clear case where European companies are globally competitive, albeit with room for improvement. Overall, there are Every country that's trying to grow its economy has to decide where the shock absorbers for the inevitable volatility will be. A good reading of this report is that the EU is trying to act as if that volatility simply doesn't exist: Russia will always be there to sell natural gas; Chinese electric vehicles will never compete with European internal combustion engines; and if every European is viewing the digital world through a lens provided by an American smartphone OS, an American social network, and an American search engine, it's not the sort of problem that periodic random fines can't somehow fix. The US's implicit system is that the two big shock absorbers are the Federal government and the net worths of the very rich—both categories a) have vast amounts of wealth, and b) tend to see disproportionate drawdowns during recessions, and individual impacts when industries get disrupted. This report is a call for the EU to recognize that volatility and uncertainty exist, but they're not a good excuse for inaction. The magnitude of this effect depends on many factors—for example, savers in Japan tend to put their money into safe assets, and are implicitly funding the country's deficits through their spending. Japan does automate, but its ability to do so isn't really constrained by household savings. But as long as 1) savers' money either goes directly into risk assets or at least gets channeled into those assets, and 2) there's some level of home-country bias—a German retiree would rather own shares of Siemens than of GE Vernova or Hitachi—then these savings ultimately lower the cost of capital for domestic growth. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/558583cb?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)Some developing countries make this decision by omission, and in their context it has the side benefit of encouraging workers to save as much as possible because there won't be a safety net waiting for them. That crushes near-term consumption, but funds a lot of investment. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/f7a4d31e?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)In light of the talent-importing point above, one of the key players in fracking was George P. Mitchell, whose father [was a first-generation immigrant from Greece named Savvas Paraskevopoulos, but changed his name when "a paymaster got tired of writing his long name and threatened to fire him](https://www.thediff.co/r/df705685?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)."[↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/9ef76991?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
You're on the free list for The Diff. Last week, paying subscribers read about A Word From Our SponsorsCan this really be true?Unit EconomicsTransportation is often a more-is-better business: when planes, ships, and trains get bigger, the unit cost per passenger- or ton-mile goes down. Some of this is just physics: you're expanding the volume of what's being moved faster than you're increasing the area that has to overcome air resistance, and some of the cost of friction both within the engine and between the train and the tracks are lower. The result of this is CoreWeave and Capital Structure ArbitrageCoreWeave, which is in the business of buying GPUs that other users can't get their hands on and then renting them out to those users, is AI and the Distribution ProblemAI tools are great at handling tasks that can be described in simple natural language, occupying the niche where something is too trivial to delegate but annoying to just do. This makes them great as glue between apps—but most chatbots don't, by default, have access to all of the apps that they need to handle a task like "put all of the dates from this document into my calendar" or "Make me a list of all the people I frequently communicate with and are located in New York so I can figure out who to meet with when I visit in a few weeks." These tasks can be done if the AI tool is something integrated with an OS, or with a suite of frequently-used apps that are all controlled by the same company. So, at least so far, Markets and NarrativesThe Diff has written a few times about the decline in Chinese government bond yields, which is partly a function of their low supply relative to other big economies' sovereign debt, and partly a result of Chinese investors having few other enticing options. ConvergenceThe classic private equity model is to borrow a lot in order to buy a company, fix it up and/or wait for the market to turn, and then flip it. Over time, this model has evolved, as PE firms concluded that 1) they can do more trades than that, and 2) there are times when they want to be selling equity and buying debt rather than the reverse. As they've moved in this direction, some of them have locked up long-term capital that gives their funding similar duration to their lending, in the form of life insurance companies. And that leads to another natural expansion: Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. See a sampling of current open roles below: - A well funded early stage startup founded by two SpaceX engineers is building the software stack for hardware companies. They're looking for a data engineer with 7+ years of experience across the data engineering stack, ideally with experience building distributed systems in Python or Go. (LA)
- Growing edtech company with successes online and offline is looking for an influencer who can reach the parents of gifted and talented kids. (Remote, full- or part-time).
- An AI startup building unique tools for compliance-focused companies is looking for a director of information security and compliance with 5+ years of info sec related experience. Experience with HIPAA, FedRAMP a plus. (NYC)
- Growing team at a multi-strategy firm is looking for senior quantitative researchers with direct experience or exposure to a relevant field (statistics, optimization, ML) 250k-400k base + bonus (NYC)
- The policy development arm of an established stablecoin is looking for an analyst to help define US crypto policy from first principles. Some background in crypto or policy preferred, but not required. (Remote)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. |
||||||||||
|
|
|
||||||||||
|