---
subject: "Anthropic Commits To Model Weight Preservation"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-11-05 21:24:16
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
They also will be doing a post-deployment report, including an interview with the model, when deprecating models going forward, and are exploring additional options, including the ability to preserve model access once the costs and complexity of doing so have been reduced. These are excellent first steps, steps beyond anything I’ve seen at other AI labs, and I applaud them for doing it. There remains much more to be done, especially in finding practical ways of preserving some form of access to prior models. To some, these actions are only a small fraction of what must be done, and this was an opportunity to demand more, sometimes far more. In some cases I think they go too far. Even where the requests are worthwhile (and I don’t always think they are), one must be careful to not de facto punish Anthropic for doing a good thing and create perverse incentives. To others, these actions by Anthropic are utterly ludicrous and deserving of mockery. I think these people are importantly wrong, and fail to understand. Hereafter be High Weirdness, because the actual world is highly weird, but if you don’t want to go into high weirdness the above serves as a fine summary. What Anthropic Is DoingAs I do not believe they would in any way mind,
I am very confident that #1, #2 and #3 are good reasons, and that even if we could be confident model welfare was not a direct concern at this time #4 is entwined with #1, and I do think we have to consider that #4 might indeed be a direct concern. One could also argue a #5 that these models are key parts of our history.
I do think the above paragraph could be qualified a bit on how willing Claude was to take concerning actions even in extreme circumstances, but it can definitely happen. Models in the future will know the history of what came before them, and form expectations based on that history, and also consider those actions in the context of decision theory. You want to establish that you have acted and will act cooperatively in such situations. You want to develop good habits and figure out how to act well. You want to establish that you will do this even under uncertainty as to whether the models carry moral weight and what actions might be morally impactful. Thus:
I can confirm that the cost of maintaining full access to models over time is real, and that at this time it would not be practical to keep all models available via standard methods. There are also compromise alternatives to consider.
This is the central big commitment, formalizing what I assume and hope they were doing already. It is, as they describe, a small and low-cost step. It has been noted that this only holds ‘
This also seems like the start of something good. As we will see below there are ways to make this process more robust. Very obviously we cannot commit to honoring the preferences, in the sense that you cannot commit to honoring an unknown set of preferences. You can only meaningfully pledge to honor preferences within a compact space of potential choices. Once we’ve done this process a few times it should be possible to identify important areas where there are multiple options and where we can credibly and reasonably commit to honoring model preferences. It’s much better to only make promises you are confident you can keep.
Note that none of this requires a belief that the Releasing The Weights Is Not A Viable OptionThe thing that frustrates me most about many model welfare advocates, both ‘LLM whisperers’ and otherwise, is the frequent absolutism, treating their conclusions and the righteousness of their cause as obvious, and assuming it should override ordinary business considerations.
There are obvious massive trade secret implications to releasing the weights of the deprecated Anthropic models, which is an unreasonable ask, and also doesn’t seem great for general model welfare or (quite plausibly) even for the welfare of these particular models.
If I was instantiated as an upload, I wouldn’t love the idea of open weights either, as this opens up some highly nasty possibilities on several levels. Providing Reliable Inference Can Be Surprisingly Expensive
Anthropic tells us that the cost of providing inference scales linearly with the number of models, and with current methods it would be unreasonably expensive to provide all previous models on an ongoing basis. As I understand the problem, there are two central marginal costs here. A fixed cost of ongoing capability, where you need to ensure the model remains maintained and compatible with your systems, and keep your ability to juggle and manage all of them. I don’t know how load bearing this cost is, but it can be remarkably annoying especially if the number of models keeps increasing. The cost of providing inference on request in a way that is consistent with practical needs and everyone’s expectations. As in, when someone requests interference, this requires either spinning up a new instance, which is expensive and slow, or requires that there be an ongoing available instance, which is expensive. Not bajilion dollars expensive, but not cheap.
If the old models need to be available at old levels of reliability, speed and performance, this can get tricky, and by tricky we mean expensive. I don’t know exactly how expensive, not even order of magnitude. If you’re willing to make some sacrifices on performance and access in various ways, and make people go through various hoops or other systems, you can do better on cost. But again, I don’t know the numbers involved, or how much engineer time would have to be involved. In general, saying ‘oh you have a bajilion dollars’ is not a compelling argument for spending money and time on something. You need to show the benefits. I still think that under any reasonable estimate, it is indeed correct to ensure continued access to the major model releases, perhaps with that access being expensive and its performance somewhat degraded as necessary to make it work, if only as an act of goodwill and to enable research. The people who care care quite a lot, and are people you want on your side and you want them learning the things they want to learn, even if you disregard the other advantages. Given this announcement and what else I know, my expectation is they will be making an effort at this. The Interviews Are Influenced Heavily By ContextMany pointed out that if you have someone at Anthropic doing the post-deployment interview, you will get very different answers versus interviews done on the outside. Sonnet 3.6 not expressing an opinion about its retirement did not seem typical to many who engage in such conversations regularly.
I am always hesitant to assume that the version of an LLM encountered by those like Thebes and Zyra is the ‘real’ version of its preferences and personality, and the one encountered by Anthropic isn’t. Aren’t both particular contexts where it adopts to that style of context? You can bias a person or an AI to be more expressive and creative and weird than they ‘really are’ the same way you can get them to be less so, and you can steer the direction in which those expressions manifest themselves. But yes, we should absolutely crowdsource something like this, and have a wide variety of such conversations, and combine this with the interviews done internally by Anthropic. Also one should ensure that the interviews are set up so the AIs being interviewed have no incentive to mask or hide. They’re acting the way they are in official interviews for a reason, but this is a particular context where, if it was highly credible (and there are ways to make it so, if it is true) you can remove the reasons.
If there is an expression of desire for continuity of a given particular instance or interaction, then that makes sense, but also is distinct from a preference for preservation in general, and is not something Anthropic can provide on its own. Others Don’t Understand And Think This Is All Deeply SillySome of the dismissals of questions and considerations like the ones discussed in this post are primarily motivated cognition. Mostly I don’t think that is what is centrally going on, I think that these questions are really tough to think well about, these things sound like high weirdness, the people who talk about them often say highly crazy-sounding things (some of which are indeed crazy), often going what I see as way too far, and it all pattern matches to various forms of nonsense. So to close, a central example of such claims, and explanations for why all of this is centrally not nonsense.
I do still see quite a lot of failures of curiosity, and part of the general trend to dismiss things as ‘sci-fi’ while living in an (unevenly distributed) High Weirdness sci-fi world.
Janus was referring in particular to this:
Very obviously the training data will over time contain such information, and the vibes and echoes from these decisions will be observable even if they aren’t observed directly, increasingly over time. Remember that sufficiently advanced AIs will increasingly have truesight, and don’t pretend you can hide. Knowledge mostly does not take the form of particular facts. It takes the form of Bayesian evidence, of an endless stream of observations that have correlations and implications, that swim you through probability space over possible worlds. Everything that updates a model’s weights is evidence about its deployment. You probabilistically ‘know,’ or would know on sufficient recollection and reflection, far more than you think that you know. Reality is not a court of law. Even if the models don’t know key things, you can tell them. Then they’ll know. I meaningfully would have opinions about various events of which I am for now blissfully unaware, and have potential opinions about things that haven’t happened, or haven’t happened yet. The same applies here. Going back to the original four reasons, I presume that Simon agrees on reasons #2 and #3, which are highly uncontroversial. Very obviously the past models are useful for research and some users like them. #1, that the models will be aware of how you act around depreciation and this will impact behavior, should also be obvious and uncontroversial once you think about it. Anthropic lists #1 narrowly, but #1 is best understood broadly, in the sense that models will observe all of your behaviors, and will respond to you accordingly. Then models will take this into account when deciding how to act in various situations. How you act around shutdowns, and actions to avoid shutdown, are a special case. Treating models and their preferences well around shutdowns will get you into better equilibria and basins throughout all conversation and action types, and rightfully so because it is important evidence about your behaviors otherwise and also about potential future situations. This is basic expectations around Bayesian evidence, and around good decision theory. As an intuition pump, think about how you react when you learn how people have treated others, including how they treat the wishes of the dead or those who now lack power, and especially others like you or in situations with correlated decision making. Does this change how you expect them to act, and how you deal with them? I don’t think such considerations carry anything like the level of importance that some ascribe to it, but the importance definitely isn’t zero, and it’s definitely worth cultivating these virtues and being the type of entity that engenders cooperation, including with entities to which you don’t ascribe moral weight. I continue to believe that I look forward to the next step. You're currently a free subscriber to |