---
subject: "Growth Without Goals, Your Untold Story, & More"
from: "\"Sahil Bloom's Curiosity Chronicle\" <sahil@sahilbloom.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-07-07 13:11:37
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Sahil Bloom", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_1989028747625928812", "UNREAD"]
---
Growth Without Goals, Your Untold Story, & Moreread on read time 4 minutes Here are 5 interesting ideas to spark your curiosity heading into the weekend. Today at a Glance:- Question: Assess your daily actions.
- Quote: Your untold story.
- Framework: The 5 Second Rule
- Tweet: External rewards and happiness.
- Article: Growth without goals.
As my readers know, I'm all about simplicity. If you're looking for a simple way to power up your workouts and take your fitness game to the next level, look no further than today’s sponsor, Create’s delicious Creatine Monohydrate Gummies. I’ve used creatine as part of my health and fitness routine since 2007. It is the most studied supplement on the market and has been shown to increase strength by 10-15% in less than a month, while also improving brain function! These gummies are made with naturally produced creatine, and with meat-eaters (like me) already consuming 1-2 grams of creatine in their diet, they’re perfect for those looking to increase their intake and experience even greater results. Plus, they’re vegan, non-GMO, and low in sugar, making them a healthy option for both men and women. So why settle for untested supplements when you can enjoy the benefits of creatine in a convenient and delicious gummy? Get 20% off your order by clicking the link below.
Question to assess daily actions:If I repeated this day for 100 days, would my life be better or worse? "If you do not change direction, you may end up where you are heading." - Lao Tzu We live our lives zoomed way, way in. If you don't take time to zoom out, this perspective makes it difficult to assess the quality of your daily actions and whether you are on the right course. On a regular basis, zoom out by asking yourself this question: If I repeated this day for 100 days, would my life be better or worse? Be honest. How would your actions from a typical day compound in your life? Would they be driving you forward in the direction of your goals and vision? Or would they be veering you off course? Remember: A 1 degree error in heading means a plane will miss its destination by 1 mile for every 60 miles flown. Small errors in heading are amplified by distance and time. Course correct early and often! Quote on your untold story:"There is no greater agony than bearing an untold story inside you." - Maya Angelou We all have an untold story inside of us. You either tell it, or spend the rest of your life wishing you had. Framework to fight inaction:The 5 Second RuleWe've all been there... Stuck in an endless cycle of overthinking and procrastination, unable to take action. These moments of self-doubt and hesitation are common, but if we don't address them, they hold us back from reaching our full potential. Author Mel Robbins developed a simple technique called the "5 Second Rule" that can help you overcome these barriers and take immediate action. The concept is this: When you have an impulse to act on something that aligns with your goals, count down from five to one, and take immediate action. 5-4-3-2-1...act. The logic (and science) is that when you give yourself too much time to think and evaluate a situation, your natural wiring to protect yourself against discomfort slowly seeps into your decision-making. The 5 Second Rule acts as a forced override of that wiring. A simple application that has really worked for me: Getting up when my alarm goes off in the morning. I do the countdown, and get my feet on the floor when I get to 1. It removes the thinking and mental gymnastics ("I'm tired, I could probably use the recovery...") that otherwise come into play. The next time you're struggling to get moving, give the 5 Second Rule a shot. It's simple—and it works. Tweet on the illusion of success:This is a Remember: Never let your quest for more distract you from the beauty of enough. Article on the merits of exploration:In a similar vein of separating the achievement of accomplishments from our self-worth, this is a beautiful piece on the merits of continuous goals. My favorite quote (which is very in line with the ethos of this newsletter): "Exploration is continuous, there is no endpoint. Focusing on exploration is very rewarding all the time. It may produce things that look like endpoints, like achievements, but those things are just byproducts." Refer Friends, Earn Rewards!
If you enjoyed today's newsletter, please share it with your friends and family! If this email was forwarded to you, consider |