---
subject: "Why Passion is Overrated, Types of Time, & More"
from: "\"Sahil Bloom's Curiosity Chronicle\" <sahil@sahilbloom.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-09-16 09:02:33
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Sahil Bloom", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_1989028747625928812", "UNREAD"]
---
The 2 Types of Time, Buying the Dip, & MoreWelcome to the new members of the curiosity tribe who have joined us this week. Join the 118,000+ others who are receiving high-signal, curiosity-inducing content every single week.
Today at a Glance:- Quote: Do to learn.
- Framework: Telic & Atelic activities.
- Tweet: The two types of time.
- Article: Should you buy the dip?
- Podcast: Mark Cuban on passion being overrated.
Today's newsletter is brought to you by When my son was born a few months ago, I suddenly realized we had a need for life insurance. The problem? Finding the best and most affordable coverage is a huge pain. The process is filled with old, analog processes. What's more, nearly 1 in 4 people only have life insurance coverage through work, but most people need 10x more coverage to properly provide for their families. These work-sponsored policies aren't portable—meaning if you leave your job, you’ll have a gap in coverage when you need it most. Policygenius is a modern insurance marketplace that combines digital tools with human expertise to simplify the process of getting life insurance to properly protect the people you love most. Most importantly, the licensed agents at Policygenius work for you, not the insurance companies, so you can trust their advocacy. Compare quotes today and you could save 50% or more on your coverage.
One Quote:"The most effective way to do it, is to do it." - Amelia Earhart If you want to achieve great things, flip the traditional model on its head: - Old Way: Learn —> Do
- New Way: Do —> Learn
Just get started. One Framework:Telic vs. Atelic ActivitiesTelos is a Greek word meaning purpose, end, or goal. From this root, philosophers have conceptualized that there are two types of activities in life: - Telic: Activities with a purpose, end, or goal.
- Atelic: Activities with no purpose, end, or goal.
Telic activities have a desired end in mind. Atelic activities do not—they are done in the abstract, for their own sake, and with no fixed time or purpose. As Khe Hy points out in This traditional thinking leads to a several flawed behavioral patterns: - We feel a deep guilt for engaging in periods of rest, solitude, or free time. That creeping dread as we linger a bit too long in bed with our spouse and children, the sense that we need to start moving when we stop and stare at some birds for too long, or the stress that arises from an afternoon snooze in that lasted a bit too long.
- We prioritize the urgent (and consistently believe everything is far more urgent than reality). I once swerved off the highway to answer an email from my boss that I believed was truly urgent. The hold that the illusion of urgency has over us is insane.
- We desire to be busy, because it makes us feel good about ourselves. Busyness has become the modern day flex—but
[it's a trap](https://click.convertkit-mail.com/zluq9ee70xsnh474mkxap/p8heh9h9womzr4hq/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuc2FoaWxibG9vbS5jb20vbmV3c2xldHRlci9ob3ctdG8tZXNjYXBlLXRoZS1idXN5LXRyYXA=). We embrace busyness because it feels like progress, when more often than not it is movement for movement's sake. - We keep ourselves on a treadmill of progress and achievement. The completion of each telic activity simply moves us into the start of the next one. We never leave space for liminal moments, because the stillness terrifies us.
As I've written about in several issues recently, it's time we fight back against this traditional thinking. We need to embrace atelic activities—not for the progress they may create (though I would argue they do!), but for their own sake. A few ideas for you this weekend: - Take that walk. Ditch the business book on tape, the mindset podcast, and the pump up music. Just walk.
- Savor a moment of sweetness. The next time you experience a moment of bliss, pause and savor it. Think about the smells, the tastes, the feelings of the moment. Kurt Vonnegut captured the sentiment best: "If this isn't nice, then what is?"
- Lie in bed 10 minutes longer than feels comfortable. It will pain you to do it, but it starts to break your deeply-embedded patterns.
- Sit in a room alone. Don't do anything for 30 minutes. Reclaim the glory of boredom.
I'd love to hear from you: - Have you felt the guilt associated with rest or free time?
- What atelic activities will you prioritize in your life?
Reply to this email or tweet at me @SahilBloom and I'll try to reply to everyone! P.S. I'm planning to write a deeper dive on the topic of the Paradox of Boredom (how boredom, stillness, and solitude paradoxically do create immense value and progress). If you're interested in seeing it, reply YES to this email. One Tweet:
Continuing with the theme: This was a very cool thread on more Ancient Greek perspectives on time. A few miscellaneous thoughts it sparked: - Elevated Moments: Kairos refers to the moments in life that have elevated importance or stature relative to most. These are the moments where we seem to have a heightened awareness of being.
- Friction & Kairos: I started thinking about how friction is what creates elevated moments—friction and Kairos go hand in hand. Smooth, easy moments tend to pass by without a thought, but the textured, difficult moments are held and feel long and memorable. Perhaps the key to extending our perception of time is to
[embrace more texture and friction in our lives](https://click.convertkit-mail.com/zluq9ee70xsnh474mkxap/6qheh8hp8ez7xoso/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuc2FoaWxibG9vbS5jb20vbmV3c2xldHRlci90aGUtaW1wb3J0YW5jZS1vZi1lbWJyYWNpbmctZnJpY3Rpb24=). - Wheel of Time: This thread also reminded me of the Ancient Indian concept of the Wheel of Time, which says that time simply goes through cycles of creation, destruction, and rebirth. I've often thought about that as a metaphor for our own pursuits and ambitions.
I think a lot about time, in particular how it can be stretched, condensed, and leveraged more effectively in our lives. Harnessing time feels like magic once you internalize the principles around it. I'll plan to write a future deep dive on my frameworks around time. If you're interested in receiving this, reply "YES" to this email. One Article: This is a data-backed piece breaking down whether it makes sense to double down on your investing when markets pull back from their highs. For as long as I can remember, my public market investment strategy has been painfully boring: - Own a small number of low cost, diversified ETFs (all Vanguard for me since they have low expense ratios).
- Execute an automated buy of a small amount of each one every single Monday.
- Selectively execute a manual buy on bigger drops where I smell opportunity.
My rationale is simply that I don't have the time, necessary skills, or particular interest in surfacing individual stocks that represent attractive opportunities, so I go with the easy, proven, dollar-cost-averaging strategy. (Note: This is not investment advice, but honestly, the above would serve the vast majority of people quite well!) This article is really putting my logic around #3 to the test. The data for the S&P 500 does seem to suggest that it's worth increasing your investments during periods of *large* drawdowns. Spoiler Alert: It's even more pronounced when you look at the All Country World Index excluding the U.S. Worth five minutes of your time if you're interested in markets or investing. One Podcast:ReThinking with Adam Grant: Mark Cuban This is a new podcast series from Adam Grant that is sure to become a regular listen for me. The first discussion with Mark Cuban was a great one. A few of my favorite insights: - On Capitalism: I loved the way Mark spoke about capitalism as being about choice. "Capitalism isn't just about trying to make as much money as you can. Capitalism is the opportunity to get the outcomes that you want that give you personal reward. It could be making as much money as possible, having the greatest amount of impact in one way or another and losing as much money as possible. You have that opportunity. It's just, you get to make that choice. And to me, that's what makes capitalism the best system."
- On Time: He hits on something I think about often with respect to time and how remote/hybrid work have created an arbitrage opportunity. "You know, the future of work is an arbitrage in your time. I've been saying that for years, you know, where it's effectively, how much can I get paid per hour per job, whatever it may be. And then how can I effectively use that money to, and arbitrage that money to get people to do things for me that cost less so I have the most time fungible time available to myself. That's effectively what we try to do in our lives."
- On Passion: Mark talks about how "follow your passion" is the worst career advice he has ever gotten. "Follow your efforts. No one quits anything they're good at. If I followed my passions, I'd be still trying to play professional basketball."
Definitely worth your time! Listen to it on Refer Friends, Earn Rewards!
If you enjoyed today's newsletter, please share it with your friends and family!
Where It Happens PodcastHow To Monetize On YouTube With Harley Morenstein Listen to it on This episode is brought to you by AG1 by Athletic Greens is incredible and we have been starting every day with it for several years. It’s just one scoop in 8-12 oz. of water each morning, and you're getting 75 high-quality vitamins, whole-food sourced ingredients, probiotics, and adaptogens to help you start your day right. It's one daily habit that supports gut health, supports the immune system, recovery, energy, and focus! Right now, Athletic Greens is giving you a free 1 year supply of immune-supporting Vitamin D and 5 free travel packs with your first purchase. Take ownership of your health today by going to Sahil’s Hiring ZoneTalent Collective There have been a lot of layoffs lately. But my talent collective currently has 40+ companies across the tech landscape who are actively hiring. If you’re open to hearing about new opportunities, apply to my Talent Collective and get introduced to over 40 of my favorite companies. You can join publicly or anonymously, and leave anytime. Completely free for candidates. Use the link If you’re hiring, request access to start meeting world class candidates open to new opportunities. I send out a new drop every two weeks. Learn more or request access Join the 118,000+ others who are receiving high-signal, curiosity-inducing content every single week.
|