---
subject: "Links For April 2023"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-04-20 04:38:10
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
[Remember, I haven’t independently verified each link. On average, commenters will end up spotting evidence that around two or three of the links in each links post are wrong or misleading. I correct these as I see them, and will highlight important corrections later, but I can’t guarantee I will have caught them all by the time you read this.] 1: The recent horror movie Cocaine Bear was inspired by
2: 3: 4:
5: Poll: 6: 7: 8: 9: This month in institution design: 10: Short fiction by someone I know: 11: Short fiction by someone I know: 12: Cremieux double-checks the “penises getting longer” link from last time and finds that 13: GPT-4 starts a business (click image for more). Not of actual AI interest, but funny: 14: 15: 16: 17: 18: Related: interview with Ryan Kupyn, winner of the 2022 ACX Forecasting contest, on forecasting AGI: 19: Related: Geoffrey Hinton, probably the most accomplished AI scientist in the world, 20: Related: you’ve probably all seen this by now, but Many people have made fun of this, noting that nobody has an argument for why a six month delay would help anything. And an additional reason for eye-rolling: training AIs larger than GPT-4 is extremely expensive and hard, the most likely people to do it within a six month timespan are OpenAI themselves, and they’ve announced they’re taking a break and not planning on doing this, so the letter is demanding a stop to something which probably won’t happen anyway. I think it’s intended be a compromise between many people all vaguely against current levels of AI progress for different reasons (Scott Aaronson The alignment community always figured their concerns sounded too weird for normal people to care about, that politics was a lost cause, and that our best hope lay in technical research. They also hoped that sometime in the future there would be a “fire alarm” - something would happen to get people and policy-makers’ attention - and then the political route would open up. I think we always imagined this as some AI-initiated disaster destroying a city or something. I personally am pretty surprised it was just “GPT-4 got released and was very good”. Still, that is what happened, and I’m updating. In fact, I’ve updated so far that I’m starting to worry that the problem won’t be building a political coalition against unsafe AI, the problem will be not overshooting and banning all AI forever. I’m against this: I think society’s current track is toward other existential risks or dystopia, that AI could kill everybody but could also create post-scarcity and an end to most of our current problems, and that at some point (not yet!) the risk of continuing the current path indefinitely becomes worse than the risk of just going with AI and seeing what happens. In my ideal world, we would take ten or twenty years to go really slowly with AI, pouring lots of resources into alignment the whole time - but eventually, we would take the plunge. Everything I’ve said on this topic in the has been about giving us that breathing room and those resources. Still, I also want to make sure we don’t totally kill AI the way we’ve killed (to various degrees) nuclear power, supersonic flight, and genetic engineering. I’m still trying to calibrate what that means I should be doing, but I have a lot of respect for everyone on all sides. Except the terrible people making terrible arguments (you know who you are!) 21: I’m not sure what this means in real life or why this would have changed, but congratulations to Peter Thiel, I guess: 22: This month in institution design: The 23: A few years ago I wrote 24: 25: Some good discussion of Nayib Bukele’s apparently successful anti-gang crackdown in El Salvador: [Richard Hanania](https://substack.com/redirect/b7df9028-fd2d-413a-8ffd-a18c9ad44794?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)presents evidence that it’s not just a “deal with the gangs”, it’s a real crackdown that should be embarrassing to other countries that choose not to do this and force their people to live in fear.[Matt Yglesias](https://substack.com/redirect/ce141f2f-7d43-4f52-9818-83bc914e538f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)(subscription only, sorry) is against Hanania’s implicit conclusion - he argues it’s not as simple as “leaders should have the bright idea of being tough on crime” because previous Latin American leaders (including a previous El Salvador leader) tried crackdowns and they didn’t work. He thinks crackdowns mostly fail, but through some combination of skill and luck Bukele has managed to make this one go much better than expected.[Cremieux responds](https://substack.com/redirect/b95815ce-831e-48d2-a6f7-b930d1137edd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), saying that the reason Bukele’s crackdown worked when previous crackdowns didn’t is that Bukele cracked down harder. Also he didn’t give up partway through.
26: Seems like work from home won’t be the new equilibrium :( 27: We’ve talked before here about alternate voting systems like ranked choice and approval voting, which let people vote for the candidate they like the best (eg third party) without “throwing away their vote” or risking the wrong big-party candidate getting in. One of the few rare victories for these voting systems was Fargo, North Dakota, where in 2018 voters agreed to conduct city elections via approval voting from then on, with good results between then and now. But now 28: Trevor’s understandably morally anxious about benefiting from his Jewish ethnicity. Should he be? Is this any worse than benefiting from white privilege or male privilege or whatever other forms of privilege they’ve invented since I last checked? Is it any worse than benefiting from being an American, and so having access to social support and benefit programs that Sudanese and Bangladeshis can only dream of? I’m not sure. 29: You’ve spent the past ten years hearing arguments about how the Catholic Church wasn’t anti-science and Galileo had it coming. But 30: Also from Matt Yglesias: 31: Alexey Guzey changes his mind - 32: New weird either-genius-or-crackpot diet blog ( 33: New weird either-genius-or-crackpot anthropology blog ( 34: A few years ago a weird object called Oumuamua entered the solar system and a few astronomers speculated in might have been an alien spacecraft (it’s since left). One of those astronomers, Harvard professor Avi Loeb, got access to Department of Defense data that he used to locate 35: Wikipedia on
I can’t tell whether they’re claiming Stalin was actually very good - or that he pretended his poems were anonymous, and everyone else praised them lavishly while pretending not to know Stalin wrote them. You can find some 36: 37: 38: Click image to expand map ( You're currently a free subscriber to |