---
subject: "Wonderland, Incorporated"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-11-30 12:04:34
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
If you haven’t seen the previous installments in this series on the making of our ideas about the American West, check them out. So far, we’ve covered Also! If you’ve been wanting to support this newsletter but have found the yearly price a little steep, I’m offering a discount right now — 35% off, which makes the price about $2 per month. Becoming a paid subscriber gets you access to the archives and the warm feeling that comes from supporting something you enjoy. If you value the work that goes into this newsletter, please consider signing up as a paid member by clicking this link: Thomas Moran’s family suffered what so many did during the Industrial Revolution. His parents were hand
The Morans fled this “dark, unattractive hole” to America. They settled in Philadelphia, where teenage Thomas apprenticed for an engraver and studied painting. As soon as he was old enough, he headed west. Perhaps his bleak, urban childhood created his desire to visit and capture the majestic natural spaces in America. After painting the Great Lakes and achieving moderate success, he looked for an opportunity to see the spectacular areas of the West. The chance came when Ferdinand Hayden invited Moran and the photographer William Henry Jackson to come along on a geological survey of Yellowstone in 1871. On this trip, Moran first saw the Grand Canyon of the Yellowstone, which became a lifelong obsession. He painted the area again and again: Moran’s greatest painting of the canyon, which he completed in 1872, sparked real excitement back in Washington. Congress bought the 7x12-foot canvas for The painting caused a stir. According to Moran’s contemporaries, it played a pivotal role in Congress’s decision to make Yellowstone the first national park. After all, the members of Congress who voted on the legislation had no real knowledge of what the Yellowstone area was like. You had to see it to understand it. A member of the Army Corps of Engineers There are a few other things you should probably know about Moran’s painting. First, Moran wanted to capture the spirit of Yellowstone more than he wanted to precisely record what he saw. He didn’t mind adding details, like the Native Americans dwarfed by the landscape in the foreground of this painting, to make the image even grander than its real-life inspiration. Moran Second, Moran got his big chance to accompany the Hayden expedition at the behest of railroad baron As the man in charge of the Northern Pacific Railroad, Cooke wanted to boost traffic on his trains. He employed Nathaniel Langford, an ambitious man whose Langford recruited General Henry Washburn to lead an “expedition” to Yellowstone. The expedition Cooke then helpfully suggested that Hayden take Thomas Moran along to paint what he saw. The painting ended up in Congress. Two years after hatching the idea, Cooke had his national park, which, not coincidentally, made the Northern Pacific’s rail routes much more lucrative. So we have a choice: we can see the creation of Yellowstone and the other national parks as a pure expression of the American love of nature, or we can see the same events as the result of crass capitalistic machinations. Or maybe they’re the ultimate expression of the American national character, where noble pursuits are never entirely free of the influence of commerce. Although, as Franklin Roosevelt In the early 20th century, the Northern Pacific advertised the wildness of the national parks: But many of its ads in magazines like National Geographic made the trip to Yellowstone look inspiring but manageable: Some ads were downright whimsical: Other railroads followed suit, advertising a rather civilized version of roughing it: The railroads weren’t the only ones who advertised these places. As John Clayton Yard constructed National Park Portfolios to entice Americans to visit their parks. They’re beautiful, as you can see from these pages from the We should keep in mind that, during the early 20th century, the parks were hard to get to and people rarely visited them. In 1904, the first year records were kept, only In 2024, 331 million people visited the parks, constituting about one visit for every American citizen. Today, some people argue that the national parks are being “ But early on, the parks did need some marketing. If no one visited or even thought about them, they might have been put toward a more “productive” use, their rivers dammed and their minerals extracted. We can thank the marketers — and the images they used — for making such things unthinkable today. It’s tempting to try to set up two opposing values: pure nature on one side and filthy commerce on the other. But the truth is more complicated than that. Commercial interests helped create the national parks in the first place, and they continued to shape the idea of the national parks in the American mind long before most Americans could see them for themselves. If we’re going to consider the national parks as an expression of what America’s all about, we’ll have to acknowledge the fact that commerce has never been far from the core of the American experience. This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are three ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: You can share the newsletter with others: You can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading! You're currently a free subscriber to |