---
subject: "When Aging Actually Begins"
from: "Ashlee Vance from Core Memory  <ashleevance@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-19 15:48:10
labels: ["Ashlee Vance", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_4216359091400734623", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX"]
---
If you hang out at longevity and aging start-ups, you are sure to run into people who have studied under He’s spent decades doing no-nonsense, pioneering work in the aging field, and he’s ever sober and realistic about the field. One of my favorite results to come out of Gladyshev’s lab was a 2021 Recently, I had a chance to sit down with Gladyshev and discuss this paper, his work and the aging field. Enjoy, aging nerds. Enjoy. Vance: Describe the current state of the aging field as you see it. Gladyshev: First, we need to define what field we are talking about. I don't even know sometimes what exactly people mean by aging. Some people think aging is the increased chance of dying – that we literally are more likely to die tomorrow than today via age. They think that's really the essence of aging. Other people say, “No, people can die for various reasons.” It could be infection, accidents, whatever. And then aging for them is really a functional decline - a loss of function over time. Yet, another group say, "No, the function can be easily changed. You start exercising, you improve your muscle function." People like me say that aging is an accumulation of negative things, such as molecular damage. The essence of aging is different for various scientists. And therefore they would want to target aging in different ways because they view aging in so widely different ways. Vance: You were born in Russia? Gladyshev: Yeah, I'm Russian. Vance: There's this fascinating part of the culture, whether it's an Gladyshev: I wonder about it myself. It's really common in Russia to go into the fields with big questions, but people there often are unable to pursue them in routine and consistent ways. I think it's maybe true that large nations chase these types of questions. In Russia, things are often underdeveloped, but then sometimes you get a really good composer or a writer or put people in space. So, it's interesting that if you go to the aging field, there are many Russians. Maybe some of this influenced me when I was growing up. In my heart, I'm a scientist. I'm just interested in uncovering new things. I’ve been in several fields, and, at one point, I joined the aging field. I’ve been just amazed that the potential impact of studying aging is so huge, and it's so interesting to study aging. After you get immersed into aging research, it's just very hard to study anything else. Vance: You haven't really done any startups, right? Gladyshev: I haven't. I may be the only one in the field. Everybody has companies, literally everybody senior in the field, but I don't. Vance: Is that because you haven’t seen anything that you feel is really effective at thwarting aging? Gladyshev: There are two reasons. One, you're right. I'm still waiting for something that would be more impactful. I just don't want to start a company with a little chance to succeed. And this is true for all the companies in the field so far. But also, again, I'm an academic researcher. A company is not where my heart is. Vance: I’m curious what you make of partial cell reprogramming and its role in this field. Gladyshev: There are a lot of unknowns currently, but it is a very interesting area. We don't understand it mechanistically and much of this research is being done by companies, and they don’t always publish their findings. I think it’s possible to partially reprogram cells and partially rejuvenate them. But how that will affect the aging of an organism is unclear. Vance: The longevity and aging fields are surrounded by controversy and wild claims. This must make the work harder. Gladyshev: Being scientists, we have to be critical, question new findings and require controls, reproducibility and validation. It's true that there is a lot of unknown in the field, and there are some people who benefit commercially. They sell stuff, and they may exaggerate the findings. And there are also people who don't understand aging. It's easy to write about it and pretend to be an expert. That's true. But at the same time, when the field is so unsettled and anything can be questioned, we really need a diversity of opinions and we should not suppress new ideas. Even at the expense of exaggerated claims. So in that sense, there are Bryan Johnsons, whose approach is not scientific, but also there are scientists who are too critical such as Charles Brenner. I disagree with both of them, although both bring the necessary diversity. Vance: One of your former students Alex Trapp was the one who explained to me this moment in the womb where originally the zygote is not at zero. It has extra baggage from the parents. And then, in humans, it does reset to the totally refreshed zero state after three weeks in the womb. Intuitively we knew there's some sort of resetting going on because we see kids and they don't have all the genetic crap from their parents, but it’s my understanding that nobody really understood this process before your lab figured it out. Gladyshev: Let me walk you through logically how we came with that idea. First, there is And this prediction is actually true. For example, we can build a clock for sperm age. But then if the germline indeed ages, there must be a place and time when it rejuvenates. Oocytes and sperm form the zygote, which is a fertilized egg. And our prediction was that its age should be low but above zero. And then there must be a rejuvenation process after the zygote is formed. It was predicted theoretically initially. I published the first paper as a strictly theoretical paper, predicting that rejuvenation during early embryogenesis would happen. This was a 2021 Trends in Molecular Medicine In humans, it would correspond to the third week of life, that's the lowest biological age during human life. That point marks the beginning of aging, organismal aging. And the embryonic phase before that, it may be viewed as the stage for preparation for organismal life. This is the stage when the damage is cleared, cells grow, telomeres are extended, the epigenome is remodeled, and once it is done, organismal aging can begin. Moreover, both organismal life and organismal aging begin at that point. That's what this finding is about. One limitation of this approach is that we apply aging clocks, and the aging clocks are trained for adult ages. So strictly speaking, we don't know 100 percent whether the clocks can be applied to that period of life. And sometimes, people do comment on that - and they may be right - that we cannot be 100 percent sure that the clocks are applicable. So, it's still a model. There's no final proof yet. But many lines of experimental evidence point to the same conclusion. Vance: We’ve done these tests in mice but not humans? Gladyshev: Well, in humans it is a bit more difficult, as we cannot do experiments in humans. There is the so-called 14-day rule. We can work with human embryos until they are 14 days old and then most experiments are prohibited. This minimal biological age in humans corresponds to the third week of life, which is exactly the period which is not approved. I should mention that, two years ago, there was a decision to leave the permission to study human embryos up to the local committees. But, so far, I haven't seen any studies. It's very risky, I think, because society is not ready for the experiments with human embryos. Vance: So how do we know it's the third week in humans? Gladyshev: We know because mouse development corresponds to human development at specific stages. In the mouse, the period of seven to eight days corresponds to the third week in humans. We have the data on in vitro models of early human development, and we do observe a decrease in biological age. Vance: And so you really feel the aging process begins at this third week mark? Gladyshev: Well, yes, aging begins at that point, but not only aging. To me, a big element is that life begins at that point too. By life, I mean organismal life. When you ask people, when does organismal life begin? There's a diversity of opinion. Some people think it's at conception, and other people think, well, maybe at the first heartbeat or the first neuronal activity, or when a child is born. And many people of course don't even think in terms of those categories. But to me, life itself begins in that state, which we call ground zero. Vance: We hear a lot about aging clocks these days. How accurate do you think they are? Gladyshev: This topic relates to how we think about the aging process. My question to people who criticize aging clocks is, "What do you think aging is?" It really determines how we construct and use the clocks. I sometimes ask people who think aging is an increased chance of dying, "Who is older, a one-year-old child or a five-year-old child?" They say, "Well, of course the five-year-old is older." But, based on their definition of aging, it should be the opposite. Because the five-year-old is less likely to die, less likely to have cancer, less likely to have diabetes, less likely to have heart disease, less likely to have any of the chronic diseases. The five-year-old is also better functionally. So, by their definition of aging, the five-year-old should be younger. But it makes no sense. However, if you think in terms of damage accumulation, accumulation of negative consequences of life, then it is clear that the five-year-old has more damage. So to me, the five-year-old is older. But this means that mortality is not a good representation of aging. Well, it is good, but it does not always work. Clocks, depending on how you build them, can help quantify biological age. Other clocks quantify future mortality; yet others quantify functional decline or the rate of aging. What do we want to quantify when quantifying aging? What is aging? Consider the period from 20-years-old up to late life. Everything changes during this period, mortality increases, function decreases, damage accumulates. But the thing is that in addition to those changes, organisms also respond by adaptive changes. For example, an organism accumulates damage, but this damage activates protective systems. And those protective changes, they also have an age structure. So when we build aging biomarkers, protective changes end up being in them. So the clock is really a composite of aging plus something else. And it's been hard to separate these features. Another important issue is that internally organisms age asynchronously. Different cells and organs age at slightly different rates. And it happens that when we quantify aging with bulk clocks, we are unable to capture this, especially in humans we are unable to quantify this, as samples are largely limited to the blood. Tony Wyss-Coray did a very interesting The idea was that we can analyze proteins in plasma, but some of these proteins come from the liver, some from the brain, some from the kidney, some from other organs. And we can build clocks based on these subsets. Well, Tony doesn't call them clocks, but they are aging biomarkers based only on those proteins. Let's say we only focus on the proteins secreted by the brain and detected in the plasma. This way, we are able to assess aging of the brain by looking at the plasma. And he realized that some organisms are older in particular organs. He calls them agers in particular organs. For example, in some people, the liver ages more rapidly than other organs. In some it is the brain, in some the kidney, and so on. That's a really interesting insight. But what we did in a recent study is something much more dramatic. First we use a much larger data set and a much better phenotype data set. And we train aging clocks on future mortality, not just on chronological age, and do it for different organs and systems. Vance: This is based off the same human data set? Gladyshev: It's the data set of 53,000 people in the UK. About 10 percent of them already died, so we’ve been able to make these mortality clocks trained for particular organs, and then associate them with diseases, professions, diets, drugs, offering really amazing insights. Let's look at diseases like dementia. In dementia cases, only the brain shows accelerated aging. Other organs, for example, when we apply the liver clock or the arterial clock or the kidney clock, they look younger. Also, in the case of COPD, which is a lung disease, only the lung shows accelerated aging. There are also clusters like heart disease, kidney disease, diabetes, where several diseases are associated with accelerated aging in several organs. We report several other interesting observations. For example, alcohol consumption is associated with accelerated aging in many organs, but not in the artery. The artery may even be younger. It may be possible that if someone is older in the artery, these people may drink occasionally. We just published The point is that aging is not uniform, and so we need clocks that not only capture the essence of aging in a causal way but also do this in a much more granular way. By analyzing plasma, we are able to examine aging of several major organs and systems. But we don't yet have access to the aging state of many other organs. Vance: Tell me about the naked mole-rat. Gladyshev: It is an amazing animal, the most unusual mammal. We published a Nature As a result, many scientists say it's a non-aging mammal. To me it makes no sense because these animals must age because they accumulate damage over time, but somehow this increase in biological age doesn't result in an increased mortality. Vance: They just don't show a lot of the typical diseases that develop as you age? Gladyshev: There are no large colonies to test this extensively. But, yes, diseases like cancer are extremely rare. And because their lifespan is so long, it's been very hard to quantify the incidence. They can live more than 40 years, but most animals in labs are 10 years or younger. Rarely do you find 15-year-old, and almost never 20-year-old animals. So the naked mole rat studied would correspond to people before they are 40 years old. Also, considering small numbers of these animals available, it's very hard to conclude on the disease incidence. To me, the data on predicted biological age and mortality mean that these animals age, but mortality cannot be used to assess their aging. That's my conclusion. But other people would say that since there's no increased chance of dying, naked mole rats do not age. This goes back to the fundamental question we discussed earlier. What is aging? To me, mortality is a manifestation of aging. It's not aging itself. It's just one of the features. But for others, the increased chance of dying is aging. I disagree, and therefore we interpret the naked mole rat data differently. Vance: Have we found anything from the DNA that gives any indication to where it is developing these unusual properties? Gladyshev: There are many generic variants and genes that link to particular phenotypes. For example, we found that melatonin, a regulator of sleep, does not function as it does in other animals. Naked mole rats lost both melatonin receptors present in other mammals, but since they live in underground burrows in the dark, they don't really need this regulation. They also lost many genes that support vision. They probably see in black and white, and their vision overall is really bad. They probably do see a little bit, but not much, which is okay because they live underground. Anyway, we and other labs have found many interesting generic features. I would point out another study So whatever we do in terms of extending life span in the lab, like rapamycin, calorie restriction and so on, is different from how nature extends life span, including how it does in the naked mole-rat. Nature acts by targeting many genes and pathways, but in the lab it's one compound or one gene or a lifestyle change that are analyzed. Since nature modulates many, many things, the associated mechanisms of longevity are different than the mechanisms uncovered in the lab setting. This realization is really striking. Vance: This is going to be a hard problem. Gladyshev: It's going to be very hard to radically change life span like nature does. It's not going to be a simple intervention or even a simple combination of interventions. It’s not easy to recapitulate the way nature does it. So we are thinking, how can we use these natural strategies? What exactly can we do? Vance: I want to change gears for a minute. There are some new labs like Gladyshev: These are good ideas. But I think any of this is still at a relatively small scale compared to the NIH. Many people criticize the NIH funding system, but I think it’s actually it's not a bad system. Of course there is excessive bureaucracy, but I think there's a real filter to not support bad science in general. And if someone has great ideas and is persistent, they're still able to get funded through the NIH system. So it's a workable system. Yes, it's hard to obtain substantial funding for large projects, and it takes a lot of time to write grants, reports, and satisfy all the bureaucratic, regulatory requirements. It's just so many barriers, so much paper-work, forms, protocols, tests. It takes half of my time. This is really unfortunate. Companies don’t have to do those things. I wish science funding would change for the better, but nevertheless, I think it's already a reasonable system, and it's large enough to support the research community. In the aging field, I don't think you can isolate yourself like some companies and initiatives and solve the aging problem. It's too difficult a problem for any companies or an institution, We need a community. Vance: Do you chat with Altos Labs people much? Gladyshev: We collaborate with some people like Steve Horvath, but, overall, they are secretive. I have mixed feelings about it. Steve is a true scientist, a great scientist. But he gets criticized for the clocks. To me he started a revolution. Yes, the clocks still need to be improved. But the conceptual advance is really important. Vance: Obviously, there are people who think the clocks are total bullshit. Gladyshev: Yeah, there's a camp of people who like to think like that. Nothing can convince them. Nothing. It's like a religion. There are no arguments. Vance: What has you particularly excited at the moment? Gladyshev: My passion is to solve aging. We attack that problem from different directions. It’s one, big grand problem I want to solve. Hopefully, you enjoyed this story. If so, please share it and subscribe to Core Memory. We want to do more of this for you and need your help. Thanks! |