---
subject: "The Park Hyatt Tokyo Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-08-28 11:44:56
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Colin here. Back in May, one of my favorite hotels, Park Hyatt Tokyo, closed its doors for a renovation. This happens all the time in real estate and hospitality. So does this one matter so much to me? The Park is a blend of things that came together to create something exceptional. First, there is patient ownership: Tokyo Gas and Electric has adhered to the long-term vision and stewardship of the place, something that doesn’t always happen in business. Then, there is the iconicity of the building in Tokyo, designed by Kenzō Tange, that peeks out from different vantage points around the city and has become a hallmark of the skyline. Then, crucially, there are the interiors. Why is this interesting? Everything at the hotel, down to the arrangement of the books in the rooms and the library was overseen by the masterful designer John Morford. Seafoam green Le Corbusier chairs are positioned just so, while leather lounge chairs in the men’s locker room convey a 90’s Japanese power exec aesthetic. There’s also the use of light and darkness as you travel throughout the hotel, an inherent and thoughtful balance that has been left to just be, since the hotel opened in 1995. There’s been no sudden moves, and this is the point. I had the pleasure of interviewing a few of the hotel’s more famous guests in a video they put together for the 25th anniversary a few years back. It was fun to hear such creative people as the late Sakamoto-san and Sofia Coppola speak about their sensory memories and other deep observations from their time with the property. For me also, the hotel is laden with memories. I can remember the first time I booked it when I was young, finger hovering over the reservations button, deciding to take the plunge on an expensive room. Over more than 45 stays, my relationship with the hotel and its staff has matured, and subtly improves each time. We’ve gotten to know each other, and there’s always a crisp copy of the FT nestled outside of my room door each morning. A folded card with the day’s weather report, delivered with room service, is arranged next to a single fresh rose in a small glass vase. Service here is a unique blend of Japanese and Western hospitality. At its best, the hotel has one of the The hotel staff had discovered my left-behind items, noted down their exact location in the room for “lost and found” purposes, and then realized upon checking their records that I was due to return in just a few days. Without even a mention they had simply put my stuff back into my new room, in exactly the same location, in the morning before I checked in. There is a name for this kind of magic—it’s called “Omotenashi”. Besides my own, there will undoubtedly be eyes on what Hyatt does to change and evolve the hotel. It is a truly beloved property that longtime guests feel some ownership of, and I am hoping the stewards of the hotel will elegantly manage its refresh. This is one of the most high wire acts that can happen in hotels: evolving a beloved icon, while retaining its magic elements. Park Hyatt Tokyo is a place where you either get it, or you don’t. But it is a place with integrity, timelessness, and a design intention that has been executed with remarkable consistency over time. Regardless of what happens next, the true hospitality and essence of the place has been forever imbued into my soul, into how I think, and how I understand excellence. (CJN) Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) —
You're currently a free subscriber to |