---
subject: "Now I Really Won That AI Bet"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-07-08 12:24:15
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
In June 2022, I bet a commenter $100 that AI would master image compositionality by June 2025. DALL-E2 had just come out, showcasing the potential of AI art. But it couldn’t follow complex instructions; its images only matched the “vibe” of the prompt. For example, here were some of its attempts at “a red sphere on a blue cube, with a yellow pyramid on the right, all on top of a green table”. At the time, I wrote:
Commenters objected that this was overly optimistic. AI was just a pattern-matching “stochastic parrot”. It would take a deep understanding of grammar to get a prompt exactly right, and that would require some entirely new paradigm beyond LLMs.
So we
Some image models of the time refused to draw humans, so we agreed that robots could stand in for humans in pictures that required them. In September 2022, I got some good results from Google Imagen and The bet is now over, and official judge Gwern AI Compositionality: A Three Year RetrospectiveImage Set 1: June 2022 When we first made the bet in June 2022, the best that an AI model could do on the five prompts was: You can see why people would be skeptical! In most images, the pieces are all there: astronauts, foxes, lipstick. But they’re combined in whatever way seems most “plausible” or “realistic”, rather than the way indicated by the prompt - so for example, the astronaut is wearing the lipstick, rather than the fox. Other times there are unrelated inexplicable failures, like the half-fox, half-astronaut abomination in panel #1. Here we get 0/5. Image Set 2: June 2022 Three months later, I declared premature victory when Google Imagen produced the following: I said it got the cat, llama, and basketball exactly right, meeting the necessary 3/5. Edwin and his evaluators Image Set 3: January 2024 One of the questions on the 2023 - 2024 ACX prediction contest was whether any AI would win the bet by the end of 2023. In order to resolve the question, Edwin and his Surge team returned to the image mines in January 2024. They checked DALL-E3 and Midjourney; I’m including only the pictures from DALL-E3, which did better. These are of higher artistic quality, and they can finally generate humans (instead of just robots). But they still don’t win the bet. This time Edwin granted the cat and the farmer. But the stupid llama still didn’t have the bell on its tail, the #$%&ing raven still didn’t have the key in its mouth, and although the fox had lipstick in one picture (#2), the astronaut wasn’t exactly holding it. 2/5, one short of victory. On prediction markets, where users had given 62% probability that Edwin would grant me the win that year, Image Set 4: September - December 2024 User I would give this 3/5. We keep the top-hatted cat and the basketball-holding farmer, and the bell is finally on the llama’s tail. But the raven picture isn’t stained glass, and the fox still doesn’t have lipstick. I tried to contact Edwin for confirmation, without success. I wondered what had happened to him, and a quick search found that In the absence of a grader, I figured I would let the bet run out the clock. Image Set 5: May - June 2025 These are using ChatGPT 4o, released in May 2025, all images generated June 1 (thanks Not only is this 5/5, but it’s an obvious step up in matching the styles, and these were all produced on the first try. In retrospect, it feels like judges were right to dismiss former models, which were sort of blundering about and getting some of them right by coincidence. 4o just works. Edwin is presumably still on his yacht, but original contest judge Gwern gave it his seal of approval, saying:
In Memoriam: Your Last Set Of Goalposts, Gone But Not ForgottenIt’s probably bad form to write a whole blog post gloating that you won a bet. I’m doing it anyway, because we’re still having the same debate - whether AI is a “stochastic parrot” that will never be able to go beyond “mere pattern-matching” into the realm of “real understanding”.
I think this thesis has done well so far. So far, every time people have claimed there’s something an AI can never do without “real understanding”, the AI has accomplished it with better pattern-matching. This was true back in 2020 when GPT-2 failed to add 2+1 and There is still one discordant note in this story. When I give 4o a really hard prompt…
…it still can’t get it quite right: But a smart human can complete an arbitrarily complicated prompt. So is there still some sense in which the AI is “just pattern matching”, but the human is “really understanding”? Maybe AIs get better at pattern-matching as they scale up, and eventually they’ll get good enough for every conceivable reasonably task, but they still won’t be infinitely good in the same way humans are? I think there’s something going on here where the AI is doing the equivalent of a human trying to keep a prompt in working memory after hearing it once - something we can’t do arbitrarily well. I admit I can’t prove this, and it’s not necessarily intuitive - the AI does have a scratchpad, not to mention it has the prompt in front of it the whole time. It’s just what makes sense to me based on an analogy with math problems, where AIs often break down at the same point humans do (eg they can multiply two-digit numbers “in their head”, but not three-digit numbers). I think this will be solved when we solve agency well enough that the AI can generate plans like drawing part of the picture at a time, then checking the prompt, then doing the rest of it. This may require new skills, like self-reference and planning, which might be added in by hand, emerge naturally from the scaling and training process, or some combination of both. If you disagree, let me know - maybe we can bet on it! Thanks to everyone who helped operationalize, judge, and generate images for this bet. Vitor, you owe me $100, email me at scott@slatestarcodex.com. You're currently a free subscriber to |