---
subject: "Inciting Incident: AI is outperforming human storytellers. But only in some things"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-12-06 10:31:15
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031"]
---
|
|
Inciting Incident
Fri, 06 Dec 24
Inciting Incident is our weekly newsletter about the most powerful tool of our age—stories. Stories told by businesses, leaders, governments..
Good Morning Ishan,
It has been a while since I caught you up on what storytelling means in the age of AI.
Many new things have come to light since the last time we touched upon the topic in this newsletter—both in terms of tech advancements and AI research. In fact, we’ve seen the release of some very interesting forward-looking insights in just the last few weeks.
But before we get into that, let me go back to what experts were predicting last year.
In May 2023, [a letter](https://www.theguardian.com/music/2023/may/22/ai-cant-compete-with-the-likes-of-taylor-swift) published in The Guardian made some observations on what AI in its current form could “realistically” do. And according to the artist who wrote it, the future looked neither very bleak nor as dysfunctional as many people feared.
AI, they wrote, couldn’t compete with the likes of artists like Taylor Swift.
AI is a threat to musicians, but principally to the “factory” approach of turning out endless derivative pop. AI can, of course, generate yet another samey‑sounding song and could replace any future Stock Aitken Waterman hit factory. It will not be able to replace original work. No AI is going to turn out unique lyrics such as “Did you hear my covert narcissism I disguise as altruism” (Taylor Swift’s Anti‑Hero) for the simple reason that AI relies on guessing what a likely lyric would be.
Until lots of people start using “narcissism” in their lyrics, it will be absent from AI-generated songs. Talented musicians should welcome AI as it will make their unique songwriting skills stand out and have greater value.
I want to emphasise the words “talented”, “original”, and “unique”.
This is a conclusion that is starting to hold weight for many other sectors where human roles were seen as vulnerable to an AI takeover. The key to protecting your job from AI competition hasn’t changed from what [we wrote](https://the-ken.com/incitingincident/inciting-incident-your-favourite-influencer-may-not-even-be-human/) in January: human imagination.
You see, brands like Samsung, Puma, Calvin Klein, Prada, and Mahindra—though in this case, it backfired for them—are increasingly opting to use Artificial Intelligence (AI) to fill a role that’s become essential for modern narrative building—the influencer. There is some pushback right now, but it looks more and more like “AI/virtual influencers” are here to stay (and multiply).
[…]
So, if you are an influencer, how do you make yourself AI-proof? Or better yet, if the world is going to be one where AI influencers are everywhere, how do you stand out? If you ask Jessica: “By being authentic. All these AI influencers are not truly powered by AI yet. Your originality will make you stand out. No matter how much AI becomes human-like, it can never become human. Being original is your sole defence.”
Now, as we wind up 2024, there is quite a lot of evidence that appears to back these earlier predictions.
And it seems quite clear that when it comes to storytelling, at least, what we are seeing is the birth of an alliance between humans and AI, not a hostile takeover.
Let me start with a [research paper](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41599-024-03868-8) published in academic journal Nature’s October edition of Humanities and Social Sciences Communications.
First, the paper reflects the importance of prompts given by humans. The authors analysed 250 stories authored by people, and 80 stories generated by GPT-3.5 and GPT-4. Both were given the same prompt: write a story about a human creating and falling in love with an artificial human.
The analysis revealed that AI-generated narratives were more progressive in terms of gender roles and sexuality than those written by humans. At least, to an extent.
In examining social biases and representation, the paper reveals that GPT-3.5 and particularly GPT-4 are more progressive regarding gender roles and sexuality than human writers. Language models exhibit a greater propensity to place female characters in roles traditionally occupied by male characters and to introduce same-sex relationships into the traditionally heterosexual Pygmalion paradigm. However, attributes and descriptions of characters remain biased to an extent, especially regarding physical appearance and feminine traits in female protagonists.
And while AI narratives with default settings and no additional prompting sometimes provided innovative plot twists, they generally lacked the imaginative scenarios replete in human-written texts.
What the paper establishes, essentially, is that AI seems to have reached a point where its awareness as an objective spectator is giving it an edge over human storytellers still mired in their socio-cultural and other biases.
However, humans still have the edge when it comes to imagination.
Another article that [analysed](https://www.downtoearth.org.in/science-technology/your-next-favorite-story-wont-be-written-by-ai-but-it-could-be-someday) studies comparing human and AI storytelling assessed stories based on four parameters: good writing, believability, creativity, and lived experience.
These aspects are fundamental, and are prerequisites for all good stories. And the article concluded that while AI can write fluently and make stories believable, it falls short on the other two parameters.
It is low on creativity and has no lived experience to offer. And it is creativity that brings the “X-factor” to all great stories, and the lived experience of the storyteller that adds authenticity, vulnerability, and empathy.
AI is good at writing fluently and coherently, and its creativity may rival that of average writers… For now, screenwriters and novelists aren’t at risk of losing their jobs. AI can tell stories, but they aren’t quite on par with the best human storytellers.
So, it does seem like the prediction made in the letter published by The Guardian has been proven right. At least for now.
Generative AI and large language models have started to compete with “average” creators, but storytellers who are original, authentic, and lean into their humanity continue to engage audiences in ways that AI cannot.
Now, imagine a world where some of the most creative storytellers use the most advanced technology to create their art.
That world is close.
Modern filmmaking is one sector that has started allowing talented writers to use AI to develop their scripts and screenplays, and even to enhance their creativity. While human writers bring their instincts, emotions, and experiences to the table, [AI offers](https://business-review.eu/tech/7-benefits-of-ai-driven-storytelling-transforming-modern-filmmaking-275888) deep analyses of audience data and other technical aspects.
I find that AI allows filmmakers to create more complex and engaging characters. By analyzing data and patterns, AI can suggest character traits and development arcs that align with the story’s theme. When I use AI, it helps in building characters that react dynamically to plot changes. This adaptability makes them more believable and relatable to audiences, enhancing the storytelling experience. AI also aids in reducing stereotypical portrayals by offering diverse perspectives and backgrounds for characters. It provides insights into different cultural or social contexts, allowing me to craft characters that are not only diverse but also authentically represented.
AI can also help craft very complex narratives while still preserving their coherence.
Far from displacing all human storytelling, it’s increasingly clear that the advent of AI really heralds the arrival of a potent human-AI alliance.
That’s a wrap for this week. Have a great weekend!
If you want to enrol your team in a Storytelling Workshop conducted by The Ken Learning, you can do so [here](https://the-ken.com/learning/case-study/the-art-of-emotion-in-the-age-of-ai/).
Also, please do write to me at [inciting-incident@the-ken.com](mailto:inciting-incident@the-ken.com) and let me know what you thought about this newsletter. I’ll be back in your inbox at 4 pm India time next Friday with more stories decoding the world of storytelling.
Yours,
Ruhi