---
subject: "It’s AI Versus The Weather Now"
from: "Uncharted from Core Memory  <ashleevance@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-07-14 23:10:03
labels: ["Ashlee Vance", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_4216359091400734623", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
As Hurricane Ian spiraled off the coast of Florida in September 2022, an object resembling an errant plastic bag drifted through its eye, cavorting to the beat of convection physics. This plastic bag—also known as a Global Sounding Balloon, or GSB—was on a one-way mission to gather meteorological data as it surfed along the 80 mph winds. Over 2,000 miles away, a Harvard-trained physicist named Dr. Andrey Sushko piloted this contraption from inside a mission control (and climate-controlled) suite at the Palo Alto headquarters of Though typically run by an automated program, this GSB was on an atypical path and required the nimble fingers of a pilot. WindBorne’s team worked in shifts to steer the GSB from its launch site in Gainesville, Florida into the hurricane's orbit. When it reached the western eyewall 50 hours later, Sushko and his crew were locked in. They typed commands to release pinches of sand from the ballast bag hanging beneath the balloon, lightening the GSB so it could rise above the hurricane’s eyewall. They then issued another order to vent helium with a slow hiss and plunge the GSB into its eye. Real-time moisture and wind speed measurements from the GSB let Sushko and his co-founders—John Dean, Kai Marshland, and Joan Creus-Costa—know that it had entered the hurricane’s hollow heart. Despite the frenzied journey, Sushko, the company’s CTO, says that the conditions weren’t horrible: “Flying inside a thunderstorm in Oklahoma is arguably worse in terms of altitude control.” Satellites relayed the data gathered from the GSB to the company’s principal product: an AI-forecasting model called WeatherMesh. This balloon-to-software pipeline might just be the first actual cloud-to-cloud service, and it is WindBorne’s edge in the latest high-tech race to answer one of civilization’s oldest questions: what’s the weather today? The cost of an incomplete answer is steep. On July 4th, severe rainfall abruptly turned into major floods in Central Texas, which have so far In recent years, the weather forecast has found itself caught between an increasingly unpredictable climate, an Extreme weather events accounted for But where some spot a crisis, others view an opportunity. Tech giants like Google, Keep reading with a 7-day free trialSubscribe to Core Memory to keep reading this post and get 7 days of free access to the full post archives. A subscription gets you:
|