---
subject: "The Old PC Video Games Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-09-17 11:31:13
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Steve Bryant (SB) is a Steve here. A thing I recommend you do, should you be so nostalgically inclined, is to download PC video games from 35 years ago and play them on whatever type of computer you own today. Why is this interesting? What those games lack in photorealistic 3D graphics, ray tracing, and global illumination, they make up for in low-res childhood comfort. Suddenly you’re back in your bedroom, sitting in front of the coke bottle-thick glass of your monitor, keyboarding your way through the bitmapped levels of your youth. No headset, no online indicators, no Discord pings: Only a 16-bit, tin cup soundtrack and all the time in the world. You’re disconnected from everything, and that’s the point. How to get started? Step one is to remember what games you played. In my bedroom, on my 386SX PC clone, I played games like the space combat sim My favorite, though, was Step two is to find the games. If you’re interested in simply downloading and playing games as easily as possible, two popular sites will be of great help: If you’re on a Mac and all the games you want to play only work in Windows, grab a free copy of When I was a kid, most of the games my friends and I “owned” were cracked versions downloaded off BBSs (Bulletin Board Systems). We didn’t have the guidebooks that came with the games, meaning we had to figure out the controls ourselves or, in the case of complex story-based games like Darklands, imagine the backstory and context without any narrative support. These days, however, you’ll find 30+ years of community support in forums and fan sites, which are filled with old school gamers looking for a hit of playable nostalgia just like you. (SB) You're currently a free subscriber to |