---
subject: "Fun With Veo 3 and Media Generation"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-05-28 18:27:42
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Since Claude 4 Opus things have been refreshingly quiet. Video break! The First Good AI VideosFirst up we have H What does it say about the medium, or about us, that these are the first legit videos?
I predict that will be the key for making AI videos at the current tech level. You have to have a great script and embrace the style of storytelling that AI can do well. It will be like the new TikTok, except with a higher barrier to entry. At this level, it is fantastic for creatives and creators. Or you can do this (thread has a bunch more):
We Can TalkSound is a game changer, and within an eight second clip I think we’re definitely ‘there’ with Veo 3 except for having more fine control and editing tools. What we don’t see yet is anyone extending the eight second clips into sixteen second clips (and then more by induction), but it feels like we’re only a few months away from that being viable and then the sky’s the limit. Our Price CheapIs Veo 3 too expensive for ‘personal fun’ uses?
For now, basically yes, once you run through your free credits. It’s $21 marginal cost per minute of silent video or $45 with sound, and any given generation might not be what you want. That’s not casual use territory. If you can produce a good two-hour movie for $10k (let’s say you get to use about half the footage?) then that’s obviously great, but yeah you gotta be going for real distribution here. I predict that sometime soon, someone will make a good Veo 3 rules video, about the existential situation of the actors involved being AI, where the twist is that the video was made by human actors. I also predict that the cost of making this video will be, shall we say, not small in relative terms.
Insanely expensive? My lord is this ‘ Changing the Game
Seb thinks all this is good, actually. I think it could be, but I’m highly unsure. We should beware the further shattering of the cultural commons, for many reasons, and also a lack of sufficient incentives to drive creatives, even if their costs are down. And a lot of this will depend on our ability to use AI or rely on others to do selection. That seems like a highly solvable problem, and we’ve made great strides in solving it for some areas but we still struggle a lot, especially with the inability to make the selection mechanism be maximizing user experience rather than work for a platform. Another big issue Gwern raises is that ‘bad money crowds out good’ is totally a thing.
I think we are definitely better off at least for now on both video and text, but yeah there isn’t going to be any getting around it, especially for people who scroll TikTok or Instagram, unless we get good widely distributed AI filtering.
Yes, this is true, you can work around Spotify recs being bad, but in practice it is so so much better if the recs that are natural and easy to access are good. Netflix illustrates this even more clearly, yes you can in theory do a search for anything you want, but who will do that? How they organize your list and recommendations determines (I think?) most of what most people watch. Making Things InterestingUntil Veo 3, nothing anyone made with AI video was interesting to me as more than a curiosity. Now, we have a few good meta things. Soon, it’s going beyond that. Also, in sort of related news, here’s a funny thing that happened this week:
Also I’d love to see a Netflix-Anthropic partnership, Claude giving me my Netflix recommendations and having full access to their catalogue with subscription when? You're currently a free subscriber to |