---
subject: "Should You Hedge It All?"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <the-diff@ghost.io>"
to: ""
date: 2024-03-04 15:42:15
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX"]
---
|
|
|
In this issue: - Should You Hedge It All? Investors are used to the idea of hedging risks they don't want to take. But why limit that to your financial portfolio? You can hedge the cost of filling a gas tank, living in a particular city, or the risk of an industry downturn. But these hedges are harder to think about and execute, and in general, if they're worth the time there are better ways to spend your time.
- Apple Car—Apple's model for launching new products that relaunch their categories doesn't work in an industry where someone else built their brand doing exactly the same thing.
- State-Directed Investment—The UK considers forcing some local investors to invest locally.
- Flywheels and Bubbles—MicroStrategy's perpetual motion machine can't actually work forever.
- Inflation Impacts—Independent restaurants are squeezed by delivery platforms in two directions.
- Vertical Integration—Boeing considers covering an expensive short position.
We're testing a new AI-generated audio narration feature for the newsletter. Please let us know if you have any thoughts or feedback on how it sounds!
Should You Hedge It All?One of the central insights of modern finance is that you should only take the risks you're being paid to take. Suppose you discover the world's most amazing, underrated CEO—a charismatic leader, an expert capital allocator, and someone you'd absolutely trust to multiply your money many times over, over an extended period of time. And this CEO happens to run a nickel mining company. So buying the stock is making two bets: your differentiated bet on the manager, and a generic bet on supply and demand for a particular metal. You could refine this by learning about the nickel market, figuring out what the long-term drivers of supply and demand are, and coming up with a differentiated view. In financial markets, this is sometimes trivial to understand and often straightforward to implement. You're either calculating a correlation between asset prices to neutralize some unwanted exposure, or you're hedging something that directly correlates with the company's topline so your bet is on what's unique about the company. Capital markets make this convenient, because you can directly measure the correlation between what you're buying and what you're using to hedge. It's a popular approach, both because it's a cleaner way to express a thesis, and because stripping out extraneous variables makes it far easier to justify high pay. (See But we can easily extend this. For example, many people need to buy gas for their cars, and can't significantly vary their driving (though That headline number is a good start for explaining why most people don't do this: if $2,000 a year is not a worrisome expense for you, it's not worth the trouble; if it is, where are you going to find ten to twenty-five times that amount? There are more capital-efficient hedges. But they're the wrong size; the standard oil futures contract represents 1,000 barrels, so you can hedge your lifetime consumption or none of it. You might try lower-leverage versions of this, like an ETF that tracks oil futures performance but comes in a more convenient size. But it raises another problem: if you're making an illiquid trade—and there are no easy ways to trade a derivative based on your own future consumption of oil, beef, potatoes, or anything else—and if you hedge it with a liquid and levered asset, you can find yourself in a situation where you get margin-called on the unprofitable leg of an overall-profitable trade. This is one version of the story behind the collapse of Long-Term Capital Management. Hedging all that future consumption either means having an insanely high savings rate or taking on a lot of leverage, and it's simply embarrassing to get your brokerage account wiped out because you were shorting Hertz and Avis to hedge the fact that you bought a car. There is one category where you can do this. You can lever up in order to hedge a large expense, and not have to worry about margin calls. Unfortunately, it's also a case where that's a relatively bad idea: buying a house is a way to control the risk that you'll get priced out of where you live; you're switching a floating obligation (rent) for a fixed one (a mortgage). But the local housing market is strongly influenced by local wages, so in that sense it's renting that's a hedge, especially if you live in a city with disproportionate reliance on a single industry. Houston real estate crashes when oil does; Manhattan condos are on sale when bonuses are down; Bay Area housing is a proxy for tech pay. There's a related concept that does have some legs: using what you know about your industry to a) invest in the best companies, and b) hedge against your employer losing in some critical area. It's not crazy for someone who gets all of their money from one specific kind of economic activity to make bets that pay off if that part of the economy gets less lucrative. The good news is that this has been done before. The bad news is that the most prominent case was There are two broad models we're left with: First, it's good to remember that for any given asset class, the global portfolio's exposure sums to 100% if it's cash, real assets, or equity, and to 0% if it's credit or a derivative. Stocks have to have an owner, so the world cannot be anything more than 100% net long the stock market. Loans have a borrower (who is effectively short the loan), and a derivative is a two-sided bet with winnings equal to losses. So, for any given kind of risk, somebody needs to bear it on their balance sheet. The people who own stocks, generally high-income net savers who are gunning for a better/earlier retirement but not seriously worried about being able to provide for themselves in the future, are the perfect demographic for warehousing this kind of risk. If the market's going to drop 20% at some point, it's ideal if the main real-world impact of this is that a large number of millionaires are millionaires by a slightly smaller margin. The second upside from this is that concentrating your risk is, in part, the price you pay for participating in some high-upside jobs. Venture capital investors typically expect a fund's backers to put a meaningful check on themselves, but the median venture fund manager would do better if they put an equivalent amount in the S&P. There's signaling value, here, where they're demonstrating that they don't think they will be the ones underperforming other asset classes. Similarly, the pressure to buy a house past a certain point forces most people to eventually double down on whatever city they're in and buy something. So we actually have a pretty convenient financial system. For someone who absolutely insists on hedging their risk, there are opportunities to do so; if you're worried about the price of eggs, Cal-Maine stock is right there, and not onerous to borrow. But for the most part, if you're saving responsibly the hedge is not worth the effort, and it's better to take advantage of the fact that your retirement savings can withstand the inevitable volatility of higher-return asset classes. And, in the event that you do the truly irresponsible thing—put all of your wealth into the company that also supplies you with a job, and to which your reputation is tied, too—know that while you risk losing it all, at least you haven't hedged your way out of the possibility of serious wealth. And perhaps the CEO's capital allocation skill extends to allocating their own human capital; for some fraction of the people who made their money being in the right place and the right time, that proximity and timing was heavily influenced by skill rather than luck. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/049bab81?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)The variation in yields among trusts indicates that different ones have different prospects, at least as far as investors know. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/3233e1e8?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)Specifically, that if they were betting on something like convergence between Italian and German bond yields, they'd buy the Italian bonds through one bank and sell the German bonds through a different one. Since everyone knew that they were doing fixed income arbitrage, everyone also knew that copying just one side of the trade would involve much more risk than what LTCM was taking. So they could be confident that it was hard to spy on exactly what they were doing. But this came back to bite them when they started losing money, because no one providing them with leverage knew what hedges they had on, and prudent creditors assume the worst. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/d7065a84?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)In some cases, especially when there's a business that insiders recognize is more winner-take-all than the market appreciates, shorting competitors can be incredibly profitable because it both provides a day-to-day hedge against owning your employer's stock, and a source of upside as those competitors fail. But this is high-risk! [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/6b88ce4c?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)Markets vary, but my experience in both Austin and New York is that the larger dwellings available for rent are targeting an extremely well-off demographic looking for their Nth party mansion. Families with kids have another reason to hedge their real estate costs specifically, in that it's trivial for a typical single twentysomething to switch apartments—I certainly did it a lot—but comparatively hard to extricate kids from school, clubs, friendships, etc. in order to move. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/022cb2f3?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
You're on the free list for The Diff. This week, paying subscribers read about Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. See a sampling of current open roles below: - A company building ML-powered tools to accelerate developer productivity is looking for ML researchers with a knack for converting research into Github repos. (Washington DC area)
- A VC firm using data science and ML to source and evaluate opportunities is looking for a senior data engineer. (Menlo Park, CA or NYC)
- A concentrated crossover fund is looking for an experienced full stack software engineer to help develop and maintain internal applications to improve investment decision-making and external applications to enable portfolio companies. (SF)
- A private credit fund denominated in Bitcoin needs a credit analyst that can negotiate derivatives pricing. Experience with low-risk crypto lending preferred (i.e. to large miners, prop-trading firms in safe jurisdictions). (Remote)
- A seed-stage startup is helping homebuyers assume the homeseller’s low-rate mortgage, and is in need of a product designer and a product manager. (NYC)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. ElsewhereApple CarApple wound down its autonomous electric car project after In that sense, it really does make sense to blame Tesla, since Tesla essentially adapted the Apple approach of launching a product that was clearly superior on most measurable criteria and that added a new product trait it automatically monopolized. Teslas, as individual products, are hit-or-miss; they are a testament to the tradeoff between scaling production and achieving consistent quality. But as a brand, they occupied the exact spot an Apple Car would have. State-Directed InvestmentA group of British asset managers have Flywheels and BubblesHere's a Inflation ImpactsThe WSJ - The shift from dine-in to pickup and delivery has meant that they're bearing extra costs for packaging, while they aren't recouping as much of their rent as more tables stay empty. They could adjust prices to encourage dining in, but they're already having a hard time turning a profit. Meanwhile, if they skimp on kitchen staff, they can end up being understaffed when the peak does happen.
- The big source of cost increases is labor, and the big driver of that is rising pay for gig workers. So the restaurant pays for UberEats twice, first because of Uber's cut and second because Uber's existence forces them to pay more for the workers they get.
Larger restaurants face exactly the same pressures, but have more tools to insulate themselves. They can do dynamic pricing (as long as they don't call it surge pricing, and as long as they focus on the fact that off-peak prices are lower rather than that peak prices are higher). And they have better data to determine exactly who should come in for a given shift. That's part of the broad theme of Vertical IntegrationIn 2005, Boeing spun off some of its aircraft assembly assets into a new company, Spirit Aerosystems, which continued to work with Boeing but also did business with Airbus. Now, after multiple safety issues, |
|||||||||
|
|
|
||||||||||
|