---
subject: "Childhood and Education #10: Behaviors"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-06-23 20:34:09
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Thus, I’m going to continue with the system of making the roundups have more focus in their themes, with this one being the opposite of school questions, except for the question of banning phones in schools which seemed to fit. Table of ContentsMetal Health
If you are bored, you can now go on your phone until you are anxious instead. You could also make other choices, but that seems to be the default. CoercionI’m not always with Žižek, but here I’m with Žižek.
This goes so much farther than children. You see it in so many other situations as well. It’s one thing for someone to have to do [X]. And it’s good to explain it’s because [Y]. It’s another to have to want to do [X], and ‘prove’ to everyone that you ‘want’ to do [X]. Or even worse, to have to prove that you want to do [X] specifically because of [Y]. Or to have to do [X] and like it. Look, I’m enjoying this. I’m having a good time. There is the version of asking for such a choice where the child, or the anyone else, is actually free to say no - you really are asking them to consider how much grandma loves them, but if they decide not to go, then that really is allowed and not punished. Alas, this version is rare. Game Theoretically Sound Discipline
Indeed. Most of the time that children are acting like they are in acute distress, and they are not rather obviously in actual acute distress, they are doing a strategic action to create the outcomes and incentives they want, or following through on their negotiating positions to establish credibility, and so on. I have mad respect for that. You must respond in kind as needed. You are still the adult. You can tell, if you pay attention, which is which. If school really is hell, or there is otherwise something really wrong? It will rapidly become clear that this is the case.
There will of course be situations where you start out asking, and then at some point you are no longer asking, because time runs out or the situation otherwise changes. Again, one should be clear, and not give false choices. The Joy of Doing Nothing
I too spent a lot of time with remarkably little ‘to do,’ and I too watched a remarkably large amount of The Price Is Right, which has its value but definitely isn’t an efficient educational option. At some points yes I think I watched Young and the Restless, I remember it being terrible. Not ideal, but It was, very obviously, fine. As with many things, there’s a big difference between ‘this is a good idea’ and ‘this is not the best idea but it’s not a huge deal.’ I think lots of essentially wasted time in this sense falls into the second category. I don’t buy the full Garrion Keilor ‘the kids need to actively be bored,’ but they do need breaks without pressure, and if that time is mostly wasted that is fine, the optimal amount of that is not zero. ADHD Exists But So Do Boys
We put the ADHD diagnosis on 15.5% of American adolescents, 21% of 14-year-old boys and 23% of 17-year-old boys, for a total of seven million American children. Yes, ADHD is very obviously a real thing. I’ve seen it. And yes, rates of actual ADHD are likely somewhat higher than they used to be, for various reasons. This is still very obviously an epidemic of overdiagnosis. It is way of expressing a preference for being willing to sit still for long periods of time. In the past, if not playing along? You’d force them to, or else. We now think that’s bad. Nowadays, not playing along? Deploy the meth. That’s much better, you see. Sports Go Sports
What does work is to give them positive things to do instead, and positive status hierarchies to climb by doing so.
He cites the classic failure mode, the old DARE anti-drug problem, which warns you not to do drugs so kids respond by doing drugs more. On the Big Screen
My experience is more ‘big screen is dangerous, small screen is way worse.’ The big screen is better, somehow providing a better experience and also a less zombifying or addictive one. However, at least in my experience, that doesn’t mean kids don’t threaten to go complete zombie if you aren’t careful. You absolutely have to watch screen time and content if you don’t want that to happen, no matter how big the screen might be. Kids Media Is Often Anti-Capitalist PropagandaNot all of it. But quite a lot of it. It is remarkably hard to avoid.
I get the many reasons why this is the natural outcome of the types of people making kids TV making TV for kids. Similar forces also cause a lot of vegetarian advocacy. It’s all really, truly obnoxious and I think it does a lot of very real damage. CultureContent consumed by children used to be made by adults, whether or not it was aimed at children, and was generally not ephemeral or optimized too hard for short term engagement, But also, if you miss a reference now - whether or not it is ‘The Odyssey’ - you can not only Google it, you can ask Claude (or another LLM). And most entertainment is easy to pause so you can ask, and this should get even easier and better over time - by the end of 2025 the AI should automatically see the content you’re watching, and understand the context of your questions, which you’ll ask in voice mode, and so on. Movies are designed for everyone to be off their phones, so they’ll be the exception, but this should give us the opportunity to do much higher-level stuff once people get used to it, since no one need get lost. I can’t even with for example War and Peace, I don’t want to have to try and keep track of all that, but once I get a Daylight Computer I probably won’t have to? (And if you ever don’t get what something I say is referencing, or it seems like there’s another level to it, and it’s very clearly not explained and you’re curious, asking Claude is probably a good idea. I’m often very intentionally not explaining, IYKYK, etc.) The problem is if kids go the other way and Travel
If you want to see your grandkids, or generally see someone with young kids, on the regular, you need to be willing to come to them more often than not. That’s life. Phone a Friend
That’s a hell of a graph. Walking is surprisingly ‘meaningful.’ As is watching TV or movies with others, that gets you almost to 4 on this scale. And I love my kids, but ‘bathing’ and ‘looking after’ are almost as meaningful as ‘playing with’ and better than anything else? And doing homework together is a 4.6 and alone it’s a 4.2? Homework? I could go on. Yeah, I don’t know about this chart. I do still buy the core premise, that the things we do with others tend to be more meaningful, and that we’re doing less of them.
It’s actually worse than that, if 25% use TikTok ‘almost constantly’ and 24% to it with YouTube, and 18% for Instagram, well, not that many are ‘constantly’ doing all three? And indeed:
I mean, I use the internet almost constantly, so maybe fair? But this is different. The Case For PhonesAre kids with phones better off than kids without phones? I mean, yeah, data says so, but that rather obviously is not entirely causal. To the extent it is causal it is largely a collective action problem. If everyone else has a phone, then you not having a phone isolates you.
To be fair, further down, she does admit to the obvious big confounding issue.
This isn’t about socioeconomic status (SES). Indeed, that runs the opposite way.
They did do statistical weighting (based on parent/guardian's education, household income, household size, child's age by gender, and child's race/ethnicity) but given income runs the other way that is unlikely to catch the issues. They did not control for attributes of the children prior to getting the phones or in previous years. Are the richer families making a gigantic mistake? What did they see?
There was clear miscommunication about the time with friends numbers, which were 2.7 days/week for kids with phones versus 2.2 days/week for those without. But what’s even weirder is the same gap applies to daily video gamers (2.8 vs. 2.3) and social media users (2.7 vs. 2.2). And then, even weirder, to tablet owners? What? Again it’s 2.8 vs. 2.3. Then kids say they spent an average of 3.2 hours per day (!) ‘hanging out with friends online.’ To which I say, really? That’s… quite a lot, especially since it’s all respondents including those without phones. Kids reported 4.4 hours on their smartphones and tablets per school day and 6.3 per non-school day, which means the majority of that was supposedly spent ‘with friends.’
Indeed it says the opposite, because of the isolation effect. If previously you had a phone, and now everyone but you has a phone, you are going to have a hard time coordinating with your friends, meeting with them and talking to them. That’s going to be bad for your mental health. So the fact that there was zero impact suggests that the phones are net negative. A reader offers Ban Cell Phones in Schools
Even if one concluded the peer reviewed study literature pointed in the direction in question, I refuse to be gaslit into not believing that things that are obviously happening are indeed happening, or that obviously bad for people things aren’t bad for people, purely because ‘
A Sobering Thought
You're currently a free subscriber to |