---
subject: "The Conway's Law Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-02-09 11:39:03
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Noah here. If you’ve ever built websites for large companies, you can surely relate to the challenges of nailing down a primary nav. The top nav is seen as the primary method for users to find what they’re looking for, and so the links that appear there will have the most juice in attracting customers. In some situations, this leads to a massively bloated top nav, where every part of the organization has managed to position itself as critical enough to merit top billing. At other times, the top nav is shaved down to just a few sections—shop, learn, and support, for instance—that ultimately represent a company’s essential functions (and leaders). WITI Classifieds: We are experimenting with running some weekly classifieds in WITI. If you’re interested in running an ad, Parlance is a Brand Voice Advisory Studio. We Help Make the Impossible, Relatable. Tempo Rubato is a live classical music venue in an old factory shell in the backstreets of inner city Melbourne. My Next Electric is a hella-fun online crash course about how to move from gas to electric cars and stoves. Noah here. I've got a new newsletter about brands and AI called BrXnd Dispatch. If you're in marketing, creative, or just interested in understanding what's up with AI, check it out. No matter the approach, what is almost always true about a corporate website’s primary nav is that it is representative of the company’s structure in one way or another. Shop, learn, and support represent sales, marketing, and support, respectively. Each of those departments has enough pull to be worthy of mention on the page’s primary real estate. As much as companies like to talk about user-centered design, many websites are more a reflection of the company’s org chart than any kind of deep insight into a customer. Why is this interesting? Many years ago, computer scientist In some ways, the concept is not entirely different than The question of why this kind of mirroring occurs is not entirely clear. One of the more interesting theories is called “
In other words, as long as people need to work together on problems, it makes a decent amount of sense for the solutions to bear some resemblance to the teams responsible. So what can and should organizations do about Conway’s Law? One answer is nothing. After all, it may well be the best way to design a system for that organization/problem. Another approach is to find an appropriate balance. If you buy the idea that some part of mirroring/Conway’s Law is simply about making it easier to understand and maintain systems, then it’s probably good to keep some mirroring. But it doesn’t need to be all or nothing. In the aforementioned As you see at the bottom of the framework, you have option three: “Strategic mirror-breaking.” This is also sometimes called an “ In the end, like many things, being aware of the existence of Conway’s Law and some of the approaches to dealing with it is probably the most important piece of the puzzle. (NRB) — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) —
|