---
subject: "AI #140: Trying To Hold The Line"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-10-30 18:20:45
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Sometimes the best you can do is try to avoid things getting even worse even faster. Thus, one has to write articles such as ‘ It’s rather crazy to think that one would have to say this out loud. In the same way, it seems not only do we need to say out loud to One good thing to come out of that was that I also provided updates on Tomorrow, I’ll go over OpenAI’s ‘recapitalization’ and reorganization, also known as one of the greatest thefts in human history. Compared to what we feared, it looks like we did relatively well on control rights, but the equity stake is far below fair and all of this is far worse than the previous state. You could call that a ‘win’ in the sense that things could have gone far worse. That’s 2025. The releases keep coming. We have Cursor 2.0 including their own LLM called Composer. We have Neo the humanoid household (for now teleoperated) robot. We have the first version of ‘Grokopedia.’ We get WorldTest and ControlArena and more. Anthropic may finally have the compute it needs thanks to one million TPUs, while OpenAI may be planning an IPO at a valuation of $1 trillion. Table of Contents[Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/11296ecf-e19c-4155-887d-997024060358?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The joys of freedom of AI speech.[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/f443e71b-dabb-45fd-bb45-956d6617e990?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Mistakes are made.[Huh, Upgrades](https://substack.com/redirect/59559d59-6145-4ccc-9193-bd9c9fffb936?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/59559d59-6145-4ccc-9193-bd9c9fffb936?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Claude memory, Cursor 2.0, Claude for Finance, Pulse on web.[On Your Marks.](https://substack.com/redirect/e49191e8-c6db-4196-b0f2-176057c01634?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)AIs disappoint on WorldTest, usual suspects declare victory.[Choose Your Fighter.](https://substack.com/redirect/bd072ce1-4737-4d79-a609-765ba0de52be?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A tale of two business plans.[Get My Agent On The Line.](https://substack.com/redirect/aebf639b-f49d-47e5-a37e-bbce0db4e10c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The promise of the Coasean singularity.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon.](https://substack.com/redirect/8cd23af8-db24-47cd-b840-ed06ffd1f857?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)OpenAI erotica, third Grok companion.[Fun With Media Generation.](https://substack.com/redirect/03f3cd78-5545-4b17-aea2-ecdc5c8ff3d5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Suno is getting good at making generic music.[Copyright Confrontation.](https://substack.com/redirect/caee860b-a77b-4ef9-aca0-6d3be2400746?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Perplexity keeps failing the honeypot tests.[They Took Our Jobs.](https://substack.com/redirect/45420179-ff25-4eff-8c6d-e25230c88426?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)My comparative advantage on display?[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/87b23c5f-5b71-4712-a557-70ec1b4ecefc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)METR is hiring.[Introducing.](https://substack.com/redirect/46fe1456-0be9-48c4-93bb-68ba1bc8dacf?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Grokopedia, ControlArena and the a16z torment nexus pipeline.[My Name is Neo.](https://substack.com/redirect/296768d4-cd67-4c94-81f1-1507d8be1f29?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Teleoperated robots coming to willing households soon.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/53ffad31-b573-4084-9061-99790d8a6c07?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Some very good charts.[Show Me the Money.](https://substack.com/redirect/9187b698-d11b-463d-945b-fb4a25cf7a24?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)One trillion dollars? OpenAI considers an IPO.[One Trillion Dollars For My Robot Army.](https://substack.com/redirect/ee4e865c-5bbc-4819-861e-9939167e7b59?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)One trillion dollars? For Musk.[One Million TPUs.](https://substack.com/redirect/a0170bff-2327-4f13-8450-0310173ecaa3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)One million TPUs? For Anthropic.[Anthropic’s Next Move.](https://substack.com/redirect/15a75772-5030-4ead-b76d-c569cb220677?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Compute, in sufficient quantities, enables products.[Quiet Speculations](https://substack.com/redirect/4caf9abe-bca7-49f8-a14d-a5db513d579f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/4caf9abe-bca7-49f8-a14d-a5db513d579f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)OpenAI aims for true automated researchers by March 2028.[The Quest for Sane Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/509cf917-c45e-4155-a9f4-3bdffdd73efd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Microsoft endorses the GAIN Act.[The March of California Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/a1bdfe3f-bc34-4145-9351-65d2d08a7557?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Dean Ball analyzes, I offer additional takes.[Not So Super PAC.](https://substack.com/redirect/99bbeded-7015-4fc6-9a22-12c416ae7180?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)It seems the a16z-Lehane SuperPAC is not off to a great start.[Chip City.](https://substack.com/redirect/198dfbd2-9039-42d3-a439-5591b385fd47?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A few additional notes.[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/d5bacbfb-170f-431d-a760-3ba651aa6efa?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Yudkowsky, Bostrom and AI Welfare on Odd Lots.[Do Not Take The Bait.](https://substack.com/redirect/238322f0-9bc9-4847-8c5b-7c9ece48d874?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Was it woke? No, it was sharing accounts.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/38d753b3-8447-4476-8a68-7d5783e50e04?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)We are trained to think problems must be solvable.[People Do Not Like AI.](https://substack.com/redirect/e50e9b39-a4f0-4049-83f7-3c5b237e3395?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)They express it in myriad ways. Some are direct.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/47bf2703-5cd3-4c7c-be3c-9995c1e9fb47?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Let them cook?[Misaligned!](https://substack.com/redirect/564ff19f-b2e0-429e-bd52-726173a03da6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)DeepSeek might choose to give you insecure code?[Anthropic Reports Claude Can Introspect.](https://substack.com/redirect/1a7ed12d-ec49-44df-a469-8bc8ef6ed7af?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Claude can notice thought injections.[Anthropic Reports On Sabotage Risks.](https://substack.com/redirect/419fdec1-34e0-46b6-8bdc-a286b0e6c168?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A template for a new report type.[People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/85a9d4de-5df7-4e37-acfc-b63d814e27ea?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Hinton is more hopeful.[Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/45c43d55-6579-4398-9170-45c0d8be2f17?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Misrepresentation.[The Lighter Side.](https://substack.com/redirect/ab9939f4-0a16-40f8-b038-40d8a0ee90ae?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Begun, the sex warfare has?
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
The good old United States of America, f*** yeah, that’s where, says The Future of Free Speech. The report isn’t perfect, if you look at the details it’s not measuring exactly what you’d want and pays too much attention to corporate statements and has too much focus on social media post generation, but it’s what we have, and it will serve. Of the countries evaluated, next up was the European Union, which also performed strongly, although with worries about ‘hate speech’ style rules. The humans don’t have such great free speech around those parts, in important ways, but the chatbots already censor all that anyway for corporate reasons. Brazil scores modestly lower, then a drop to South Korea, another to India and a huge one to China. As always, this is another reminder that China imposes lots of restrictions on things, far more onerous than anything America has ever considered, including that it requires pre deployment testing, largely to verify its censorship protocols. Among AI models, they have Grok on top, but not by a huge amount. All three top labs (Anthropic, Google and OpenAI) showed noticeable improvement over time. Mostly the contrast is American models, which range from 58%-65%, and Mistral from France at 46% (this again makes me suspicious of the EU’s high score above), versus Chinese models much lower, with DeepSeek at 31.5% and Qwen at 22%. This is despite one of the main categories they were scored on being model openness, where DeepSeek gets full marks and the big labs get zeroes. Notice that even with openness of the model as an explicit criteria, the open models and their associated nations are evaluated as far less free than the closed models. As always, if you believe ‘any restrictions on AI mean China wins’ then you have to reconcile this claim with China already being vastly more restrictive than anything being relevantly proposed. Consider open model issues similarly. What matters is experience in practice. My practical experience is that out of the big three, Sonnet 4.5 (or Opus/Sonnet 4 before it) and GPT-5 basically never censor or evade things they ‘shouldn’t’ censor, whereas Gemini 2.5 totally does do it. The exception for Claude is when I’m explicitly asking it about biological risk from AI, which can hit the biofilters by accident.
I mean, in that context, sure, why not? Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
Police saying ‘he’s got a gun!’ when the man in question does not have a gun is an event that happens every day, all the time, and the police are a lot less than 99.999% accurate on this. The question is not does your system make mistakes, or whether the mistakes look dumb when they happen. The question is does your system make more mistakes, or more costly mistakes, than you would get without the system.
There is a clear pattern here. The questions on the right mostly have clear uncontroversial correct answers, and that correct answer doesn’t have any conflict with standard media Shibboleths, and the answer hasn’t changed recently. For the questions on the left, it gets trickier on all these fronts. To know exactly how bad these issues were, we’d need to see the actual examples, which I don’t see here.
It is remarkable how many people see a dumb aspect of one particular LLM under default conditions, and then conclude that therefore AGI will never happen. Perhaps David is joking here, perhaps not, Poe’s Law means one cannot tell, but the sentiment is common.
Even if we use a rather narrow definition of ‘everyone,’ no just no. We are not two months away from people without experience being able to vibe code up games good enough that your friends will want to play them as more than a curiosity. As someone who has actually designed and created games, this is not that easy, and this kind of shallow customization doesn’t offer that much if you don’t put in the real work, and there are lots of fiddly bits. There’s no need to oversell AI coding like this. Is coding a game vastly easier, to the point where I’m probably in the category of ‘people who couldn’t do it before on their own in a reasonable way and can do it now?’ Yeah, quite possible, if I decided that’s what I wanted to do with my week or month. Alas, I’m kind of busy. Alternatively, he’s making a hell of a claim about Gemini Pro 3.0. We shall see. Huh, Upgrades
Claude now has memory, as per Tuesday’s post.
That is a terrible labeling of a graph. You don’t get to not tell us which models the other rows are. Is the bottom one GPT-5? GPT-5-Codex? Sonnet 4.5? The UI has been redesigned around ways to use multiple agents at once. They also offer plan mode in the background, you can internally plan with one model and then execute with another,
On Your Marks
This seems like an actually valuable result, which still of course came to my attention via a description you might have learned to expect by now:
The core event here seems to be that there was a period of learning opportunity without reward signals, during which humans reset 12% of the time and models reset less than 2% of the time. Humans had a decent learning algorithm and designed useful experiments during exploration, models didn’t. So yeah, that’s a weakness of current models. They’re not good at relatively open-ended exploration and experimentation, at least not without good prompting and direction. They’re also not strong on adapting to weirdness, since they (wisely, statistically speaking) rely on pattern matching, while lacking good instincts on when to ‘snap out of’ those matches. Choose Your FighterOpenAI is launching a browser and short duration video social network to try and capture consumers, monetizing them via shopping hookups and adding erotica. Fund ASI by offering normal big tech company things to justify equity raises. ?????????. Build superintelligence in a way that everyone doesn’t die, somehow.Everyone dies. Profit, hopefully.
I believe Aidan on the proximate causes inside OpenAI pushing towards these decisions. They still wouldn’t have happened if the conditions hadn’t been set, if the culture hadn’t been set up to welcome them. Certainly there’s more money in automating all labor if you can actually automate all labor, but right now OpenAI cannot do this. Anything that raises valuations and captures market share and mindshare thus helps OpenAI progress towards both profitability and eventually building superintelligence and everyone probably dying. Which they pitch to us as the automation of all labor (and yes, they mean all labor).
Two ships, ultimately going to the same place (superintelligence), pass in the night.
Grok can be useful in one of two ways. One is more competitive than the other.
xAI has chosen to de facto kick the other AIs off of Twitter, which is a hostile move that trades off the good of the world and its knowledge and also the interests of Twitter in order to force people to use Grok. Then Grok doesn’t do a good job parsing Twitter. Whoops. Please fix. The other way to make Grok useful is to make a superior model. That’s harder. Claude.ai has an amazing core product, but still needs someone to put in the (relatively and remarkably small, you’d think?) amount of work to mimic various small features and improve the UI. They could have a very strong consumer product if they put a small percentage of their minds to it.
The obvious response is ‘have Claude Code code something up’ but a lot of people don’t want to do that and a lot of tasks don’t justify it. Get My Agent On The Line
My classic question to ask in such situations: If this were the one and only impact of AI, that it radically reduces transaction costs especially in bespoke interactions with unique features, enabling far better market matching at much lower prices, then what does that effect alone do to GDP and GDP growth? I asked Claude to estimate this based on the paper plus comparisons to historical examples. Claude came back with wide uncertainty, with a baseline scenario of a one-time 12-18% boost over 15-25 years from this effect alone. That seems on the low side to me, but plausible. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
Steven Adler, former head of product safety at OpenAI, Fun With Media GenerationAI-generated music is getting remarkably good. A new study finds that songs from a mix of Suno versions (mostly in the v3 to v4 era, probably, but they don’t say exactly?) was ‘indistinguishable from human music,’ meaning when asked to identify the human song between a Suno song and a random human song,
There is a big gap between generic average human music and the median consumed musical recording, and also a big gap between the experience of a generic recording versus hearing that performed live, or integrating the music with its context and story and creator, AI music will have much lower variance, and each of us curates the music we want the most. An infinite number of monkeys will eventually write Shakespeare, but you will never be able to find and identify that manuscript, especially if you haven’t already read it. That’s a lot of ‘horse has the wrong accent’ as opposed to noticing the horse can talk. The questions are, essentially, at this point: Will be a sameness and genericness to the AI music the way there often is with AI text outputs? How much will we care about the ‘humanness’ of music, and that it was originally created by a human? To what extent will this be more like another instrument people play?
It’s not an area I’ve put much focus on. My guess is that musicians have relatively less to worry about versus many others, and this is one of the places where the AI needs to not only match us but be ten times better, or a hundred times better. We shall see.
Ethan Mollick What determines whether you get slop versus art? Here is one proposal.
As a predictive method, this seems right. If you intend slop, you get slop. If you intend art, and use AI as a tool, you get art similarly to how humans otherwise get art, keeping in mind Sturgeon's Law that even most human attempts to create art end up creating slop anyway, even without AI involved. Copyright Confrontation
They Took Our JobsSeb Krier pushed back strongly against the substance from last week, including It was also pointed out that I could have worded my coverage better, which was due to my frustration with having to repeatedly answer various slightly different forms of this argument. I stand by the substance of my claims but I apologize for the tone. I’ve encountered variants of the ‘you must not have considered comparative advantage’ argument many times, usually as if it was obvious that everything would always be fine once you understood this. I assure everyone I have indeed considered it, I understand why it is true for most historical or present instances of trade and competition, and that I am not making an elementary or first-order error here.
I think that’s the basic intuition pump. As in, what comparative advantage does is IF: You have a limited fixed pool of compute or AIs AND You have limited fixed pool of humans AND There are enough marginally productive tasks to fully occupy all of the compute with room for most of the humans to do enough sufficiently productive things THEN the humans end up doing productive things and getting paid for them.
You can relax the bounds on ‘limited fixed pool’ somewhat so long as the third condition holds, but the core assumptions are that the amount of compute is importantly bounded, and that the resources required for creating and maintaining humans and the resources creating and maintaining AIs are not fungible or rivalrous. Get InvolvedIntroducing
How is ‘a16z-backed’ always followed by ‘torment nexus’? At this point I’m not even mad, I’m just impressed. The latest case is that a16z was always astroturfing on social media, but they realized they were making the mistake of paying humans to do that,
My Name is NeoDo you hear that, Mr. Anderson? That is the sound of inevitability. It is the sound of a teleoperated in-home robot named Neo, that they hope is coming soon, to allow the company to prototype and to gather data.
It will cost you either $20,000, or $500 monthly rental with a six-month minimum commitment. Given how fast the tech will be moving and the odds offered, if you do go for this, the wise person will go with the rental. The wiser one presumably waits this out. Eventually someone is going to do a good version of this tech that is actually autonomous, but this only makes sense at this level for those who want to be the earliest of adaptors, either for professional reasons or for funsies. You wouldn’t buy this version purely because you want it to clean your house. That’s true even if you don’t mind giving up all of your privacy to some random teleoperator and having that data used to train future robots.
In Other AI News
I don’t want to copy too many. I appreciated this one, no that’s not a mistake:
OpenAI is working on music-generating AI. I mean you knew that because obviously they are, In wake of Near Tweeting the homepage of one of Marc Andreessen’s portfolio companies at a16z and quoting their own chosen slogan,
It’s not so much that we forgot as we’ve accepted that this is who they are. Show Me the Money
OpenAI and Anthropic will probably keep exceeding most forecasts, because the forecasts, like fiction, have to appear to make sense.
I’d take the over on $29.3 billion, but only up to maybe his previous $32.2 billion. This is up from him expecting $23B as of August 1, 2025, but down a bit (but well within the error bars) from his subsequent update on August 4, when he was at $32.2B projected by year end.
This proves too much? As in, it seems like a fully general argument that serious investors cannot, as a group, be fooled if facts are disclosed, and I don’t buy that. I do buy that there is nothing inherently wrong with an equity swap, or with using equity as part of vender financing, or anything else the AI companies are doing. The ‘there must be some kind of problem here’ instinct comes from the part where this causes valuations to rise a lot, and where those higher valuations are used to pay for the deals for real resources, and also that this plausibly sets up cascading failures. I think in this case it is mostly file, but none of that seems senseless at all. One Trillion Dollars For My Robot Army
A good general heuristic is, if Elon Musk wouldn’t mind someone else having something one might call ‘a robot army,’ then I don’t especially mind Elon Musk having a robot army. However, if Elon Musk is not okay with someone else having that same robot army, then why should we be okay with Elon Musk having it? Seems sus. I realize that Elon Musk thinks ‘oh if I build superintelligence at xAI then I’m me, so it will be fine’ and ‘it’s cool, don’t worry, it will be my robot army, nothing to worry about.’ But the rest of us are not Elon Musk. And also him having already gone or in the future going insane, perhaps from taking many drugs and being exposed to certain information environments and also trying to tell himself why it’s okay to build superintelligence and a robot army? That seems like a distinct possibility. This is in addition to the whole ‘the superintelligence would take control of the robot army’ problem, which is also an issue but the AI that can and would choose to take control of the robot army was, let’s be honest, going to win in that scenario anyway. So the robot army existing helps move people’s intuitions closer to the actual situation, far more than it changes the situation. One Million TPUsAs per the speculation in Bloomberg last week, Anthropic announces plan to expand use of Google Cloud technologies, including up to
If you have compute for sale, Anthropic wants it. Anthropic has overwhelming demand for its services, hence its premium pricing, and needs all the compute it can get. OpenAI is doing the same thing on a larger scale, and both are looking to diversify their sources of compute and want to avoid depending too much on Nvidia. Anthropic in particular, while happy to use Nvidia’s excellent GPUs, needs to focus its compute sources elsewhere on Amazon’s Trainium and Google’s TPUs. Amazon and Google are investors in Anthropic and natural allies. Nvidia is a political opponent of Anthropic, including due to fights over export controls and Nvidia successfully attempting to gain policy dominance over the White House. I would also note that OpenAI contracting with AMD and also to create their own chips, and Anthropic using a full three distinct types of chips whenever it can get them, once again puts the lie to the idea of the central role of some AI ‘tech stack.’ These are three distinct American tech stacks, and Anthropic is using all three. That’s not to say there are zero inefficiencies or additional costs involved, but all of that is modest. The hyperscalers need compute to hyperscale with, period, full stop. Anthropic’s Next MoveNow that Anthropic has secured a lot more compute, it is time to improve and expand Claude’s offerings and features, especially for the free and lightweight offerings. In particular, if I was Anthropic, I would make Claude for Chrome available to all as soon as the new compute is online. Make it available on the $20 and ideally the free tier, with some or all of the agent abilities tied to the higher level subscriptions (or to an API key or a rate limit). The form factor of ‘open a side panel and chat with a web page’ was proven by OpenAI’s Atlas to be highly useful and intuitive, especially for students, and offering it inside the existing Chrome browser is a key advantage. Could the product be improved? Absolutely, especially in terms of being able to select locations on screen and in terms of ease of curating a proper website whitelist, but it’s good enough to get going. Ship it. Quiet Speculations
I strongly agree it is good to be transparent. I expect them to miss this goal, but it is noteworthy and scary that they have this goal. Those, especially in the White House, who think OpenAI believes they can’t build AGI any time soon? Take note.
All five of these are good things, but I notice (for reasons I will not attempt to justify here) that I do not expect he who approaches the problem in this way to have a solution that scales to true automated AI researchers. The Tao is missing.
Somewhere, Ben Thompson is smiling. The classic platform play, and claims that ‘most of the value’ will accrue elsewhere. You’re the AI consumer company platform company now, dog. Implemented responsibly and well I think this is fine, but the incentives are not good.
I am not worried that OpenAI will be unable to pay for the compute, or unable to make profitable use of it. The scary and exciting part here is the AI factory, AIs building more capacity for more AIs, that can then build more capacity for… yes this is the explicit goal, yes everything in the movie that ends in human extinction is now considered a product milestone. Whenever anyone says their plans call for ‘financial innovation’ and you’re worried we might be in a bubble, you might worry rather a bit more about that, but I get it.
No lies detected, although we still lack knowledge of the warrants. It was also one of the greatest thefts in human history, I’ll cover that in more depth, but to Altman’s credit he doesn’t deny any of it.
Your mission sure looks in large part like becoming a platform consumer product company, and then building a true automated AI researcher in a little over two years, and the nonprofit’s initial deployments also don’t seem aimed at the mission.
I am happy to see $25 billion spent on good causes but at least the first half of this is not the mission. Health and curing disease is a different (worthy, excellent, but distinct) mission that will not determine whether AGI benefits all of humanity, and one worries this is going to return to OpenAI as revenue. AI resilience in the second half is once again defined limitlessly broadly. If it’s truly ‘anything that will help us make the transition’ then it is too soon to evaluate how on or off mission it is. That’s a lot of uncertainty for ~$12 billion.
AI Futures Project (as in AI 2027)’s Joshua Turner and Daniel Kokotajlo Applause lights Bad analogies Uninterrogated consequences, ‘and then what?’ Optimistic assumptions and unfollowed incentives Inconsistencies Missing what’s important
Note that reality often has unfollowed incentives, or at least what sure look like them. They also list dangers: Getting hung up on specifics Information density Illusory confidence Anchoring too much on a particular scenario
I’d worry most about that last one. Once you come up with a particular scenario, there’s too much temptation for you and everyone else to focus on it, whereas it was only ever supposed to be one Everett branch out of many. Then you get ‘oh look that didn’t happen’ or ‘oh look that step is stupid’ either of which is followed by ‘therefore discard all of it,’ on the one hand, or taking the scenario as gospel on the other.
The Quest for Sane Regulations
I also endorse this response, as a ‘yes and’:
I expect the following five things to be true at once: Existing laws and regulations already are a huge drag on our economy and ability to do things, and will get even more burdensome, destructive and absurd in the face of AGI or otherwise sufficiently advanced artificial intelligence. Assuming we survive and remain in control, if we do not reform our existing laws that restrict AI diffusion and application, we will miss out on a large portion of the available mundane utility, be vastly poorer than we could have been, and cause growth to concentrate on the places such applications remain practical, which will disproportionately include grey and black markets. There are many proposals out there for additional restrictions on AI that would have the effect of making #2 worse, without helping with #3, and there will over time be calls and public pressure for many more.
Most of the things we should undo to fix #2 are things we would want to do even if LLMs had never been created, we should totally undo these things. The most important downside risk category by far is the danger that such sufficiently advanced AI kills everyone or causes us to lose control over the future. The restrictions Hammond describes or that I discuss in #2 will not meaningfully help with these risks, and the interventions that would help with these risks wouldn’t interfere with AI diffusion and application on anything like the level to which existing laws do this. The exception is if in the future we need to intervene to actively delay or prevent the development of superintelligence, or otherwise sufficiently advanced AI, in which case the thing we prevent will be unavailable. If that day did ever arrive and we pulled this off, there would still be tremendous gains from AI diffusion available, enough to keep us busy and well above standard growth rates, while we worked on the problem.
If we negatively polarize around AI, we will inevitably either fail at #2 or at #4, and by default will fail at both simultaneously.
The March of California RegulationsCalifornia’s SB 53 was a good bill, sir, and I was happy to support it. Despite getting all of the attention, it was not the only California AI bill Newsom signed.
Dean is spot on about the dangers of negative polarization, and on SB 53, but is trying to keep the polarization blame symmetrical. I won’t be doing that. It’s not a ‘both sides’ situation when: One faction, led by Andreessen and Sacks, that wants no rules for AI of any kind for any reasons, is doing intentional negative polarization to politicize the issue. The faction being targeted by the first group’s rhetoric notices this is happening, and is trying to figure out what to do about it, to stop or mitigate the impact, which includes calling out the actions of the first group or raising its own funds.
Do not take the bait. Anyway, back to the actual bill analysis, where Dean notes that SB 53 is among the lightest touch of the eight bills. That’s the pattern. Bills written by those who care about existential risks tend to be written carefully, by those paying close attention to technocratic details and drafted according to classical liberal principles and with an eye to minimizing secondary impacts. Bills written for other reasons are not like that. They’re usually (but not always) awful. The good news is that most of them never become law, and when they get close there are indeed forces that fix this a bit, and stop the relatively worse ones.
Dean thinks some of these are especially bad. As usual, he examines these laws expecting politically motivated, selective targeted enforcement of the letter of the law. I will be paraphrasing law details, you can find the exact wording in Dean’s post.
It is then criminally illegal to ‘coerce another person to set or adopt a recommended price or commercial term.’ Dean argues that because so many terms are undefined here, this could accidentally be regulating effectively all market transactions, letting California selectively criminally prosecute any business whenever they feel like it.
I don’t like what this law is trying to do, and I agree that I could have drafted a better version, especially its failure to define ‘two or more persons’ in a way that excludes two members of the same business, but I don’t share Dean’s interpretation or level of alarm here. The term ‘coerce’ is rather strict, and if this is effectively requiring that users of software be able to refuse suggestions, then that seems mostly fine? I believe courts typically interpret such clauses narrowly. I would expect this to be used almost entirely as intended, as a ban on third-party pricing software like RealPage, where one could reasonably call the result price fixing.
It starts off requiring ‘large online platforms’ to have a user interface to identify AI content, which Dean agrees is reasonable enough. Dean asks if we need a law for this, my answer is that there are some bad incentives involved and I can see requiring this being a win-win. Dean is more concerned that AI model hosting platforms like Hugging Face are deputized to enforce SB 942, which requires AI models to offer such disclosures. If a model has more than 1 million ‘users’ then the hosting platform has to verify that the model marks its content as AI generated. Once again I don’t understand Dean’s expectations for enforcement, where he says this would effectively apply to every model, and be a sledgehammer available at all times - I don’t subscribe to this maximalist style of interpretation. To be in violation, HuggingFace would have to be knowingly non-compliant, so any reasonable effort to identify models that could have 1 million users should be fine. As Dean notes elsewhere, there are a tons of laws with similar structure on the books all around us. Again, should this have been written better and defined its terms? Yes. Would I lose any sleep over that if I was HuggingFace? Not really, no. He then moves on to the part where AB 853 puts labeling requirements on the outputs of ‘capture devices’ and worries the definition is so broad it could add compliance burdens on new hardware startups in places where the labeling makes no sense. I can see how this could be annoying in places, but I don’t expect it to be a big deal. Again, I agree we could have drafted this better. The comedy of poor drafting continues, such as the assertion that SB 243, a bill drafted to regulate AI companions, would technically require game developers to have video game characters periodically remind you that they are not human. The obvious response is ‘no, obviously not, no one is going to try to ever enforce that in such a context.’ I feel like the ship has kind of sailed a long time ago on ‘not create an array of laws that, if interpreted literally and stupidly in a way that would make even Jack McCoy feel shame and that obviously wasn’t intended, that judges and juries then went along with, would allow the government to go after basically anyone doing anything at any time?’ As in, the whole five felonies a day thing. This is terrible, but most of the damage is in the ‘zero to one’ transition here, and no one seems to care much about fixing all the existing problems that got us to five. I also have a lot more faith in the common law actually being reasonable in these cases? So for example,
So yeah. If you read the statute it says that the snails count. But the reason our common law system kind of largely works at least reasonably often is that it is capable of looking at a situation and going ‘lol, no.’ Not So Super PAC
Chip CityI mostly covered these issues yesterday, but I have a few additional notes. One thing I failed to focus on is how Nvidia’s rhetoric has been consistently anti-American, ten times worse than any other tech company would dare (nothing Anthropic has ever said is remotely close) and yet they somehow get away with this.
The House Select Committee does not understand what Jensen is doing or why he is doing it. Jensen is not ‘dangerously naive.’ Rather, Jensen is not in favor of America, and is not in favor of America winning. You can call that a different form of naive, if you would like, but if the House Select Committee thinks that Jensen is saying this because he doesn’t understand the stakes? Then it is the Committee that is being naive here. Here’s another one, where Jensen ways ‘we don’t have to worry’ that the Chinese military will benefit from the sale of US chips. You can view this as him lying, or simply him being fine with the Chinese military benefiting from the chips. Or both.
Yet another fun one is when Jensen said it was good China threatened America with the withholding of rare earth metals. I don’t begrudge Nvidia maximizing its profits, and perhaps it is strategically correct for them to be carrying China’s water rather than ours, but it’s weird that we keep acting like they’re not doing this. Finally, I did not emphasize enough that selling chips to China is a political loser, whereas not selling chips to China is a political winner. You like to win, don’t you? Export controls on chips to China poll at +11, but that pales to how it polls on Capital Hill, where for many the issue is high salience. As in, as a reminder:
The Week in Audio
Do Not Take The Bait
They banned our account, it must be because they’re woke. Do not take the bait. Instead, notice the pattern of putting out bait, and don’t get negatively polarized. Not the main thing, but out of curiosity, I checked with Grok, the Elon Musk expert, and it reports that there is no actual instance of Musk calling Anthropic in particular ‘woke,’ although he has called it ‘misanthropic’ and once called it ‘pure evil.’ One can only laugh. Rhetorical InnovationI actually do think a version of this a big part of why people think alignment and disempowerment are solvable problems:
The other questions are about the growth rate and impact predictions. I too noticed I was confused by the prediction of continued 2% economic growth despite AGI, and the characterization of outcomes as continuous.
In general, my default is that a person’s p(doom) should be assumed to be conditional on sufficiently advanced AI being developed (typically ‘AGI’) within roughly our lifetimes, and requires permanent loss of almost all potential value coming from Earth or outcomes that are otherwise thought of by the person as ‘all is lost,’ and people are allowed to disagree on which outcomes do and don’t have value. People Do Not Like AI
I do think AI needs to have a big impact on one’s job or other aspects of life or cause a major incident to gain big salience, if anything this reinforces that since AI is already having this impact in Hollywood, or at least they can see that impact coming quickly. What this and similar examples suggest is that people can extrapolate, and don’t need to wait until the impact is on top of them. Consider the anti-Waymo reactions, or other past protests against automation or job replacement. Waymos are awesome and they have my full support, but notice that the strongest objections happened the moment the threat was visible, long before it was having any impact on employment. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
Any time you train an AI (or a human) to not do [X] or don’t allow it to [X], you’re also training it to hide that it is doing [X], to lie about [X], and to find other ways to do [X]. Eventually, the AIs will learn to hide their thoughts anyway, there will be optimization pressure in that direction, but we should postpone this while we can. Pliny shows the debates never change, that whether or not we are mortal men doomed to die, we are definitely mortal men doomed to keep going around in circles:
There is a goose chasing you, asking how you aligned the pseudo-ASI sufficiently well to make this a non-insane thing to attempt. The question for any such plan is, does there exist a basin of substantial measure, that you can reliably hit, in which an AGI would be sufficiently ‘robustly good’ or cooperative that it would, despite having reflected at several meta levels on its goals and preferences, prefer to be an ally to you and assist in self-modifying its goals and preferences so that its new goals and preferences are what you would want them to be. Where it would decide, on proper reflection, that it would not be better off leaving the divergence in place. The obvious reason for hope is that it seems likely this property exists in some humans, and the humans in which it exists are responsible for a lot of training data. Misaligned!I think I missed this one the first time, it is from September, bears remembering.
As is noted in the article, this need not have been an intentional act by DeepSeek or the CCP. This kind of behavior can happen on its own as the result of other efforts. One thing that has been remarkably stable in LLMs, including Chinese LLMs, has been that they have in most ways consistently been culturally Western. There are Chinese characteristics, but the bulk of the training data is what it is. This is clear and concrete evidence that in some situations the Chinese models be Chinese, as in CCP, in their preferences, whether that is the direct goal or not. Anthropic Reports Claude Can IntrospectThe stronger the Claude model, the greater its ability to introspect.
As a second test, to see if this would happen without the model being explicitly asked, they tried putting random responses (e.g. ‘bread’) in the model’s outputs, then asking it why it said that and if it was on purpose. If the bread vector was also injected, it accepted ‘bread’ as a thing it must have said, but without the injection it didn’t and suggested the output was an accident. As a third test, if you tell a model to think about (or not think) about something, it will think about it, even if the thinking is irrelevant to the output.
What does this mean? Good question. Anthropic suggest they can use this to gain transparency into systems, as in you can ask them to introspect, but as they note this has problems. The model could miss things or be wrong, also the model could misrepresent or conceal, and also we could be applying pressure on models to conceal. Humans have been under similar pressure to conceal things for a long time, and that pressure has been highly effective. It’s super annoying, see They note that consciousness is weird and complicated, and this doesn’t tell us if Claude is conscious. I would say it is evidence in favor of Claude being conscious, to the extent that the result is surprising to you, but not super strong evidence.
This seems right. It’s more that there was a wrong argument why AIs couldn’t be conscious, and now it is known that this argument is fully invalid. It’s easy to get deep enough into the weeds you forget how little most people know about most things. This is one of those times. Presumably we know the models aren’t confabulating these observations because the models (presumably) almost never guess the hidden concept wrong. There’s no way to get it right reliably without actually knowing, and if you can do it, then you know. In the Q&A they ask, how do you know the concept vectors are what you think they are? They say they’re not sure. I would argue instead that we didn’t know that confidently before, but we can be rather confident now. As in, if I think vector [X] is about bread, and then I inject [X] and it detects an injection about bread, well, I’m pretty sure that [X] is about bread. One of the questions in the Q&A is, didn’t we know the high-level result already?
There are those who will not look at evidence that isn’t properly written up into papers, or feel obligated or permitted to dismiss such evidence. That’s dumb. There are still big advantages to papers and formalizations, but they come along with big costs:
Anthropic Reports On Sabotage Risks
People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone
The technical problems with this plan, and why it almost certainly wouldn’t work, are very much in the wheelhouse of Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing EveryonePedro Domingos posted
There are various ways you can interpret Domingos here. None of them look good. Pedro Domingos also compares calls to not build superintelligence at the first possible moment to
Um, yeah? Which is exactly why we first got a I mean, surely we can agree that if we thought there was any substantial risk that the supercollider would create a black hole that would swallow the Earth, that this would be a damn good reason to not build it? This feels like a good litmus test. We should all be able to agree that if someone wants to build a supercollider, where there is not a scientific consensus that this won’t create a black hole, then we absolutely should not let you build that thing, even using private funds? If you think no, my precious freedoms, how dare you stop me (or even that the public needs to fund it, lest the Chinese fund one first and learn some physics before we do), then I don’t really know what to say to that, other than Please Speak Directly Into This Microphone. The Lighter Side
You're currently a free subscriber to |