---
subject: "How Machines Shape the Way We Write"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-01-14 13:53:20
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
At some point around the turn of the last century, a New York food merchant sent a telegram to a colleague in New Orleans. He Not long after, the merchant received far more persimmons than he could handle, with apologies that his correspondents couldn’t quite find 50 barrels of them in New Orleans. This rather expensive mistake was a result of the technology that these people were using to communicate. Telegraph operators used Morse code, which spells out letters through a series of dots and dashes. They paused briefly to indicate that they were moving on to a new letter, and a bit more to indicate a new word. It seems that the New York and New Orleans operators weren’t quite on the same wavelength, leading the man in New Orleans to write down “persimmons” instead of “per Simmons.” The telegraph opened up amazing new possibilities for communication after its invention in the middle of the 19th century. It must have felt like magic to send a message across the country in a matter of minutes. But this new technology also changed the way people wrote and spoke. Telegraphic communication required brevity and specificity — brevity because people generally paid by the word, and specificity because shortened messages like the one above were easily misinterpreted, and it was expensive to go back and forth clarifying matters. So, journalist Robert Lincoln O’Brien tells us in his 1904 The telegraph pushed people into formulaic speech. One way to save money on a telegram was to The technology also encouraged longer, more specific words. As O’Brien notes, since you were paying by the word, not the letter, and didn’t want misunderstandings, you might write “superintendent” instead of “chief” or “head” because a word that long would be harder for the telegraph operators to confuse with something else. Operators also started to cut down on adverbial phrases at the beginning of sentences, which were expensive and too easy to attach to another sentence, as well as complex sentences requiring punctuation beyond periods (which were clearly indicated with the word “STOP”). So the new technology of the telegraph enabled much more written communication, but it also shaped it. These changes didn’t stay isolated in telegrams; the more people became used to sending and reading these sorts of messages, the more these quirks of telegraphic English leaked into the culture at large. A little while back, Sam Kriss wrote an interesting piece about Kriss summarizes a few of them: LLMs love the words “delve” and “tapestry,” they mess up sensory metaphors, and, “As everyone knows, A.I. writing always uses em dashes, and it always says, ‘It’s not X, it’s Y.’” He also notes the rapidity with which AI-ese is making its way into our society at large:
This is probably true — we’re likely headed for a future in which more and more of our language starts to sound like AI-ese, either because it’s generated by an LLM, it’s smoothed out by an AI tool like Grammarly, or because we absorb its preferences by osmosis. Some human writers will mimic AI (which, in turn, is trying to mimic human writers). Others will work to distinguish themselves and their writing from the AI-generated stuff (as an example, I’ve been debating whether to leave the em-dash in the first paragraph of this sentence lest it look too AI-adjacent). But we shouldn’t be too alarmed by these changes, I suppose, because our technologies have been changing how we speak and write for a long time. Before the printing press, people didn’t write all that much. Most communication was oral. It seems to have taken place in a bewildering variety of dialects, and there were a lot of different ways to spell the same word. In These variations were troublesome for printers, who made more money when they could quickly and efficiently typeset books. As T.H. Howard Hill So printers started to prune the English language of its variety, making the spelling of words easier and more consistent. They removed The fact that people were producing books in English at all was a fresh development during this period. Before the printing press, most European books were in Latin. As printing spread, more books were printed in vernacular languages, but printers didn’t give all languages equal exposure. Some languages and dialects won out, and others withered away. Elizabeth Eisenstein
The printing press had a standardizing and somewhat diversifying effect on language, shaped by the efficiencies that the new technology provided. It became possible in the early modern period to get exposure to many more types of writing than had been previously available, but only those styles that dovetailed with printing technology. If you read political speeches from the 1800s — well, let’s be honest, you probably won’t read a political speech from the 1800s, because you’ll have a hard time making your way through something so wordy and dense. Check out the
In comparison, a linguistic Television also standardized the way people talked. A In the United States, television has promoted what linguists call “ Finally, in recent decades, the internet has changed how we speak and write. My children sometimes say “lol” (pronounced “lawl”) to indicate that they think something is slightly funny but not actually laughter-inducing. It’s a testament to the ever-evolving nature of language that “lol” means precisely the opposite of what it was originally supposed to mean (“laughing out loud”). In many cases, as This kind of text-speak is an artifact of the technologies of my kids’ childhoods: the inefficiencies of early texting, the character limits of early social platforms, and the shortening attention span that their online lives have encouraged. Our language has been littered with acronymic slang (TLDR, IDK, BTW) from the world of texting. Some artifacts of social media and texting have made their way into speech (someone might, for example, say aloud, “hashtag winning”). Meanwhile, the incentive for people on social media to convey their thoughts as briefly and quickly as possible has created new conventions, like “ As more of our communication has moved away from speech into text, we’ve started to use more “tone management” techniques to make sure the person on the other side of the conversation understands our intent. Written language has also expanded beyond the alphabet. Emojis are making their way into our written text — I’ve even had students insert emojis into essays in recent years. Emojis are deployed as punctuation or intensifiers, which change the meaning of sentences. My children now think a period at the end of a text means I’m mad at them; for them, there’s a huge difference between “I’m looking forward to picking you up 🥳” and “I’m looking forward to picking you up.” These And now along comes the large language model, designed to simulate human writing. We’re already seeing that it’s not just going to copy us, it’s going to guide us — and as we delve deeper into our relationship with this new technology, we’re going to create a rich tapestry of changes in the way we speak and write. This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: Or you can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading! You're currently a free subscriber to |