---
subject: "Why is Colmar Interesting?"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-03-31 12:39:35
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Graydon here. Colmar, France is not cool, at least not in the sense people commonly use that term. Eater does not have an article on the best restaurants in town. The New York Times has never sketched out what you could do if you found yourself there for 36 hours. Coffee shops with white subway tiles and hulking La Marzocco machines Colmar’s La Petite Venise However, there is something magical about Colmar. The brightly colored, timber accented homes that line the streets feel more like a movie set than a real town. (This area was the inspiration for the village in Beauty and the Beast.) It’s this fairytale feel that brings families from around Europe to this small city, where they munch on But for me, it’s not (just) the dreamy residential architecture that makes Colmar special. It’s the wine. Alsace is unlike any other wine region in France. Tucked behind the Vosges range, it is the driest winegrowing region in the country, shielded by the mountains from storms blowing in off the Atlantic. It is best known for growing grapes — Riesling, Gewurztraminer, Silvaner, Pinot Blanc — less closely associated with France than Germany (where Pinot Blanc is known as Weißburgunder). And it is among WITI Classifieds: We are experimenting with running some weekly classifieds in WITI. If you’re interested in running an ad, How to Make New Friends: Nobody teaches adults this! But after hosting 100s of small parties, I found what works. But you can of course get the wonderful wines of Alsace without making the hike to within a stone’s throw of the French/German border. The reason to go to Colmar and surrounding towns like Ammerschwihr, Wettolsheim, and Dambach-la-Ville is who you will drink the wine with. Far away from the professional tours and well appointed tasting rooms of Bordeaux, Burgundy, and Champagne, Alsace’s wine industry is made up almost entirely of small, family-run wineries. Actually getting in touch with local winemakers takes a bit of effort: You are gonna have to dial a number and hope your French is good enough to schedule a visit, or fill out a contact form and pray that someone is checking their email that week. But send out enough feelers, and you’ll find yourself sharing a glass in some special places with some special people. Take Christian Binner, Alsace’s official entry in the cool kid wine scene. Their wines are represented stateside by Your author, across the street from the Binner home, thinking about wine. Just south of Colmar, little more than an hour walk from the center of the city, can be found And if you decide to venture a bit farther from the city limits, the warm-hearted duo of So yes, Colmar is not cool. But on a sunny Alsace day, with a glass of dry riesling in your hand and a smiling winemaker by your side, it can be magical. (GG) — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Graydon (GG) —
|