---
subject: "Links For February 2026"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-02-05 12:55:10
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
[I haven’t independently verified each link. On average, commenters will end up spotting evidence that around two or three of the links in each links post are wrong or misleading. I correct these as I see them, and will highlight important corrections later, but I can’t guarantee I will have caught them all by the time you read this.] 1: 2: You might know that the term “weaboo” (or “weeb”) originally comes from a Perry Bible Fellowship comic. But how did it come to mean “a Westerner who likes Japanese culture”? Answer, from 3: @TPCarney: “ 4: Strange things happening at It rose as high as 86% in 2023, dropped to 50-50 after the Rootclaim debate, stayed there until mid-2025, and has since declined all the way to 27%. Some of this might be 5: Related: 6: 7: Related: 8: 9: 10: 11: 12: 13: 14: 15: 16: A16Z’s 17: Related: 18: Related: From
Obvious explanation is the world’s most ham-fisted paid influence campaign by NVIDIA. I, for one, am shocked - shocked! - to hear about a lapse in the ethical standards of our nation’s right-wing Twitter influencers. I hope people in the AL policy world are paying attention. 19: Related: Meanwhile, OpenAI has offended another demographic There seems to be a general mood that OpenAI is vulnerable these days, culminating in 20: Another 21: 22: New representation-in-historical-movies controversy, this time about an African woman getting cast as Helen of Troy in the new Odyssey. 23: 24: And current state of AI for physics: Polymath and friend of the blog Steve Hsu celebrates You can see them debate the result in this video; they basically agree it’s not a successful breakthrough, but Hsu sticks to finding it an interesting exploration, and Oppenheim sticks to finding it boringly false. 25: 26: Best (worst?) paragraph I read this month,
27: Some amazing religious architecture happening in India these days, including …and the 28: 29: Related: 30: Related: Jan Leike (former head of alignment at OpenAI, now at Anthropic) writes that 31: Related: 32: 60 Minutes recorded a segment on CECOT (El Salvador torture prison being used by Trump administration), then tried to suppress it (probably under indirect pressure from the administration), then changed its mind and showed it after all. I was heartened to see that when it was still being suppressed, someone 33: Interesting as a way to build intuition for why Russia invaded Ukraine, h/t 34: 35: 36: Indonesia has solved the conflict between density and single-family zoning by putting suburban neighborhoods on top of giant multi-story buildings (h/t 37: AI Futures Project (the Here the mode for this milestone (automated coder) is 2027-2028, but the median is 2029-2030. This mode-median discrepancy has been a big problem in trying to communicate results, because the scenarios have used modes (ie the single most likely world), and then people hear the medians and get confused and mad that they’re different. But it’s probably fair to summarize as them Commentary from I don’t think this is quite right - I think they’re actually following their math and so when they redid the math and got different results they said so - but I agree it’s ironic that when everyone else had long timelines, AIFP went short, and now that everyone else is starting to come around, AIFP’s going longer again. AIFP has also 38: New Bryan Caplan book out, the aggressively-titled 39: When complaining about modernity’s real and obvious flaws, it’s important 40: Did you know: Seattle’s new socialist mayor Katie Wilson is the daughter of evolutionary biologist, group selection fan, and Evolution Institute founder 41: The unfortunately-acronymed 42: 43: The last Emperor of Korea was overthrown by Japan in 1910. That last emperor has several living grandsons, who fight over which of them is the “rightful heir” (a meaningless title, as neither Korea recognizes the monarchy). A Korean-American tech entrepreneur, 44: Ted Naismith, famous for his Tolkien illustrations, also has 45: 46: Claim: 47: Changing Lanes:
48: Also from Changing Lanes: 49: 50: A reader refers me to 51 ACX reader Simon Berens reports that his company GetBrighter has succeeded at its IndieGogo campaign and now has a decent stock of their 52: The second story is that the “villain” character in the game, Amelia - a cute student who tries to convince the protagonist to attend anti-immigrant rallies with her - has inevitably become a new right-wing meme/symbol/hero: 53: 54: Most discussions of the crime rate focus on murder and other violent crimes, which have “only” gone down by a third in the past fifty years, so I was surprised to see 55: Related: there’s a common argument that maybe these statistics are wrong and biased, and crime rates have actually gone up. It goes: most crimes are plagued by reporting bias - if crime gets too bad, people simply don’t bother telling the police or other data-collecting bodies. The only crime that isn’t like this is murder - everyone notices a missing/dead human, and the police have to investigate all of them. So the only trustworthy statistic is the murder rate. Murders have gone down, but this is an artifact of improved trauma care saving many victims’ lives; if trauma care has gotten twice as good, then the apparent number of murders will halve even for the same amount of crime. If you adjust the apparent murder rate for the improvement in trauma care, real murder rates may have doubled or even more. 56: 57: Surprising claims: some people still use Instagram Threads? 58: Ajeya Cotra
…sparking further arguments and contributions from I’ll take this opportunity to pitch my startup idea - a dating site where, instead of checking boxes to see if you match, you give a willingness-to-date between 0 and 9, and match if your combined WTD is 10 or greater (so it could be both people rating the other 5, or you rating them 9 and them rating you 1, and so on). That way, you’ll still never match with someone you don’t like (you can always prevent a match by rating them 0), but you have finer-grained control over things like “I’d be willing to date this person if they were super into me, but I’m not, like, chomping at the bit to date them if they’re just vaguely okay with trying it.” 59: The Old English word for paradise was 60: 61: 62: You're currently a free subscriber to |