---
subject: "fragments"
from: "visakanv <visakanv@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-11-18 18:12:42
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Visakan V"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3317537462887877902"]
---
the presentation of the artist – a sensitivity to the audience – a radical acceptance of what is happeningI’m starting a new folder in my notes app titled ‘fragments’. Now, technically, everything I write starts out as fragments. Every tweet is a fragment. And blogposts and essays and even books grow out of fragments, or collections of fragments. If I were to be completely indifferent to presentation, I could rename my Substack to be “Visa’s fragments” and just post a different random fragment every day, without bothering to contextualize or explain anything. It’s not the craziest idea; in fact that might be in some ways maybe better than half of the ideas I’ve had about how to move ahead with my body of work. But the truth is that I do care somewhat about presentation. As much as I’ve tried (halfheartedly?) to think of my substack as anything other than a performance stage, I do still keep returning to the stage as a metaphor. Particularly because Posts are sent to people’s email inboxes– it makes an ask of them, to take some time to “attend the show”. And I want my show to at least make some sense, have at least some sensitivity to the audience. And I recognise that this itself is a flexible, subjective thing. It’s conceivable that an author who is extremely indifferent to their audience’s experience might end up creating a better experience than one who is trying to care. I find myself thinking of Orny Adams, whom I’ve been meaning to write about. Orny was a struggling comedian who was featured in a 2002 documentary with Seinfeld, and there’s a Now, that was in 2002. In 2006, ✱ I’ve come to agree with on the danger of ‘doing the right thing’…and when I look back at when my process was most mucked up, it was when I was fixated on the details, trying to be impressive, trying to write something Proper and Good. It doesn’t even necessarily feel like a showboating thing, that’s the tricky part. It can actually feel like I’m trying to “do the right thing”. See how dangerous that is? And I can think about all sorts of people who’d made all sorts of decisions they later regretted because it seemed like the right thing to do. School, work, marriage, moving, buying a house, the really big-ticket stuff. There can be a murkiness between what you think is right, and what actually feels right, and it can be shockingly, troublingly easy for one’s thoughts to smother one’s feelings– especially if those thoughts themselves turn out to be driven by ‘darker’ or ‘grabbier’ feelings– feelings of insecurity, anxiety, fear of loss, fear of being shunned, mocked, etc. If we bring those feelings out into the light of consciousness, write them out, discuss them with someone else, it can become easier to see what’s really going on, and make better decisions for ourselves. But it can be difficult to face those feelings to begin with, one of the strongest reasons being that acknowledging these ‘darker’ feelings is itself something that feels risky. When I’m feeling good about myself, it’s easier to talk openly about my insecurities from a place of strength and confidence, and it’s easier to write honestly. But when I haven’t had any wins in a long while, I can slip into a wretched cycle of self-doubt, where I feel compelled to hide my negative feelings from myself, which then leaves me in a state of “fake happy”, which is a numb place from which nothing good can happen. I vaguely recall hearing a quote somewhere years ago, and it might have been someone admonishing a kid, “you should be glad that your parents are disappointed with you, because that means at least they still care”. I don’t know if anything is ever really that straightforward, but I’ve definitely been in the wrong part of that cycle within myself– where I hide my disappointment and fear and insecurity from myself, and as a consequence sever my connection with myself, and become something of a disembodied ghost in my own life. ✱ Back to the question of notes and fragments. I still really like what I set out in In By taking lots of different pictures of the same subject from different angles, and cropping and assembling them, Brno puts together a visual experience that gives you a sense of a person beyond what you could get from a single portrait. While technically a static image, there is a dynamism ‘encoded’ into it, for the viewer to interpret and unpack. These push the limits of the medium of photography and still images in a particular way. You could of course also make a video of someone, use multiple cuts and takes etc, and achieve a similar effect, and arguably a more profound effect of sorts. (I’m definitely of the sincere belief that some of humanity’s greatest cinematic minds and artists are being developed on tiktok and youtube right now, yes, even amidst the inevitable slop.) In 2018 I had a conversation with a friend about how social media was fragmenting everything in a way that was disorienting, and it informed my thinking about how the way to deal with that was not necessarily to try to reverse it– that might be like trying to unscramble an egg– but rather, the approach ought to be better threading between fragments. Assembly. Grouping. Linking. Pointing. Threading. Directing. And I think whether you think of yourself as an artist or a creator or not– and I’d argue that capital-L Living, beyond merely existing, is necessarily, inevitably a creative process, because you have to actively author your own life, your sense of meaning, what is important to you, what person you are becoming, etc– it’s worth thinking about what you can do with the fragments you have, how you can present or not-present them, and so on. I’ll get into more of that in subsequent posts. ✱ It’s time for me to start wrapping up. I notice that I didn’t actually answer the question of why I created a folder titled Fragments. It’s possible that the true answer might be kinda pedestrian: from time to time I just create a new ‘workspace’ of some sort, just as a “before/after” partition. It’s like starting a new notebook for a new project. There’s a that “new workspace smell”, full of possibility, where you haven’t yet racked up any disappointments and failures. Well, that’s the answer for “why a new folder”, but why Fragments? I think it’s that I want to be really deliberate about the imperfect, unfinished nature of my work. There’s a Marshall McLuhan quote that goes, “Once you see the boundaries of your environment, they are no longer the boundaries of your environment".” I feel like something is true of this here as well. I’m reminded of the redditor /u/Shitty_Watercolour, who started out making really bad paintings, and went on to make remarkably good ones: There’s a kinda cerebral argument you can have about whether or not it’s ill-advised to call your work shitty in advance, and both sides are kinda true simultaneously. I do think it’s generally important not to downplay my work, and that the language I use will shape my perceptions, decisions and so on. But context is everything. I think in Shitty_Watercolour’s case, it’s very significant that he was posting consistently on reddit, where people grew to appreciate and enjoy his presence – even when the paintings were initially “very bad”, it was charming that somebody had put in the effort to do a painting at all, and his preemptive anticipation of people’s responses was a kind of charming, too. In my case, I feel like I’ve been burdened so much and for so long with the idea of needing to write Proper Complete Essays, that simply reframing it into “I’m only doing Fragments for now”, or maybe even “I’m only allowed to do Fragments for the next year”, is something that generates more thrust than drag, at least for now. It feels like I’m introducing an interesting constraint that I then have to be creative about. And it’s entirely possible that the only thing that’s changed is an internal frame of reference. But that’s the thing about frames, and that’s part of why I’m doing ‘Frame Studies’. Because you can change things by just framing them differently. You're currently a free subscriber to |