---
subject: "You Can Only Die as Deeply as You Live"
from: "\"River Kenna from In•Star\" <riverkenna@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-06-08 14:43:45
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "River Kenna", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3010718370428876194", "UNREAD"]
---
I was thinking again of my article “The Hero’s Journey is a Jammed Door.” In that article, I pointed out that most developmental models agree that the majority of people get stuck somewhere around adolescence — by default, we seem to stop developing past that point unless both a) something forces us to, and b) we get lucky and make it past the next threshold instead of falling back to adolescence again. Using Bill Plotkin’s model of development, I suggested one specific juncture where we get stuck: we aren’t dying. To move from one stage of life to another — and especially to move from adolescence to adulthood — the person you were has to die, in some sense. All the old patterns and certainties, your old way of relating to life. At a certain point, it holds you back; you have to undergo the terrifying, grievous death of who you were as a child in order to step into who your people and your world need you to be as an adult. And the way our culture is set up right now, we just aren’t undergoing that death. Even in our stories and movies, the “deaths” of our heroes have become a formality that mean nothing. A hand drops under the surface of the water, the camera waits an extra beat, and the hero resurfaces. None of us doubted for a second that he was still alive. We know the drill. It’s the same with our own lives and souls — we know the drill, there’s a threshold to be crossed, a graduation ceremony to dress up for, maybe a gap year or a semester abroad to be wild and free and reborn and all that. And then you’ll come home, tell a couple stories, and start applying for the jobs you already know you need to apply for. It’s all on the schedule. It’s all penciled in from preschool onward. We aren’t dying. We’re just letting the camera take an extra beat before we resurface for the next scene. I was thinking about that idea, turning it over in my head again and again. It’s one thing to say we aren’t dying, we aren’t being reborn — it’s another thing entirely to try to solve that problem. If the natural process is to die as your old self and be reborn into adulthood, why is that process getting interrupted? What’s obstructing us as a culture? What’s jamming the doorway out of adolescence? Working on my next project, You Can Only Die as Deeply as You Live. In order to move to a new phase of development, a significant part of you has to die. But if there’s not a significant part of you that is really, truly, deeply alive — that’s just not possible. If you’re going through the motions, on autopilot, following the certainies you know you ought to follow — life is too superficial to invite significant death, let alone rebirth. If you can barely feel your feelings, you’re dissociated half the time, you’ve lost track of Calling, you’re not present in your relationships — there’s not enough of you Alive to sway the heft of the needed Death. To thrive as a culture, we need Elders. Coming out of the widespread cultural coma may be the best shot we have. There’s an analogy here to the life cycle of insects, and their We need to build up enough aliveness, feel our feelings deeply enough, live powerfully enough from Calling and Mission… all so that we’re living deeply enough to properly die and be reborn. That’s the path forward. Live deeply to die deeply — trust what’s in you to be reborn as something spectacular and necessary. Infra is free and will stay free, but if you get something out of my work, consider giving something back. Share my writing with friends & followers, pick up my |