---
subject: "Traffic and Transit Roundup #1"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-09-02 11:58:10
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Traffic and transit are finally getting a roundup all their own. I’ll start out with various victory laps on the awesomeness that is New York City Congestion pricing, which should hopefully now be a settled matter, then do a survey of everything else. New York City Congestion Pricing ReduxWe spent years fighting to get congestion pricing passed in New York City. Once it was in place, everyone saw that it worked. The city was a better place, almost everyone was better off, and also we got bonus tax revenue. And this is only the bare minimum viable product, we could do so much better. We had a big debate over whether congestion pricing is good until it was implemented. At this point,
The thread continues, and the news only improves from there.
The comments somehow consistently still fill with people saying how horrible everything must be and how we can’t trust any of the data, no way this can be happening, it must somehow be a huge disaster. We ignoring these silly wabbits.
If business is actively up, what more is there to say? The only real enemy left is Donald Trump, who is determined to wage war to kill congestion pricing, presumably because he hates Manhattan and wants us to suffer, or perhaps because of his belief that Trade Bad. But he’s the President, and he’s commanding the Department of Transportation to go to war over this, and there’s a decent chance they will win and make all our lives substantially worse. Because Trump does not like that New York has this nice thing, and is trying to kill it. The good news there is that it seems the good guys are winning for now.
The wording on the surveys here are weird since they asked whether ‘Trump should permit this to continue.’ What business of Trump’s is New York doing congestion pricing? But the results are telling, especially in relative terms. The results here are now months old, and the more people are exposed to congestion pricing and see the results, the more they approve of it.
In particular, those who drive into the central business district several times a week (also known as ‘those who pay the fee’) support congestion pricing 66%-32%, and those who do it a few times a month support 51%-47%, and Manhattan residents (who take the cabs that also pay fees although modestly less than they should) support 57%-36%, but support statewide remains in the red, 27%-47%.
The only way you are worse off is if your hourly for being in traffic is low, so either you have to pay a toll without getting value in return (if you pay the $9) or not take the trip (if the trip wasn’t that valuable to you). In the second case, system is functioning as designed. What Reis is doing is totally the system working as designed. The first case is slightly unfortunate redistribution, but this was never supposed to be a Pareto improvement. If you wanted to do some (very small) progressive redistribution to fully compensate, that would be super doable.
Here’s a fun bonus:
The declines here are absolute numbers, not per trip, so per trip the drop is bigger. I presume those numbers are too big to purely be congestion pricing, and the cops obviously matter, but so does ridership, both quantity and quality. Critical mass of people on mass transit makes you much safer, in addition to justifying better service. It’s basically great until the point where you don’t get a seat. Then it’s no big deal until when you start to be nervous about getting on and off. That sucks, but I continue to find that to be mostly a peak of rush hour 4-5-6 line problem. As for many other complaints, Foot traffic is what matters for business, not car traffic. The false alarms were all ‘foot traffic is way down.’ If that went the other way, we’re golden.
New York City Light Rail
Having this line available would shorten travel times in a lot of non-obvious ways, since it lets you more easily transpose between train lines. If this is buildable and could run the whole way in 32 minutes it is an obviously excellent pick. There would also be a lot of value in extending the Second Avenue Subway properly, especially to take pressure off the Lexington (456) line, but that looks like it is simply not doable logistically at any sane price. Fare Evasion (1)
Give up, reduce friction and make the bus free. This would be my instinct. You want more people taking buses, doing so is good for everyone, and you weren’t enforcing the rules anyway. The homelessness (or ‘sleep on the bus’) problem is the main reason why not, but there are solutions. Put plainclothes officers on the buses and have them earn $600 each hour (Claude’s estimate, I think it could be even higher) for the city writing tickets until people stop evading the fare?
Why wouldn’t option two work?
Once again, I ask, how is sitting there writing $100 tickets unprofitable, and enforcement ‘a way to lose money’? Is collection of tickets so bad that you cannot pay the hourly cost for a police officer to write the tickets, even if you discount the incentive effects? I find this beyond absurd. And seriously, the ‘civil rights advocates’ are giving such causes a bad name. If you want the bus to be free and pay with other taxes instead, advocate for that, and I’ll potentially support you although recent findings have tampered my enthusiasm for that solution. Don’t tell us not to enforce the law. There is no third alternative. Half of people not paying is approaching the tipping point where no one pays. Indeed, there would soon be active pressure not to pay, as paying slows down boarding. Fare Evasion (2)It is remarkable how well enforcement works, and how well it then reduces crime.
In other places, they’re not even trying.
Free TransitOn first principles, free mass transit (such as the free buses recently promised to NYC) seem like an obviously good idea. You want people using them, you want people wanting to move around more, transaction costs are high and money is fungible. But conventional wisdom says not so fast. Tallinn is the most often claimed example of mass transit being made free and it not helping, and several comments illustrated why all of this can get complicated by selection effects.
The core question is, are the fares actually stopping people who you want to ride? My personal experiences say yes to some extent, especially when you’re considering a zero marginal cost alternative like walking, or when the annoyance of paying the fare enters play, and when you are young. It matters some, especially at lower incomes. Having fully free buses also means that children who don’t have money can get home. But ultimately, everyone who studies this or looks at their own experience seems to agrees this a relatively minor concern. How often and how reliably the bus or subway comes, how fast it goes, how comfortable and crowded it is, and how safe you feel are all more important factors. And without the money from the fares, yes money is fungible but the political economy involved means funding will likely decline. In addition, the people who will ride a lot more for free than for a small price are exactly the people others do not want to ride alongside. We have the experiments that show that cracking down on fare evasion greatly reduces crime and generally makes transit more pleasant, which generates positive feedback loops. So sadly, I have learned my lesson. I no longer in favor of mass transit being free, although I do think that heavy encouragement of buying monthly passes is good so that marginal cost drops to zero. Ideally this could be attached to tax filing? I do also still think free is superior to technically not free if that is unenforced. The Last TrainSan Francisco restaurants often close before 10pm, Smooth OperatorQuietly, the MTA union convinced the state legislature to mandate two train operators per train. Hopefully Hochul does not sign this outright theft.
Mass Transit And Health
Also Ah California High Speed RailCalifornia high speed rail connecting Los Angeles to San Francisco is a great idea. Or it would be, if you were able to actually lay the track. There’s the rub.
Yes, the complaints are all about the terrible execution, but also that seems sufficiently terrible to sink all this? The part where they take in a lot of money and then do not build HSR seems like a fatal flaw. Amtrak
This is of course a deeply stupid map. Why do we want a second line from Minneapolis to Seattle, when you can take the existing one to Portland and then ride to Seattle? Why do we put a high speed rail line from Charlotte to Atlanta, and Dallas to Houston, and not upgrade the Acela line?
The High Speed Rail We Actually Need Is AcelaThe lack of focus on Acela in the previous plan, in particular, is completely insane. The United States has one area where high speed rail would actually be a great big deal, where all the passengers and people are, that is economically super valuable. That is the eastern line between Boston, New York City, Philadelphia and Washington, D.C. Improving that line to be true high speed rail would be an absolute game changer. We could then discuss extending that effort elsewhere. Instead, it gets completely ignored. And no, I don’t want to hear about permitting issues, you’re the government. Fix It. Compared to that, all the other high speed rail proposals are chump change, and they don’t fit together into anything cohesive, and also we don’t seem to be able to actually build them. I’m sufficiently gung ho that I think they’re still good ideas if we can actually make them exist, and once you have some good pairwise connections you can look to expand from there, but that seems to be a tall order.
Well, maybe.
This project seems obviously worthwhile even at $117 billion if it would actually happen. At $17 billion it is absurdly great and yes the region should be happy to fund, or for a private company to fund since I agree it sounds profitable. If I had an extra $20 billion lying around I would be seriously plotting this out and seeing if various states and the White House would sufficiently play ball. The cost is that this kills off the Northeast Regional, which cuts some stations off from intercity rail. I think Matthew Yglesias is right that this is a worthwhile trade, but I worry that it is politically a very big problem for such a project. I’d be willing to (inefficiently) give back some of the gains here to fix that in one of various ways. The Other High Speed Rail Project
CaltrainIt’s good when people ride your trains. Or is it?
Bike Lanes
Airports
Jones Act Bonus Episodes
It seems Cremieux is taking ‘automation makes the ports run faster’ as a given. I find it very hard to argue with this, after the things I’ve read about how manual ports work, and the failure of our ports to run 24/7 - obviously an automated port need never close, but most of ours do. If you read Trump’s explanation of why he is opposing port automation, it’s literally zero-sum thinking that ‘these foreign companies should hire our American workers’ without asking the question of whether this makes the ports run better or worse. This is a man who scribbles ‘trade is bad’ on reports and thinks tariffs are good. California closed a refinery and had to import fuel, A cost comparison:
Sad: Even Joe Biden considered coming out for Jones Act repeal, In BriefThey’re building a private rail line between Los Angeles and Las Vegas. It’s a short line, but We are also doing it by changing the name, I notice that I keep not considering the possibility of flying into or out of OAK instead of SFO when visiting from New York, despite this not being obviously worse. I never check, because there is no easy code for ‘OAK or SFO’ when booking, which we need. You should be able to say ‘SFB’ or something, the way you can say ‘NYC’ and get JFK, LaGuardia and Newark.
I mean, no? Or at least, this is not causal. There is no way that the bike lane is boosting sales by a 46%. There are not enough bikes for that, this makes no sense. I have to assume that the street in question happens to be doing well, unless this is (and it would not shock me, shall we say) a massive data or calculation error. California High Speed Rail subsidized the Bakersfield to Merced portion of track first, despite this being obviously not economically valuable,
Remember when from 1840 to 1850,
The other thing building half a bridge does is provide strong incentive to finish the bridge, or to adjust where things are. Whenever one builds capacity, especially infrastructure, it likely opens up the possibility of building more capacity of various types, as well as ways to adjust. This can then trigger a cascade. If you only built things that were profitable on the margin without any such additional building or adjustments, you would often miss most of the value and severely underbuild. This is one reason I am typically eager to proceed with rail lines and other mass transit, even when the direct case does not seem to justify the cost. You have to start somewhere. If for example we do hook up a point in Los Angeles to Las Vegas via a new high speed rail line, then there is hope that this provides impetus to go further, also most of the gains are impossible to capture. So given a private group is remotely considering doing it, we should be ecstatic. You're currently a free subscriber to |