---
subject: "Capgemini’s $3.3B WNS deal shows how AI turned call centres into a data goldmine"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-09-19 02:49:07
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031"]
---
|
|
Delivered to Ishan, Subscriber to The Ken.
Fri, 19 Sep 2025
|
The Spotlight by Arundhati Ramanathan
Deputy Editor
|
|
Good Morning Ishan,
Employees in headsets, pulling late-night shifts and answering queries for customers around the world, have long been the defining image of Indian call centres.
Now, employees of these back offices have a constant shadow. AI copilots are watching, tracking, recording, and learning their every move. These copilots present themselves as productivity tools, but the data generated by this workforce on how they resolve queries is now potentially more valuable.
The same processes that were once sold as outsourced services can now be turned into proprietary products—if companies know how. But before they can even attempt that, global firms have noticed and are swooping in.
In July, Capgemini paid $3.3 billion for WNS Global, a homegrown Business Process Management (BPM) giant. But it wasn’t the headset-wearing staff that drew the French consultancy’s eye. What it wanted was three decades’ worth of workflow data. Insurance claims, late invoices, refund approvals—everything the industry has been perfecting for clients abroad is now the raw material for the next frontier of automation: agentic AI.
In her deeply reported [debut story](https://the-ken.com/story/capgeminis-3-3b-wns-deal-shows-how-ai-turned-call-centres-into-a-data-goldmine/?utm_source=daily_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=daily_newsletter) for The Ken, Mrunmayee writes about how this $54-billion industry, once dismissed as back-office drudgery, is suddenly at the heart of AI training.
Got a tip? If you have a lead for a great story that The Ken can pursue, please send it to [tips@the-ken.com](mailto:tips@the-ken.com) or share it through [this form](https://theken.typeform.com/got-a-tip). To find out more about how to do this securely, read our [blog post](https://the-ken.com/blog/help-the-ken-tell-the-next-big-story/) about sharing tips with The Ken.
The Ken is now on WhatsappThe best of our journalism now at your fingertips—follow our Whatsapp channel for the latest updates on all our stories, newsletters, and podcasts
|
Latest on the ken
The world’s largest back office may yet remain a back office—training the very machines that will take its place |
| Community Activity |
|
Amritpal Mann Commented Businesses are not build on excel sheets sitting in swanky offices. They need trust and logic which is clearly missing from KKR’s side |
On Story
|
|
Shruti Commented Ironic how offline retail is zeroing down on core offerings while e-commerce , especially quick commerce, is focusing on horizontal category expansion to stay relevant. Are we at crossroads between e-tail taking up major low-to-mid ticket items while offline retail moves towards high margin stores made for experiential, high involvement purchases? |
On Story
|