---
subject: "Upgrade to the future; a much-needed industry measure; an oasis for DAOs"
from: "web3 letter from a16zcrypto <a16zcrypto@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-03-18 21:20:38
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "a16zcrypto"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2535365729249697677"]
---
Feature: Understanding the biggest upgrade to Ethereum since The Mergewith Noah Citron and Valeria Nikolaenko Ethereum just underwent its biggest upgrade since Of these proposed changes aka Ethereum improvement proposals (EIPs), the most-anticipated was Why it mattersSo why does EIP-4844 matter? First, it introduced the concept of “blobs” — a place to store additional, temporary data on Ethereum blocks. Simply put, blobs are a new place to store rollup data that’s being added to the network. Rollups are layer two (L2) services that reduce the network’s load by processing transactions off-chain and then bringing them back on-chain. Since rollups only need this data temporarily, the blob-data is (mostly) forgotten by the blockchain afterwards. Think of Ethereum as a highway. Mainnet transactions are the people riding alone in cars. Rollups are the buses that group people, helping alleviate traffic. EIP-4844 basically adds a “dedicated bus lane” to Ethereum, making the network more efficient. The Dencun upgrade also paves the way for additional “bus lanes” to be added in future.
Benefits and resultsImagine if rollup data didn’t expire. That would add roughly 83.7 gigabytes of data to the blockchain every month (~31 days), and 985.5 gigabytes per year. This figure would only keep increasing, because remember: blockchains store info permanently. Implications and applicationsLower transaction costs matters for everyone, because cheaper transactions unlock entirely new categories of applications that didn’t make sense with higher fees. related resources:▶️📹 Resource: Understanding ‘LVR’ – a tool for measuring the costs of market-making in DeFiwith Tim Roughgarden Why does this work matter, in the big picture?In traditional finance, participants rely on order books, brokers, centralized exchanges, and other market-making intermediaries to help them trade and hold their assets — including granting those intermediaries access to their personal information to do so. But in decentralized finance (DeFi), math and code enable liquidity providers to pool assets (for a share of transaction fees and/or tokens), through automated market makers (AMMs) — allowing anyone to transact directly on decentralized exchanges. However, in such decentralized finance systems, what’s the cost of providing liquidity to an AMM? The original paper introducing LVR (by Jason Milionis, Ciamac Moallemi, Tim Roughgarden, and Anthony Lee Zhang) in 2022 answered this question with a new running-cost metric they proposed, called loss-versus-rebalancing (LVR). Unlike the traditional, but widely criticized, metric of “impermanent loss”, LVR isolates the adverse selection/ information costs of liquidity provision — independent of any market risk component. The authors also suggested how LVR can inform liquidity provision decisions and the design of AMM protocols: ▶️▶️ see also:“ “ In the news: A breakthrough for DAOs as legal entitieswith Miles Jennings and David Kerr more reading:[article in Fortune](https://substack.com/redirect/e0e346ae-08b9-487f-942c-d9d3e52ddd8f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)(March 2024) - “Wyoming wants to become the Delaware of DAOs with new crypto law for decentralized autonomous organizations”, by Leo Schwartz[three-part series on legal frameworks on DAOs](https://substack.com/redirect/7383a389-b564-41a7-b321-541b2f92d7f2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)(April-June 2022) - from a baseline framework to DAO entity features & entity selection to how to pick a DAO entity, by Miles Jennings and David Kerr[+ model framework in SSRN](https://substack.com/redirect/c8b3073d-c2b0-407f-b87f-c8519e6ce3cf?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)(March 2024) - “A model decentralized unincorporated nonprofit association act” by Miles Jennings and David Kerr
You’re receiving this newsletter because you signed up for it on our websites, at an event, or elsewhere (you can opt out any time using the ‘unsubscribe’ link below). This newsletter is provided for informational purposes only, and should NOT be relied upon as legal, business, investment, or tax advice. Furthermore, the content is not directed at nor intended for use by any investors or prospective investors in any a16z funds. Please see a16z.com/disclosures for additional important details, including link to list of investments.
|