---
subject: "information zero"
from: "Auren Hoffman of Five Links <auren@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-07-21 11:41:51
labels: ["Auren Hoffman", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_4260038268466989707", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
yeah, i know: you are bragging about getting to inbox zero. that one time in your life. yeah. congrats. now imagine a day that you are inbox zero, podcast zero (consumed every podcast in the world you are remotely interested in), book zero (read every book you can ever conceive of reading), news zero, movie zero, TV zero, and even watched every random youtube videos of crazy guys doing stupid stunts. and, for good measure, you did this in every language in the world. you know every joke ever told. you are at INFORMATION ZERO.
that has happened. you, my friend, are an AI. congratulations, you finished the internet! imagine there is literally nothing left to know. you now know everything. that world is coming. that is the information zero world. so now imagine you are really at information zero … what do you do with your free time? yeah, i know, first we’d massively increase our hours playing pickleball. i’d definitely be playing pickle at least twice a day when we get to information zero. and all those consumed pickleball youtube videos would vastly increase my skillz (and the skillz of all my opponents). but after binging on pickleball, what next? what do you create with all that information? your brain is no longer a sponge. it’s a freakin laser as spiderman’s uncle likes to say … with knowledge comes POWER … and RESPONSIBILITY. after information zero, what do you invent for the world? that is the question we are all going to be asking ourselves VERY soon. information zero is SUPER exciting (and also really scary). onward! steps to enlightenment: You’ve reached Information Zero. What do you do? note: if you like this article, please do three things: share it with someone you admire follow me ( [@auren](https://substack.com/redirect/e61e1b96-525f-4563-beae-bec3537d3f55?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)) on Xsubscribe to the “ [World of DaaS](https://substack.com/redirect/4042b671-1249-494e-8b1a-e4def393de68?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)” podcast
(if you hate this, please share with all your enemies) Hope you enjoy |