---
subject: "What Things Really Feel?"
from: "Robin Hanson from Overcoming Bias <overcomingbias@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-03-15 02:34:10
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Overcoming Bias", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8616244883382228708", "UNREAD"]
---
We humans have brains that guide our behavior, via our inserting complex “signal-processing” between input from our eyes, ears, etc., and output to control our hands, mouth, etch. We physicists feel confident that we have a pretty complete understanding of the low level physical processes involved, which are quite ordinary; any exotic effects can have only minor stochastic influences on brain outcomes. Furthermore, like most designed signal-processing systems (e.g., TVs, phones, watches), our brains are designed to be pretty robust to fluctuations in low level details. Introspectively, we see ourselves as having vivid feelings related to our brain processes; we feel strongly about what we see, touch, hope for, and plan. And many scholars believe strongly that they can counterfactually imagine the exactly same physical brain processes and resulting physical outcomes happening (in “philosophical zombies”), including our claiming to have these feelings, without our *actually having such feelings. Furthermore, most people see all non-animal physical processes, Note that the feelings that we have are exactly those computed by our brain processes; the only extra thing here might be the non-physical existence of, not the content of, such feelings. Also, note that the completeness of our understanding of the physics of brain processes means that such extra non-physical facts couldn’t actually be the local *cause for our claiming to have such more-than-physical feelings. Apparently, natural selection would have inclined us to make such claims even if they were not true. But that doesn’t make us wrong. In some recent polls, I found that most of us don’t think that Now the fact that feelings don’t cause actions also means that we never get any physical empirical data on which physical things in our universe have what associated feelings when. So we instead rely either on case-specific intuitions or theoretical arguments. For example, if we believe that humans feeling reports are usually correct then we can use that to infer what humans feel when. And we often guess that when animals similar to humans have behaviors similar to humans, they likely also have similar feelings. However, we seem reluctant to extend these approaches to artificial devises. So we face the hard and actionable question of how to estimate which artificial devices or alien creatures feel what when? As most of us put far more moral weight on creatures who actually have feelings, compared to those that just mimic feelings, in a world full of artificial creatures, which may be coming to us soon, it will matter a lot to which creatures we attribute real feelings. This is a reason to want a lot more research to go into this topic. And in a recent One theoretical approach is to seek as simple as possible a meta-law or rule by which the universe might decide which physical things feel what when, consistent with the constraint that humans always feel exactly what their brains compute that they feel. For example, maybe all devices and creatures actually feel whatever feelings their brains have computed that they feel. To make this into a clear rule we’d need a way to objectively identify brains in the physical world and which of their internal states are what “feelings.” It also suggests that LLMs today are actually feeling the emotions they express. Alas, the fact that most people seem convinced that some fictional robots or androids looked like they had real feelings suggests that without some solid accepted theoretical rule, we are likely to go with our intuitions. And since AIs will likely get very good at acting like they have feelings, we will probably attribute feelings to the AIs that we like and want to respect, while seeing those we dislike and want to disrespect as not having feelings. The fact that humans have been able to see humans that they enslave as subhuman suggests we have a large capacity to disrespect those we want to mistreat. You're currently a free subscriber to |