---
subject: "How Do Villages Grow into Cities?"
from: "Tomas Pueyo from Uncharted Territories <unchartedterritories@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-09-19 14:02:58
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tomas Pueyo", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_28238133486362596", "UNREAD"]
---
In our previous article, Food Productivity of CitiesThe regional productivity of the land will determine the average population density: The more fertile the land is, and the better the technology to extract food out of it, the more food will be available and the more the population will grow. As we saw in The number of people who can live in cities will be determined by the food surplus. For example, if every person can only produce enough food to feed themselves, everybody will be a farmer. But if every farmer only uses half of their harvest, the other half can feed non-farmers, and so 50% of the population will be able to do other work, usually better done in cities. In other words, the food production surplus determines the share of urban population, up to about 80% city dwellers.¹ But how does this food reach the cities? In Notice how there’s plenty of farmland inside the city walls. Outside the walls there was more. We saw in that article that the simplified model was this: The food that must be consumed soon after production had to be produced within the city or close by. Some forest land had to be close by too, because wood is heavy, so transporting it is expensive. Farther out, grains, since they don’t spoil. They can be transported slowly and don’t need refrigeration. Farther still, ranching, as cattle can move by foot.²
In this structure, farmers in the periphery sell their grain surplus to the city, which is one of the reasons that surrounding villages can’t be too big: They must produce a heavy surplus to feed the city, so they can’t have too many hands per farm. But as we discussed, transportation costs had a prominent role: They were so high that they could quickly make any product prohibitively expensive. And as you might know by now if you read Uncharted Territories frequently, river transportation costs could be 10-30x cheaper than overland. The easier the river transportation, the faster boats could travel and bring food from faraway villages. This is why Ancient Egypt’s capitals were so rich, harvesting all the farming surplus of the entire Nile. This is why all the earliest civilizations emerged along rivers, first as cities, which then conquered or allied with more and more land and other settlements along the same rivers. One way to get a sense of this is through “isochrones”: The confluence of rivers increased the influence area. And this is also why rivers were better than coasts. At a macro level, coastal cities allowed the emergence of big empires (and thus huge capitals). This is why the Roman Empire was called Roman (from the city of Rome) and why both Rome and its empire were so big: The Romans used the Mediterranean (Mare Nostrum, “our sea”) as a highway to transport grain from across the empire (notably Egypt). Its roads had the same effect. Why gather in cities though? We mentioned There’s a clue in the paintings of Padova and London I showed before. DefenseOf all the existing cities I know that were formed centuries ago, virtually all of them are in a highly defensible spot: [London](https://substack.com/redirect/9a3fe17b-a6ec-487f-91f4-5e9a0b6b2fe8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)was on a hill on the Thames. Other cities along a river with a fort on a hill include[Athens](https://substack.com/redirect/b4cb1bca-8598-436d-8abc-2dd374b08a69?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o),[Carcassonne, Salzburg](https://substack.com/redirect/b4cb1bca-8598-436d-8abc-2dd374b08a69?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o),[Budapest](https://substack.com/redirect/7103bca1-74f4-4e09-93af-db329d7e7861?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), Prague…Byzantium / Constantinople is at the end of a rocky peninsula, like San Francisco. [Pittsburgh](https://substack.com/redirect/345d6365-a5ab-4ef9-8dd1-36fa9021c804?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)and[Lyon](https://substack.com/redirect/59c090ce-13d6-4f9e-9cb2-0413a18e116b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)are on a hill at the confluence of two rivers.[Cairo](https://substack.com/redirect/8cefe5b2-ade0-4655-ad4b-6f2460883dde?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)(and all of Egypt) are protected on three sides by desert, and by sea on the 4th. The same was true of the early[Indus Valley civilization](https://substack.com/redirect/21afc3cb-1095-4ea2-af07-b9a6a95d25b5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)..[Mexico](https://substack.com/redirect/5f58841b-dbcf-4688-b93f-cd4578030f1f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)was on a lake surrounded by mountainsRome was on hills close to the Tiber river, in a marshy and malaria-prone area [Moscow](https://substack.com/redirect/cfcf3fe3-44c6-4552-9a86-573b0afa8716?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)was ideally suited to defend against the steppe hordes.
Many of the cities we know today in Europe and around the Mediterranean were founded by Romans first as military bases, and only after did they become cities. This suggests the more general mechanism: Villagers were attacked by neighbors or foreigners They would pack into bigger towns to wall them and protect themselves³ Those towns that could protect themselves the best were more likely to survive and attracted more people, eventually emerging as big cities
Many of these cities were on rivers because of the protection, the water for drinking, for irrigation, to source food from farms along the river… And from trade. The Trade Effect of CitiesIn They tended to start as military centers Which transformed them into administrative centers For protection, food, water (drinking and irrigation), and transportation speed, they tended to be on rivers The ones that were on the best parts of rivers (navigable waters at the confluence of rivers or at their mouth) grew much faster than the others
In other words, the key factor that made a city grow a lot was being at the crossroads of cheap transportation lines. We see this in So the ideal city is a village that happens to be on the confluence of several calm, navigable rivers, on an estuary close to the coast, with a ford to cross the rivers, and near a natural road that connects important points. What’s a natural road? A line that quickly connects one important city to another through pretty flat terrain. You can see for example how many of Spain’s modern roads are close to where old Roman roads were: Locations at line crossing evolved into marketplaces, which generated wealth that could pay for the grain and infrastructure needed to continue feeding them. I explained how valuable rivers were for this process in
To use a concrete example, imagine the costs of $1 of woolen cloth. $0.30 could have been for getting the wool, $0.30 for Now halve the transportation cost. Suddenly, the average profit rises to $0.40, and after living costs, the trader can save $0.25, or 5x more than before!⁴ But as we have seen, this also expands the market. Now the trader can cover 4x the area, so he will be able to sell 4x more cloth, so he will make $1 where before he was only making $0.05! Of course, this also increases by 4 the amount of wool production. Or maybe more, because competition will bring prices down, which will increase demand. This competition emerges because more people see a profit to be made in wool trade. And they will sell their product wherever someone else is already selling it—to benefit from existing customers. The added variety will attract new customers, who will attract more sellers. Soon, dyers will also come to dye the cloth with beautiful colors. Designers will innovate the cuts. Weavers will start co-locating in the same city, because that way they can see what sells, and they can make those types of clothes. Button makers will also settle nearby, to sell their buttons to clothmakers. Boats will specialize in carrying wool and cloth, making that trade more efficient. Soon, you have an entire industry that co-locates into the same city because of the economies of agglomeration. Economies of Agglomeration...Keep reading with a 7-day free trialSubscribe to Uncharted Territories to keep reading this post and get 7 days of free access to the full post archives. A subscription gets you:
|