---
subject: "OpenAI #8: The Right to Warn"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-06-17 11:50:16
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
The fun at OpenAI continues. We finally have the details of how Leopold Aschenbrenner was fired, at least according to Leopold. We have a letter calling for a way for employees to do something if frontier AI labs are endangering safety. And we have continued details and fallout from the issues with non-disparagement agreements and NDAs. Hopefully we can stop meeting like this for a while. Due to jury duty and it being largely distinct, this post does not cover the appointment of General Paul Nakasone to the board of directors. I’ll cover that later, probably in the weekly update. The Firing of Leopold AschenbrennerWhat happened that caused Leopold to leave OpenAI? Given the nature of this topic, I encourage getting the story from Leopold by This is especially true on the question of the firing ( Remember that this is only Leopold’s side of the story. We do not know what is missing from his story, or what parts might be inaccurate. It has however been over a week, and there has been no response from OpenAI. If Leopold’s statements are true and complete? Well, it doesn’t look good. The short answer is: Leopold refused to sign the OpenAI letter demanding the board resign. Leopold wrote a memo about what he saw as OpenAI’s terrible cybersecurity. OpenAI did not respond. There was a major cybersecurity incident. Leopold shared the memo with the board. OpenAI admonished him for sharing the memo with the board. OpenAI went on a fishing expedition to find a reason to fire him. OpenAI fired him, citing ‘leaking information’ that did not contain any non-public information, and that was well within OpenAI communication norms. Leopold was explicitly told that without the memo, he wouldn’t have been fired.
You can call it ‘going outside the chain of command.’ You can also call it ‘fired for whistleblowing under false pretenses,’ and treating the board as an enemy who should not be informed about potential problems with cybersecurity, and also retaliation for not being sufficiently loyal to Altman. Your call. For comprehension I am moving statements around, but here is the story I believe Leopold is telling, with time stamps. (2:29:10) Leopold joined superalignment. The goal of superalignment was to find the successor to RLHF, because it probably won’t scale to superhuman systems, humans can’t evaluate superhuman outputs. He liked Ilya and the team and the ambitious agenda on an important problem. Not probably won’t scale. It won’t scale. I love that Leike was clear on this.
(2:31:24) What happened to superalignment? OpenAI ‘decided to take things in a somewhat different direction.’ After November there were personnel changes, some amount of ‘reprioritization.’ The 20% compute commitment, a key part of recruiting many people, was broken. If you turn against your safety team because of corporate political fights and thus decide to ‘go in a different direction,’ and that different direction is to not do the safety work? And your safety team quits with no sign you are going to replace them? That seems quite bad. If you recruit a bunch of people based on a very loud public commitment of resources, then you do not commit those resources? That seems quite bad.
(2:32:25) Why did Leopold leave, they said you were fired, what happened? I encourage reading Leopold’s exact answer and not take my word for this, but the short version is… Leopold wrote a memo warning about the need to secure model weights and algorithmic secrets against espionage, especially by the CCP. After a major security incident, Leopold shared that memo with the board. HR responded by saying that worrying about CCP espionage was racist and unconstructive. “I got an official HR warning for sharing the memo with the board.” In case it needs to be said, it is totally absurd to say this was either racist or unconstructive. Neither claim makes any sense in context.
In the interviews before he was fired, Leopold was asked extensively about his views on safety and security, on superalignment’s ‘loyalty’ to the company and his activity during the board events. It sure sounds like OpenAI was interpreting anything but blind loyalty, or any raising of concerns, as damage and a threat and attempting to kill or route around it.
When he was fired, Leopold was told "the reason this is a firing and not a warning is because of the security memo." If Leopold’s statements are true, it sure sounds like he was fired in retaliation for being a whistleblower, that HR admitted this, and it reveals that HR took the position that OpenAI was in a hostile relationship with its own board and had an active policy of hiding mission-critical information from them. I have not seen any denials of these claims. Leopold’s answer including him saying he could have been more diplomatic, acting almost apologetic. Either this is him bending over backwards to be diplomatic about all this, he has suffered trauma, or both.
The main official reason was the ‘leak of information,’ in a brainstormed Google docs memo he shared with outside researchers six months prior, whose actual confidential information was redacted before sharing. In particular OpenAI pointed only to a line about ‘planning for AGI in 2027-2028,’ which was the official public mission of the Superalignment team. They claimed Leopold was ‘unforthcoming during the investigation’ because he couldn’t remember who he shared the document with, but it was a literal Google doc, so that information was easy to retrieve. That leaking claim was the outcome of a team going through all of Leopold’s communication. So that was the worst they could find in what was presumably a search for a reason to fire him. If Leopold’s statements are true and complete, then the leaking claim was at best a pretext. It sure sounds like it was pure and utter bullshit. I have not seen any denials of these claims. If this was the worst they could find, this means Leopold was being vastly more responsible than my model of the median employee at an AI lab.
Their other claims listed were that Leopold had spoken externally including to a think tank and a DM to a friend about his view that AGI would likely become a government project, and therefore had ‘engaged on policy in a way they didn’t like.’ Such discussions were, Leopold claims, within standard norms at OpenAI, and several dozen former colleagues confirmed this. Again, if true, this sounds like what you get from a highly unsuccessful fishing expedition. There is nothing here. The alternative, that such actions are against the norms of OpenAI and justify firing an employee, are vastly worse. If it is your policy that you fire people for discussing key non-confidential facts about the world and the safety situation with outside colleagues, seriously, what the hell?
Oh, and the other thing Leopold did was not sign the employee letter. He says he agreed the board should have resigned but had issues with letter details, in particular that it called for the board to resign but not for the new board to be independent. He notes there was pressure to sign. Again, this sure looks like what it looks like. If you have a letter like this, and a huge portion of those who do not sign are gone six months later, you can draw various conclusions. At best, you can say that those who did not agree with the direction of the company felt unwelcome or that their work was harmful or both, and decided to leave. Another question is, if you see everyone who failed to sign being frozen out and retaliated against, what should you conclude there? The first thing you would conclude is that a lot of employees likely signed the letter in order to protect themselves, so saying that you had ‘95% approval’ becomes meaningless. You simply do not know how many people actually believed what they signed. The second obvious thing is that all of this sounds like retaliation and pressure and other not good things.
Leopold was fired right before his cliff, with equity of close to a million dollars. He was offered the equity if he signed the exit documents, but he refused. The timing here does not seem like a coincidence. We are fortunate that Leopold decided freedom was priceless and refused. This is ‘how it is supposed to work’ in the sense that at least Leopold was offered real consideration for signing. It still seems like terrible public policy to have it go that way, especially if (as one might presume from the circumstances) they fired him before the cliff in order to get the leverage.
Leopold really should consult a lawyer on all this if he hasn’t done so. It seems highly plausible that this incident was a major causal factor in the decisions by Jan Leike and Ilya Sutskever to leave OpenAI.
(2:42:49) Why so much drama? The stakes, and the cognitive dissonance of believing you are building AGI while avoiding grappling with the implications. If you actually appreciated what it meant, you would be thinking long and hard about security and prioritize it. You would care about the geopolitical risks of placing data centers in the UAE. You would take your safety commitments seriously, especially when they were heavily used for recruitment, which Leopold says the compute commitments to superalignment were. Leopold indicates breaking the 20% compute commitment to superalignment was part of a pattern of OpenAI not keeping its commitments. One amazing part of this is that Leopold does not mention alignment or existential risks here, other than the need to invest in long term safety. This is what it is like to view alignment and existential risk as mere engineering problems requiring investment to solve, commit resources to solving them and recruit on that basis, then decide to sacrifice your commitments to ship a slightly better consumer product. This is what is looks like when the stakes are as low as they possibly could be. AGI will be a historically powerful technology usable for both good and bad, even if you think all the talk of existential risk or loss of control is nonsense. There is no denying the immense national security implications, even if you think they ‘top out’ well before what Leopold believes, no matter what else is also at stake that might matter more. There are of course… other factors here. It doesn’t have to be this way.
Daniel Kokotajlo Speaks and The Right to WarnHere is his full Twitter statement he made once he felt free to speak, aimed at ensuring that others are also free to speak.
I also noticed this in The New York Times.
That is the pattern. Altman will tell you what you want to hear. The Right to Warn Letter
It is telling that all current OpenAI members who signed stayed anonymous, and two former ones did too. It does not seem like they are doing well on open criticism. But also note that this is a small percentage of all OpenAI employees and ex-employees. In practice, this calls for four things. What would this mean? Revoking any non-disparagement agreements (he says OpenAI promised to do this, but no, it simply said it did not ‘intend to enforce’ them, which is very different). Create an anonymous mechanism for employees and former employees to raise safety concerns to the board, regulators and an independent AI safety agency. Support a ‘culture of open criticism’ about safety. Not to retaliate if employees share confidential information when raising risk-related concerns, if employees first use a created confidential and anonymous process.
The first three should be entirely uncontroversial, although good luck with the third. The fourth is asking a lot. It is not obviously a good idea. It is a tough spot. You do not want anyone sharing your confidential information or feeling free to do so. But if there is existential danger, and there is no process or the process has failed, what can be done? Leopold tried going to the board. We know how that turned out. In general, there are situations where there are rules that should be broken only in true extremis, and the best procedure we can agree to is that if the stakes are high enough, the right move is to break the rules and if necessary you take the consequences, and others can choose to mitigate that post hoc. When the situation is bad enough, you stand up, you protest, you sacrifice. Or you Do What Must Be Done. Here that would be: A duty to warn, rather than a right to warn. Ideally we would like to do better than that.
OpenAI’s non-response was as you would expect:
I like Google’s response better. The fully general counterargument against safety people saying they would actually doing things to enforce safety is what if that means no one is ever willing to hire them? If you threaten to leak confidential information, how do you expect companies to respond?
I admit, that has been pretty great to the extent it is real. I am not convinced it is true that there is only one red line? What could one say, as an employee of OpenAI, before it would get management or Altman mad at you? I don’t know. I do know that whenever current employees of OpenAI talk in public, they do not act like they can express viewpoints approaching my own on this. The dilemma is, you need to be able to trust the safety researchers, but also what happens if there actually is a real need to shout from the rooftops? How to reconcile?
So, actually, yes. I do think that it is your job to try to scuttle the launch if you feel a moral obligation to do that! At least in the room. Whether or not you are the safety officer. That is what a moral obligation means. If you think an actively unsafe, potentially existentially unsafe thing is about to happen, and you are in the room where it happens, you try and stop it. Breaking confidentiality is a higher bar. If it is sufficiently bad that you need to use methods that break the rules and take the consequences, you take the consequences. I take confidentiality very seriously, a lot depends on it. One should only go there with a heavy heart. Almost everyone is far too quick to pull that trigger. The other dilemma is, I would hope we can all agree that we all need to have a procedure where those with concerns that depend on confidential information can get those concerns to the Reasonable Authority Figures. There needs to be a way to go up or around the chain of command to do that, that gets things taken seriously.
You find out a lot when people finally have the right to speak out. Or you could treat any request for any whistleblower protections this way:
No, they are absolutely not asking for that, nor is there any world where they get it. Ideally there would be a company procedure, and if that failed there would be a regulator that could take the information in confidence, and act as the Reasonable Authority Figure if it came to that. Again, this is a strong reason for such an authority to exist. Ultimately, you try to find a compromise, but either the company is effectively sovereign over these issues, or it isn’t, so it’s hard. The letter here is what happens after a company like OpenAI has proven itself not trustworthy and very willing to retaliate. Alas, I do not think you can fully implement clause four here without doing more harm than good. I don’t think any promise not to retaliate is credible, and I think the threat of sharing confidential information will cause a lot of damage. I do draw a distinction between retaliation within the company such as being fired, versus loss of equity, versus suing for damages. Asking that employees not get sued (or blackballed) for sounding the alarm, at a minimum, seems highly reasonable. I do think we should apply other pressure to companies, including OpenAI, to have strong safety concern reporting procedures. And we should work to have a governmental system. But if that fails, I think as written Principle 4 here goes too far. I do not think it goes as badly as Joshua describes, it is not at all carte blanche, but I do think it goes too far. Instead we likely need to push for the first three clauses to be implemented for real, and then fall back on the true honor system. If things are bad enough, you do it anyway, and you take the consequences. I also note that this all assumes that everyone else does not want to be called out if someone genuinely believes safety is at risk. Any sane version of Principle 4 has a very strong ‘you had better be right and God help you if you’re wrong or if the info you shared wasn’t fully necessary’ attached to it, for the reasons Joshua discusses. Shouldn’t you want Amanda Askell in that room, exactly for the purpose of scuttling the launch if the launch needs to get scuttled? Indeed, that is exactly what Daniel Kokotajlo did, without revealing confidential information. He took a stand, and accepted the consequences. You’ll Be Hearing From Our LawyerLawrence Lessig, a lawyer now representing Daniel Kokotajlo and ten other OpenAI employees pro bono (what a mensch!) writes at CNN that AI risks could be catastrophic, Lessig calls for OpenAI and others to adapt the ‘right to warn’ pledge, described above. As Lessig points out, you have the right to report illegal activity. But if being unsafe is not illegal, then you don’t get to report it. So this is one key way in which we benefit from better regulation. Even if it is hard to enforce, we at least allow reporting. Also of note: According to Lessig, Altman’s apology and the restoration of Kokotajlo’s equity effectively tamped down attention to OpenAI’s ‘legal blunder.’ I don’t agree it was a blunder, and I also don’t agree the ploy worked. I think people remember, and that things seemed to die down because that’s how things work, people focus elsewhere after a few days. Possession is Nine Tenths of the LawWhat do you own, if you own OpenAI shares, or profit participation units? I know what you do not want to own. Nothing. A share of OpenAI’s future profit distributions that you cannot sell.
Alas, you should worry about both of these. The second worry is because: There will be no payments for years, at least. There are probably no payments, ever.
The first clause is obvious. OpenAI will spend any profits developing an AGI. Then once it has an AGI, its terms say it does not have to hand over those profits. Remember that they still have their unique rather bizarre structure. You do not even get unlimited upside, your profits are capped. There is a reason you are told to ‘consider your investment in the spirit of a donation.’ Thus, the most likely outcome is that OpenAI’s shares are a simulacrum. It is a memecoin. Everything is worth what the customer will pay for it. The shares are highly valuable because other people will pay money for them. Those people need OpenAI’s permission to pay. OpenAI could flat out take your shares, if it felt like it.
Whoops! CNBC reports that employees and ex-employees are concerned. Most of their wealth is tied up in OpenAI shares. OpenAI now says it will not take away those shares no matter what and not use them to get people to sign restrictive agreements. They say they ‘do not expect to change’ the policy that everyone gets the same liquidity offers at the same price point. That is not exactly a promise. Trust in OpenAI on such matters is not high.
When you respond to the question about taking equity for $0 Actually taking the equity for $0 would be quite something. But OpenAI would not be doing something that unusual if it did stop certain employees from selling. Thus, this seems like a wise thing to keep in mind:
What I Can Tell You I Used To Not Be Able To Tell YouHow deep does the rabbit hole go?
‘Does not intend to enforce’ continues to be language that would not give me as much comfort as I would like. Employees have been willing to speak out now, but it does seem like at least some of them are still holding back. In related news on the non-disparagement clauses:
Clarifying the Mission
You do not get to go on a mission to build AGI as quickly as possible and then pretend that ASI (superintelligence) is not implied by that mission. This is in the context of The question is why. The obvious answer starts with the fact that by ‘AI industry’ here we mean Altman and OpenAI. There is a reason all the examples here are OpenAI. Anthropic still takes the problem seriously, messaging issues aside. Google never says anything either way. Meta was always lol I’m Meta. Altman has changed his tune. That does not constitute a global thesis. The thesis of the article is that the warnings were hype and an excuse to raise the money, cynical lies that were abandoned when no longer useful. The interesting new twist is to tie this to a broader story about ESG and DEI:
At least here it is symmetrical, with Altman (and unnamed others) having no underlying opinion either way, merely echoing whatever is useful at the time, the same way ESG and DEI were useful or caving to them was useful, and when it stopped being useful companies pulled back. There have been crazier theories. I think for ESG and DEI the shoe largely fits. But for AI this one is still pretty crazy. The pitch ‘we care about the planet or about the disadvantaged or good governance or not getting blamed for not caring about them’ is often a good pitch, whatever your beliefs. Whereas I continue to not believe that ‘our product will likely kill everyone on Earth if we succeed’ was the brilliant marketing pitch people often claim it to have been. Altman’s comments, in particular, both require a real understanding and appreciation of the issues involved to say at all, and involved what were clearly in-context costly signals. It is true that OpenAI has now revealed that it is going to act like a regular business. It is especially true that this is an excellent warning about the next story that Altman tries to sell to us. What this does not do, even if the full narrative story was true, is tell us that ‘the apocalypse was just another pitch.’ Even if Sam Altman was making just another pitch, that does not mean that the pitch is false. Indeed, the pitch gets steadily better as it becomes more plausible. The truth is the best lie. Sam Altman Told the SEC He Was Chairman of YC
YC Has an Investment in OpenAI
OpenAI’s for-profit arm is a ‘capped profit,’ although they keep weakening the cap. So it makes sense that so far it didn’t get super big. OpenAI is Hiring a Lot of Lobbyists
There is nothing unusual about a company hiring a bunch of lobbyists to shape the regulations it will face in the future. I only bring it up because we are under few illusions what the policy goals of these lobbyists are going to be. OpenAI Says They Value Privacy
Your ChatGPT chats help train their models by default, but your ChatGPT Enterprise, ChatGPT Team and API queries don’t. You can also avoid helping by using temporary chats or you can opt-out. They claim they do not ‘actively seek out’ personal information to train their models, and do not use public information to build profiles about people, advertise to or target them, or sell user data. And they say they work to reduce how much they train on personal information. That is good, also mostly much a ‘least you can do’ position. The advertising decision is real. I don’t see a future promise, but for now OpenAI is not doing any advertising at all, and that is pretty great. Microsoft Went Around the Safety Board
I Don’t Really Know What You Were ExpectingI mean, yes, fair.
Where Did Everybody Go?
It was never a good plan. The latest departure is
In Other OpenAI News
Various
The media spin during November’s events was impressive. As part of that spin, yes, Kara Swisher is an obnoxious hyperbolic (jerk)
It seems very difficult to claim OpenAI is ‘80th-90th percentile good’ now. You're currently a free subscriber to |