---
subject: "Political Backflow From Europe"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-02-11 11:23:56
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
The European discourse can be - for lack of a better term - America-brained. We hear stories of Black Lives Matter marches in countries without significant black populations, or defendants demanding their First Amendment rights in countries without constitutions. Why shouldn’t the opposite phenomenon exist? Europe is more populous than the US, and looms large in the American imagination. Why shouldn’t we find ourselves accidentally absorbing European ideas that don’t make sense in the American context? In
So maybe this is one example of European issues leaking to a less appropriate American context. Are there any others? In This may be true, but I propose a simpler explanation: the American conservative narrative on immigration is mostly true in Europe, mostly false in America, and it is more pleasant to think about the places where your narrative is mostly true. The conservative narrative on immigration is - to put it uncomfortably bluntly - that immigrants are often parasites and criminals. As our news sources love to remind us, this is untrue in the American context. The average immigrant is In Europe, the situation is more complicated. There are still some ways of asking the question where you find immigrants collecting fewer benefits than natives (for example, because immigrants are young, natives are old, and pensions are a benefit). But there are also more options for asking the question in ways where This makes it tempting for US right-wingers to center their discussion of immigration around stories, narratives, and images from Europe. No-go zones, grooming gangs, rape statistics, sharia law, and asylum seekers are all parts of the European experience with limited relevance to an America where most immigrants are Mexican, Central American, or Indian. For example, in There are no good statistics on asylum-seeker crime per se in America, but (What about the very poorest groups from the most dysfunctional countries? Taken literally, the numbers suggest that So US asylum-seekers as a category probably have a lower crime rate than natives (no perfectly applicable statistics, but I think the evidence suggests about half, and ChatGPT
Unfortunately, nobody has an incentive to think about this. Conservatives don’t want to think about it because it undermines their anti-immigrant talking points. But liberals also don’t want to think about it, both because it feels problematic to admit that European anti-immigrant populists might have a point, and because they don’t like touching crime statistics for purely domestic reasons. Both sides covertly cooperate in treating “the West” as a monolithic entity. Still, I think this plays into the conservatives’ hands. They can tell scary stories about immigrants in Europe, always hinting that they apply to America too. American liberals either ignore them or call them problematic, giving the conservatives a second victory: they can paint intellectuals as mealy-mouthed and unwilling to acknowledge reality. I think the more honest and politically practical course would be to acknowledge when these stories about Europe are true, then challenge conservatives to return to the American context - where they’ll have more of an uphill battle⁶. 1 These statistics are hard to find, and I am mixing the rate for all Afghan-Americans with the rate for specifically foreign-born Venezuelans and Chinese. I assume that most Afghan-Americans are first or second generation immigrants and this shouldn’t affect numbers much. 2 See paragraph below for further discussion of this - in one analysis, this approximately doubled the immigrant:native criminality ratio, although this estimate will depend a lot on how new immigration from the relevant country is. Various other biases: sometimes criminal immigrants are deported instead of being incarcerated. Sometimes immigrants are incarcerated for immigration-related offenses. I don’t think any of these, or all of them together, are enough to let us dismiss the effect. 3 Eyeballing technique: Somalis appeared to have about 1x native crime rate, but after Lilley/VerBruggen’s adjustment, they had about 2x, so the adjustment seems to double the raw numbers. Haitians started with 0.6x native crime rate, so this would double to 1.2x, but Haitians have been in the US longer than Somalis on average, so we should expect this effect to be smaller, so I rounded down to 1x. 4 There is unclear suggestive evidence for Hondurans, although this doesn’t extend even to other Central American groups. 5 Why should these numbers be so different in the US vs. Germany? Partly because differing geography and history expose them to different immigrant groups, partly because differing legal systems mean they select immigrants differently, partly because different culture makes it easier for immigrants to integrate into America, and partly because native-born Americans have a higher crime rate than native-born Germans, so the same immigrant crime rate can be higher than Americans but lower than Germans. 6 What about the recent Somali fraud case? I agree this is bad, but obviously much less bad than grooming gangs, and forcing conservatives to focus “only” on Somali fraud rather than child rape would be a victory. More speculatively, I think this fits into a long American tradition of ethnic enclave fraud, which we saw in the Irish at Tammany Hall and in the Italians with the Sicilian Mafia. Immigrant groups from countries with a history of clannishness, who are poorly assimilated into US values and whose main starting advantage is strong intra-community ties, are in a great position to do organized crime, and a poor position to do anything else. I think the correct answer is to punish the people involved, fire whichever state officials allowed it to happen, put better safeguards in place, and wait to see if the Somalis assimilate the same way the Irish and Italians did. I realize this is controversial and that I’ve only hinted at the barest skeleton of an argument, but a friend is going to write a blog post about this in a few weeks, and I’ll link it when it comes up. You're currently a free subscriber to |