---
subject: "Soulmates / Exhalation / Instant dice"
from: "Recomendo <recomendo@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-12-21 10:01:45
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Recomendo", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8455078693589186571", "UNREAD"]
---
Black‑Mirror‑style sci-fi about soulmates
Good science fictionI don’t read much science fiction, so when I do I am picky. An author I find reliably good is Ted Chiang, who writes mostly short stories, including the one that was the basis for the movie Arrival. I really like his anthology of nine stories, Instant diceMy cousin invited me over for breakfast recently. He pulled a Favorite YouTube makersI subscribe to 40 different YouTubers who make stuff in their workshops. I watch them for how-to tips, to learn shop techniques, and for inspiration for possible projects. If I rank them by how much I’ve learned from them, in my top five are three non-Americans (an Australian and two Canadians) who are life-long makers, who are great explainers, and who are also experimentalists in how and what they build. “Both can be true” chartThis Rock Paper Scissors strategyI don’t remember where I first encountered this, but it works surprisingly well: after each round, switch to the option neither player used. If your rock loses to their paper, throw scissors next. If your scissors beat their paper, throw a rock next. I've been testing it against my friends and winning more than chance would predict. The World Rock Paper Scissors Association has THIS ISSUE IS SPONSORED BY FARMKINDFactory farming impacts animals, human health, and the environment. I’m pleased to welcome FarmKind as this week’s sponsor — check out their work reforming the industry and improving animal welfare through smart donations. — MF Most problems feel impossible to solve. This one isn’t. By supporting effective charities, you can save 25 animals from cruelty with just $13 and help reform the entire industry. Recomendo Unclassified Ads work! UNCLASSIFIEDS
9 Lesser-Known Amazon Prime Perks You Need to Be Using. Are you taking advantage of your Amazon Prime perks? Whether you’re already a Prime member or considering signing up, here are Click to get your free Decaf sucks! But we unsucked it. Pinky promise. High grade, non-toxic, premium coffee from a small business. Don’t love it? Get refunded. Get free shipping on a Welcome Pack and/or an extra 20% for Recomendo readers. Code: RECOMENDO Recomendo is an authentic, hand-crafted, human-written weekly newsletter that is free, but not cheap. Please consider supporting our work with a paid option, now at the low price of $45 per year. Paid subs enable us to keep making it free for others. Recomendo is published by Cool Tools Lab, a small company of three people. We also run the Recomendo is copyrighted by Cool Tools Lab, LLC. Commissions may be earned from the links above. |