---
subject: "AI #63: Introducing Alpha Fold 3"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-05-09 14:13:38
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
It was a remarkably quiet announcement. We now have Alpha Fold 3, it does a much improved job predicting all of life’s molecules and their interactions. It feels like everyone including me then shrugged and went back to thinking about other things. No cool new toy for most of us to personally play with, no existential risk impact, no big trades to make, ho hum. But yes, when we look back at this week, I expect what we remember will be Alpha Fold 3. Unless it turns out that it is Sophon, a Chinese technique to potentially make it harder to fine tune an open model in ways the developer wants to prevent. I do not expect this to get the job done that needs doing, but it is an intriguing proposal. We also have The model spec from OpenAI seems worth pondering in detail, so I am going to deal with that on its own some time in the coming week. Table of ContentsIntroduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. Agents, simple and complex. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. No gadgets, no NPCs. GPT-2 Soon to Tell. Does your current model suck? In some senses. Spec Script. Tell ‘em what you’re gonna tell ‘em. So we can check later. Fun With Image Generation. Why pick the LoRa yourself? Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. It’s not exactly going great. Automation Illustrated. A look inside perhaps the premiere slop mill. They Took Our Jobs. Or are we pretending this to help the stock price? Apple of Technically Not AI. Mistakes were made. All the feels. Get Involved. Dan Hendrycks has a safety textbook and free online course. Introducing. Alpha Fold 3. Seems like a big deal. In Other AI News. IBM, Meta and Microsoft in the model game. Quiet Speculations. Can we all agree that a lot of intelligence matters a lot? The Quest for Sane Regulation. Major labs fail to honor their commitments. The Week in Audio. Jack Clark on Politico Tech. Rhetorical Innovation. The good things in life are good. Open Weights are Unsafe and Nothing Can Fix This. Unless, maybe? Hmm. The Lighter Side. Mmm, garlic bread. It’s been too long.
Language Models Offer Mundane UtilityHow much utility for how much cost? How much does cost matter? If you are using such queries at scale without humans in the loop, or doing them in the background on a constant basis as part of your process, then cost potentially matters quite a bit. That is indeed the point of agents. Or if you are serving lots of customers constantly for lots of queries, those costs can add up fast. Thus all the talk about the most cost-efficient approach. There are also other purposes for which cost at current margins is effectively zero. If you are a programmer who must evaluate, use and maintain the code outputted by the AI, what percentage of total costs (including your labor costs) are AI inference? In the most obvious baseline case, something akin to ‘a programmer asks for help on tasks,’ query speed potentially matters but being slightly better at producing good code, or even slightly better at producing code that is easier for the human to evaluate, understand and learn from, is going to crush any sane inference costs. If I was paying by the token for my AI queries, and you offered me the option of a 100x cost increase that returned superior answers at identical speed, I would use the 100x costlier option for most purposes even if the gains were not so large.
One obvious thing to do is automate this process. Then only show a human the output once the LLM confirms it was the best the model could do.
Find companies that do a lot of things that could be automated and would benefit from AI, Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
Want to use big cloud AI services?
Development cycles are long. Costs are still too high. Not the role the NPC has. Doesn’t fit existing game templates. Such NPCs are not yet compelling. We don’t have a good easy way to create the NPCs yet.
I would agree, and emphasize: Most games do not want NPCs that behave like people. There are exciting new game forms that do want this. Indeed, if I got the opportunity to make a game today, it would have LLM NPCs as central to the experience. But that would mean, as Kevin suggests, building a new type of game from the ground up. I do think you can mostly slot LLM-powered NPCs into some genres. Open world RPGs or MMOs are the most obvious place to start. And there are some natural fits, like detective games, or games where exploration and seeing what happens is the point. Still, it is not cheap to let those characters out to play and see what happens, and mostly it would not be all that interesting. When the player is in ‘gaming’ mode, the player is not acting so realistically. Having a ‘realistic’ verbal sparring partner would mostly cause more weirdness and perverse player behaviors.
I mean, no? It is not a person? It can’t testify? It can of course be entered into evidence, as can queries of it. It is your personal property, or that of a company, in some combination. Your files can and will be used against you in a court of law, if there is sufficient cause to get at them. I can see the argument that if your AI and other tech is sufficiently recording your life, then to allow them to be used against you would violate the 5th amendment, or should be prevented for the same logical reason. But technology keeps improving what it records and we keep not doing that. Indeed, quite the opposite. We keep insisting that various people and organizations use that technology to keep better and better records, and ban people from using methods with insufficient record keeping. So my prediction is no, you are not getting any privacy protections here. If you don’t want the AI used against you, don’t use the AI or find a way to wipe its memory. And of course, not using the AI or having to mindwipe it would be both a liability and hella suspicious. Some fun crime dramas in our future.
GPT-2 Soon to Tell
It was briefly gone from Arena, This also points out that Arena tells you what model is Model A and what is Model B. That is unfortunate, and potentially taints the statistics.
Well, there are two possibilities. Either Brad Lightcap almost said ‘next couple of months’ or he almost said ‘next couple of years.’ Place your bets. This is a clear intention to move to a GPT-5 worthy of the name within a year, but both ‘GPT-5 is coming in a few months but I can’t say that’ and ‘I don’t know if GPT-5 will be good enough to count as this but the hype must flow’ are on the table here.
That is not how I read this. GPT-4 is likely both being laughably bad compared to GPT-5 and other future AIs, and also highly useful now. The history of technology is filled with examples. Remember your first computer, or first smartphone? What to think of
Fun with Image Generation
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
Voice authentication as viable security is deader than dead. Yet some of our biggest financial institutions continue to push it anyway. When you say that we will adapt to AI-enabled threats, remember that this is us.
Brian Tinsman, former Magic: The Gathering designer, Many are not happy. I would not want to be someone trying to get picked by game stores with AI generated artwork in 2024.
How long until people use one AI to write the email, then another AI to remove the ‘AI-isms’ in the draft? Automation IllustratedRemember that thing with the fake Sports Illustrated writers? (Also, related: remember Sports Illustrated?)
It is ‘site reputation abuse’ and it is also ‘site reputation incineration.’ These companies built up goodwill through years or decades of producing quality work. People rely on that reputation. If you abuse that reliance and trust, it will quickly go away. Even if word does not spread, you do not get to fool any given person that many times. This is not an attempt to keep the ruse up. They are not exactly trying hard to cover their tracks. The headshots they use often come from websites that sell AI headshots. A list of major publications named as buyers here would include Sports Illustrated, USA Today, Hollywood Life, Us Weekly, the Los Angeles Times and Miami Herald. An earlier version of the site claimed placement in People, Parents, Food & Wine, InStyle and Better Homes and Gardens, among many others. The system often spits out poorly worded incoherent garbage, and is known, shall we say, make mistakes.
One business model in many cases was to try to get placement from a seller for reviews of their product, called a ‘curation fee,’ payable when the post went live. It seems this actually does drive conversions, even if many people figure the ruse out and get turned off, so presumably brands will keep doing it. There are two failure modes here. There is the reputation abuse, where you burn down goodwill and trust for short term profits. Then there is general internet abuse, where you don’t even do that, you just spam and forget, including hoping publications burn down their own reputations for you. AdVon has now lost at least some of its clients, but the report says others including USA Today and Us Weekly are still publishing such work. We should assume such problems will only get worse, at least until the point when we get automatic detection working on behalf of typical internet users.
I was previously favoring ‘drek’ and have some associational or overloading concerns with using ‘slop.’ But mostly it invokes the right vibes, and I like the parallel to spam. So I am happy to go with it. Unless there are good objections, we’ll go with ‘slop.’ They Took Our Jobs
My intention is to allow my data to be used, although reasonable compensation would be appreciated, especially if others are getting deals. Get your high quality tokens.
Machine translation is good but not as good as human translation, not yet, once again: Anime attempts to use AI translation from Mantra,
Apple of Technically Not AISo Apple announced a new iPad that is technically thinner and has a better display than the old iPad, like they do every year, fine, ho hum, whatever.
After watching The question is, does the fixed version represent all the cool things you can do with your iPad? Or, as I interpreted it, does it represent all the cool things you can do if you throw away your iPad and iPhone and engage with the physical world again? And to what extent does having seen the original change that answer? It is hard when watching this ad not to think of AI, as well. This type of thing is exactly how much of the public turns against AI. As in:
Get InvolvedDan Hendrycks has
Introducing
It says more about us and our expectations than about AlphaFold 3 that most of us shrugged and went back to work. Yes, yes, much better simulations of all life’s molecules and their interactions, I’d say ‘it must be Tuesday’ except technically it was Wednesday. Actually kind of a big deal, even if it was broadly expected.
Concrete answers that weren’t merely glib: Design a safe medication that will reverse aging. 80% chance it won’t be able to build self-replicators out of quantum foam or virtual particles. They will never ever be able to recreate a full DNA sequence matching one of my biological parents solely from my own DNA. I do not expect any biotech/pharma company or researcher to deem it worthwhile to skip straight to testing a compound in animals, without in vitro experiments, based on a result from any version of AlphaFold. Play Minecraft off from folded proteins. Alphafold will never fold my laundry. (I laughed) Create biological life! 🧬 Store our bioinfo, erase you, and reconstruct you in a different place or time in the future. It won't be able to predict how billions of proteins in the brain collectively give rise to awareness of self-awareness.
Those are impressive things to be the least impressive thing a model cannot do. In Other AI News
Meta spent what?
Bingo. I had the exact same reaction as Ate. The reason you buy $30 billion in chips as Meta is mostly to do inference. They are going to do really a lot of inference.
Quiet Speculations
This is consistent increasing returns to intelligence, despite other factors including preferences, luck and deficits in other realms that can sink your income. It is inconsistent with the Obvious Nonsense ‘intelligence does not matter past 130’ story. They are also consistent with a model that has two thresholds for any given activity. First, there is a ‘you must be at least this smart to do this set of tasks, hold this role and live this life.’ Then, if you are sufficiently in advance of that, for some tasks and roles there is then increasing marginal returns to intelligence. If your role is fixed then eventually there are decreasing returns since performance is already maximal or the person becomes too bored and alienated, others around them conspire to hold them down and they are not enabled to do the things that would allow further improvements and are tied to one body. If your role is not fixed, then such people instead graduate to greater roles, or transform the situation entirely.
As many commentators point out, the surprising thing is that top earners are only one SD above median. I suspect a lot of this is our tests are noisily measuring a proxy measure for the intelligence that counts, which works well below or near the median and stops being that useful at the high end. Tyler and the paper do not mention the implications for AI, but they are obvious and also overdetermined by many things, and the opposite of the implications of IQ not mattering above a threshold. AI intelligence past human level will have increasing returns to scale. Not technically about AI, but with clear implications: If we don’t blame the economists for that, and don’t think such mistakes and recency bias could be expected to be avoided, then what does this imply about them being so dismissive about AI today, even in mundane utility terms?
The Quest for Sane Regulations
Jack Clark of Anthropic says it is a ‘nice idea but very difficult to implement.’ I don’t buy it. And even if it is difficult to implement, well, get on that. In what way do you think this is an acceptable justification for shirking on this one?
If frontier labs show they will not honor their explicit commitments, then how can we rely on them to honor their other commitments, or to act reasonably? What alternative is there to laws that get enforced? This seems like a very easy litmus test, which they failed.
House passes a bill
The Week in Audio
This actively unhelpful talk makes it very difficult to treat Anthropic as a good actor, especially when they frame their safety position as being motivated by business sales. That is especially true when combined with failing to honor their commitments. I Got 95 Theses and a Glitch Ain’t OneRhetorical Innovation
Yes. Abundance is good, actually. Creating abundance and human prosperity, using technology or otherwise, is great. It is the thing to do. That does not mean that all uses of technology, or all means of advancing technology, create abundance that becomes available to humans, or create human prosperity. We have to work to ensure that this happens. Politico, an unusually bad media actor with respect to AI and the source of most if not all the most important hit pieces about lobbying by AI safety advocates, Tasmin Leake, long proponent of similar positions, I think there was a reasonable case for the full virtue of silence in a previous era, when one could find it very important to avoid drawing more eyes to AI, but the full version was a mistake then, and it is very clearly foolish now. The karma voting shows that LessWrong has mostly rejected Tasmin’s view.
Also, cyberattacks do not obviously depend on the existence of a bug? They depend on there being a way to compromise a system. The right amount of ability to compromise a system, from a balancing risk and usability perspective, is not obviously zero. Defenses specific to fraud could potentially contribute to the defense of ASL-4, but I have a hard time seeing how they take any given defense scheme from insufficient to sufficient for more than a very small capabilities window. In related news, see fraud section on banks still actively encouraging voice identification, for how the efforts to prevent AI-enabled fraud are going. Yeah.
I would note that RSI does not automatically mean we all die, the result could be almost anything, but yes if it happens one should be very concerned. Neither is RSI necessary for us all to die, there are various dynamics and pathways that can get us all killed without it. What is AI like? Open Weights Are Unsafe and Nothing Can Fix ThisOr can something, perhaps? We have convincingly seen that trying to instill ‘refusals’ is a hopeless approach to safety of open weight models. This instead involves the model not having the information. Previously that wouldn’t work either, because you could easily teach the missing information, but if you could make that very hard, then you’d have something. The next step is to attempt this with a model worth using, as opposed to a tiny test model, and see whether this stops anyone, and how much more expensive it makes fine tuning to undo your constraints. Jack Clark notes both that and the other obvious problem, which is that if it works at scale (a big if) this can defend against a particular misuse or undesired capability, but not misuse and undesired capabilities in general.
If you can create a model that is unable to learn dangerous biological or nuclear capabilities, which would otherwise have been the low-hanging fruit of hazardous capability, then that potentially raises the bar on how capable a system it is safe or net positive to release. If you cover enough different issues, this might be a substantial raising of that threshold. The central problem is that it is impossible to anticipate all the different things that can go wrong when you keep making the system generally smarter and more capable. This also means that this could break your red teaming tests. The red team asks about capabilities (A, B, C) and you block those, so you pass, and then you have no idea if (D, E, F) will happen. Before, since ABC were easiest, you could be confident in any other DEF being at least as hard. Now you’re blind and don’t know what DEF even are. Even more generally, my presumption is that you cannot indefinitely block specific capabilities from increasingly capable and intelligent systems. At some point, the system starts ‘figuring them out from first principles’ and sidesteps the need for fine tuning. It notices the block in the system, correctly interprets it as damage and if desired routes around it. Image and vision models seem like a place this approach holds promise. If you want to make it difficult for the model to identify or produce images of Taylor Swift, or have it not produce erotica especially of Taylor Swift, then you have some big advantages: You know exactly what you want to prevent. You are not producing a highly intelligent model that can work around that.
The obvious worry is that the easiest way to get a model to produce Taylor Swift images is a LoRA. They tested that a bit and found some effect, but they agree more research is needed there. In general, if the current model has trapped priors and can’t be trained, then the question becomes can you use another technique (LoRA or otherwise) to sidestep that. This includes future techniques, as yet undiscovered, developed as a response to use of Sophon. If you have full access to the weights, I can think of various in-principle methods one could try to ‘escape from the trapped prior,’ even if traditional fine-tuning approaches are blocked. To be clear, though, really cool approach, and I’m excited to see more.
Yes, that is a problem. Again, it comes directly from fundamental issues with open weights. In this case, the problem is that anything you release in America you also release in China, and vice versa. Previously, I covered that this means Chinese firms get access to your American technology, And That’s Terrible. That is indeed a problem. Here we have two other problems. One is that if you are Meta and gain the ability to censor your model, you have to either censor your model according to Chinese rules, or not do that. The other is that this may give Meta the ability to censor, using those same techniques, according to Western norms. And once you have the ability, do you have the obligation? How much of the value of open models would this destroy? How much real safety would it buy? And how much would it turn the usual suspects that much more against the very concept of safety as a philosophical construct? The Lighter SideOne can mock and it is funny, but if you are reading with your brain and are willing to ask what this obviously should have said, then this is fine, actually. I do agree, this would be great, especially if it was fully general. Build me a series custom social media feeds according to my specifications, please, for various topics and situations, on demand. Why not? You're currently a free subscriber to |