---
subject: "First Principles: Self-discovery, P-C fit, and career pivots"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-08-11 06:43:42
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
First Principles
Sun, 11 Aug 24
Your Sunday newsletter on mental models and leadership, seasoned with insights from some of India’s most disruptive thinkers.
Good morning and welcome back to First Principles, our Sunday stream of collective consciousness (and sometimes, subconsciousness!).
So many of you wrote back expressing your concern, sorrow, and desire to help those who suffered from the Wayanad landslide. Thank you! If you missed First Principles last week, here’s the link where you can donate to the Kerala CM’s [Disaster Relief Fund](https://donation.cmdrf.kerala.gov.in/).
It has been raining almost every day in Bengaluru for the past few weeks. Karnataka’s dams and rivers are full. Hopefully, our stressed water tables are getting recharged too. The mango tree we’d planted a few years ago in our backyard started flowering uncharacteristically out of season, briefly surprising us, before shedding all its blossoms. We’re hoping it will fruit this coming year.
I’ve heard that rains usually clear up leaf infections and pests from fruiting trees, but no one seems to have sent that memo to the thousands of fire ants that have stitched up many of the mango tree’s leaves, turning them into their homes. If you know of a safe and organic way to get rid of fire ants or sooty mould, please email me!
If you’ve been part of the FP community for a while, you know I am a huge fan of feedback loops. Well, a few weeks ago I got a full body musculoskeletal assessment done from [Elevate Performance](https://www.elevateperformlab.com/). I went there on the recommendation of Dharmendra D, a running coach who I got introduced to via the FP community and[ our Fitness Quest](https://the-ken.com/newsletter/first-principles/first-principles-quest-special-the-meaning-of-fitness/). Dharmendra and I hit it off like long lost friends when we met. (Yes, we’re all intricately connected, influencing each other’s lives in ways we don’t even recognise).
Long story short, the assessment (which I heartily recommend as sort of a “baseline” test for anyone who actively pursues fitness and has had to deal with injuries) made me aware of a bunch of my own imbalances and weaknesses that I never took seriously enough. Why? Because the lab takes photos and videos of you through various tests, and then shares them with you later.
Seeing yourself in photos and videos establishes a feedback loop that is hard to deny.
So, I’m now on a calorie deficit diet reinforced with calorie tracking, to lose weight; a new strength training program I am cooking up after reading 7–8 different books, to build muscle; and a wonderful[ shoulder rehab and mobility program](https://www.theptinitiative.com/shoulderprogram) from The PT Initiative.
Why do we do these? So, we can be the best versions of ourselves? I don’t know. But don’t you just love feedback loops!
Here’s everything we have for you this edition.
1. P-C fits and pivots
2. Delhi vs Bengaluru 🎙️
3. The ordinary translated into the humourous 📚
4. Our next Framed issue is coming up! 📸
[Pro tip: This email is a highly abbreviated version, since many email clients impose restrictions on the amount of material we can publish in a single email before intervention. In fact, it’s likely some email clients may even clip this truncated email.
The best way to experience this edition is to [read it on our website](https://the-ken.com/newsletter/first-principles/self-discovery-p-c-fit-and-career-pivots/), where all sections are featured in full and unabridged form.
Also, if your default setting is to not show images within emails, please consider turning it off for this newsletter. Or else, you’ll miss many of the interesting images and photos we carry each Sunday.]
[Advertisement]
The/Nudge Institute—charcha: collaborative convening for India’s development sector
Since 2020, charcha has emerged as India’s preeminent livelihood convening, uniting visionaries and change-makers from government, civil society and markets, and fostering conversations and collaborations towards creating resilient livelihoods. Over 30 marquee organisations have come together to co-host four editions of charcha, and it’s back in 2024 with Edition 5 in a bigger, better avatar. With 35+ sessions involving 200+ eminent speakers over three days, spanning 12 immersive themes, co-hosted by 20+ marquee partners, you’ll gain actionable insights into sustainable models for enabling urban and rural livelihoods.
First Principles readers get an exclusive 25% discount on passes. Discount code: FP25
[Every Sunday, First Principles goes out to over 425,000 subscribers in India and across the world. [Sponsor an edition](https://theken.typeform.com/to/Hntrc1Ss)]
Many of you would have heard of the term “pivot” used in the context of young companies. It’s when the companies (often significantly) change their underlying business model or product features to improve their chances of success.
Perhaps the best example of a successful pivot I could offer you is one we’ve largely forgotten: Netflix’s[ pivot from DVDs to streaming](https://leenallalingham.com/2023/05/05/from-dvd-rentals-to-original-content-the-story-of-netflixs-transformation/).
For most startups, the necessity to pivot usually arises from the lack of something else: P-M fit, or[ Product-Market Fit](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Product-market_fit).
Today we take P-M fits and pivots almost as a given in startups. In fact, it is expected that startups and founders need to persevere (through pivots if necessary) till they find successful Product-Market fit.
What never ceases to surprise me is how few of us—as individuals and professionals—think the same way about our careers.
Somehow, most of our careers turned out the way they did because of what our employers, managers, and bosses did. That might have been okay, say, 10 years ago, but no longer.
This is primarily because, in the real world, conventional wisdom persuades most of us that the right answer to the question “Where do I go from here?” is “Up.”
Careers, conventional wisdom advises, should follow a prescribed path: You begin in a lowly individual contributor role. You gain some expertise and so are promoted to a slightly more stretching, slightly less menial individual contributor role. Next you are promoted to supervise other individual contributors. Then, blessed with good performance, good fortune, and good contacts, you climb up and up, until you can barely remember what the individual contributors do at all.
In 1969, in his book, The Peter Principle, Laurence Peter warned us that if we followed this path without question, we would wind up promoting each person to his level of incompetence. It was true then. It is true now. Unfortunately, in the intervening years we haven’t succeeded in changing very much. We still think that the most creative way to reward excellence in a role is to promote the person out of it. We still tie pay, perks, and titles to a rung on the ladder: the higher the rung, the greater the pay, the better the perks, the grander the title. Every signal we send tells the employee to look onward and upward. “Don’t stay in your current role for too long,” we advise. “It looks bad on the résumé. Keep pressing, pushing, stretching to take that next step. It’s the only way to get ahead. It’s the only way to get respect.”
These signals, although well-intended, place every employee in an extremely precarious position. To earn respect, he knows he must climb. And as he takes each step, he sees that the company is burning the rungs behind him. He cannot retrace his steps, not without being tarred with the failure brush. So he continues his blind, breathless climb to the top, and sooner or later he overreaches. Sooner or later he steps into the wrong role. And there he is trapped. Unwilling to go back, unable to climb up, he clings to his rung until, finally, the company pushes him off.
Excerpt From “First, Break All the Rules” by Marcus Buckingham
Sounds familiar? Either you’ve felt some version of this in your own career, or have seen this happening to a colleague, friend, or family member.
Do you see whose influence is usually missing from these stories? That of the affected person. Somehow, we become the[ objects, not subjects](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subject_and_object_(philosophy)) in our own career arcs.
When we become subjects instead, the element that pushes us to success is self-discovery.
It assumes that the energy for a career should emanate from the employee’s desire to better herself, to fill herself out with attractive experiences. She should not linger long in one particular role. Instead she should skip from one role to the next every couple of years so that, over time, her résumé becomes impressively varied. Under the terms of lifelong employment, the employees with the most impressive résumés were the most likely to be selected for the next rung on the internal ladder. Under the terms of lifelong employability, the employees with these attractive résumés are the most likely to be snapped up, externally, by a new company.
[…]
Great managers disagree. Acquiring varied experiences is important but peripheral to a healthy career. It is an accessory, not the driving force. The true source of energy for a healthy career, they say, is generated elsewhere.
[…]
They tell stories of people who took a step, looked in the mirror, and discovered something about themselves. In some cases the person looked in the mirror spontaneously. In others he had to be coaxed to turn his head before seeing himself clearly. There are stories where the discovery was a confirmation to stay the course.
[…]
Their recurring story reveals that self-discovery is the driving, guiding force for a healthy career. The energy for a healthy career is generated from discovering the talents that are already there, not from filling oneself up with marketable experiences. Self-discovery is a long process, never fully achieved. Nonetheless, great managers know that it is this search for a full understanding of your talents and nontalents that serves as the source of energy powering your career.
[…]
Second, these exemplary managers emphasize that the point of self-discovery is not to fix your nontalents. The point is not to “identify and then fill in your skill gaps,” as many human resources departments euphemistically describe it. In the spirit of the insight that “you cannot put in what was left out, you can only draw out what was left in,” the point of self-discovery is to learn about yourself so that you can capitalize on who you are. The point is to take control of your career, to make more informed decisions, and to gradually select roles that represent an increasingly good fit for your natural talents.
Excerpt From “First, Break All the Rules” by Marcus Buckingham
Self-discovery requires us to be self-aware first, as professionals. Nobody else can tell us how we feel in a role or at work better than we ourselves. Sadly, so few of us pay heed to ourselves.
“Over time each of us becomes more and more aware of who we really are. This growing awareness of self is vital to strength building because it allows each of us to identify more clearly our natural talents and to cultivate these talents into strengths. Unfortunately, this process is not always smooth. Some of us identify our talents accurately enough but then wish we were blessed with different ones. Like Mozart’s rival, Salieri, in the film Amadeus, we become increasingly bitter as we try and fail to conjure new talents from within. When we are in this mode, we aren’t much fun to be around. No matter how many classes we take, no matter how many books we read, it still grates, it is still hard, and it still doesn’t seem to get any easier. If you have ever found yourself in a role that asked you to be something you are not, you know how this feels.
And then suddenly we have a revelation. “I should never have taken this sales job. I hate bothering people.” Or maybe “I’m not a manager! I much prefer doing my own work than being responsible for other people’s.” We return to our strengths path, and our friends, impressed by all the good things that happen as a result – our productivity increase, our attitude improvement – look at us and say, “Wow, look at him. He changed.” Well, no, the exact opposite has happened.
What looks on the surface like transformation is actually acceptance of some things that can never be transformed – talents. We don’t change. We simply accept our talents and refocus our lives around them. We become more self-aware.
Excerpt From “Now, Discover Your Strengths” by Marcus Buckingham
But once we truly start listening to our own instincts and feelings, it helps us take charge of what we want to “be”. For some it happens in their 20s, for others it may be in their 40s, 50s, or even 60s.
Those who reach the highest levels in their professions often talk about an irresistible urge that impelled them toward their “calling in life” or “the thing I was born to do.” In his essay “Why I Write,” George Orwell describes this kind of need to be true to his nature: “From a very early age, perhaps five or six, I knew that when I grew up I should be a writer. Between the ages of about seventeen and twenty-four I tried to abandon this idea, but I did so with the consciousness that I was outraging my true nature and that sooner or later I would have to settle down and write books.”
Claremont Graduate University Professor Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, another important influence in the field of positive psychology, calls this marriage of personality and pursuit an “autotelic experience” or “flow.” At work, these optimal situations are those in which the employee enjoys the work itself rather than enduring the job just to earn the pay or to gain the chance to be promoted to a better, more fulfilling job.
Excerpt From “12—The Elements of Great Managing” by Rodd Wagner and James K Harter
It should be our search for this “autotelic experience” or “flow” that makes us more conscious, more aware with each passing year of our careers about what we enjoy and what we don’t.
This missing “fit” between us and our careers is what I call the Person-Career fit. If we are the “founders” in charge of the most valuable “startup” in our lives—our respective careers—then we need that Product-Career Fit. If that means a few pivots that turn out to have been unsuccessful, that is okay.
How will we know when we’ve found P-C Fit, you might be wondering? We’ll know it when we have[ momentum](https://the-ken.com/newsletter/first-principles/first-impressions-and-momentum/).
Momentum is one of the most underrated and underappreciated concepts in life and work. Most of us innately “feel” and live it when we’re on great “streaks”, be it in the gym or at work. But not enough of us spend time trying to consciously craft our momentum.
Author Ashley Goodall explains it even better by using the classical physics definition. If “mass” refers to our innate traits and “velocity” to our past performances, then “momentum” is their combination.
“From the answers to these two sets of questions, you’ll have discovered, first, who Maureen is at work. These are her traits. These are things that are inherent and enduring in her—not entirely unchanging, but nonetheless resistant to change. These are the loves and aspirations that are uniquely hers, and that she carries around with her everywhere she goes, just as surely as she carries her own body. Wherever she goes, they are there. You can call these her mass.
And second, you’ll have unearthed some things she’s acquired as she’s applied herself in the world to move in a particular direction: her current and past record of performance, and her tested certifications. Obviously, since she can change any and all of these things, these are states. But since they describe how she has moved through the world—how she’s done it, how well she’s done it, how quickly, and in what direction—you can usefully label these her velocity.
In the world of physics, there’s a name for the discrete, measurable, definable, and directional thing that is produced when mass and velocity combine. It’s called momentum. In the world of teams and team members, the same applies. Maureen has momentum.
By keeping these two ideas about Maureen—mass and velocity—separate, and by using momentum to describe their combination, we suddenly enable you, the team leader, to do all manner of useful things to help her.”
Excerpt From “Nine Lies About Work: A Freethinking Leader’s Guide to the Real World” by Ashley Goodall
This has been a long piece, so thank you for reading.
I grew up in Delhi. Spent the first 17 years of my life there. So, the city isn’t a stranger to me.
But Bengaluru is where I feel at home. Cumulatively, I’m approaching the three-decade mark for the time I’ve spent here. It’s the city I love.
Which is why it was conflicting for me to argue that Delhi startups are beating Bengaluru startups when it comes to running profitable and public businesses at scale. Many Bengaluru startups (I use that word loosely), including The Ken itself, have gone soft. They need to bring back some killer instinct. They need to define the rules of the game. They need to change.
Praveen Gopal Krishnan, Prashant Singh (Head of Product at Jar), Arnav Gupta (Head of Engineering at JioCinema), and I discussed this in episode 5 of Two by Two, The Ken’s weekly podcast on the questions no one is asking.
[Subscriber Version (70 minutes)](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/two-by-two/delhi-pricked-the-bangalore-bubble/?utm_source=twobytwo&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=fp)
Dear reader, welcome to the First Principles books section. We have three recommendations for you today—this time, all fiction. We don’t usually receive many fiction recommendations, so I spent some time reading excerpts from the books to understand what it was about them that made such an impression. I actually even ended up finding one of the short stories from one of our recommendations—The Greatest Enemy of Rain by Manu Bhattathiri—on [Bombay Lit Mag](https://bombaylitmag.com/the-biggest-enemy-of-rain-by-manu-bhattathiri/). Bombay Lit Mag is a 10-year-old online magazine that publishes stories, poems, essays, reviews, visual narratives, and graphic fiction from writers across the world, with a focus on South Asian writing. I highly recommend bookmarking the magazine and coming back to it once in a while when you are looking for a slow, relaxed read.
The Greatest Enemy of Rain is a collection of short stories “about the mundane and mysterious aspects of everyday life of the eccentric and oddball characters that occupy its pages”. The eponymous story, published in the magazine, is a sweet, funny, warm little recounting of an old man’s lifelong relationship with rain. A mostly hate-relationship, which nevertheless intertwines itself so deeply into the man’s life and relationships that he can’t help but get attached to this dreadful friend of his.
More than anything, I’d urge you to read this story for the wonderful humour in its simple writing. Like, for instance, when the author introduces the rain, arguably a protagonist of the story.
“Gopi’s hatred for rain began when he was seven years old. It was the first day of his holidays, he said, his old eyes shining through their cataract with the power of looking so far back. Always given to playing completely alone (his playthings being stones, used cans, threads and safety pins), Gopi was all set and running along the paddy fields that skirt our little town when the sky darkened slightly. Though he didn’t yet hate rain, he did think of it as an absurd phenomenon: a sort of aberration in the natural scheme of things that came and wet everyone and created ugly puddles everywhere. He was certain that one day when the world became more perfect, after god had repaired his silly mistakes, rain would stop. The water in wells and oceans and the small stream bordering our town would be enough to drink and wash in, without it having to shower down moronically from above.”
This is, of course, not the first time that we’ve received recommendations for the sheer writing in the books. Just a couple of weeks ago, we shared recommendations centred on [ergodic literature](https://the-ken.com/newsletter/first-principles/what-are-you-keeping-constant-bonus-childhood-mulberries/), books led wholly by their weird, wonderful format of writing.
If you have any recommendations for books that the community would enjoy—for the writing, the stories, or the learnings in them, or simply because they have made a really deep impression on you—please share it with us [here](https://theken.typeform.com/FPBooks)! If you want to, you can also share images of the physical copies of the books you’ve been reading.
For now, here are this week’s recommendations. Please switch our onsite version to see what our recommenders have to say about them.
1. The Saint of Bright Doors by Vajra Chandrasekera—from Kirti Manian
2. The Greatest Enemy of Rain by Manu Bhattathiri—from Deepto Roy
3. The Little Liar by Mitch Albom—from Ashwini Rao
Hello Ishan, it’s Jonathan here. Welcome to another issue of First Principles Silent Sunday. Considering we didn’t have an edition last week and the stream of contributions from all you wonderful photographers never seems to stop, we’re going to jump straight into our submissions.
But first, a quick alert. We are going to have another edition of ‘Framed’ on Silent Sunday in the next couple of weeks. If you missed the first issue of Framed, do check it out; the idea is to dedicate one issue every few weeks to a single subject—maybe a city, maybe a continent, maybe a broader theme, like mountains, seas, deserts, or horizons…
Our first Framed issue was centred on a beloved Indian city: [Mumbai, framed](https://the-ken.com/newsletter/first-principles/animals-and-choices/?utm_source=ro_hdr&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=fp_newsletter)
Our next is going to cover an entire continent—Europe.
So if you have any pictures you’d like to contribute for the issue, [please do so here](https://theken.typeform.com/FPSilentSundays). You can send in regular contributions using the same link too.
For now, here are our top picks for this issue.
| Langza, Spiti (Himadri Sharma) |
| Panaji, Goa (Abheet Sachdeva) |
| Ulu Pandan PCN, Singapore on my morning run (Kirti Manian) |
Please switch our onsite version to see the full, uncropped versions of all our submissions.
That’s a wrap for this week. Before you go, if you know someone who might like this newsletter, forward us to them!
Please write to fp@the-ken.com if there’s anything you’d like to share with us. Or leave a comment on our on-site edition. See you next Sunday!
Regards,
Rohin Dharmakumar