---
subject: "Culture Is High Dimensional"
from: "Robin Hanson from Overcoming Bias <overcomingbias@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-09-20 15:38:27
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Overcoming Bias", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8616244883382228708", "UNREAD"]
---
The above are my prior attempts to make sense of the STEM vs humanities/arts distinction. Lately I’ve been pondering why so much talk on specific cultures (not cultural evolution in general) is so different from STEM talk. Such culture talk is said to be: symbolic, normative, qualitative, provocative, ambiguous, diffusive, resonant, synthetic, and interpretative. It uses analogies, metaphors, aphorisms, and “thick descriptions”. It more critiques, “understands from the inside”, and seeks new perspectives. To a STEM person, this is all “what the hell?!” Let me try again, now analogizing to foraging in high dimensions:
In low dimensional topic spaces, it is more possible to describe stuff in terms of fewer standard descriptors. Which then allows one to collect datasets of comparable stuff, and to draw graphs and maps of it all in terms of such descriptors. And then to work out systems that usefully organize stuff, with standard ways to evaluate proposals to change such systems. But in high dimensional spaces one often can’t find such standard descriptors. One instead has specific items connected in a network to specific neighboring items, and maybe if one is lucky one can find a limited set of standard connectors between items. One can take nearby sets of items and try to describe key ways in which they are the same or different, and then try to project those distinctions farther out into the network. But it is hard to do that in robust or stable ways. New connections project off into new dimensions, and all the configurations are floppy and changing. When one finds different concepts that make sense of different but adjacent clusters, one often finds to relate those concepts, using candidate more general concepts. But there is often a large space of somewhat different versions that could work similarly well to unify those examples, but which would have quite different implications if projected further out into the network. If one adds the habit of adding real connections between items, a vastly larger set of stuff can become “adjacent” to any one item. And then the resulting concepts that organize these purposely-connected items are closely connected to the reasons people used to add such connections. So then a few key concepts might organize a larger space of stuff, but only because those concepts directed the construction. There would still remain a vast larger space of possible things one could build, if only one would consider them. Thus talk about stuff in large dimensional spaces uses thick descriptions of particular cases, especially the cases where people actually are, analogies and metaphors to compare neighboring clusters, and ambiguous concepts that have some prototypical examples, but which become less well pinned down as one moves away from those. It makes sense for people to spend a lot of time critiquing the concept proposals of others, and trying to interpret unusually successful concepts, to see what they could mean. Of course it is quite possible that we will in the future find better more robust concepts that make STEM talk more feasible for lager areas of culture space. And this seems well worth the attempt. But until we do, I feel now more sympathetic to existing culture talk, as a way to deal with high dimensional spaces of culture topics. You're currently a free subscriber to |