---
subject: "The Captagon Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-11-12 09:51:05
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Colin here. In modern geopolitics, sanctioned states typically turn to creative—and often shady—means of survival. Iran, hemmed in by economic sanctions, has built a clandestine network of Why is this interesting? In Syria’s case, Captagon production isn’t just a black-market venture—it’s the backbone of a The cross border movement of the stimulant also has consequences for Syria’s neighbors: rising addiction rates in Saudi Arabia, a constant flood of smuggling attempts in Jordan, and heightened border tensions. The New Yorker recently
This, of course, also brings to mind other narco-states in history: Colombia, Bolivia and other Central/South American economies relied on the robust cocaine trade in the 80s, and the Taliban were seed funded (pardon the easy pun) from poppies and the resulting opium production. The proliferation of Captagon has put strain on the public health and security infrastructure of Syria’s neighbors, straining diplomatic ties and exacerbating regional instability. Saudi Arabia is Our friend Edith Zimmerman—an occasional WITI contributor and author/illustrator of the excellent Tackling the Captagon trade isn’t easy. Any actual progress would require cooperation from the Syrian government, a dictatorship that obviously benefits from the trade and its juicy margin. However, as Syria needs capital for reconstruction, one could surmise that this could be an ongoing (and effective) tool of leverage in trying to curtail the trade. Saudi Arabia and the UAE are among the few entities with the resources and potential willingness to finance significant reconstruction projects. And it amounts to big business. In exchange for funding, GCC countries can press for specific anti-trafficking measures, such as dismantling Captagon production sites or taking action against officials known to be involved. An easy solve would be for Assad to direct the margin rich flow elsewhere, which has other terror financing or illicit implications (think Hezbollah, or even as far as Africa or Latin America). So it likely won’t be as easy as turning off the pill factories. And, just like the drug’s ability to hook users, the margins and the personal financial benefit for some of the Assad clan might be hard to extricate from Capagon’s mind altering clutches. (CN) Invite your friends and earn rewardsIf you enjoy Why is this interesting?, share it with your friends and earn rewards when they subscribe. |