---
subject: "AI #34: Chipping Away at Chip Exports"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-10-19 14:54:28
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
It did not get the bulk of the attention, but the actual biggest story this week was that America tightened the rules on its chip exports, closing the loophole Nvidia was using to create the A800 and H800. Perhaps the new restrictions will actually have teeth. Also new capabilities continue to come in based on the recent GPT upgrades, along with the first signs of adversarial attacks. Also a lot of rhetoric, including, yes, that manifesto. Yes, I do cover it. Table of ContentsIntroduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. A model made of gears. Dalle-3 Complete Prompt. Here you go. GPT-4 Real This Time. Begun, the adversarial vision attacks have. Fun With Image Generation. Upscale the Mona Lisa, perhaps? Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. Hi, I’m NYC Mayor Eric Adams. People Genuinely Against Genuine People Personalities. They warned us. They Took Our Jobs. The stack doth no longer overflow. Get Involved. Open Philanthropy and Survival and Flourishing are hiring. Introducing. Here, have a new model. In Other AI News. The State of AI report is here. Quiet Speculations. SEC chair predicts unavoidable financial crash. No. Man With a Plan. Are responsible scaling plans responsible? Are they plans? China. Draft guidance on how their companies can comply with the rules. The Quest for Sane Regulation. A proposed international treaty. The Chips are Down. The biggest loophole on chip exports to China is closing. The Week in Audio. Justin Wolfers on GPT and homework, me on a new podcast. Yes, We Will Speak Directly Into This Microphone. We aim to convince. Rhetorical Innovation. Critch tries twice more, an objection taxonomy, and more. Open Source AI is Unsafe and Nothing Can Fix This. Better documentation. No One Would Be So Stupid As To. Unprincipled exception too good to ignore. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. Ask any human. People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Quite a lot of them. New Bengio Interview. Lot of good content. Marc Andreessen’s Techno-Optimist Manifesto. I want to like it, except, yeah. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Usual suspects. Other People Wonder Whether It Would Be Moral To Not Die. Maybe stop? The Lighter Side. America.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
Dalle-3 System Complete Prompt
The first note is that capital letters works for emphasis in prompts. I am definitely going to tell GPT-4 to THINK STEP BY STEP now. A lot of the rest points out that the prompt sets out orders,, and then backpedals to clean up unfortunate splash damage and side effects. GPT-4 Real This TimeThe GPT-4V dog that did not bark remains adversarial attacks. At some point, one would think, we would get word of either: Successful adversarial image-based attacks on GPT-4V. Unsuccessful attempts at adversarial image-based attacks on GPT-4V.
I would expect the first, but I definitely at least expected the second one. And yet, no. We get neither. Everyone keeps whistling in the dark. Cool toy bro, let’s keep playing with it, no need to hack the system. This gap included the system card. We have at least a little bit of an attempt, now? It straightforwardly works?
Whoops. That is, presumably, not the behavior we want the system to exhibit. Instructions in the picture should not overrule the system, or cause the system to lie to the user. That would be quite bad, especially if you could embed human-invisible instructions.
It is not this easy. If you do not know exactly how the LLM will be used, or there are humans in the loop, trying this will get you caught. There are still a lot of more subtle things one can do. Also a lot of more damaging ones. So what have we learned? OpenAI is willing to ship a product that, as far as we can tell, is completely open to adversarial prompt injections. We also learned that we are all cool with it, in practice? That nothing went wrong? Well, nothing went wrong yet. I certainly do not see both shoes resting upon the floor. Fun with Image Generation
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
He explicitly does not address the fourth issue, that LLMs might spontaneously generate plausible but wrong information, rather than people spreading it on purpose. I would add to that the worry that they will regurgitate existing misinformation from its training data.
I would also note a dog that so far has not barked. This past week, there has been quite a lot of misinformation and enflamed rhetoric, with much confusion about what did and did not happen and who is or is not to blame. Those with different agendas pushed different narratives, while others sought to figure out the truth. We hopefully paid attention to how all our information and media sources reacted to that test, including prediction markets and their participants, and hopefully will update accordingly. What played essentially no role in any of it, as far as I can tell, was AI. Good old fashioned lying and misinformation are still state of the art when the stakes are high. Will that change? I am sure that eventually it will. For now, the song remains the same. People Genuinely Against Genuine People Personalities
Unlike existential risks, this type of AI risk, that childhood development might be impacted, is exactly like previous risks. Things change, in some ways for the worse. When we learn the full effects, often we have to adapt, to mitigate, to muddle through. We figure it out. If necessary, we can ban or restrict the harmful offerings. It would surprise me, but not shock me, if character AIs interfered with children forming friendships. It would be if anything less surprising to me if this one went the other way. The default to me is approximately the null hypothesis.
Is this possible? Definitely. It is indeed remarkably easy to imagine takeover scenarios driven by character AIs, even character AIs that are below human capabilities and intelligence levels. The intelligence in that case could be centered in the humans, as it did in Suarez’s novel Daemon. It would not be the first time that people used some automated process or other simple mechanism to give their lives meaning, became attached to it, and it gained remarkable power in the world (see among other things: all the religions and political movements and nations you do not believe in.) At least for now, it still seems like the kind of thing we are used to dealing with, that we can adapt to and mitigate as it happens. As Roko notes, it would not happen overnight. It does not seem that different in kind from previous tech changes, not at anything like current capabilities levels. That changes when the AIs involved are as smart or smarter than we are, or otherwise at or above human levels at chatting and convincing. But at that point, we are in most of the same trouble without the genuine people personalities, and the AIs will start learning to fake them anyway if that is not true. Would I support a ban on AI mimicking humans in various ways? If I had to choose purely between this restriction and none at all, I would do it in order to slow things down and raise the thresholds where various risks emerged, and yeah I can see the purely social impacts being reasonably bad and we have not thought that through. I would still note that this feels like an unprincipled place to draw the line, and that it is not likely to be an especially helpful one, and that this type of precaution is all too pervasive and does not serve us well. I would happily trade these ‘GPPs’ to get freedom to do other things like build houses and ship goods between ports. But if we are determined not to build houses or ship goods either way? Hmm. They Took Our JobsDid they?
This graph was circulating online, which Stack Overflow claims is inaccurate:
A 50% decline seems like a lot given how slowly people adapt new technology, and how often LLMs fail to be a good substitute. And the timing of the first decline does not match. But 5% seems suspiciously low. If I were to be trying to program, my use of stack overflow would be down quite a lot. And they’re laying off 28% of the workforce for some reason. How to reconcile all this? Presumably Stack Overflow is doing its best to sell a bad situation. Or perhaps there are a lot of AIs pinging their website.
At first, yes. Over time, I would not be so sure.
Robin Hanson not only believes this won’t happen, he describes this as ‘they keep saying this & keep being wrong.’ That depends on the value of they. If they means people worried about technology reducing employment across history, then yes, they keep saying this and they keep being wrong. If they means those building AI and striving to build AGI, we have not yet much tested the theory. We can rule out the most gung-ho predictions of massive change happening on the spot. We can also rule out the ‘this will not make any difference’ predictions. It is still very early days. Get Involved
I love this idea in general. I suggest it as ideally a feature of LinkedIn, although it could also be its own tool. Rather than apply individually for jobs, you can select companies that you want to work for, leave a ‘common job application’ resume and include your requirements like geographic location, hours and salary. Then the companies you selected can see the list of interested people, and if interested back they can contact you. Companies that want good interest can then develop policies of keeping their interest list confidential. And Facebook-style, other companies rather than cold emailing you can make ‘interest requests’ in case you want to know who is looking. This lets you stay exposed to finding your dream jobs without having automatically alerting your current employer or having to interact with a human. No one wants to have to interact with a human in a situation like this.
Not AI, but Introducing
In Other AI News
If we don’t want China to have access to cutting edge chips, NIMBY continues its world tour,
From Interesting that Google and Cohere do so well here. Also a lot of open source action for those looking to commercialize, which makes sense. I find this chart interesting in large part for its colorizations and sorting rules. Prompting needs to be heavily customized. It makes sense that internal tools would be popular here, although external tools sometimes work. Spreadsheets not bad either. You cannot rely on benchmarks, metrics or recursive AI evaluations if you want to know if the AI is doing what you need. Yet many still rely upon it, and less than half of those surveyed are relying on human review or data collection from users. I predict the other half that went the other way will not do as well. Air Street Capital releases their Here they review their predictions for the past year. Note that for each of the five correct predictions, the threshold was exceeded by an order of magnitude, arguably for the ambiguous prediction as well. The DeepMind prediction was likely only a few months too early. Then the two failed predictions were expecting a particular safety response - I am confident this would have traded very low in all prediction markets throughout - and a call for commercial failure that did not pan out. It has been quite a year. They attribute GPT-4’s superiority over open source alternatives to OpenAI’s use of RLHF. I do not think this is centrally right. Slide #109 shows that while Generative AI investment in startups is way up, general AI investment actually is not up despite this, as VCs cut overall investment in all compnies by 50%. Here’s #122, a chart of who is regulating how. They see UK and China as leading the pack on AI-specific legislation, whereas they do not expect the USA to pass any AI-related laws any time soon. There’s lots of very good detail in the slides, Here is how they overview catastrophic AI risk, via Dan Hendrycks. Even though Dan Hendrycks is the author of the most prominent paper warning about evolution favoring AIs, even his graphics exclude many of the scenarios I am most worried about in ways I worry will make people actually disregard such dangers. The report then discuss the mainstreaming of debate around such issues, in a NYT-style neutral-both-sides approach that seems fine as far as it goes. They end with predictions:
The odd prediction out here is #6, which I do not expect. The rest seem more likely than not to varying degrees. I created Manifold markets for the first five. If I have time and there is interest I will also create the other five.
Old statement:
New statement:
Quiet SpeculationsSEC chair Gary Gensler, famous hater of new technology and herald of doom,
I give this one decisively to Cowen. As usual, Gensler fails to understand the nature of new technology, looking only for ways to attack and blame it. Man With a Plan
Then once most people have committed, with everyone loving a winner, getting government to codify the whole thing becomes far easier. As Jaan points out, this plan at minimum requires certain assumptions.
I would add that it also assumes we can do the capability evaluations properly, which evhub asserts in bold, with the requirement of fine-tuning and a bunch of careful engineering work. Right now evals do not meet this bar, and meeting this bar at least imposes real and expensive delays. I am skeptical that we can have this level of confidence in our future evaluation process, and its ability to stand up to new techniques discovered later that might increase capabilities of a given model. And it also presumes that if the RSPs were triggered, that the alignment check wouldn’t be handwaved away or routed around or botched, that we can trust each lab on this, and that using this approach would not bake in such problems. Ut oh. Evhub’s response is to accept short-term further scaling as an acceptable risk, and that yes figuring out the right capabilities bar here is tricky (and that it has not yet been agreed upon). His hope is that you evaluate capabilities continuously during training, and that capabilities advances are at least marginally continuous, so you spot the problem in time. I responded by asking whether this is a realistic evaluation standard to expect labs to follow, given no one has yet done anything like that and it seems pretty expensive and potentially slow, Adam Jermyn says Anthropic’s RSP includes fine-tuning-included evals every three months or 4x compute increase, including during training. That’s at least something.
That is still better than no action. The issue is the communication, which Akash (I think largely correctly) likens to a motte-and-bailey situation. Bold in original.
This goes hand-in-hand with last week’s note about prominent organizations declining to help further push the Overton Window, instead advising us to aim in ‘realistic’ fashion. We can do both. We can implement Responsible Scaling Policies that are far too vague and weak but far better than nothing, at an individual level, and try to get others and then government to follow. While we also are clear that such policies are not strong enough, or even complete or well-specified, in their current forms. China
My presumption is that this will be a de facto requirement, necessary but not sufficient for compliance. It seems unlikely it will serve as a safe harbor, but it will give you some amount of benefit of the doubt, perhaps? The worry, which remains, is that you can get entirely roasted for even a single mistake. I would not want to be the first Chinese executive to find out if this is true. The system outlined here is highly vulnerable to being gamed. You get to design your own test set, who is to say why you chose those particular questions based on the particular quirks (or tested inputs or contaminated data set) of your model. Even if you are not cheating, refusing >95% of requests you should refuse without >5% false refusals is not so high a bar if the test sets are non-adversarial. Which, given the company gets to make the data sets, they won’t be. Contrast this with an ARC-style evaluation, where you do not know what they will throw at you. The regulations here have no teeth except for fear of what regulators would do if they found out you played it too loose. Which in turn I am guessing is actually bad for Chinese AI companies. When dealing with a regime like China’s, you want safe harbor. Ensure you’ve done X, Y and Z, and you are in the clear. Instead, this is suggesting you do X, Y and Z, but leaving you so much room to fudge them that if you piss off an official they can point to all your fudging, and that of everyone else. But if you don’t do the test, then that’s worse. So the test becomes necessary without being sufficient. The Quest for Sane Regulations
Note the implied odds of action here,
So how do we do that?
This means the first limit is fine for everyone else, and the second limit is for work in a collaborative AI safety lab. I continue to think that 10^23 is too low in practice, an attempt to find a completely safe level in a place where we need to accept we can’t be completely safe. The next 1-2 OOMs introduce some risk, but also greatly increase the chances of pulling this off and lessen the practical costs. This is especially true given that the treaty gives their new organization, JAISL, the power to lower the limit to account for algorithmic improvements.
These proposals seem good in principle, but don’t have the same level of concrete detail. So how are we doing that? The central strategy is to create and use The Joint AI Safety Laboratory (JAISL), which would have a higher compute limit to work with than everyone else. As part of their work they would create more capable models, and responsible actors who got with the program would be given API access.
The treaty seems like a fine baseline from which to have discussion. It does not address many key issues, such as: Who will control JAISL? If JAISL develops something very powerful, who determines what happens with it? Who gets to control the future? This type of question is going to likely be the major sticking point, on which the current draft is silent. America will expect to be in charge in a robust defensible way, China will demand that this not be the case, generally it is not obvious there is any ZOPA (zone of possible agreement) even for those two parties alone, and then there’s everyone else. What is the enforcement mechanism, and the way to get everyone to sign on? We do need everyone to sign on. The carrot of ‘you get access to the good models’ is not nothing, but it seems hard to stop indirect access from mostly interdicting this, and there are strong incentives to defy the entire operation, or to not enforce the rules, or have a government project of your own, and so on.
It is good to discuss how to get the foundation right, even if we don’t have a solution to the hardest questions. One thing at a time, or else ‘you can’t even do X so how are you going to do Y’ plus ‘this only does X without Y so it won’t work’ combine to block you from making any progress.
They also offer a timeline for potential catastrophe:
The Chips Are DownAmerica has for a while been imposing export controls to stop China from getting advanced chips and competing in the AI race. This is one of the few places where there is easy American political consensus on this issue. Whatever your concern, including existential risk prevention, everyone agrees China should not get the chips. The problem has been that, as companies faced with regulations often do, Nvidia and others looked at the chip regulations, noticed a loophole, and drove a truck through it. The problem was that to be restricted, a chip needed both fast computational performance and fast interconnect speed. So Nvidia (with shades of old Intel in the 486 era) produced chips with intentionally crippled interconnect speeds, the H800 and A800, so they would not count. They aren’t as good as H100s and A100s, but they were not that much worse either. At a conference on reducing AI existential risk, we asked the question of to what degree the restrictions would ultimately matter if the flaw was not fixed, and the consensus was not all that much in the grand scheme. We wondered whether this could be fixed. The answer is yes.
The graph on the left and the one on the bottom are the ones people drew at the conference. The one on the right is the new rule.
New rules also
Is the lack of comments a huge error and EMH violation? Or do comments not matter? It has to be one or the other, there are billions of dollars and major international competitions at stake. The Week in Audio
Could be an older clip, but ICYMI: Illya Sutskever, co-founder of OpenAI currently helping lead the Superalignment Taskforce, Yes, We Will Speak Directly Into This Microphone
She is here to deliver the shocking message that people trying to persuade others and convince politicians did the things you do when persuading others and convincing politicians, great, finally, we did it everyone.
Give Republicans some credit here. ‘Oppressive AI’ plays on their biases, but the other three distinct messages are about conveying the actual problem using more words, versus vibing the problem with less words.
Yes, the big shock is that we are using the possibility of extinction, simply because it is possible that we all go extinct from this.
Did we speak sufficiently directly into your microphone? Do you have any follow-up questions? Rhetorical Innovation
Yes, obviously. I don’t get how anyone thinks this as a Can’t Happen. I really don’t. And yes, the danger of pointing out AI might kill us is that some people treat this as hype, or as a sign that they should go out and build the thing first, either to ‘build it safely before someone else builds it unsafely’ or purely because think of the potential. And we collectively very much did not appreciate this risk before it was too late. But at this point, it is too late to worry about that, the damage has already been done. Andrew Critch also offers his thoughts on the need for (lack of) speed.
As with many such arguments, I wonder if that helps convince anyone? The speed advantage makes disaster and existential risk more likely, but is not necessary for those scenarios. Nor is it sufficient on its own. I hope it causes some people to wake up to the issues, makes the situation feel real in a way it wouldn’t feel otherwise. But it is very hard to tell. One way people try to not notice this problem is to say ‘well what matters is the physical world, where the limit is the speed of physical action.’
I find this type of argument convincing, yes obviously if you are thousands of times faster you can run virtual circles around humans and today’s world makes that a clear victory condition if you don’t have other comparable handicaps. But I did not need to be convinced.
I doubt this is close to complete but here is a noble attempt at Fizzlers saying capable AGI is far or won’t happen How-Skeptics saying AGI won’t be able to effectively take over or kill us. Why-Skeptics saying AGI won’t want to. Solvabilists saying we can and definitely will solve alignment in time. Anthropociders who say ‘but that’s good, actually.’
Each is then broken up into subcategories. Is that complete? If AGI is soon, has sufficient affordances to kill us or end up effectively in control of the future, would use those affordances, couldn’t be prevented from doing so, and that’s bad actually, is there another way out? The names other than Fizzlers could use improvement. For the fifth one I tend to use Omnicidal Maniacs, which I admit is not a neutral term, but they actively want me, my children and everyone else dead so I’m okay with that. The other three are trickier to get right. My response to the five objections is something like: This is a reasonable objection to have. It might save us, or buy us much time. What I do not see is how one can be 99%+ (or even 90%+) confident in this. These objections do not make sense. At all. If you create things that are smarter than you, better optimizers than you, with more affordances and capabilities than you, this is a rather dangerous thing to do. Usually their arguments essentially involve imagining one particular potential takeover attempt, saying it would not work, therefore we are safe. There is an endless array of ‘your argument does not make sense, and also does not change the outcome even if true.’ I almost want to call these people the Premise Deniers. Almost all such objections are clearly wrong, to the extent that clearly stating such an argument’s assumptions usually sounds like you are being unfair and leads directly to ‘well, when you put it like that, obviously not.’ People want it to be one way. It’s the other way. Honorable mention to 3.a.ii, the theory that the ASI will engage in acausal negotiations with other potential ASIs resulting in a universal morality that leads to a good outcome, and I do think things like this are possible but if you are counting on it then that seems so absurd to me. The only plausible version of this broader category I’ve encountered or considered is missing here, which I’ll call 3d: We will only create one dominant AI (or at worst, a very limited number), use a pivotal act to prevent other competitive-level AIs from being created, and the one dominant AI will be given bespoke instructions to let us accomplish this and other things without causing broader issues. Which itself constitutes a different kind and set of risks, so essentially no one mentions it as a reason not to worry. Reasonable people disagree strongly on alignment difficulty, although I definitely do not think ‘oh this is easy, 99%+ chance we get it by default’ is a reasonable position. I am confident for many reasons that alignment is relatively hard, that the dynamics involved will make it difficult to devote proper resources to solving it, and that solving the alignment problem as we understand [it would still be insufficient](https://substack.com/redirect/3404bbca-cdb0-4e8b-9ca3-49c9ad692141?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).[In my model, this gets us ‘out of phase 1’ but then we enter a phase 2](https://substack.com/redirect/0f77d04a-1182-4965-9966-08bbfcf58173?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), where we would then need to find an equilibrium where power did not pass to AI due to either competitive dynamics or people who want power to pass to AI.Please speak directly into this microphone, sir. Tell the world what you think.
What else is missing from the list?
This reminds us of Which effect dominates depends on circumstances and details. What you do not want to do is to cast out those who ever do any bad thing at all, or failing to differentiate ‘this action is bad’ from ‘you are bad,’ or make people fear that you will do this, especially after they stop. But you also can’t be giving indefinite free passes to abject cowards. So it is hard.
Somewhere in the middle, one would hope, the truth lies. Making mistakes or not living up to the ideal standard does not make you a bad person. Thinking (or willfully not realizing) that what you are working on is likely to end the world, and continuing to work on it and increasing the chances of that happening because the job pays well or the problems are too delicious, without any attempt to mitigate the risk? That pretty much does? If this is you, you are bad and you should feel bad, until such time as you One natural reaction to this is to decide not to realize that what you are doing is risky, which is even worse because it increases the risks and poisons your mind and the epistemic commons. You don’t get to do that. Whereas if you sincerely on reflection think such work does not pose these risks or is worth the risks, then I believe you are a wrong person, but not a bad one. The line between these can of course be thin. If you tell a story where your work at the lab is instead advancing safety, and are working towards that end, then that is different, but you should beware that it is very easy to fool oneself into thinking that what you are doing is helping and ending up merely fueling the system instead. Feynman reminds you that you are the easiest person to fool. Open Source AI is Unsafe and Nothing Can Fix ThisWhat is obvious to people who know is not obvious to others, or to lawmakers, or to those who are determined not to notice or admit it.
No One Would Be So Stupid As To
Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
While I have chosen for safety reasons not to publish my long critique of Anthropic’s implementation of constitutional AI, I will note that when you pile on these kinds of conflicting maximalist principles on the basis of how they socially sound, the result is at best going to be insufferable, and if you turned up the capabilities you get far worse. The exercise also illustrated a lot of directly opposed perspectives between different groups, as one would expect. People Are Worried About AI Killing EveryoneThose people include a majority of AI engineers, First, some data on who these people are. These are mostly not people working on frontier models. They are mostly working on SaaS. So what does the future look like? Just for fun, huh? If we take the P(doom) answers here seriously, that is a lot of doom. 88% of respondents have it >1%, and two thirds are >25%. The median and mean look like they’re something like 35%-40%, the range where this is a huge deal and our decisions matter quite a lot. Note that includes those who think AI is overhyped, so a lot of that non-doom is coming from not expecting sufficient capabilities. There are some reasons to worry that we should not take the answer so seriously. Here Robert Wilbin goes through the realizations of the issues involved:
We will know more in a few weeks when they publish further. I’d like to see this re-run at a conference, without online access of any kind, and with this question not put without explanation into the ‘rapid fire’ section. We certainly should not rely on this answer to be accurate, given it both has these methodological issues and is also an outlier. It still makes it very difficult for the real answer to be in the vicinity o ‘oh right, then if you believe that carry on, then.’ The open source answer is strange, especially in that there is so little support for ‘both’ despite that being the equilibrium for existing software, and the current state of AI as well. Perhaps they think that open source is the future unless banned, so you cannot have it both ways? I’d love to see the cross-tabs between open source predictions and doom predictions, and also everything else. Perhaps the boldest prediction yet, in the context that Roon (1) expects us to build AGI and (2) expects us to survive it, although he recognizes this is far from a given, and what we do determines our fate.
If you told me there were no massive scale social chaos effects after we built AGI, I would assume the reason for this was that we all died or lost control too quickly for there to be social chaos. Given his expectations here are very different from mine and he does not expect that, that seems like a full on New Bengio Interview
I would note this exchange:
That matches my understanding. The scientific venues were dismissive and did not want to hear it, demanding ‘concrete evidence’ in ways that did not in context make sense, and which formed self-reinforcing barriers because scientific credibility and standards of evidence are recursive and self-recommending, for both good and bad reasons. Faced with this, those trying to sound the alarm ‘turned their backs’ in the field in the sense of giving up on the channels that were refusing to engage. Standard you-can-call-it-both-sides situation. Things are improving on both fronts now. The gatekeepers are less automatically dismissive, and there is enough ‘concrete evidence’ available to satisfy at least some demands for it and start the bootstrapping, although that requirement remains massively warping at best. And with that plus the higher stakes and resourcing, existential risk advocates are making more of an effort. Also this:
Yes. If you seek to understand, there is no substitute for explaining to others. As always, there is the clash of priorities. Notice the standard asymmetries.
So how bad are things?
We can be rather good at convincing people to behave when we are willing to apply various forms of pressure, or if necessary force, but we have to be willing to do that. We are willing to do that continuously, every day, on a wide range of ordinary things. I am not so despairing that we could do it once again, even if the international aspect increases the difficulty level, but Bengio nails the problem that we need the motivation to do it, and that this might not happen until catastrophe strikes. At which point, it could already be too late. His conclusion:
In one form or another, this seems right. Marc Andreessen’s Techno-Optimist ManifestoAll right, fine. Big ‘in this house we believe’ energy. Very much Directionally, in most places, it is right, and it makes many important points, citing the usual suspects starting with Smith and Ricardo. Many overstatements. It’s a manifesto, comes with the territory. What did you except, truth seeking to ever get chosen over anticipated memetic fitness? This. Is. Manifesto. Alas, while I mostly agree with the non-AI portions, I was not inspired by them, because the damn thing is too long and rambling, and it is not precise while doing so, it does not seem to be attempting to convince anyone, and yeah yeah what else is new. The exception to that is the Technological Values section, much of which is excellent. Then there’s the parts on AI, which are quite bad. There’s the ‘intelligence’ section.
That’s right. Not developing maximum AI is a form of murder. I feel oddly singled out, here? Why isn’t holding back everything else or any non-optimal decision also a form of murder? What about Marc’s failure to donate more money for malaria nets?
Existential risk? Never heard of her, except in the ‘enemies’ list. Very constructive way to think we have here:
Does Marc have no idea that the first of these things - and I do not think it is a coincidence it is first - is not like the others? That one of these things does not belong? Or does he know, and is deliberately trying to put it there anyway? Perhaps as the entire central point of the entire damn manifesto? Or is he so far gone that the concept of the map matching the territory, that words could have meaning and causes might have a variety of effects, completely lost to him? Either way, none of this is an argument on anything but vibes. Which is a shame, because I otherwise very much want to help with the whole techno-optimism thing, and the list of virtues (called ‘technological values’) starts off pretty sweet and also is pretty sweet later on, this part is a list I can get behind (modulo ‘what is revenge doing there, that’s kind of a weird choice…’):
Except I don’t want us all to die. What did I skip over?
What does it mean to ‘believe in evolution,’ ‘embrace variance’ and ‘believe in risk, in leaps into the unknown’ in the context of intentionally creating maximally intelligent and capable new things as quickly as possible? It means losing control over the future, it means having no preferences other than fitness. It means death. Which could be with or without the ‘and that’s good, actually’ line at the end that is logically implied. And later, in the next section, we have this:
Like the rest of the manifesto, this has historically been very true, is currently very true on most (but notice, not all) margins, and quite obviously we should not expect that relationship to hold if we build machines that think better than we do. What to make of all this? One certainly must take in the irony.
Again, on his list of enemies,
Vice wins the hot take contest with “ Fact check technically accurate, I think?
There is also this gem of willful misunderstanding:
There is no mystery here. The official ideology of Silicon Valley is to build cool stuff and make money. That is true whether or not they live up to their ideals. Also, sure, there are a bunch of them who really don’t want us all to die and have noticed that one might be up in the air, another highly overlapping bunch of them think maybe doing good things for people is good, and on the flip side others think that building cool stuff is The Way even if it would look to a normal person like the particular cool stuff might actually go badly up to and including getting everyone killed. They are people, and contain multitudes. What frustrates me most is that Marc Andreessen keeps talking about general techno-optimism, I agree with him on every margin except frontier or open source AI models, and yet he seems profoundly uninterested in all the other issues, where I mostly think he is right. Many others are in the same boat, for example Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone
I suppose there are four possibilities here. Full-on belief in [The Dial of Progress](https://substack.com/redirect/49901d83-9207-4887-bc2c-6d2c068cc254?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), except I was downplaying it a lot.A complete lack of reading comprehension, resulting in deep confusion. Sufficiently motivated cognition that this is what comes out the other end. Lying.
What else? That’s all I got. The rest of the thread, by others, only gets worse. We say ‘don’t build an AGI before we know how to have it not kill everyone’ and repeatedly say ‘we do not want anyone to have AGI [at this time]’ they hear both ‘managed decline of humanity’ and ‘hand the lightcone over to Sam Altman.’ Except, I’m used to it at this point, you know? I except nothing less, and nothing more. Nor do I believe there is some way to say ‘I can’t help but notice that building an AGI right now would probably kill everyone, maybe we should therefore not do that’ without getting these kinds of reactions.
This is exactly (part of) the correct way to think about AI risk. The risks are not Gaussian. The whole point of the game is to prevent ruin, to keep playing, and this is a whole new level of ruin and humanity not getting to keep playing. If things go wrong, the loss is infinite, and you can’t draw conclusions from it not having happened yet. Nor will it be, when and if it does happen, a black swan or unlikely event. There has to be an Other People Wonder Whether It Would Be Moral To Not DieJessica Taylor says many AI discussions come from a place of philosophical confusion, which I agree with, and then questions whether a deontologist can consider it moral to align an AI or worry about AI existential risk, since the AI capable of causing extinction would be more moral than we are? That definitely is strong evidence of profound philosophical confusion. My general stance on such matters is that Wrong Conclusions are Wrong, if your deontology cannot figure out that the extinction of humanity would be worse than aligning an AI, then what needs to be extinguished or aligned is your version of deontology. Morality is to serve us, not the other way around. My solution to this particular dilemma, aside from not centrally being a Kantian deontologist, is that (up to a point, but quite sufficiently for this case) a universal rule of sticking up for one’s own values and interests and everyone having a perspective is a much better universal system than everyone trying to pretend that they don’t have such a perspective and that they their preferences should be ignored. The Lighter Side
Illustrations as well.
Packy McCormick: DALL•E3 is America-pilled "Please make me an image of the best possible future for humanity" You're currently a free subscriber to |