---
subject: "Frederick Douglass and the Power of the Photograph"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-02-11 12:15:59
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Having your picture taken in the 1860s was This is one reason why early photos look so stiff and artificial to us today. The people in these images were trying to convey as much as they could about themselves — their social class, their inner qualities, their dignity — while enduring an awkward and uncomfortable experience. The photos we see of people from this era often represent their one and only shot to capture their images for posterity. But, as often happens with a new medium, That’s right — the abolitionist and orator appears in more photos than Abraham Lincoln, Ulysses S. Grant, or any other person of his era. And that was on purpose. Douglass was an enthusiastic adopter of this new technology and used it to achieve his political goals. He understood earlier than most that controlling one’s own image was a form of political power. In 1861, as the nation was falling apart into a Civil War, Douglass got up in front of a crowd in Boston and spoke about the link between “ Douglass saw Louis Daguerre, the inventor of photography, as an underappreciated figure who had brought new possibilities to the masses:
He went on to appreciate the emotional power of an image:
Douglass argued that humans are unique among animals in their ability to make and appreciate images. Then he made a rather abrupt transition toward his usual topics — abolition, national disunion, and racial justice. Audience members might have wondered what Douglass’s interest in photography had to do with his larger political project until he ties political and technological progress together at the end of the speech:
It’s a real techno-optimist manifesto ( Frederick Douglass got his picture taken as often as he could because he saw photography as a less prejudiced medium than a painting or drawing could ever be. He had long believed, as he
But a photograph, Douglass believed, told the truth. He could be seen as he really was, not as a white person imagined him to be. He could use photographs of himself to combat the flood of racist caricatures that misled white Americans about black people’s abilities and intelligence. These pictures helped Douglass to Douglass’ portraits, whether taken early in his life or as he aged, show an individual of fierce intelligence and dignity. He never smiled, because he didn’t want to lean into the stereotype of the “ Not only did he sit for well over 100 portraits, Douglass also worked hard to circulate his image. He carried pocket-sized photos (called cartes de visite) with him. Every time he left his image with someone, he was spreading the idea that he was a man like any other. I doubt you needed to see these pictures of Frederick Douglass to know what he looked like, because his campaign was so successful. Every American history textbook, every documentary about the Civil War, and every museum exhibit about the period serves as evidence that Douglass was correct about the power of the photograph to influence the way people saw him and his fellow black Americans. We’ve become a much more image-oriented society in the years since Frederick Douglass went around handing out little photos of himself. Does Douglass’s optimism about the power of the image still hold true? So much of our information about the world comes from quick glances at images. The choice of a lead photo on the front page of a newspaper or website can shape the opinions of the people who will never read the article. People spend hours every day flicking between visual stimuli on Instagram or TikTok, allowing the images they encounter to shape their understanding of reality. Sometimes, when I run through the park near my house, I will see a young couple with expensive-looking camera equipment trying to get an Instagrammable shot of their kid in a scenic spot. If you’ve ever seen something like this — where the husband instructs the wife again and again to lift their child up into the air at just the right angle to catch the light through the leaves — you know that the photo they eventually post online will be, if not a lie, not quite truthful either. It would be more representative to post one of the 37 failed attempts, maybe the one where the kid is on the verge of tears or the one where a random jogger like me runs through the background. There are more consequential ways in which an image can mislead, as well. On the one hand, the fact that everyone has a high-powered camera in their pocket allows more of life to be recorded than ever before. Ordinary citizens are able to capture important events like the behavior of ICE agents and circulate them to a global audience. On the other hand, a well-cropped photo or cleverly-edited video snippet can give us the wrong impression about an event. Now, as AI tools get better at simulating reality, we’re likely to struggle even more with photographic images. I frequently find myself wondering if a too-good-to-be-true photo is real or if it’s AI. The current administration has already But maybe Frederick Douglass would be more at home in our era than it seems. After all, was his constant portrait-taking much different from the efforts of the influencer to project a particular image to their followers? Douglass didn’t necessarily show his true self in these images; he showed the side of himself that he thought America needed to see. Martha Cutter Frederick Douglass knew that the image, properly orchestrated, could be a liberating force — and that, in the hands of bad actors, images could be used to mislead and even oppress. In this, as in many other areas, he was a man ahead of his time. This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: Or you can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading! You're currently a free subscriber to |