---
subject: "Everything-Except-Book Review Contest 2025"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-28 16:14:28
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
I enjoy the yearly book review contest, but it feels like last year’s contest is barely done, and I want to give you a break so you can read more books before we start over. So this year, let’s do something different. Submit an ACX-length post reviewing something, anything, except a book. You can review a movie, song, or video game. You can review a product, restaurant, or tourist attraction. But don’t let the usual categories limit you. Review comic books or blog posts. Review political parties - no, whole societies! Review animals or trees! Review the rocks and clouds! Review abstract concepts! Mathematical proofs! Love! Death! God Himself! (please don’t review human races, I don’t need any more NYT articles) Otherwise, the usual rules apply. There’s no official word count requirement, but previous finalists and winners were often between 2,000 and 10,000 words. There’s no official recommended style, but check the style of Then send me your review through (does this mean you can’t say something like “This movie about war reminded me of my own experiences as a soldier” because that gives a hint about your identity? My rule of thumb is - if I don’t know who you are, and the average ACX reader doesn’t know who you are, you’re fine. I just want to prevent my friends, or Internet semi-famous people, from getting an advantage. If you’re in one of those categories and think your personal experience would give it away, please don’t write about your personal experience.) If your review includes footnotes, please make them endnotes in plain text [1], not in Google Docs’ native footnote functionality. The native footnotes don’t automatically transfer to Substack, and transferring them manually is a pain. First prize will get at least $2,500, second prize at least $1,000, third prize at least $500; I might increase these numbers later on. All winners and finalists will get free publicity (including links to any other works you want me to link to) and free ACX subscriptions. And all winners will get the right to pitch me new articles if they want (most people don’t take me up on this, but Your due date is May 12th. Good luck! If you have any questions, ask them in the comments. And remember, the form for submitting entries is ENDNOTES [1] Like this. You're currently a free subscriber to |