---
subject: "The Murder Mystery Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-09-15 12:41:02
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
A classic from the archives today. Back tomorrow. -Colin (CJN) Scott Stedman (SS) is an entrepreneur who co-founded Scott here. We’re here today to talk murder… well, the genre. Edgar Allan Poe invented the murder mystery genre we know today with Why this is interesting? When I described murder mysteries in that second sentence, your mind likely jumped to two authors: Arthur Conan Doyle and Agatha Christie. While Poe may have invented the genre, Conan Doyle and Sherlock Holmes did something that the form had never seen—they changed “reason” into “science” and applied it to the art of deduction. Holmes was introduced in the novella, A Study in Scarlet, published in 1887, the same year as the While Doyle spurred an entire literature of copycats (most interestingly, the Holmes-eque villain “I specialize in murders of quiet, domestic interest.” – Agatha Christie. Agatha Christie is the most popular modern writer to ever live (outmatched in sales by only Shakespeare and the Bible). Christie is unrelenting in her ability to surprise—she The criminal must be mentioned in the early part of the story, but must not be anyone whose thoughts the reader has been allowed to know. All [supernatural](https://substack.com/redirect/f56e7a94-56e9-4470-90c0-548a7a309bd1?r=8o54n)or[preternatural](https://substack.com/redirect/2b0f24bb-2135-491d-961b-561a95e12542?r=8o54n)agencies are ruled out as a matter of course.Not more than one secret room or [passage](https://substack.com/redirect/8d221d70-dbe2-4112-944f-275021ca8cd5?r=8o54n)is allowable.No hitherto undiscovered poisons may be used, nor any appliance which will need a long scientific explanation at the end. No racial stereotypes. (Scott’s Note: I’ve slightly adapted the language from the original which now reads as very dated and racist when the intention was the opposite). No accident must ever help the detective, nor must he ever have an unaccountable intuition that proves to be right. The detective himself must not commit the crime. The detective is bound to declare any clues which he may discover. The "sidekick" of the detective, the Watson, must not conceal from the reader any thoughts which pass through his mind: his intelligence must be slightly, but very slightly, below that of the average reader. Twin brothers, and doubles generally, must not appear unless we have been duly prepared for them.
Dame Agatha and the Detection Club’s rules ushered in what’s known as the Golden Age of detective fiction. However, on the other side of the pond, a revolution in form was brewing in the livers of Hardboiled detective stories were the exact opposite of the garden variety created in England. Detectives like Sam Spade and Philip Marlowe didn’t adhere to the genteel community guidelines of Inspector Poirot, Ms. Marple, or Lord Peter Wimsey. They didn’t give a damn what people thought. They followed their own existential code, with similar rigor, regardless of the consequences. The last great innovation to transform the genre began with Lawrence Treat’s unsuccessful book V as in Victim. A decade later the police procedural would grow in popularity and attain global recognition with the rise of writers like the husband and wife team of The police procedural anchors the detective in clearly defined routines of real life. There’s no quart of scotch before work without implications. There’s usually a family not far away. Clients aren’t bombshells. And there’s lots of paperwork. While the procedural carries lots of aesthetic and structural similarities with both previous forms (the garden variety and hardboiled), there is one difference that’s most notable: The villain is at a notable disadvantage. The cop is the pro—and he’s got the resources of the police department behind him. This is not a clash of superheroes, but a reflection of what most readers are hoping to do in their own lives: finding the exceptional in the banal. Of course, the great procedural writers like The murder mystery is a genre that’s so rich and surprising to its readers because it marries form and purpose effortlessly—the rules and aesthetic guidelines of each genre, reflect the unique moment in time that the writers were living through. The garden variety murder mystery mirrors a centuries-old British culture torn by war, watching its traditions melt into modernity. While hardboiled was born from a new American culture defining itself without a unifying identity. Finally, the procedural tears down the mythologies of the genre, instead portraying the classic battle of chaos vs. order, as a mundane slog through a working-class 9 to 5—a fight that many could identify with as automation and globalization began to de-personalize the modern workforce. The constant play between the aesthetic and cultural—illustrated both by each genre’s unique form, and the history of how that form emerged—gives the murder mystery’s greatest storytellers an incredible array of tools to subvert, divert, suspend, expound, and confound. With our culture changing under our feet, it’s quite certain that there will be new approaches to the murder mystery that will keep us engaged everywhere from the beach to the bedroom—with only one thing for sure… someone’s gunna die, and someone’s gunna figure out whodunit. (SS) — WITI x McKinsey: An ongoing partnership where we highlight interesting McKinsey research, writing, and data. Freelance, side hustles, and gigs: Independent work is booming, the American Opportunity Survey shows. For these workers and society, the upsides and drawbacks are all part of the gig. Don’t miss — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Scott (SS) — Why is this interesting? is a daily email from Noah Brier & Colin Nagy (and friends!) about interesting things. If you’ve enjoyed this edition, please consider forwarding it to a friend. If you’re reading it for the first time, consider subscribing (it’s free!). You’re a free subscriber to |