---
subject: "Cultural Variety Is Crazy Hard To Fix"
from: "Robin Hanson from Overcoming Bias <overcomingbias@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-12-19 17:45:21
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Overcoming Bias", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8616244883382228708", "UNREAD"]
---
Vitalik Buterin (VB)
It seems that VB has learned much about culture. But I fear that he, and most of you, still don’t quite get just how severe is our culture problem. Some aspects of culture, like clothes and food, let people feel enjoy a distinct cultural identity, but are shallow, and don’t much influence biological adaptiveness. Other aspects are deep, like those that set our attitudes and behaviors to family, fertility, death, war, community, and democracy. Each aspect of culture has a (context-dependent) scale above which it can easily vary, and below which it cannot. Aspects with low scales allow for much variety and experimentation, and thus effective selection, but aspects with high scales allow for far less, and this is where we have a big problem. Deep aspects tend to have higher scales. When aspects vary one at a time, then to win, innovations must be attractive given the usual distribution over all the other aspects. But when aspects can be varied as packages, parts can win that would not seem attractive by themselves. This is like the evolution of species compared to organisms, or of firm cultures compared to within-firm innovations. These species- and firm- level innovation processes actually matter more than do within-species and within-firm level innovation processes, as we have seen more innovation in fragmented habits and industries. When we try to innovate in language, tech, business practice, law, and governance, we can often A) see which factors were held fixed while others changed, B) distinguish cause from effect among related factors, and C) see which particular factor changes most contributed to which particular local outcomes of interest. These abilities greatly aid us in identifying promising changes and adapting them to new contexts. But doing these is just far harder with culture. Which is why culture has far less structured experimentation, or learning of useful lessons from the variations we see. And this is why cultural evolution has long been much more of a simple Darwinian process of natural selection: variations happen, and then some win out over others. It is thus far easier to promote innovation in say software or governance, compared to culture. To innovate in culture, we can mainly just induce many new cults, cults that try out whole packages of deep high-scale cultural features, that try to last for generations, and that build up sufficient insularity against outside influences to have a shot at actually retaining kids and preserving distinctiveness for generations. Most of the cultural experiments that VB celebrates have far too little insularity to plausibly serve in this role. More important, the world now has many orders of magnitude a) too little variety, at the cultures level, and also b) too few attempts to start and grow new cults. So I’m afraid that the amount of added variety that VB could plausibly induce in these parameters, even if he induced 100x more from others, is just vastly insufficient to the need. But VB, or people like him, could plausibly single-handedly induce far more experimentation and thus innovation in governance. And there is a decent chance that we could find far more competent forms of governance, which we might then assign to the task of fixing and improving our processes of cultural evolution, including its variety. Yes, even this seems a long shot, and so my best prediction is that we will fail, and our civilization will decline, to be replaced by descendants of the Amish, Haredim, etc. But its the best shot I can see. You're currently a free subscriber to |