---
subject: "Why Do Transgender People Report Hypermobile Joints?"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-03-16 22:26:49
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX"]
---
[Related: I. Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is a category of connective tissue disorder; it usually involves stretchy skin and loose, hypermobile joints. For a few years now, doctors who work with transgender people have commented on an apparently high rate of EDS in this population. For example, Dr. Will Powers, who specializes in hormone therapy,
Coming from the other direction, Why should this be? I know of four and a half theories: 1 ) Spurious result: Although EDS is technically a well-defined disease caused by specific measurable genetic mutations, in practice some cases are just sort of diagnosed on vibes, and the vibes have been getting more popular lately.
But Long COVID is maximally easy to psych yourself into thinking you have - it’s just fatigue - and Ehlers-Danlos is pretty hard. And Pirate Wires was able to find 1.25x relative risk for bi people and Long COVID, and Najafian found 132x relative risk for trans people and EDS. Also, many trans people are able to easily demonstrate skin/joint abnormalities that are obvious to anyone who looks at them - although it’s possible this is selection bias - a subgroup who have real EDS (at the same rate as cis people) and are very salient because of their gender identity, while cis people with EDS (and trans people with psychosomatic EDS) don’t talk about it as much. 2 ) Estrogen: Women have more EDS (and other joint disorders) than men. They also have looser joints in general. This is mostly because estrogen makes joints more mobile. Maybe there’s something about trans women suddenly taking estrogen after a lifetime of not having estrogen which causes joint problems (or just makes them notice the kinds of minor issues cis women deal with their whole lives). In contrast to this theory, trans women say they had them even before starting estrogen, and these conditions also seem elevated in trans men. 3 ) Genetics: The gene for congenital adrenal hyperplasia, a sex hormone condition that frequently causes gender divergence, is interwoven on chromosome 6 with the gene for tenascin-X, a joint-related protein whose abnormality causes Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Maybe if there’s a problem in that part of chromosome 6, you could get both conditions. In contrast to this theory, congenital adrenal hyperplasia is extremely rare, maybe 4 ) Autism: There’s an equally mysterious relationship between EDS and autism; My guess is something like joint issues → poor proprioception → all sensory experience is noisy and confusing → the brain, which is embodied and spends most of its time trying to process sensory experience, learns a different reasoning style → different reasoning style is less context-dependent (producing symptoms of autism) → different reasoning style when trying to interpret bodily correlates of gender (eg sex hormones) → transgender. For more on why I would think this, see II. In order to learn more about this, I asked people about their gender and their joint disorders on the ACX survey, taken by about 7000 people. All joint conditions are more common among (biological) women, and biological women also relate to gender differently, so to avoid confounding I separated results by biological sex. Here’s the results for biological men - “M (cisgender)” is coded as cis, “F (transgender f → m)” or “Other” is coded as trans. Total sample size was 5841 cis, 271 trans:
Ehlers-Danlos was the same, but sample size was completely inadequate - there was only one EDS patient in the trans group. In the other categories, incidence in transgender respondents was about double the average. Chi squared test was marginally significant (p = 0.09) for diagnosed joint issues, and clearly significant (p = 0.01) for any hypermobility. Here’s the same thing, biological women (n = 765 cis, 91 trans):
None of these were significant, but again the sample sizes were really tiny. Was this confounded by autism? Hard to say. I did the same analysis individually in people who didn’t have an autism diagnosis, and then again in people who did have an autism diagnosis, and although the sample sizes were pretty low, a trend was still apparent. But this means nothing; my autism question was binned into do have / don’t have, autism is definitely a spectrum, and it could be that within people who have autism, the people with more severe autism had both more EDS and more gender divergence. These results were a bit ambiguous, but I think overall they pointed in the direction of replicating the connection. 6/6 trends were in the expected direction, and the first and second largest-sample-size questions were clearly and marginally significant, respectively. Some ACX survey respondents kindly indicated that I could email them if I had any questions about their responses. I asked some trans people with joint mobility issues to tell me their stories. Here’s a typical response:
I think this is some evidence against theory 1 (Instagram special snowflakes). But also, these respondents weren’t people looking for attention. They were people who clicked a box saying “I guess my joints do seem hypermobile” when I specifically asked them about it, on a survey which they were taking for other reasons. It also argues against theory 2 (supplemental estrogen), since they noticed it long before taking that. Given that this person is male → female, and congenital adrenal hyperplasia is both very rare and almost always female → male, I don’t think theory 3 looks very good here either. I continue to find theory 4.5 - a link between proprioception and reasoning styles which sometimes also produces autism - the most convincing. I’ll probably ask followup questions on next year’s ACX survey where I ask you to try to Speaking of which, thanks to everyone who took the ACX survey - especially our transgender readers, who are heroically patient with me using them as lab rats to test my weird neuroscience theories. As always, you can try to replicate my work using the publicly available You're currently a free subscriber to |