---
subject: "Group Technology, the Forgotten Cousin of Lean Manufacturing"
from: "Construction Physics <constructionphysics@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-08-07 13:31:04
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Construction Physics", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8588207018748827248", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Industrial improvement systems — strategies for making a business more profitable, more efficient, or better operated — rise and fall in popularity over time. Today, the most widely known improvement systems are probably various flavors of “Lean methods," the adaptation of the Toyota Production System first made popular by the 1990 book The Machine that Changed the World. But go back to the 1950s, and efficiency experts will instead tout the benefits of “work simplification," a collection of strategies for streamlining production processes and eliminating wasteful or unnecessary steps. (Work simplification is still occasionally recommended as a method of process improvement today, including by the consultant with the unfortunate website URL One lesser known industrial improvement system that appeared and then receded in the second half of the 20th century is Group Technology. Group Technology first arose in the Soviet Union, and shares many similarities with Lean methods. But its popularity peaked in the 1980s, and today it seems mostly forgotten. It’s interesting to try and understand what made it seem compelling, and why it ultimately lost favor. Premise of Group TechnologyGroup Technology is an improvement system designed to apply to factories, machine shops, or other production operations that produce a wide variety of different parts in relatively small numbers. Unlike mass production, which can use dedicated production lines to produce large volumes of identical or near-identical goods, equipment in these high-mix, low-volume operations will be used to produce a variety of different parts or components depending on the day. A machine might be used for Part A today, Part B tomorrow, Part C the next day, and so on. The basic idea behind Group Technology is that many of the parts and components produced in these sorts of operations will share similarities. A machine shop might make 50 different types of steel bolt, depending on the exact product or the customer’s order, but while the sizes and shapes of the bolts might differ, they’ll likely all use similar materials and require the same sort of operations done in roughly the same order. These similarities can be exploited to make production operations more efficient. In Group Technology, similar parts made from similar materials and that require similar operations are grouped together (hence the name), and produced in manufacturing cells dedicated to those types of parts. These cells contain the exact machines needed, arranged in the order that they’re needed and configured to do the sorts of jobs that the parts require. This arrangement yields several benefits: Movement and travel times are reduced. Parts don’t need to be routed all over the factory, but move quickly through a series of machines dedicated to particular groups. Setup times are reduced. Machines can be configured to quickly perform the sorts of operations a particular group of parts or components requires. Work in process and cycle times are reduced. With less movement and setup time, products get routed through the necessary steps much more quickly, resulting in less inventory piling up and products getting to the customer much faster. Short cycle times allow for material to be ordered frequently in smaller batches, paced to the level of demand, making it easier to flexibly respond to market changes. Capital costs are reduced. Less work in process means smaller factories are required, and reduced setup times results in greater equipment utilization, squeezing more output from a given amount of equipment.
More generally, Group Technology aims to achieve many of the benefits of mass production in a high-mix, low-volume production operation. A brief history of Group TechnologyThe basic ideas behind Group Technology — creating dedicated production areas for similar sorts of parts — began to emerge in the early 20th century in the wake of mass production, assembly line methods.² In 1925, American engineer RE Flanders described a method of production control which emphasized “standardization of product, departmentalization by product rather than process, minimized transportation, visual control of work itself instead of remote control by records.’” In 1938, JC Kerr, another American engineer, described grouping machine tools together to “smooth the flow of production as it does in a one-product shop.” And in 1949, Swedish engineer Arn Corling described the reorganization of a Swedish bus manufacturer around principles of what he called “group production”:
But it was the Soviet Union where Group Technology as a holistic system of improvement truly emerged. In 1937 Soviet professor AP Sokolovskiy suggested that “parts of similar configuration and features should be manufactured by standard processes, thus making it possible to introduce flow line into batch production.” In 1952, Soviet engineer Group Technology Adoption in Soviet Factories Number of Soviet factories which had adopted Group Technology As it spread in the Soviet Union, Group Technology also began to take root in Europe and the US. This seems to have been partly due to broader interest in codification and classification systems that were being developed in the late 1950s and early 1960s, and partly due to Mitrov’s book The peak of Group Technology’s popularity seems to have been the 1980s.³ Up through the end of the decade, it continued to be the subject of dedicated books, and merit substantial mentions in books on adjacent subjects (such as One industry that did, and (as far as I’m aware, still does) enthusiastically adopt Group Technology is shipbuilding. Modern texts on shipbuilding, such as Why interest in Group Technology wanedIt’s not 100% clear why interest fell in Group Technology, but I have some suspicions. Many of the valuable aspects of Group Technology — using manufacturing cells, reducing work in process and cycle times, eliminating wasteful part movements, decreasing setup times, increasing machine utilization — weren’t unique to group technology, but were similarly advocated by other industrial improvement systems like Lean methods and the Theory of Constraints. (Those familiar with Lean methods will note how similar the advertised benefits of Group Technology are to Lean.) And other systems often bundled these benefits into a much sexier package. Lean methods were spread by The Machine that Changed the World, a popularization of Womack and Jones’ academic research on the Japanese Auto industry, which sold in enormous numbers, like The Goal. Both of these books encapsulate their recommendations into an easily digestible format. By contrast, what’s notable to me when reading about Group Technology is how much emphasis is immediately placed on the tedious process of part coding and classification. It often seems like developing a part coding scheme and the necessary documentation (which might entail creating thousands of new part drawings) is the main thing Group Technology efforts end up focusing on. A 1989 Given how much emphasis it places on doing tedious paperwork and software configuration, it’s not surprising to me that there were no breakout Group Technology hits like The Goal or The Machine That Changed The World, or that systems that repackaged many of Group Technology’s basic ideas, without the immense emphasis on paperwork, became more successful. 1 Scientific management isn’t shown on this graph, but its early 20th century peak is much higher than any subsequent peaks, and even following its decline it still has more frequent mentions than any other system. I suspect this is due to interest as a subject of historical study. 2 It was likely the adoption of electricity, which allowed machine tools to have their own dedicated electric motors, which made Group Technology possible. Prior to dedicated electric motors, machines were driven by belts connected to overhead drive shafts, which limited flexibility in machine arrangement. Giving each machine its own motor removed this constraint. (industrial innovation in the soviet union 106). 3 In general, the 1980s seem to have been a period of high demand for industrial improvement systems, possibly due to Construction Physics articles will always remain free, but if you find this work valuable, I encourage you to Construction Physics is produced in partnership with the Institute for Progress, a Washington, DC-based think tank. You can learn more about their work by visiting their You can also contact me on |