---
subject: "Highlights From The Comments On Supplement Labeling"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-10-26 01:20:46
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
[Original post here: 1: AvalancheGenesis
Vitamin C The supplements I find more interesting are things like melatonin for sleep, ashwagandha or Some commenters chimed in to discuss supplements that have anecdotally worked for them ( 2: Gbdub
I’ve been reading his stuff for almost ten years now. I guess at some point in reading someone’s online writings for a long time, you start to know them as a person and trust them. Some people who read my blog say they trust me - hopefully not blindly, just in the sense that they know my virtues and deficiencies and assume I’m not totally lying to them. This is how I feel about MYASD too. I said at the end that it’s probably not a problem if your supplement has +/- 25% of the active ingredient, so I don’t know where we’re disagreeing here. Also, I will never tire of reminding people that “snake oil” is closely related to fish oil - now recommended for cardiovascular problems, joint pain, mental health issues, etc - and it probably worked just as well. It got a bad reputation because people started selling fake snake oil (technically: oil from omega-3-less rattlesnakes instead of omega-3-rich water snakes), leading “snake oil” to be associated with scams and fakes. Over a hundred years, people forgot the story and started associating it with things that never worked at all. Which brings us back to our original question of whether supplement labeling is trustworthy - if people could have been sure that their snake oil contained only the snakes listed on the label, there would have been no problem! 3: Stephen Pimental
I think this is a minority position. There’s a brief discussion about it in the comments 4: Diddly (writes
The LabDoor and ConsumerLab analyses I mentioned in this post also checked for heavy metals; most of the products were at undetectable levels, and none were at dangerous ones. Still, this was just one or two dozen, and maybe a product needs some level of reputability to even make it to LabDoor, so let’s look at Diddly’s links. They make three main claims: first, supplements are contaminated with bacteria. Second, one particular supplement company had its products recalled for dangerous heavy metal contamination. Third, a study showed 5% of supplements contained arsenic above a maximum safe level. The first article says “In one assessment, researchers found bacteria in all 138 products they investigated.” I have trouble figuring out how to think about this. I take supplements sometimes. Many of my friends take supplements sometimes. According to The second article seems more serious. It’s from 2019. When I Google various permutations of “supplement dangerous lead level”, all the examples I can find of this happening in the US are still about this one case from a supplement company I’ve never heard of in 2016. In fact, what is Ton Shen Health / Life Rising, the company implicated in this? I’m having trouble figuring this out - when I My best guess is that this is one traditional Chinese medicine shaman guy in Chicago selling some supplements he made himself, mostly in his own office but also partly syndicated through local stores. Between 2016 and 2019 he screwed up and included way too much lead and poisoned three local children. And this is the example everybody gives to indict the entire supplement industry forever, and to try to scare you off from buying melatonin at Whole Foods. The third article is a study which the comment describes as showing that 5% of supplements had dangerous levels of arsenic, although it’s actually more comprehensive than that and finds similar problems with mercury, cadmium, etc. The only clue they give us as to which products were the offenders is that 11% of “Chinese, Ayurvedic, and marine” products had high arsenic levels, compared to only 3% of “North American excluding Chinese/Ayurvedic/marine” products. But if we believe them, that rules out that it’s all stuff like Ton Shen. But I would put this in context - about 33% of spices have heavy metals above safe levels,
I couldn’t find any exact lead and arsenic levels in their report to compare to those in supplements. But CR also finds that On the other hand, the worst Chinese/Ayurvedic/marine supplement had 2000 mcg of arsenic in it. That’s 2 mg. For context, a medium dose of the antipsychotic risperidone is 2 mg/day. So these supplements contained as much arsenic as a risperidone pill does of risperidone. How do you end up with that much arsenic in a pill? I think some traditional Chinese medicines might, uh, So my guess is that taking reputable North American supplements gives you about the same heavy metal risk as spices or juices, and taking Chinese or Ayurvedic supplements can potentially have a much higher risk if you’re not careful. My guess is that taking Ayurvedic supplements that have been processed and Westernized and are produced by Western companies (eg ashwagandha) is fine, but I can’t prove it. I’m mentioning this comparison because I think people tend to freak out over supplements, and if anyone hears that a supplement might have lead, they tend demand all supplements be banned, or say that you would be crazy to take them. But if they hear that apple juice or spices have the same amount of lead, then they accept it as “well, it’s hard to regulate everything perfectly, and probably most things by reputable companies are safe, whatever”. But I notice I’m trying pretty hard to defend supplements here and I might be biased. Someone else should sanity-check my work before you take it too seriously. 5: Neil Thanedar of LabDoor writes (on
I am grateful to Neil for the extra information, and I feel bad saying anything against LabDoor because I super respect their work. They’re doing something that should be done - testing and rating supplements. I hate saying anything against anybody who’s trying to do a hard thing to improve the world. I personally use LabDoor sometimes and find it very helpful. That having been said, I don’t think it’s true that it’s “only one site, Illuminate Labs”, who have expressed concern.
MYASD of Nootropics Depot
I’m also concerned by Regarding the overages, I agree that it’s better to penalize something more for an underage than an overage, but I am still not sure this is good communication. Consider for example I admit that some of these complaints are letting the perfect be the enemy of the good. Again, I use LabDoor a lot, I more or less trust their numerical results, and I think they’re a good source for people who understand what’s going on and want the specific results of specific tests. But I also worry that people who just use their letter grades without understanding what’s going on will end up confused. And for what it’s worth, Calloway Cook
For what it’s worth, LabDoor is free and ConsumerLab costs money. I give LabDoor a lot of respect for staying free and realize that this is a principled decision and makes life harder for them. But I keep hearing people I trust saying to be wary of them, so I am wary. 6: Marathon
This is a fair point, thanks. You’re a free subscriber to |