---
subject: "An Infinite Number of Leaflike Skins"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-05-11 13:01:45
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
The new technology made Honore Balzac nervous. He
Balzac’s friend, Gaspard-Félix Tournachon, who wrote the above account, drew this caricature of the great writer: Then he wrote this:
Today’s subject is not Balzac but Tournachon, the friend who not-so-gently ribbed the great novelist. As you might be able to tell from the passage above, Tournachon, who went by the pseudonym Nadar, was a wit and a weirdo. He wasn’t for everyone: his memoir, from which the above passages are taken, is either a Nadar was one of those playful artistic types who loved to toy with reality and perception, always keeping his audience guessing. He aspired to be a great writer — he Thanks for reading! If you like this post so far, you should subscribe to the newsletter. If you are really enjoying it, please consider purchasing a paid subscription. Paid subscribers — it’s only about 75 cents a week! — get access to the archives, the satisfaction of supporting work they enjoy, and my undying gratitude. To support this newsletter, please click the button below: Mid-19th-century Paris was a city on the move. Baron Georges-Eugène Haussmann was undertaking a wholesale transformation of France’s capital, turning a crowded medieval city into a spacious, modern metropolis. It was also filled with fascinating and eccentric artists and intellectuals. It was the city in which Zola, Baudelaire, and Flaubert transformed literature while Delacroix, Monet, Manet, and Courbet navigated the transition between Romanticism and Impressionism. Bohemian intellectuals competed at pushing the boundaries of polite society. Nadar thrilled at the intellectual ferment around him, and one of his first major works was a tribute to the Parisian scene. In “Nadar’s Pantheon,” he caricatured over 200 of the intellectual giants in Paris, their line snaking toward busts of the writers he considered to be the greatest: Balzac, George Sand, François-René de Chateaubriand, and Frédéric Soulié. Nadar himself sits behind a sign on the right-hand side. Fittingly for a celebration of the bohemian art scene, the Pantheon was a critical success and a financial disaster. Nadar owed a lot of money to the army of people who helped him with the lithograph and ran into legal trouble around copyrights. He sold only 136 copies of the print and had to abandon his plans to publish three additions to it. But I suspect he didn’t care much, because his creation became the talk of the town. Never one to settle down or stick with something for too long, Nadar quickly jumped to a new project. He was captivated by the inventions that were emerging all around him, and there was none more fascinating than photography. For all of human history, fleeting moments had been just that. Events in one’s life would be forgotten soon after they happened or, at best, relegated to the mists of memory. But Nadar understood that the power of photography was in its ability to make the impermanent permanent. He Nadar opened a famous photography studio in which he captured the images of many of the most famous people of his time, and next week we’ll look at those photographs. But this week, I want to dwell on Nadar’s other subjects. It makes sense, I think, to start with himself and his family. He wasn’t afraid to peel layers off of himself and sacrifice them to the camera, not if he could preserve the versions of himself that would otherwise disappear into memory. He took standard family photos, in this case with his son Paul, wife Ernestine, and brother Adrien: And this sweet photo of Paul with his dog: I like this series of Ernestine, too, much later in life: But Nadar’s self-portraits often showed him staring into the camera, an artifact, perhaps, of his famously intense personality: He wanted to capture himself from every angle: Animated, the portraits resemble an early motion picture. I love that he smiles in exactly one frame: Some of his self-portraits give us a glimpse of the way Nadar loved to make a splash. This one shows us the photographer in the costume he wore to fancy Parisian parties: an “eskimo
Sure, whatever: In addition to photography, Nadar was obsessed with flight, specifically breaking the shackles of gravity with a hot-air balloon. He joined the Society for the Encouragement of Aerial Locomotion by Means of Machines Heavier Than Air — here, he befriended Jules Verne, who named the protagonist of several novels Michael Ardan, an anagram of Nadar. Nadar took pictures of himself and Ernestine in a basket hanging from the ceiling of his studio: And posed alone in the little basket (probably a laundry hamper); he distributed this photo to get people to come to his balloon launches: Nadar really did fly, though, and became famous for his aerial exploits. This Daumier print shows him soaring above the city: He took the first aerial photographs, for the first time showing people what Paris looked like from the sky: Eventually, Nadar sunk much of his money into "Le Géant" (The Giant), a ludicrously large balloon that would carry a darkroom and a pool table. It was not a particularly airworthy vessel, and it was destroyed in a famous, harrowing accident in 1863: Nadar recorded everything, even the wreckage of his beloved balloon. The accident had almost killed him, but it also made him more famous, and Nadar knew the value of publicity. During the Prussian Siege of Paris in 1870, Nadar used smaller balloons to carry mail outside of the city, which had been cut off from the world. Unfortunately, because of the vicissitudes of the wind, he couldn’t reliably fly back into Paris with the replies — so he Nadar was obsessed with seeing Paris from strange angles. In addition to soaring above the city in a balloon, he delved into the dark spaces underground. In the early 1860s, he began taking his cameras into the catacombs and sewers that stretched beneath the city to show Parisians the secret spaces that existed under their feet. His photos of the underground were not just a creative endeavor but a technical achievement, as he invented a portable electric-lighting system to illuminate the darkened scenes. Though Nadar once called the underground world of Paris a "deformed tangle of filth and entrails beyond the imagination of Piranesi," his photos had the opposite effect, showing Parisians that the underground city was a marvel of modernity. Matthew Gandy
Nadar was especially fascinated with the catacombs underneath Paris. These ossuaries held the bones of some six million people whose remains had been moved there from overcrowded and unsafe cemeteries in the late 1700s. Their walls of skulls and bones were a powerful memento mori and a spectral vision of a secret world of the dead. Sometimes he posed a mannequin to represent the workers who had to maintain the remains: These photos fascinated Parisians, who crowded into the catacombs on the four days that they were open to the public each year. Nadar himself When he published his “Pantheon,” Nadar included himself, but more as an observer than a member of the club. But after establishing himself as Paris’ most prominent photographer and a mainstay of its strange and exciting social scene, he was worthy of inclusion in any collection of Parisian luminaries. The greatest characters of his age — and a number of fascinating ordinary people — came to his studio for a photograph, and Nadar was happy to peel away a layer of their essence in order to capture something of their character. Next week, we’ll look at Nadar’s remarkable portraiture, which peeled off so many layers from the most famous people of his era. This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are three ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: You can share the newsletter with others: You can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week! You're currently a free subscriber to |