---
subject: "It's Like if Tensegrity Were Evil"
from: "\"River Kenna from In•Star\" <riverkenna@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-15 09:56:20
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "River Kenna", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3010718370428876194", "UNREAD"]
---
I keep finding these situations that feel like catch-22s, but aren’t quite. It’s more like there’s something I want — but the very structure of my wanting is in the way of me getting it. And when I look closer at the structure of that wanting, it reveals a sprawling mycelial tangle that runs close to the center of my ego structure. And so, motivated by wanting the thing I want, I start to unwind that mycelial tangle — knowing that by the time I untangle it (and from the act of untangling it) I may well not want that outcome anymore. But it somehow tends to kind of work out? At least so far? I think? The big step, each time, is to look at the structure of my wanting, and to see what’s on the deeper layers of that structure. What do I really want? What is this surface-level desire substituting for? What void is it trying to fill? And then I can see that the substitute is precisely the thing in the way of meeting the deeper desire. Which honestly feels a little funhouse mirror-ish: the deep structure of my desire is what keeps me from getting the surface-level thing I want, and the surface-level thing I want is what’s keeping me from getting the deeper desire met. It’s like if tensegrity were evil. Oh I like that line, I’m making that the title. Roll credits. But what was I saying? Right — the substitutes. My desire for these substitutes, these surrogate wants, they take up a space that would otherwise be empty. That’s what they’re there for, to fill a void. Which, normally, makes sense. Gotta fill that void, or it’s just an open wound. But sometimes, in one’s life, it becomes possible for those voids to be filled from below, rather than above. It becomes possible for your deeper self to grow upward and fill those places where you’ve been empty for so long. (I must be feeling vulnerable about this, I changed out of first person in that paragraph. Let’s try that again.) But at this point in my life, it feels possible for some of these voids to be filled from below, rather than above. It feels possible for my deeper self to grow upward and fill those places where I’ve been empty for so long, where I’ve been plugging the space with surrogate desires for so long. But in order for my deeper self to fill that void, I have to first make it empty. I have to clear the void-filling substitutes out that void and just… feel that raw horrible emptiness I’ve spent my whole life filling because the emptiness hurts too much. I have to suck it up, empty it out, and just feel it and have faith that my intuition is right, that this place can and will be filled in a durable, healthy way — rather than getting filled with my piecemeal surrogate strategies. But in the meantime, waiting for that crack in me to close, waiting for that piece of me to grow together — it’s just me and the void, alone, hanging out, getting intimate with the apocalyptic chemistry between us, with the jagged bloody horrors we make of one another. And allowing that to be the place, the only possible place, where wholeness can knit itself together out of the mess of me. I’m not sure I’m describing this well. I’m not even sure I’m seeing it well. Though I’m certainly feeling it quite sharply, over and over again. I kind of want to give an example or two, but the best examples I can think of include stories that aren’t mine to tell and identifying details that I can’t be giving out, so. I just can’t shake this feeling, this image, that a very deep part of me is whispering up to my ego,
And I keep cleaning out part of what’s crammed in the wound, and going “there, all done.” And then the deeper part of me goes, “Sorry, no; there’s more stuff buried in there” So I dig that stuff out and go “ouch, alright, got all of it now.” And then the whisper goes, “So close, so close — but you see that bulge right there? Yeah, that’s reeeeaaally old stuff, shoved in there forever ago, and the rest of you has grown over it. …You’re gonna have to cut it out.” And then I resist, ignore, say no I’m pretty sure you’re wrong. Until it gets too obvious to ignore, and then I start the messy process of cutting away the vines and moss and heart muscle wrapped around the debris. And finally, I hope, that whispered voice turns into a sigh — and the healing can start. Infra is free and will stay free, but if you get something out of my work, consider giving something back. Share my writing with friends & followers, pick up my |