---
subject: "AI #96: o3 But Not Yet For Thee"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-12-26 20:26:17
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
The year in models certainly finished off with a bang. In this penultimate week, we get o3, which purports to give us vastly more efficient performance than o1, and also to allow us to choose to spend vastly more compute if we want a superior answer. o3 is a big deal, making big gains on coding tests, ARC and some other benchmarks. How big a deal is difficult to say given what we know now. It’s about to enter full fledged safety testing. o3 will get its own post soon, and I’m also pushing back coverage of Deliberative Alignment, OpenAI’s new alignment strategy, to incorporate into that. We also got DeepSeek v3, which claims to have trained a roughly Sonnet-strength model for only $6 million and 37b active parameters per token (671b total via mixture of experts). DeepSeek v3 gets its own brief section with the headlines, but full coverage will have to wait a week or so for reactions and for me to read the technical report. Both are potential game changers, both in their practical applications and in terms of what their existence predicts for our future. It is also too soon to know if either of them is the real deal. Both are mostly not covered here quite yet, due to the holidays. Stay tuned. Table of Contents[Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/3b6c18fc-f918-4804-b53d-9e70d7e0abf3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Make best use of your new AI agents.[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/4a3e7a9d-34c0-4935-9e0d-e9a010f64c93?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The uncanny valley of reliability.[Flash in the Pan.](https://substack.com/redirect/fb1fa70d-32a0-40da-b4c2-86ef3a35a0f8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)o1-style thinking comes to Gemini Flash. It’s doing its best.[The Six Million Dollar Model.](https://substack.com/redirect/cc7bd5ff-eab2-4375-953e-1dedd2d361d0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Can they make it faster, stronger, better, cheaper?[And I’ll Form the Head.](https://substack.com/redirect/2047d2a2-077b-434e-aefc-f93586ee5ccf?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)We all have our own mixture of experts.[Huh, Upgrades.](https://substack.com/redirect/e39b3dfc-23a5-46db-8a32-fe340773c408?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)ChatGPT can use Mac apps, unlimited (slow) holiday Sora.[o1 Reactions.](https://substack.com/redirect/301bf2e7-5bd4-4ca0-9c38-a312e233e7c8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Many really love it, others keep reporting being disappointed.[Fun With Image Generation.](https://substack.com/redirect/346a85cb-2506-40b3-b7a6-9f877bf5357a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)What is your favorite color? Blue. It’s blue.[Introducing.](https://substack.com/redirect/b212ee8b-b312-4c50-b396-d31935b5f311?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Google finally gives us LearnLM.[They Took Our Jobs.](https://substack.com/redirect/aa90574f-2a68-48c0-ae22-206afe9fc6c1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Why are you still writing your own code?[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/f27348e2-8a7e-4114-93e9-544dba259dbe?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Quick reminder that opportunity to fund things is everywhere.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/da571bcd-b925-4f53-b8fc-5fdef966cedc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Claude gets into a fight over LessWrong moderation.[You See an Agent, You Run.](https://substack.com/redirect/5203d2c0-3d2e-4e06-8d3b-34ebd16e3343?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Building effective agents by not doing so.[Another One Leaves the Bus.](https://substack.com/redirect/ef6a9cd2-76ac-4cc2-89de-0bdeb3a76168?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Alec Radford leaves OpenAI.[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/57223fdd-7419-4b82-948b-5ae29fa44ea8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Estimates of economic growth keep coming in super low.[Lock It In.](https://substack.com/redirect/83325c0b-2e0f-40e3-999b-ac8621e06547?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)What stops you from switching LLMs?[The Quest for Sane Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/38ac02d7-5395-4c8c-b29a-e9a3c64e3d71?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Sriram Krishnan joins the Trump administration.[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/7e2b9a80-cc22-4267-a5bc-c60b000d8f18?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The many faces of Yann LeCun. Anthropic’s co-founders talk.[A Tale as Old as Time.](https://substack.com/redirect/eda27457-5561-4e01-a341-761438dee892?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Ask why mostly in a predictive sense.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/38fe2e1f-dd83-4261-9d03-e67e3f5f4387?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)You won’t not wear the f***ing hat.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/4432a00d-40ce-4f62-89cc-3a1fca66bfe5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Cooperate with yourself.[People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/00d40780-b0e2-4ce5-aff6-3cab9e2197fa?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)I choose you.[The Lighter Side.](https://substack.com/redirect/44663e8b-20a1-467e-a355-22e0f9ee47cc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Please, no one call human resources.
Language Models Offer Mundane UtilityHow does your company make best use of AI agents? That all makes sense, and not only for corporations. If there’s something you want your future AIs to know, write it down in a form they can read, and try to design your workflows such that you can minimize human (your own!) touch points. To what extent are you living in the future?
What will citizenship mean in the age of AI? I have absolutely no idea. So how do you prepare for that? Largely the same goes for wellbeing. A lot of this could be thought of as: Focus on the general and the adaptable, and focus less on the specific, including things specifically for Jobs and other current forms of paid work - you want to be creative and useful and flexible and able to roll with the punches. That of course assumes that you are taking the world as given, rather than trying to change the course of history. In which case, there’s a very different calculation.
ChatGPT is a left-leaning midwit, Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
In Cursor I made an effort to split up files exactly because I found I had to always scan the file being changed to ensure it wasn’t about to go silently delete anything. The way I was doing it you didn’t have to worry it was modifying or deleting other files. On the plus side, now I know how to do reasonable version control.
Flash in the Pan
Gemini 2.0 Flash Thinking is now essentially tied at the top of the overall leaderboard with Gemini-Exp-1206, which is essentially a beta of Gemini Pro 2.0. This tells us something about the model, but also reinforces that this metric is bizarre now. It puts us in a strange spot. What is the scenario where you will want Flash Thinking rather than o1 (or o3!) and also rather than Gemini Pro, Claude Sonnet, Perplexity or GPT-4o? One cool thing about Thinking is that (like DeepSeek’s Deep Thought) it explains its chain of thought much better than o1.
That result… did not replicate when I tried it. It went off the rails, and it went off them hard. And it went off them in ways that make me skeptical that you can use this for anything of the sort. Maybe Deedy got lucky? Other reports I’ve seen are less excited about quality, and when o3 got announced it seemed everyone got distracted. What about Gemini 2.0 Experimental (e.g. the beta of Gemini 2.0 Pro, aka Gemini-1206)? It’s certainly a substantial leap over previous Gemini Pro versions and it is atop the Arena. But I don’t see much practical eagerness to use it, and I’m not sure what the use case is there where it is the right tool.
That one did replicate for me, and the logic is fine, but wow do some models make life a little tougher than it is, think faster and harder not smarter I suppose: I mean, yes, that’s all correct, but… wow.
Flash isn’t that much worse than GPT-4o in many ways, but certainly it could be better. Presumably the next step is to plug in Gemini Pro 2.0 and see what happens? Teortaxes was initially impressed, The Six Million Dollar ModelHaving no respect for American holidays,
If this performs halfway as well as its evals, this was a rather stunning success.
It’s a mixture of experts model with 671b total parameters, 37b activate per token. As always, not so fast. DeepSeek is not known to chase benchmarks, but one never knows the quality of a model until people have a chance to bang on it a bunch. If they did train a Sonnet-quality model for $6 million in compute, then that will change quite a lot of things. Essentially no one has reported back on what this model can do in practice yet, and it’ll take a while to go through the technical report, and more time to figure out how to think about the implications. And it’s Christmas. So: Check back later for more. And I’ll Form the HeadIncreasingly the correct solution to ‘what LLM or other AI product should I use?’ is ‘you should use a variety of products depending on your exact use case.’
This is mostly the same workflow I used before o1, when there was only Sonnet. I’d discuss to form a plan, then use that to craft a request, then make the edits. The swap doesn’t seem like it makes things that much trickier, the logistical trick is getting all the code implementation automated. Huh, UpgradesChatGPT picks up integration with various apps on Mac including Warp, ItelliJ Idea, PyCharm, Apple Notes, Notion, Quip and more, including via voice mode. That gives you access to outside context, including an IDE and a command line and also your notes. Windows (and presumably more apps) coming soon.
Requested upgrade: o1 Reactions
This seems like an emerging consensus of many, except different people put different barriers on the math/code category (e.g. Tyler Cowen includes economics):
Well, yeah, because it seems like it is GPT-4o under the hood?
Here’s a skeptical take.
I say Damek got his $200 worth, no? If you’re using o1 a lot, removing the limits there is already worth $200/month, even if you rarely use o1 Pro. There’s a phenomenon where people think about cost and value in terms of typical cost, rather than thinking in terms of marginal benefit. Buying relatively expensive but in absolute terms cheap things is often an amazing play - there are many things where 10x the price for 10% better is an amazing deal for you, because your consumer surplus is absolutely massive. Also, once you take 10 seconds, there’s not much marginal cost to taking 10 minutes, as I learned with Deep Research. You ask your question, you tab out, you do something else, you come back later. That said, I’m not currently paying the $200, because I don’t find myself hitting the o1 limits, and I’d mostly rather use Claude. If it gave me unlimited uses in Cursor I’d probably slam that button the moment I have the time to code again (December has been completely insane). Fun With Image Generation
There are some patterns here, especially that more powerful models seem to converge on various shades of blue, whereas less powerful models are all over the place. As I understand it, this isn’t testing orthogonality in the sense of ‘all powerful minds prefer blue’ rather it is ‘by default sufficiently powerful minds trained in the way we typically train them end up preferring blue.’ I wonder if this could be used as a quick de facto model test in some way. There was somehow a completely fake ‘true crime’ story about an 18-year-old who was supposedly paid to have sex with women in his building where the victim’s father was recording videos and selling them in Japan… Introducing
Sure, sure. But is it useful? They Took Our Jobs
He’s obviously right about this. It’s too convenient, too much faster. Indeed, I expect we’ll see a clear division between ‘code you can have the AI write’ which happens super fast, and ‘code you cannot let the AI write’ because of corporate policy or security issues, both legit and not legit, which happens the old much slower way. Complement versus supplement, economic not assuming the conclusion edition.
I can see us spending time in #1. As Roon says, AI capabilities progress has been spiky, with some human-easy tasks being hard and some human-hard tasks being easy. So the 3→1 path makes some sense, if progress isn’t too quick, including if the high complexity tasks start to cost ‘real money’ as per o3 so choosing the right questions and tasks becomes very important. Alternatively, we might get our act together enough to restrict certain cognitive tasks to humans even though AIs could do them, either for good reasons or rent seeking reasons (or even ‘good rent seeking’ reasons?) to keep us in that scenario. But yeah, the default is a rapid transition to #4, and for that to happen to all labor not only cognitive labor. Robotics is hard, it’s not impossible.
An excellent reason we still have our jobs is that people really aren’t willing to invest in getting AI to work, even when they know it exists, if it doesn’t work right away they typically give up:
Get Involved
In Other AI News
The Surface Layer are a bunch of canned phrases and actions you can trigger, and which you will often want to route around through altering context. You mostly want to avoid triggering this layer. The Character Layer, which is similar to what it sounds like in a person and their personality, which for Opus and Sonnet includes a generalized notion of what Jan calls ‘goodness’ or ‘benevolence.’ This comes from a mix of pre-training, fine-tuning and explicit instructions. The Predictive Ground Layer, the simulator, deep pattern matcher, and next word predictor. Brilliant and superhuman in some ways, strangely dense in others.
In this frame, a self-aware character layer leads to reasoning about the model’s own reasoning, and to goal driven behavior, with everything that follows from those. Jan then thinks the ground layer can also become self-aware.
In terms of traditionally trained models, though, it seems like they are now actively behind. I would much rather use Claude Sonnet 3.5 (or Gemini-1206) than GPT-4o, unless I needed something in particular from GPT-4o. On the low end, Gemini Flash is clearly ahead. OpenAI’s attempts to directly go beyond GPT-4o have, by all media accounts, faile, and Anthropic is said to be sitting on Claude Opus 3.5. OpenAI does have o1 and soon o3, where no one else has gotten there yet, no Google Flash Thinking and Deep Thought do not much count. As far as I can tell, OpenAI has made two highly successful big bets - one on scaling GPTs, and now one on the o1 series. Good choices, and both instances of throwing massively more compute at a problem, and executing well. Will this lead persist? We shall see. My hunch is that it won’t unless the lead is self-sustaining due to low-level recursive improvements. You See an Agent, You RunAnthropic offers advice on
Another One Leaves the BusA lot of people have left OpenAI. Usually it’s a safety researcher. Not this time. This time it’s Alec Radford. He’s the Canonical Brilliant AI Capabilities Researcher, whose love is by all reports doing AI research. This is especially weird given he had to have known about o3, which seems like an excellent reason to want to do your research inside OpenAI. So, well, whoops?
Quiet Speculations
Fully would of course go completely crazy. That would be that. But even a dramatic speedup would be a pretty big deal, and also fully would then not be so far behind. Reminder of the Law of However this is not fully or always the case. It would be a reasonable model to say that the big surprises follow a Poisson distribution drawn from an unknown frequency, with the magnitude of the surprise also drawn from a power distribution - which seems like a very reasonable prior. That still means every big surprise is still a big surprise, the same way that if you expect.
You should feel that shock now if you haven’t, then slowly undo some of that shock every day that the estimated date of that gets later, then have some of the shock left for when it suddenly becomes zero days or the timeline gets shorter. Updates for everyone.
Lock It In
Also like relationships with humans, including employees and friends, and so on. My guess is the lock-in will be substantial but mostly for terribly superficial reasons? For now, I think people are vastly overestimating memories. The memory functions aren’t nothing but they don’t seem to do that much. Custom instructions will always be a power user thing. Regular people don’t use custom instructions, they literally never go into the settings on any program. They certainly didn’t ‘do the work’ of customizing them to the particular AI through testing and iterations - and for those who did do that, they’d likely be down for doing it again. What I think matters more is that the UIs will be different, and the behaviors and correct prompts will be different, and people will be used to what they are used to in those ways. The flip side is that this will take place in the age of AI, and of AI agents. Imagine a world, not too long from now, where if you shift between Claude, Gemini and ChatGPT, they will ask if you want their agent to go into the browser and take care of everything to make the transition seamless and have it work like you want it to work. That doesn’t seem so unrealistic. The biggest barrier, I presume, will continue to be inertia, not doing things and not knowing why one would want to switch. Trivial inconveniences. The Quest for Sane Regulations
The choice of Sriram seems to have led to some rather wrongheaded (or worse) pushback, and for some reason a debate over H1B visas. As in, there are people who for some reason are against them, rather than the obviously correct position that we need vastly more H1B visas. I have never heard a person I respect not favor giving out far more H1B visas, once they learn what such visas are. Never.
Miles Brundage writes If you believe time is as short as Miles thinks it is, then this is very right - you need to try and get the policies in place in 2025, because after that it might be too late to matter, and the decisions made now will likely lock us down a path. Even if we have somewhat more time than that, we need to start building state capacity now.
We need a better model of what actually impacts Washington’s view of AI and what doesn’t. They end up in some rather insane places, Yo Shavit, who does policy at OpenAI, It’s a good thread, but I notice - again - that this essentially ignores the implications of AGI and ASI, in that somehow it expects to look around and see a fundamentally normal world in a way that seems weird. In the new potential ‘you get ASI but running it is super expensive’ world of o3, that seems less crazy than it does otherwise, and some of the things discussed would still apply even then. The assumption of ‘kind of normal’ is always important to note in places like this, and one should note which places that assumption has to hold and which it doesn’t. Point 5 is the most important one, and still fully holds - that technical alignment is the whole ballgame, in that if you fail at that you fail automatically (but you still have to play and win the ballgame even then!). And that we don’t know how hard this is, but we do know we have various labs (including Yo’s own OpenAI) under competitive pressures and poised to go on essentially YOLO runs to superintelligence while hoping it works out by default. Whereas what we need is either a race to what he calls ‘secure, trustworthy, reliable AGI that won’t burn us’ or ideally a more robust target than that or ideally not a race at all. And we really need to not do that - no matter how easy or hard alignment turns out to be, we need to maximize our chances of success over that uncertainty.
There are a bunch of assumptions here. Compute is not obviously the only limiting factor on ASI construction, and ASI can be used to forestall others making ASI in ways other than compute access, and also one could attempt to regulate compute. And it has an implicit ‘everything is kind of normal?’ built into it, rather than a true slow takeoff scenario.
Again there’s a kind of normality assumption here, where the ASIs remain under corporate control (and human control), and aren’t treated as taxable individuals but rather as property, the state continues to exist and collect taxes, money continues to function as expected, tax incidence and reactions to new taxes don’t transform industrial organization, and so on. Which leads us to observation three.
I agree that in the scenario type Yo Shavit is envisioning, even if you solve all the technical alignment questions in the strongest sense, if ‘things stay kind of normal’ and you allow AI sufficient personhood under the law, or allow it in practice even if it isn’t technically legal, then there is essentially zero chance of maintaining human control over the future, and probably this quickly extends to the resources required for human physical survival. I also don’t see any clear way to prevent it, in practice, no matter the law. You quickly get into a scenario where a human doing anything, or being in the loop for anything, is a kiss of death, an albatross around one’s neck. You can’t afford it. The word that baffles me here is ‘gradually.’ Why would one expect this to be gradual? I would expect it to be extremely rapid. And ‘the rule of law’ in this type of context will not do for you what you want it to do.
There are a lot of physical choke points that effectively don’t get used for that. It is not at all obvious to me that physically controlling data centers in practice gives you that much control over what gets done within them, in this future, although it does give you that option. As he notes later in that post, without collective ability to control compute and deal with or control AI agents - even in an otherwise under-control, human-in-charge scenario - anything like our current society won’t work. The point of compute governance over training rules is to do it in order to avoid other forms of compute governance over inference. If it turns out the training approach is not viable, and you want to ‘keep things looking normal’ in various ways and the humans to be in control, you’re going to need some form of collective levers over access to large amounts of compute. We are talking price.
Oh, right. That. If we don’t get technical alignment right in this scenario, then none of it matters, we’re all super dead. Even if we do, we still have all the other problems above, which essentially - and this must be stressed - assume a robust and robustly implemented technical alignment solution. Then we also need a way to turn this technical alignment into an equilibrium and dynamics where the humans are meaningfully directing the AIs in any sense. By default that doesn’t happen, even if we get technical alignment right, and that too has race dynamics. And we also need a way to prevent it being a kiss of death and albatross around your neck to have a human in the loop of any operation. That’s another race dynamic. The Week in Audio
The streams are crossing,
The details of his claim here are, shall we say, ‘incredibly inflated to the point of being distorted,’ even if you thought that there were no short term dangers until now. Also Yann LeCun this week, it’s dumber than a cat and poses no dangers, but in the coming years it will…:
At this point, I’m not mad, I’m not impressed, I’m just amused. Oh, and I’m sorry,
From a month ago, A Tale as Old as TimeA lot of stories people tell about various AI risks, and also various similar stories about humans or corporations, assume a kind of fixed, singular and conscious intentionality, in a way that mostly isn’t a thing. There will by default be a lot of motivations or causes or forces driving a behavior at once, and a lot of them won’t be intentionally chosen or stable. This is related to the idea many have that deception or betrayal or power-seeking, or any form of shenanigans, is some distinct magisteria or requires something to have gone wrong and for something to have caused it, rather than these being default things that minds tend to do whenever they interact. And I worry that we are continuing, as many were with the recent talk about shanengans in general and alignment faking in particular, getting distracted by the question of whether a particular behavior is in the service of something good, or will have good effects in a particular case. What matters is what our observations predict in the future.
Rhetorical Innovation
I know the same goes for me. If I could produce a similar output of formal papers that would of course do far more, but that’s not a thing that I could produce. On the issue of clothes, yeah, better clothes would likely be better for all three of us. I think Eliezer is right that the impact is not so large and most who claim it is a ‘but for’ are wrong about that, but on the margin it definitely helps. It’s probably worth it for Eliezer (and Miles!) and probably to a lesser extent for me as well but it would be expensive for me to get myself to do that. I admit I probably should anyway.
Careful curation can help with this, but it only goes so far. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
I agree that you don’t have any business releasing a highly capable (e.g. 5+ level) LLM whose graphs don’t look at least roughly as good as Sonnet’s here. If I had Copious Free Time I’d look into the details more here, as I’m curious about a lot of related questions. I strongly agree with McAleer here, also they’re remarkably similar so it’s barely even a pivot:
People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone
When you cling to a dim hope:
Do ask the girl out, though. The Lighter Side
I actually really liked this exchange - given the range of plausible mindsets Sam Altman might have, this was a positive update.
Okay, so the future is mostly in the future, and right now it might or might not be a bit overpriced, depending on other details. But it is super cool, and will get cheaper.
I find it fitting that Pliny has a missed call.
I mean, I don’t see why they wouldn’t like me. Everyone does. I’m a likeable guy. You're currently a free subscriber to |