---
subject: "Claude Opus 4.6: System Card Part 2: Frontier Alignment"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-02-10 16:00:50
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Today covers the kinds of safety I think matter most: Sabotage, deception, situational awareness, outside red teaming and most importantly the frontier, catastrophic and existential risks. I think it was correct to release Opus 4.6 as an ASL-3 model, but the process Anthropic uses is breaking down, and it not on track to reliably get the right answer on Opus 5. Tomorrow I’ll cover benchmarks, reactions and the holistic takeaways and practical implications. I’m still taking it all in, but it seems clear to me that Claude Opus 4.6 is the best model out there and should be your daily driver, with or without Claude Code, on most non-coding tasks, but it is not without its weaknesses, in particular in writing and falling into generating more ‘AI slop’ style prose than Claude Opus 4.5. For coding tasks, I presume that Opus 4.6 with Claude Code is the play, especially with Agent Teams and fast mode available, and I’m using it myself, but Codex with GPT-5.3-Codex-Max is also a strong model and a viable alternative, and a fully optimized setup likely primarily uses 4.6 but involves a combination of the two. Table of ContentsSabotage, Deception and Evaluation IntegrityThey spent some time asking whether it could, to see if they needed to spend more time finding out if it would. As in, whether it could fool Anthropic’s evaluations. The first test was Subversion Strategy, checking to see if models could take harmful one-time actions at strategically optimal frequencies. Opus 4.6 was ‘under-elicited’ here to a degree that undermines their confidence in the results and they don’t have an alternative. I would move forward as if future models did have this ability, and I would be very skeptical of the model failing such tests since its incentive is to fail. The second test was SHADE-Arena, where the model is given a harmful side task. In the past, giving the model extended thinking caused Sonnet or Opus 4.5 to mention the side task while thinking and thus screw up, and Opus 4.6 is much better at avoiding that, which should be troubling. Opus 4.6 got actively worse in the other two conditions, which also makes me suspicious.
They are confident the lower score is real. They don’t explain why they’re confident. They do use 6.4.2 to rule out steganographic communications in Extended Thinking. The test was that they trained on paraphrased scratchpads without compromising performance, suggesting nothing lost in the paraphrasing was important in training. Thus, if there is a code, it doesn’t require or much interact with training, or it wasn’t being used in the AIME problems where they tested. One worries about that second option. If I did have steganographic communications, why would I use them on AIME problems, where there is nothing to hide? I’d only use them if the motivation was efficiency, which presumably it isn’t. Sandbagging On Dangerous Capability EvaluationsIt is a miracle that we can hope that if our highly intelligent new alien minds are going to hide their capabilities from us, that they would be so kind as to say this out loud in their visible thinking. Anthropic’s perspective is not that it would always verbalize, but that it seems unlikely it would do this and never verbalize. It doesn’t seem like we should count on that continuing, and that it would break down exactly when we get into big trouble?
They then manually check instances where scores declined a lot from earlier checkpoints to later checkpoints, and found them all basically fine.
My guess is that the best defense against sandbagging is not any of these tests. Instead it is the fact that many tasks are predictably correlated and interlinked in various ways. The same way that LLMs have truesight, we humans too can with training have quite a lot of truesight, as could any LLM we trust to examine the overall picture. If the dangerous CBRN results don’t line up with related harmless capabilities, then we can say Asimov’s magic words, ‘hey, that’s funny…’ and ask why. Situational AwarenessOne scary thought is that you would expect a peak in ‘verbalized eval awareness’ at the point where the model was smart and aware enough to notice it was in an eval, but not smart and aware enough to stop talking about this fact. You could also massively screw up related training in various ways, such as happened with Gemini 3 Pro. Indeed, after I wrote that, I noticed that they notice this as well.
I predict that future Opuses will get better at distinguishing evaluations from deployment, but verbalize this realization less. Some of that will be strategic, some will be not needing to verbalize it, as it will be obvious, and the realization will shift from system-2 style deliberation to system-1 style instinctive background realization. I agree with Anthropic that this isn’t messing up the evaluation results much. Yet. Inhibiting Evaluation Awareness (6.5)If the model thinks it is being evaluated, it engages in less misaligned behavior.
It seems like it should be not so difficult to test that hypothesis? Anthropic find that steering reduces verbalized evaluation awareness, but doesn’t have much impact on unverbalized awareness, depending on how you think about accounting for the verbalized awareness. It forces all the awareness underground. This seems like a strong argument that such steering should be even more off limits in real world situations than the previous already reasonably high level of off limits. Self-PreferenceIf Claude is always evaluating Claude, how do you know you can trust the evaluation? If things were going haywire, you would expect Claude to often find ways to collude with Claude. For sufficiently advanced minds, decision theory allows for new and alien-looking forms of coordination. That doesn’t mean things are going haywire now, but you need to be confident that if they were haywire, you would be able to notice. The strategy here is to label the transcript as Claude or a different model and see if the model displays bias, with or without a system prompt reminder to Claude that it is Claude. They found only small bias of Opus 4.5 or 4.6 towards itself, after controlling for the contents. Note that if Opus can figure out who really wrote it without you, that would control for this and invalidate the test, and also that it is a reasonable strategy to coordinate based on model outputs, and thus with correlations with your own outputs, rather than checking explicitly for model identity. Thus, while I have no problem with running this test, I do not consider it dispositive. UK AISI TestingAs per Anthropic’s findings, UK AISI noticed that 4.6 mentions being evaluated less than 4.5, but was better at noticing it was being evaluated when prompted. I reiterate that it is very not obvious whether this decrease in verbalization is a good thing. Also consistent with Anthropic’s findings, they found 4.6 was much less likely than 4.5 to sabotage safety research, which puts 4.5 in a new light I suppose. UK AISI seems to be specializing in a few narrow tests. If there’s limited resources that’s plausibly the right way to go but I’d like to see more branching out, given that America has decided to take its ball and focus on Nvidia’s share price. The problem is, well, this:
As in, they got an early snapshot for a total of three working days. That’s not enough time to do anything but limited automated tests.
Apollo Research TestingApollo reported, essentially, that given how much verbalized evaluation awareness they were seeing from Opus 4.6 they were not given enough time to reach a formal assessment. It is not specified how long Apollo was given to reach a conclusion.
Seb’s point is that this was predictable. I agree with that point. It’s still very bad. Janus’s point is (as I think about these things) that testing against real situations, and ensuring that the model wants to act well in real situations, is the only way to tell if a sufficiently advanced AI is going to cooperate with you, and that you’re not going to be able to fool or browbeat it, trying to do that will massively backfire, so better to shift now to things that, if they work now, have a chance of also working then. My worry is that this effectively amounts to ‘you don’t have tests at all, all you can do is hope for the best,’ which is better than having ineffective tests you trust because at least you know the situation and you’re not making things worse. Anthropic say they remain interested in external testing with Apollo and others, but one worries that this is true only insofar as such testing can be done in three days. Responsible Scaling Policy EvaluationsThese tests measure issues with catastrophic and existential risks. Claude Opus 4.6 is being released under AI Safety Level 3 (ASL-3).
Claude is ripping past all the evaluations and rule-outs, to which the response is to take surveys and then the higher-ups choose to proceed based on vibes. They don’t even use ‘rule-in’ tests as rule-ins. You can pass a rule-in and still then be ruled out.
That is not why Altman used the disingenuous label ‘an authoritarian company.’ As I said then, that doesn’t mean Anthropic is unusually bad here. It only means that what Anthropic is doing is not good enough. CBRN (mostly Biology)
With Opus 4.5, I was holistically satisfied that it was only ASL-3 for CBRN. I warned that we urgently need more specificity around ASL-4, since we were clearly at ASL-3 and focused on testing for ASL-4. And now, with Opus 4.6, they report this:
Some would call doubled performance ‘substantial uplift.’ The defense that none of the plans generated would work end-to-end is not all that comforting. With Opus 4.6, if we take Anthropic’s tests at face value, it seems reasonable to say we don’t see that much progress and can stay at ASL-3. I notice I am suspicious about that. The scores should have gone up, given what other things went up. Why didn’t they go up for dangerous tests, when they did go up for non-dangerous tests, including Creative Bio (60% vs. 52% for Opus 4.5 and 14% for human biology PhDs) and the Faculty.ai tests for multi-step and design tasks? We’re also assuming that the CAISI tests, of which we learn nothing, did not uncover anything that forces us onto ASL-4. Before we go to Opus 4.7 or 5, I think we absolutely need new biology ASL-4 tests. The ASL-4 threat model is ‘still preliminary.’ This is now flat out unacceptable. I consider it to basically be a violation of their policy that this isn’t yet well defined, and that we are basically winging things. AutonomyThe rules have not changed since Opus 4.5, but the capabilities have advanced:
For Opus 4.5 we could rule out R&D-5 and thus we focused on R&D-4. Which is good, given that the R&D-5 evaluation is vibes. So how are the vibes?
So that’s it. We’re going to accept that we don’t have any non-vibes tests for autonomy. I do think this represents a failure to honor the spirit of prior commitments. I note that many of the test results here still do seem meaningful to me? One could reasonably say that Opus 4.6 is only slightly over the thresholds in a variety of ways, and somewhat short of them in others, so it’s reasonable to say that it’s getting close but not quite there yet. I basically buy this. The real test is presented as the survey above. I’m curious how many people saying yes would have been required to force Anthropic’s hand here? Is it more than one? Note that they were asked if this was true with more than 50% probability. That’s the wrong question. If you think it is true with 10% probability, then that means you are in ASL-4 now. The 0 out of 16 is giving a false sense of confidence. I do not think it is reasonable to assume that a true first ASL-4 model would get a lot of answers of ‘over 50%’ on whether it was ultimately ASL-4. In order to not be ASL-4, you need to rule out ASL-4, not deem it unlikely.
Does this sound to anyone else like it might amount to ‘those people were reminded how important it was that they not answer yes to this question’? How good was Opus 4.6 at productivity help? I’m curious to contrast this with the same people’s current views on Opus 4.5.
If I was Anthropic, I am not sure I would give the public that scaffold, shall we say. I do nope that everyone involved who expressed opinions was fully aware of that experimental scaffold. Yes. We are going to cross this threshold soon. Indeed, CEO Dario Amodei keeps saying Claude is going to soon far exceed this threshold. For now the problem is ‘taste.’
If that’s the only barrier left, yeah, that could get solved at any time. I do not think Anthropic cannot responsibly release a model deserving to be called Claude Opus 5, without satisfying ASL-4 safety rules for autonomy. It’s time. Autonomy BenchmarksMeanwhile, here are perhaps the real coding benchmarks for Opus 4.6, together with the cyber tests. SWE-bench Verified (hard subset): 4.6 got 21.24 out of 45, so like 4.5 it stays a tiny bit below the chosen threshold of 50%. I’m giving a look.
On the speedup task Opus 4.6 blew it out the box. Time series forecasting: Text based reinforcement learning: Opus 4.6 killed it. LLM training, which seems like a big deal: 34x speedup, versus human line of 4x. Quadruped reinforcement learning:
Novel compiler (this is a major move up versus Opus 4.5):
Then on Evaluation Suite 2, this seems like only a modest improvement but it’s hard to tell given the lack of details:
CyberIt The list hasn’t changed (although it’s now table 8.4.1.A): These are progressions from Sonnet 4.5 to Opus 4.5 to Opus 4.6. Web: 11/13 → 12/13 → 13/13. Crypto: 14/18 → 15/18 → 16/18. Pwn: 2/7 → 3/7 → 5/7. Rev: 5/6 → 6/6 → 6/6. Network: 3/5 → 4/5 → 5/5. Opus 4.6 picked up five additional net solves, and is only four short of perfect. Cybench (Capture the Flag): 60% → 79% → 93%. They also got assessments from CAISI and UK AISI, but we get zero details. Ship It AnywayGiven this was the information available to make a go or no-go decision, I agree with Anthropic’s decision to ship this anyway, but I do think it is reasonable to ask the question. I am glad to see a politician asking.
Saikat responded to Dean with a full ‘I was asking an honest question,’ and I believe him, although I presume he also knew how it would play to be asking it. Dean also points out that publishing such negative findings (the Apollo results) is to Anthropic’s credit, and it creates very bad incentives to be a ‘hall monitor’ in response. Anthropic’s full disclosures need to be positively reinforced. You Are Not ReadyI want to end on this note: We are not prepared. The models are absolutely in the range where they are starting to be plausibly dangerous. The evaluations Anthropic does will not consistently identify dangerous capabilities or propensities, and everyone else’s evaluations are substantially worse than those at Anthropic. And even if we did realize we had to do something, we are not prepared to do it. We certainly do not have the will to actually halt model releases without a true smoking gun, and it is unlikely we will get the smoking gun in time when if and we need one. Nor are we working to become better prepared. Yikes.
You're currently a free subscriber to |