---
subject: "OpenAI #14: OpenAI Descends Into Paranoia and Bad Faith Lobbying"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-09-08 18:59:59
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
I am a little late to the party on several key developments at OpenAI: OpenAI’s Chief Global Affairs Officer Chris Lehane was central to the creation of the new $100 million PAC where they will partner with a16z to oppose any and all attempts of states to regulate AI in any way for any reason. Effectively as part of that effort, OpenAI sent a deeply bad faith letter to Governor Newsom opposing SB 53. OpenAI seemingly has embraced descending fully into paranoia around various nonprofit organizations and also Effective Altruism in general, or at least is engaging in rhetoric and legal action to that effect, joining the style of Obvious Nonsense rhetoric about this previously mostly used by a16z.
This is deeply troubling news. It is substantially worse than I was expecting of them. Which is presumably my mistake. This post covers those events, along with further developments around two recent tragic suicides where ChatGPT was plausibly at fault for what went down, including harsh words from multiple attorneys general who can veto OpenAI’s conversion to a for-profit company. A Brief History of OpenAI Lobbying
[Submitted an American AI Action Plan](https://substack.com/redirect/0886c48f-ba4e-47f1-8377-610eb6b18f3b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)proposal that went full jingoist, framing AI as a race against the CCP in which we must prevail, with intentionally toxic vibes throughout.Requested immunity from all AI regulations. Attempted to ban DeepSeek using bad faith arguments. Demanded absolute fair use, for free, for all AI training, or else. Also included some reasonable technocratic proposals, such as a National Transmission Highway Act, AI Opportunity Zones, along with some I think are worse on the merits such as their ‘national AI readiness strategy.’
[This article claims](https://substack.com/redirect/8d085015-544c-4112-9873-f0634c549f6e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)both OpenAI and Microsoft were central in lobbying to take any meaningful requirements for foundation models out of the EU’s AI Act. If I was a board member, I would see this as incompatible with the OpenAI charter. This was then[fleshed out further in the OpenAI Files](https://substack.com/redirect/5adf36ea-6b00-4ef6-a5c6-7cfd75c1568a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)and in[this article from Corporate Europe Observatory](https://substack.com/redirect/8d085015-544c-4112-9873-f0634c549f6e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).OpenAI lobbied against SB 1047, both reasonably and unreasonably. OpenAI’s CEO Sam Altman has over time used increasingly jingoistic language throughout his talks, has used steadily less talk about
OpenAI’s Latest Bad Faith Lobbying AttemptOpenAI’s Chief Global Affairs Officer, Christopher Lehane, OpenAI’s previous lobbying efforts were in bad faith. This is substantially worse. Here is the key ask from OpenAI, bold in original:
As in, California should abdicate its responsibilities entirely, and treat giving lip service to the EU’s Code of Practice (not even actually complying with it!) as sufficient to satisfy California on all fronts. It also says that if a company makes any voluntary agreement with the Federal Government on anything safety related, then that too should satisfy all requirements. This is very close to saying California should have no AI safety regulations at all. The rhetoric behind this request is what you would expect. You’ve got: The jingoism. The talk about ‘innovation.’ The Obvious Nonsense threats about this slowing down progress or causing people to withdraw from California. The talk about Federal leadership on regulation without any talk of what that would look like while the only Federal proposal that ever got traction was ‘ban the states from acting and still don’t do anything on the Federal level.’ The talk about burden on ‘small developers’ when to be covered by SB 53 at all you now have to spend a full $500 million in training compute, and the only substantive expense (the outside audits) are entirely gone. The false claim that California lacks state capacity to handle this, and the false assurance us the EU and Federal Government have totally have what they need. The talk of a ‘California approach’ which here means ‘do nothing.’
They even try to equate SB 53 to CEQA, which is a non-sequitur. They equate OpenAI’s ‘commitment to work with’ the US federal government in ways that likely amount to running some bespoke tests focused on national security concerns as equivalent to being under a comprehensive regulatory regime, and as a substitute for SB 53 including its transparency requirements. They emphasize that they are a non-profit, while trying to transform themselves into a for-profit and expropriate most of the non-profit’s wealth for private gain. Plus we have again the important misstatement of OpenAI’s mission.
That is very importantly not the same thing. The best way to ensure AGI benefits all of humanity could importantly be to not build it. Also as you would expect, the letter does not, anywhere, explain why the even fully complying with Code of Practice, let alone any future unspecified voluntary safety-oriented agreement, would satisfy the policy goals behind SB 53. Because very obviously, if you read the Code of Practice and SB 53, they wouldn’t. Miles Brundage
He also goes into detail about the various bad faith provisions. OpenAI Descends Into Paranoia and Legally Attacks NonprofitsThese four things can be true at once. OpenAI has several competitors that strongly dislike OpenAI and Sam Altman, for a combination of reasons with varying amounts of merit. Elon Musk’s lawsuits against OpenAI are often without legal merit, although the objections to OpenAI’s conversion to for-profit were ruled by the judge to absolutely have merit, with the question mainly being if Musk had standing. There are many other complaints about OpenAI that have a lot or merit. AI might kill everyone and you might want to work to prevent this without having it out for OpenAI in particular or being funded by OpenAI’s competitors.
OpenAI seems, Of course a lot of us, as the primary example, are going to take issue with OpenAI’s attempt to convert from a non-profit to a for-profit while engaging in one of the biggest thefts in human history by expropriating most of the nonprofit’s financial assets, worth hundreds of billions, for private gain. That opposition has very little to do with Elon Musk.
This has long been the Obvious Nonsense a16z line, but now OpenAI is joining them via being part of the ‘Leading the Future’ super PAC. If this was merely Brockman contributing it would be one thing, but no, it’s far beyond that:
Meanwhile, OpenAI is treating everyone who opposes their transition to a for-profit as if they have to be part of this kind of vast conspiracy.
No, these groups were not (as far as I or anyone else can tell) funded by or working in concert with Musk. The suspicions that Meta was involved, including in Encode which is attempting to push forward SB 53, are not simply paranoid, they flat out don’t make any sense. Nor does the claim about Musk, either, given how he handles opposition:
I’m more concerned about OpenAI because I think they matter far more than xAI, but pound for pound xAI is by far the bigger menace acting far less responsibly, and most safety organizations in this supposed conspiracy will tell you that if you ask them, and act accordingly when the questions come up.
OpenAI’s paranoia started with CANI, and then extended to Encode, and then to LASST.
The hits keep coming as the a16z-level paranoid about EA being a ‘vast conspiracy’ kicks into high gear , such as the idea that Dustin Moskovitz doesn’t care about AI safety, he’s going after them because of his stake in Anthropic, can you possibly be serious right now, why do you think he invested in Anthropic.
Never mind that Anthropic has not supported Moskovitz on AI regulation, and that the regulatory interventions funded by Moskovitz would constantly (aside from any role in trying to stop OpenAI’s for-profit conversion) be bad for Anthropic’s commercial outlook.
Companies do this sort of thing all the time. This case is still very brazen, and very obvious, and OpenAI has now jumped into a16z levels of paranoia and bad faith between the lawfare, the funding of the new PAC and their letter on SB 53. Suing and attacking nonprofits engaging in advocacy is a new low. Compare that to the situation with Daniel Kokotajlo, where OpenAI to its credit once confronted with its bad behavior backed down rather than going on a legal offensive.
Is The OpenAI Paranoia Real?As in, do OpenAI and Sam Altman believe these false paranoid conspiracy theories? I have long wondered the same thing about Marc Andreessen and a16z, and others who say there is a ‘vast conspiracy’ out there by which they mean Effective Altruism (EA), or when they claim it’s all some plot to make money. I mean, these people are way too smart and knowledgeable to actually believe that, asks Padme, right? And certainly Sam Altman and OpenAI have to know better. Wouldn’t the more plausible theory be that these people are simply lying? That Lehane doesn’t believe in a ‘vast EA conspiracy’ any more than he believed in a ‘vast right-wing conspiracy’ when he coined the term ‘vast right-wing conspiracy’ about the (we now know very true) allegations around Monica Lewinsky. It’s an op. It’s rhetoric. It’s people saying what they think will work to get them what they want. It’s not hard to make that story make sense. Then again, maybe they do really believe it, or at least aren’t sure? People often believe genuinely crazy things that do not in any way map to reality, especially once politics starts to get involved. And I can see how going up against Elon Musk and being engaged in one the biggest heists in human history in broad daylight, while trying to build superintelligence that poses existential risks to humanity that a lot of people are very worried about and that also will have more upside than anything ever, could combine to make anyone paranoid. Highly understandable and sympathetic. Or, of course, they could have been talking to their own AIs about these questions. I hear there are some major sycophancy issues there. One must be careful. I sincerely hope that those involved here are lying. It beats the alternatives. The District Attorneys Are Not Happy With OpenAIIt seems that OpenAI’s failures on sycophancy and dealing with suicidality Maybe they will take OpenAI’s charitable mission seriously after all, at least in this way, despite presumably not understanding the full stakes involved and having the wrong idea about what kind of safety matters?
OpenAI Responds With Parental ControlsWith a lawsuit filed that OpenAI might well lose and the the two attorney generals that can veto its restructuring breathing down OpenAI’s neck, Their first announcement on August 26 included these plans:
Better late than never on that one, I suppose. That is indeed why I am relatively not so worried about problems like this, we can adjust after things start to go wrong.
On September 2 they followed up with additional information about how they are ‘
Parental controls seem like an excellent idea. I would consider most of this to effectively be ‘on by default’ already, for everyone, in the sense that AI models have controls against things like NSFW content that largely treat us all like teens. You could certainly tighten them up more for an actual teen, and it seems fine to give parents the option, although mostly I think you’re better off not doing that. I Spy With My AIThe big new thing is the notification feature. That is a double edged sword. As I’ve discussed previously, an AI or other source of help that can ‘rat you out’ to authorities, even ‘for your own good’ or ‘in moments of acute distress’ is inherently very different from a place where your secrets are safe. There is a reason we have confidentiality for psychologists and lawyers and priests, and balancing when to break that is complicated. Given an AI’s current level of reliability and its special role as a place free from human judgment or social consequence, I am actually in favor of it outright never altering others without an explicit user request to do so. Whereas things are moving in the other direction, with predictable results. As in, OpenAI is already scanning your chats as per their posts I discussed above.
They are not directing self-harm cases to protect privacy, but harm to others is deemed different. That still destroys the privacy of the interaction. And ‘harm to others’ could rapidly morph into any number of places, both with false positives and also with changes in ideas about what constitutes ‘harm.’ They’re not even talking about felonies or imminent physical harm. They’re talking about ‘engage in unauthorized activities that violate the security of any service or system,’ or ‘destroy property,’ so this could potentially extend quite far, and in places that seem far less justified than intervening in response a potentially suicidal user. These are circumstances in which typical privileged communication would hold. I very much do not like where that is going, and if I heard reports this was happening on the regular it would fundamentally alter my relationship to ChatGPT, even though I ‘have nothing to hide.’ What’s most weird about this is that OpenAI was recently advocating for ‘AI privilege.’
This is partially a case of ‘if I’m not legally forbidden to do [X] then I will get blamed for not doing [X] so please ban me from doing it’ so it’s not as hypocritical as it sounds. It is still rather hypocritical and confusing to escalate like this. Why respond to suicides by warning you will be scanning for harm to others and intent to impact the security of systems, but definitely not acting if someone is suicidal? If you think AI users deserve privilege, and I think this is a highly reasonable position, then act like it. Set a good example, set a very high bar for ratting, and confine alerting human reviewers let alone the authorities to when you catch someone on the level of trying to make a nuke or a bioweapon, or at minimum things that would force a psychologist to break privilege. It’s even good for business.
Some People Still Think OpenAI Is Some Sort Of Safety Company?
I think that’s going too far. It’s not good to hate with a passion. Even more than that, you could do so, so much worse than OpenAI on all of these questions (e.g. Meta, or xAI, or every major Chinese lab, basically everyone except Anthropic or Google is worse). Certainly we think OpenAI is on net not helping and deeply inadequate to the task, their political lobbying and rhetoric is harmful, and their efforts have generally made the world a lot less safe. They still are doing a lot of good work, making a lot of good decisions, and I believe that Altman is normative, that he is far more aware of what is coming and the problems we will face than most or than he currently lets on. I believe he is doing a much better job on these fronts than most (but not all) plausible CEOs of OpenAI would do in his place. For example, if OpenAI’s CEO of Applications Fidji Simo were in charge, or Chairman of the Board Bret Taylor were in charge, or Greg Brockman was in charge, or the CEO of any of the magnificent seven were in charge, I would expect OpenAI to act far less responsibly. Thus I consider myself relatively well-inclined towards OpenAI among those worried about AI or advocating or AI safety. I still have an entire series of posts about how terrible things have been at OpenAI and a regular section about them called ‘The Mask Comes Off.’ And I find myself forced to update my view importantly downward, towards being more concerned, in the wake of the recent events described in this post. OpenAI is steadily becoming more of a bad faith actor in the public sphere. You're currently a free subscriber to |