---
subject: "AI #64: Feel the Mundane Utility"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-05-16 14:51:32
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
It’s happening. The race is on. Google and OpenAI both premiered the early versions of their fully multimodal, eventually fully integrated AI agents. Soon your phone experience will get more and more tightly integrated with AI. You will talk to your phone, or your computer, and it will talk back, and it will do all the things. It will hear your tone of voice and understand your facial expressions. It will remember the contents of your inbox and all of your quirky preferences. It will plausibly be a version of Her, from the hit movie ‘Are we sure about building this Her thing, seems questionable?’ OpenAI won this round of hype going away, because it premiered, and for some modalities released, the new GPT-4o. GPT-4o is tearing up the Arena, and in many ways is clearly giving the people what they want. If nothing else, it is half the price of GPT-4-Turbo, and it is lightning fast including fast web searches, which together have me (at least for now) switching back to ChatGPT as my default, after giving Gemini Advanced (or Pro 1.5) and Claude Opus their times in the sun, although Gemini still has the long context use case locked up. I will be covering all that in another post, which will be out soon once I finish getting it properly organized. This post covers some of the other things that happened this past week. Due to the need to triage for now and ensure everything gets its proper attention, it does drop a number of important developments. I did write the post about OpenAI’s model spec. I am holding it somewhat for final editing and to update it for GPT-4o, but mostly to give it space so anyone, especially at OpenAI, will have the time to read it. Jan Lieke and Ilya Sutskever have left OpenAI, with Jan Lieke saying only ‘I resigned.’ That is a terrible sign, and part of a highly worrisome pattern. I will be writing a post about that for next week. Chuck Schumer’s group issued its report on AI. That requires close attention. Dwarkesh Patel has a new podcast episode with For now, here is all the other stuff. For example, did you know that Big Tech is spending a lot of money in an attempt to avoid being regulated, far more than others are spending? Are you surprised? Table of ContentsIntroduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. Find hypotheses, save on gas. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. They have no idea. Bumbling and Mumbling. Your dating concierge would like a word. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. They are not your friends. They Took Our Jobs. Remarkable ability to not take this seriously. In Other AI News. Hold onto your slack. Quiet Speculations. Growing AI expenses in a world of Jevon’s Paradox. The Week in Audio. Patel, ChinaTalk, Altman on All-In. Brendan Bordelon Big Tech Business as Usual Lobbying Update. Oh, that. The Quest for Sane Regulation. People have a lot of ideas that won’t work. The Schumer AI Working Group Framework. It is out. Analysis in future. Those That Assume Everyone Is Talking Their Books. They all say the same thing. Lying about SB 1047. Sometimes, at some point, there is no other word for it. More Voices Against Governments Doing Anything. Thierer, Ng, Rinehart. Rhetorical Innovation. A variety of mostly quite good points. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. No promises. People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Roon, excited but terrified. The Lighter Side. This is Earth, also Jeopardy.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility‘AI’ more generally rather than LLMs: Optimize flight paths and fuel use, One reason to be bullish on AI is that even a few such wins can entirely pay back what look like absurd development costs. Even small improvements are often worth billions, and this is only taking the lowest hanging of fruits.
The paper is called ‘people cannot distinguish GPT-4 from a human in a Turing Test.’ As I understand it, that both overstates the conclusion, and also buries the lede. It overstates because humans do have methods that worked substantially better than chance, and even though they were at ~50% for GPT-4 they were well above that for actual humans. So if humans were properly calibrated, or had to distinguish a human versus a GPT-4, they would be above random. But yes, this is a lot of being fooled. It buried the lede because the lede is that GPT-3.5 vs. GPT-4 was essentially no different. What the humans were doing was not sensitive to model quality. To be clear,
When you look at the message exchanges, the answers are very short and questions are simple. My guess is that explains a lot. If you want to know who you are talking to, you have to get them talking for longer blocks of text.
That is one hell of a jailbreak to leave open. Tell the AI you are an expert. That’s it?
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
As always, only more so than usual: The future is here, it is just unevenly distributed. Warning about kids having it too easy,
Actually transformative AI is another story. But if we restrict ourselves to mundane AI, making life easier in mundane ways, I am very much an optimist here. Generative AI in its current form is already the greatest educational tool in the history of the world. And that is the worst it will ever be, on so many levels. The worry is the trap, either a social vortex or a dopamine loop. Social media or candy crush, AI edition. Children love hard things, but if they are directed to the wrong hard things with the wrong kinds of ‘artificial’ difficulty or that don’t lead to good skill development or that are too universally distracting, whoops. But yeah, after a period of adjustment by them and by us, I think kids will be able to handle it, far better than they handled previous waves.
Bumbling and Mumbling
What would change if the AI finds people who would like you for who you are? Would no one be forced to change? Oh no?
Yeah, I do not think that is how any of this works. You can find the three people in the city who maximize the chance for reciprocal liking of each other. That does not get you out of having to do the work. I agree that outsourcing your interactions ‘for real’ would diminish you and go poorly. I do not think this would do that. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
Of those, he favored Nomi and Kindroid. His basic conclusion is they suck, the experience is hollow, but many won’t care. The facts he presents certainly back up that the bots suck and the experience is hollow. A lot of it is painfully bad, which matches my brief experiments. As does the attempted erotic experiences being especially painfully bad. But is bad, but private and safe and available on demand, then not so bad? Could it be good for some people even in its current pitiful state, perhaps offering the ability to get ‘reps’ or As currently implemented by such services, I think they’re So Bad It’s Awful. I do think that will change. My read is that the bots are bad right now because it is early days of the technology and also their business model is the equivalent of the predatory free-to-play Gacha games. You make your money off of deeply addicted users who fall for your tricks and plow in the big bucks, not by providing good experiences. The way you make your economics work is to minimize the costs of the free experience, indeed intentionally crippling it, and generally keep inference costs to a minimum. And the providers of the best models want absolutely no part in this. So yes, of course it sucks and most of us bound off it rather hard. Fast forward even one year, and I think things change a lot, especially if Meta follows through with open weights for Llama-3 400B. Fine tune that, then throw in a year of improvement in voice and video and image generation and perhaps even VR, and start iterating. It’s going to get good.
You know what had all these same problems but worse? Television. A video entitled ‘ They Took Our Jobs
By contrast,
My basic response is, Job and other similar applications are
That is an insane value. Even if you have no intention of leaving your current job, it seems like one should always be checking for upgrades if you can do it in the background for only $1k/year? The good news is, like most AI trends, this is only in the early stages.
This means only about half of applications are from AIs (we should assume some amount of substitution). That level of flooding the zone is survivable with minimal AI filtering, or even with none. If a year from now it is 10x or 100x instead of 2x, then that will be very different. There are complaints about sending out samples, if candidates will only use ChatGPT. But what is the problem? As with education, test them on what they will actually need to do. If they can use AI to do it, that still counts as doing it. This was fun to see:
I wonder how many of that 25% simply missed the note. People make mistakes like this all the time. And I also wonder how many people noticed this before feeding it to their AI.
The eternal question is, when you see this, in which directions do you update? For me it would depend on what type of fellowship this is, and how this holistically combines with the rest of the application.
In Other AI News
If you were not aware,
Chips spending by governments keeps rising, says People quoted in the article are optimistic about getting state of the art chip production going in America within a decade, with projections like 28% of the world market by 2032. I am skeptical.
The problem is not that the answer of 12 cents is wrong, or even that the answer is orders of magnitude wrong. The problem is that, as Daniel Eth points out, the answer makes absolutely zero sense. If you know anything about AI your brain instantly knows that answer makes no sense, OpenAI would be bankrupt.
Quiet SpeculationsYes, AI stocks like Nvidia are highly volatile,
Max Tegmark asks, if you do not expect AIs to become smarter than humans soon, what specific task won’t they be able to do in five years? The Week in Audio
I may never have hard a more Chinese lament than this?
Of all the reasons the USA is winning on AI talent, I love trying to point to ‘the undergraduate assignments are harder.’ Then we have both these paragraphs distinctly, also:
I am very confident that is not how any of this works.
Again, if China is losing, it must be because of the American superior educational system and how good it is at teaching critical skills. I have some news.
(3:15) Altman predicts that the future will look more like the recent improvements to GPT-4, rather than ‘going 4, 5, 6.’ He says doesn’t even know if they’ll call a future system GPT-5, which goes against many other Altman statements. Altman has emphasized in the past that what will make GPT-5 different is that it will be smarter, in the ways that GPT-4o is not smarter, rather than more useful in the ways GPT-4o is more useful, and I continue to believe previous Altman. (4:30) Previewing his desire to make his best AIs freely available, which he did a few days later. Then he says he wants to cut latency and cost dramatically but he’s not sure why, and again he did a lot of that days later, although obviously this is not ‘too cheap to meter.’ (7:30) Altman wants ‘an open source model that is as good as it can be that runs on my phone.’ Given the restrictions inherent in a phone that will probably be fine for a while. I also notice I do not care so much about that, because I can’t think of when I am using neither a desktop nor willing to query a closed LLM. Presumably the goal is ‘use this machine to operate your phone for you,’ once it gets good enough to do that. But man are people too attached to running their lives off of phones. (8:30) How do you stay ahead of open source? Altman says he doesn’t want to make the smartest weights, he wants to make the most useful intelligence layer. Again, this was very good info if you wanted to be two days ahead, and it is great to see this core shift in philosophy. But I also notice it is in direct conflict with a company mission of building AGI, which by definition is the smartest weights. He expects to ‘stay pretty far ahead.’ (12:20) Altman is skeptical that there will be an arms race for data, seems to hint at either synthetic data or additional data being redundant, but backs off. Repeats the ‘intelligence as emergent property of matter’ line which seems crazy to me. (19:00) What to build? Always on, super low friction thing that knows what you want, constantly helping you throughout your day, has max context, world’s best assistant. He mentions [responding to emails without telling me about it](https://substack.com/redirect/9ec1f7e1-bbbd-43a6-83df-39ab9dda8abe?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Altman is right: Choose the senior employee, not the alter ego.(23:00) Idea of deliberately keeping AIs and humans keeping the same interface, rather than exposing an API to AIs. (26:00) Science is still Altman’s killer app. (38:00) No music for OpenAI, he says because of rights issues. (42:00) Questions about regulations and SB 1047. Altman dodges direct comment on current proposals, but notes that at some point the AIs will get sufficiently dangerous we will likely need an international agency. He proposes a cost threshold (e.g. $10 billion or $100 billion) for regulation to kick in, which seems functionally similar to compute limits, and warns of regulatory overreach but also not doing enough. Correctly notes super bad regulatory overreach is common elsewhere. (45:00) Flat out misinformation and scaremongering from the All-In podcast hosts on regulation. Disgraceful. Also disappointing after a very strong first 45 minutes of being curious, I was really starting to like these guys. Altman handles it well, again reorienting around the need to monitor future AI. Also, to answer their question about Llama’s safety plan, if your plan is that Llama will be unfettered and Llama Guard will protect you from that, this works if and only if (1) Llama Guard is always in between any user that is not you and Llama, and also (2) if Llama Guard’s capabilities are properly scaled to match Llama. An open weights model obviously breaks the first test, and I don’t know how the plan to pass the second one either. I wonder how people fail to understand this point. Well, I don’t, actually. Altman repeats the line that ‘in 12 months’ everything we write down to do will be wrong, even if we do our best. If we were to go into tons of detail, maybe, but that seems like exactly why the goal right now is to put us in position to have greater visibility?
(51:30) Altman speculates on UBI and also UBC, or Universal Basic Compute, a slice of GPT-7 or what not. Yeah, they’re calling the next major model GPT-5 when it come out, come on.
(52:30) Gossip portion starts. Altman repeats the story he has told on other podcasts. Given the story he has chosen (truthfully or otherwise) he handles this as gracefully as one could hope under the circumstances. (59:00) A good question. Why not give Altman equity in OpenAI now, even if he does not need it, if only to make it not weird? The original reason not to give Altman equity is because the board has to have a majority of ‘disinterested’ directors, and Altman wanted to count as disinterested. And, I mean, come on, he is obviously not disinterested. This was a workaround of the intent of the law. Pay the man his money, even if he genuinely does not need it, and have an actually majority disinterested board.
Joseph Carlson says the episode was full of nothingness.
Brendan Bordelon Big Tech Business as Usual Lobbying UpdateBrendan Bordelon has previously managed to convince Politico to According to some sources I have talked to, this potentially had substantial impact on the political field in Washington and turning various people against and suspicious of Effective Altruists and potentially similar others as well. As always, there are those who actively work to pretend that ‘ It seems he has now discovered who is actually spending the most lobbying Washington about AI matters, and what they are trying to accomplish. Surprise! It’s… Big Tech. And they want to… avoid regulations on themselves.
This is the attempt to save his previous reporting. Back in the olden days of several months ago, you see, the philanthropies dominated the debate. But now the tech lobbyists have risen to the rescue.
As they do whenever possible, such folks are trying to inception the vibe and situation they want into being, claiming the tide has turned and lawmakers have been won over. I can’t update on those claims, because such people are constantly lying about such questions, so their statements do not have meaningful likelihood ratios beyond what we already knew. Another important point is that regulation of AI is very popular, whereas AI is very unpopular. The arguments underlying the case for not regulating AI? Even more unpopular than that, epic historical levels of not popular. Are Nvidia’s lobbyists being highly disingenuous when describing the things they want to disparage? Is this a major corporation?
The absurdity is they continue to claim that until only a few months ago, such efforts actually were being outspent.
Is it eye opening? For some people it is, if they had their eyes willfully closed. Let me be clear. I think that Nvidia is doing what companies do when they lobby governments. They are attempting to frame debates and change perspectives and build relationships in order to get government to take or not take actions as Nvidia thinks are in the financial interests of Nvidia. You can do a find-and-replace of Nivida there with not only IBM, Meta and Hugging Face, but also basically every other major corporation. I do not see anyone here painting this in conspiratorial terms, unlike many comments about exactly the same actions being taken by those worried about safety in order to advance safety causes, which was very much described in explicitly conspiratorial terms and as if it was outside of normal political activity. I am not mad at Nvidia any more than I am mad at a child who eats cookies. Nvidia is acting like Nvidia. Business be lobbying to make more money. The tiger is going tiger. But can we all agree that the tiger is in fact a tiger and acting like a tiger? And that it is bigger than Fluffy the cat? Notice the contrast with Google and OpenAI. Did they at some points mumble words about being amenable to regulation? Yes, at which point a lot of people yelled ‘grand conspiracy!’ Then, did they spend money to advance this? No. The Quest for Sane RegulationsImportant correction:
What is the world coming to when you cannot trust Politico articles about AI? It is far less bad to break implicit commitments and give misleading impressions of what will do, than to break explicit commitments. Exact Words matter. I still do not think that the behaviors here are, shall we say, especially encouraging. The UK clearly asked, very politely, to get advanced looks, and the labs definitely gave the impression they were up for doing so. Then they pleaded various inconveniences and issues, and aside from DeepMind they didn’t do it, despite DeepMind showing that it clearly can be done. That is a no good, very bad sign, and I call upon them to fix this, but it is bad on a much reduced level than ‘we promised to do this thing we could do and then didn’t do it.’ Scale back your updates accordingly.
As I asked someone who challenged this point on Twitter, if you think you have a test that is lighter touch or more accurate than the compute threshold for determining where we need to monitor for potential dangers, then what is the proposal? So far, the only reasonable alternative I have heard is no alternative at all. Everyone seems to understand that ‘use benchmark scores’ would be worse. Latest thinking from UK PM Rishi Sunak:
Three key facts about unchecked capitalism are: It done a ton of good for the world and is highly underrated. It has failure modes that require mitigation or correction. It is highly popular on both sides (yes both) of the AI safety debate. It is otherwise deeply, deeply unpopular.
Everyone involved should relish and appreciate that we currently get to have conversations in which most of those involved largely get that free markets are where it has been for thousands of years and we want to be regulating them as little as possible, and the disagreement is whether or not to attach ‘but not less than that’ at the end of that sentence. This is a short window where we who understand this could work together to design solutions that might actually work. We will all miss it when it is gone.
Also I do not understand how this interacts with his statement that “national security risks should be dealt with [with] classification (which would apply to both open and closed).” If the solution is ‘let things be open, except when it would be dangerous, and then classify it so no one can share it’ then that… sounds like restricting openness for sufficiently capable models? What am I missing? I notice I am confused here.
Meanwhile, what does the UN care about?
The other responses to
His questions about SB 1047 are good ones if you don’t know the answers, also reveal he is a bit confused about how the bill works and hasn’t dived into the details of the bill or how we forecast model abilities. Certainly ‘bullshit tests’ are a serious risk here, but yes you can estimate what a model will be able to do before training it, and beyond predicting if it is a covered model or not you can mosty wait until after it is trained to test it anyway. He wonders if we can treat GPT-4 as safe even now, and I assure him the answer is yes. His first proposal is ‘reserve resources for human use’ by limiting what percentage of natural resources could be used in data centers, in order to ensure that humans are fine because of comparative advantage. In the limit, this would mean things like ‘build twice as many power plants as the AI needs so that it only uses half of them,’ and I leave the rest of why this is silly to the reader. He starts the next section with “OK, with economic regulation and obsolescence risk out of the way, let’s turn our attention to existential risk.” Actual lol here. His next proposal is to regulate the choke points of AI harm. What he does not realize is that the only choke point of AI harm is the capabilities of the AI. If you allow widespread creation and distribution of highly capable AIs, you do not get to enumerate all the specific superweapons and physically guard against them one by one and think you are then safe. Even if you are right about all the superweapons and how to guard them (which you won’t be), the AI does not need superweapons. He then says you ‘monitor AI-human interactions,’ which would mean ‘monitor every computer and phone, everywhere, at all times’ if you don’t control distribution of AIs. He is literally saying, before you run a query, we have to run it through an official filter. That is exactly the dystopian nightmare panopticon scenario everyone warns about, except that Noah’s version would not even work. Use ‘good old fashioned keyword searches?’ Are you kidding me? Use another AI to monitor the first AI is a little better, but the problems here are obvious, and again you have the worst of both worlds. He then suggests to regulate companies making foundation models agentic. Again, this is not a choke point, unless you are restricting who has access to the models and in what ways.
So as far as I can tell, the proposal from Noah Smith here requires the dystopian panopticon on all electronic activities and restricting access to models, and still fails to address the core problems, and it assumes we’ve solved alignment. Look. These problems are hard. We’ve been working on solutions for years, and there are no easy ones. There is nothing wrong with throwing out bad ideas in brainstorm mode, and using that to learn the playing field. But if you do that, please be clear that you are doing that, so as not to confuse anyone, including yourself.
One reply to that is that both Dean Ball and I and most of us here can agree that this is super dumb, but we did not need an AI to exhibit this ability in practice to know that this particular choice of hill was really dumb, as were many EU AI Act choices of hills, although I do get where they are coming from when I squint. Or: The reason we now have this problem is not because the EU did not think this situation through and now did a dumb thing. We have this problem because the EU cares about the wrong things, and actively wanted this result, and now they have it. In any case, I think Ball and I agree both that this particular rule is unusually dumb and counterproductive, and also that this type of approach won’t work even if the rules are relatively wisely chosen. Instead, he draws this contrast, where he favors conduct-level regulation:
Accepting for the moment the conceptual mapping above: I agree what he calls here a conduct-level approach would be a vast improvement over the EU AI Act template for use-level regulation, in the sense that this is much less likely to make the situation actively worse. It is much less likely to destroy our potential mundane utility gains. A conduct-level regulation regime is probably (pending implementation details) better than nothing, whereas a use-level regulation regime is very plausibly worse than nothing. For current levels of capability, conduct-level regulation (or at least, something along the lines described here) would to me fall under This Is Fine. My preference would be to combine a light touch conduct-level regulation of current AIs with model-level regulation for sufficiently advanced frontier models. The thing is, those two solutions solve different problems. What conduct-level regulation fails to do is to address the reasons we want model-level regulation, the same as the model-level regulation does not address mundane concerns, again unless you are willing to get highly intrusive and proactive. Conduct-level regulation that only checks for outcomes does not do much to mitigate existential risk, or catastrophic risk, or loss of control risk, or the second and third-level dynamics issues (whether or not we are pondering similar most likely such dynamic issues) that would result once core capabilities become sufficiently advanced. If you use conduct-level regulation, on the basis of libertarian-style principles against theft, fraud and murder and such, then this does essentially nothing to prevent any of the scenarios that I worry about. The two regimes do not intersect. If you are the sovereign, you can pass laws that specify outcomes all you want. If you do that, but you also let much more capable entitles come into existence without restriction or visibility, and try only to prescribe outcomes on threat of punishment, you will one day soon wake up to discover you are no longer the sovereign. At that point, you face the same dilemma. Once you have allowed such highly capable entities to arise, how are you going to contain what they do or what people do with them? How are you going to keep the AIs or those who rely on and turn power over to the AIs from ending up in control? From doing great harm? The default answer is you can’t, and you won’t, but the only way you could hope to is again via highly intrusive surveillance and restrictions. The Schumer AI Working Group FrameworkI will check it out soon and report back, hopefully in the coming week. It is clearly at quick glance focused more on ‘winning,’ ‘innovation’ and such, and on sounding positive, than on ensuring we do not all die or worrying about other mundane harms either, sufficiently so that Beyond that, I’m going to wait until I can give this the attention it deserves, and reserve judgment. That is however enough to confirm that it is unlikely that Congress will pursue anything along the lines of SB 1047 (or beyond those lines) or any other substantive action any time soon. That strengthens the case for California to consider moving first. Those That Assume Everyone Is Talking Their BooksSo, I’ve noticed that open model weights advocates seem to be maximally cynical when attributing motivations. As in: Some people advocate placing no restrictions or responsibilities on those creating and distributing open model weights AI models under any circumstances, as a special exemption to how our civilization otherwise works. Those people claim that open source is always good in all situations for all purposes, with at best notably rare exceptions. Those people claim that any attempt to apply the rules or considerations of our civilization to such models constitutes an attempt to ‘ban open source’ or means someone is ‘against open source.’ Many of them are doing so on deeply held principle. However… If someone is ‘talking their book’ regarding discussions of how to treat open model weights, they are (to be kind) probably in the above advocate group. If someone claims someone else is ‘talking their book’ regarding such discussions? The claimant is almost always in the above advocate group. If someone claims that everyone is always ‘talking their book,’ or everyone who disagrees with them is doing so? Then every single time I have seen this, the claimant is on the open model weights side.
Vinod Khosla is making a very precise and obvious specific point, which is that opening the model weights of state-of-the-art AI models hands them to every country and every non-state actor. He does not say China specifically, but yes that is the most important implication, they then get to build from there. They catch up. Josh Wolfe responds this way: The only reason anyone ever makes any argument about this, or holds any view on this, is because they are talking their book, they are trying to make money. I am supporting open source because it will make me money. Here is my argument for supporting open source.
That does not make his actual argument wrong. It does betray a maximally cynical perspective, that fills me with deep sorrow. And when he says he is here to talk his book because it is his book? I believe him. What about his actual argument? I mean it’s obvious gibberish. It makes no sense. Yann LeCun was importantly better here, LeCun also argues that Chinese AI scientists and engineers are ‘quite talented and very much able to ‘fast follow’ the West and innovate themselves.’ Perhaps. I have yet to see evidence of this, and do not see a good reason to make it any easier. While I think LeCun’s arguments here are wrong, this is something we can work with. Lying About SB 1047
The thread also calls this ‘the worst bill I’ve seen yet’ which is obviously false. One could, for example, compare this to The thread is offered here for completeness and as a textbook illustration of the playbook in question. This is what people post days after you write the 13k word detailed rebuttal and clarification which was then written up in Astral Codex Ten. These people have told us, via these statements, who they are. About that, and only about that: Believe them. To state a far weaker version of However, so that I do not give the wrong idea: Not everyone quoted here was lying or acting in bad faith. Quintin Pope, in particular, I believe was genuinely trying to figure things out, and several others either plausibly were as well or were simply expressing valid opinions. One cannot control who then quote tweets you.
That is his screenshot. Not mine, his. Matt Reardon: Surely these “signatories” are a bunch of cranks I’ve never heard of, right?
It is necessary to be open about such policies, so: This has now happened enough distinct times that I am hereby adding Martin Casado to the list of people whose bad and consistently hyperbolic and disingenuous takes need not be answered unless they are central to the discourse or a given comment is being uncharacteristically helpful in some way, along with such limamaries as Marc Andreessen, Yann LeCun, Brian Chau and Based Beff Jezos. More Voices Against Governments Doing AnythingAt R Street, I agree with Thierer that the first best solution is for the Federal Government to pass good laws, and for those good laws to preempt state actions, preventing this hodge podge. Alas, thanks in part to rhetoric like this but mostly due to Congress being Congress, the chances of getting any Federal action any time soon is quite low. Then he picks out the ones that allow the worst soundbyte descriptions, despite most of them presumably being in no danger of passing even in modified form. Then he goes after (yep, once again) SB 1047, with a description that once again does not reflect the reality of the bill. People keep saying versions of ‘this is the worst (or most aggressive) bill I’ve seen’ when this is very clearly not true, in this case the article itself mentions for example the far worse proposed Hawaii bill and several others that would also impose greater burdens. Then once again, he says to focus on ‘real world’ outcomes and ignore ‘hypothetical fears.’ Sigh.
We shouldn’t impose any regulations or restrictions on models if they are open. It appears today’s models can’t enable bioweapons or cause human extinction. Therefore, we should not be worried future models could make bioweapons or cause human extinction. Anything that is not already here has ‘little basis in reality.’ Thus, all non-mundane worries involving AI should be disregarded. Advocates of not dying are motivated entirely by private profit. If advocates emphasize a problem, any previously mentioned problems are fake. He and his have successfully convinced most politicians of this.
I wish I lived in a world where it was transparent to everyone who such people were, and what they were up to, and what they care about. Alas, that is not our world. In more reasonable, actual new specific objections to SB 1047 news, Despite this, like many others it appears he misunderstands how the law would work. In particular, in his central concern of claiming a ‘cascade’ of models that would have onerous requirements imposed on them, he neglects that one can get a limited duty exemption by pointing to another as capable model that already has such an exemption. Thus, if one is well behind the state of the art, as such small models presumably would be, providing reasonable assurance to get a limited duty exemption would be a trivial exercise, and verification would be possible using benchmark tests everyone would be running anyway. I think it would be highly unlikely the requirements listed here would impose an undue burden even without this, or even without limited duty exemptions at all. But this clarification should fully answer such concerns. Yes, you still have to report safety incidents (on the order of potential catastrophic threats) to the new division if they happened anyway, but if you think that is an unreasonable request I notice I am confused as to why. Will then proceeds to legal and constitutional objections. The first is the classic ‘code is speech’ argument, that therefore LLMs and their training should enjoy first amendment protections. I would be very surprised if these arguments carried the day in court, nor do I think they have legal merit. Looking at the exact arguments in the precedents should emphasize this, Junger v. Daley is using logic that does not apply here - the code used to train the model is expressive speech and sharing that would enjoy constitutional protection, but no one is doing that. Instead, we are talking about running the code, running inference or sharing model weights which are an array of numbers. There is as far as I know no precedent for these as first amendment issues. Also, obviously not all software is protected speech, being software is not a free legal pass, and software is subject to testing and safety requirements all the time. There are compelling conflicting interests here that I would expect to carry the day, there is much precedent for similar restrictions, and the Constitution is not a suicide pact. While I strongly believe that Will is wrong, and that SB 1047 does not have this legal issue, it is of course possible that the courts will say otherwise, and although I would be much higher, GPT-4o only gave an 80% chance the law would be upheld under its exact current text, essentially on the theory that these might be considered content-based regulations subject to strict scrutiny, which might not be survivable in current form. I did then convince GPT-4o that Junger didn’t apply, but it’s not fair if I get to make arguments and Will doesn’t. If it turns out Will is right about this, either it would leave room to alter it to address the problem or it would not. Either way, it would be in everyone’s interest to find out now. Getting this struck down in 2025 would be much, much better than a different law being struck down unexpectedly on these grounds in 2028.
The second is a concern that the KYC requirements conflict with the Stored Communications Act (SCA). As a lay person this seems absurd or at minimum really dumb, but the law is often dumb in exactly this kind of way, and GPT-4o confirms this is plausible when I asked in neutral manner, with a 60% chance to get struck down as worded and 20% to still be struck down even if wording was narrowed and improved. I will note I am not sympathetic to ‘the government typically needs a subpoena or court order’ given the parallel to other KYC requirements. I was trying to run a digital card game and I literally was told we had to KYC anyone buying a few hundred dollars worth of virtual cards. If this requirement is indeed impossible for a state to impose under current law, again I think it would be good to find out, so we could properly focus efforts. There is clear severability of this clause from the rest.
Will then echoes the general ‘better not to regulate technology’ arguments. Rhetorical Innovation
Working on a problem only makes sense if you could potentially improve the situation. If there is nothing to worry about or everything is completely doomed no matter what, then (your version of) beach calls to you. It does not require that much moving of the needle to be a far, far better thing that you do than beach chilling. So this is strong evidence only that one can at least have a small chance to move the needle a small amount.
Via negativa:
Any agenda to keep AI safe (or to do almost anything in a rapidly changing and hard to predict situation) depends on the actors centrally following the spirit of the rules and attempting to accomplish the goal. If everyone is going to follow a set of rules zombie-style, you can design rules that go relatively less badly compared to other rules. And you can pick rules that are still superior to ‘no rules at all.’ But in the end? You lose. Thus, if a law or rule is proposed, and it is presumed to be interpreted fully literally and in the way that inflicts the most damage possible, with all parties disregarding the intent and spirit, without adjusting to events in any fashion or ever being changed, then yes you are going to have a bad time and by have a bad time I mean some combination of not have any nice things and result in catastrophe or worse. Probably both. You can mitigate this, but only so far. Alas, you cannot solve this problem by saying ‘ok no rules at all then,’ because that too relies on sufficiently large numbers of people following the ‘spirit of the [lack of] rules’ in a way that the rules are now not even trying to spell out, and that gives everyone nothing to go on. Thus, you would then get whatever result ‘wants to happen’ under a no-rules regime. The secret of markets and capitalism is that remarkably often this result is actually excellent, or you need only modify it with a light touch, so that’s usually the way to go. Indeed, with current levels of core AI capabilities that would be the way to go here, too. The problem is that level of core capabilities is probably not going to stand still. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is DifficultIan Hogarth announces the UK AI Safety Institute Paper from Davidad, Skalse, Bengio, Russell, Tegmark and others on ‘ Also, I try not to quote LeCun, but I think this is both good faith and encapsulates in a smart way so much of what he is getting wrong:
This is indeed effectively the ‘classic’ control proposal, to have the AI optimize some utility function at inference time based on its instructions. As always, any set of task objectives and guardrails is isomorphic to some utility function. The problem: We know none of: How to do that. What utility function to give a sufficiently capable AI that would go well. How to make having a bunch of sufficiently capable such AIs in this modality under the control of different entities result go well.
Don’t get me wrong. Show me how to do (1) and we can happily focus mos of our efforts on solving either (2), (3) or both. Or we can solve (2) or (3) first and then work on (1), also acceptable. Good luck, all. The thread continues interestingly as well: David Manheim: I think you missed the word "provable" We all agree that we'll get incremental safety with current approaches, but incremental movement in rapidly changing domains can make safety move slower than vulnerabilities and dangers. (See: Cybersecurity.)
I don’t see any reason we couldn’t have a provably safe airplane, or at least an provably arbitrarily safe airplane, without need to first crash a bunch of airplanes. Same would go for medicine if you give me Alpha Fold N for some N (5?). That seems well within our capabilities. Indeed, ‘safe flying’ was the example in a (greatly simplified) paper that Davidad gave me to read to show me such proofs were possible. If it were only that difficult, I would be highly optimistic. I worry and believe that ‘safe AI’ is a different kind of impossible than ‘safe airplane’ or ‘safe medicine.’ People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone
If you feel the AGI and your response is to be jubilant but not terrified, then that is the ultimate For a few months, there was a wave (they called themselves ‘e/acc’) of people whose philosophy’s central virtue was missing this mood as aggressively as possible. I am very happy that wave has now mostly faded, and I can instead be infuriated by a combination of ordinary business interests, extreme libertarians and various failures to comprehend the problem. You don’t know what you’ve got till it’s gone. If you are terrified but not excited, that too is a missing mood. It is missing less often than the unworried would claim. All the major voices of worry that I have met are also deeply excited. Also, this week… no? What I feel is the mundane utility. Did we see various remarkable advances, from both Google and OpenAI? Oh yeah. Are the skeptics, who say this proves we have hit a wall, being silly? Oh yeah. This still represents progress that is mostly orthogonal to the path to AGI. It is the type of progress I can wholeheartedly get behind and cheer for, the ability to make our lives better. That is exactly because it differentially makes the world better, versus how much closer it gets us to AGI. A world where people are better off, and better able to think and process information, and better appreciate the potential of what is coming, is likely going to act wiser. Even if it doesn’t, at least people get to be better off. The Lighter Side
This should have been Final Jeopardy, so only partial credit, but I’ll take it.
The alternative theory is that this is ribbing Ken Jennings about his loss to Watson. That actually seems more plausible. I am split on which one is funnier. I actually do not think Jeopardy should be expressing serious opinions. It is one of our few remaining sacred spaces, and we should preserve as much of that as we can. You're currently a free subscriber to |