---
subject: "The Nutgraf: Going out of India is easier than going out in India"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-01-04 04:42:47
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
Happy New Year!
Around a couple of years ago, I made a resolution—to avoid watching cricket matches in Indian stadiums. I suspect, like millions of others, that I’m not alone.
I made this decision after some friends and I made elaborate plans to travel to Dharamshala to watch a Test match. It was the third Test of the Border Gavaskar Trophy, fought between India and Australia—which if you don’t follow cricket, is one of the most hotly contested sporting rivalries in the world. Months in advance, we booked flight tickets, searched and found Airbnbs right next to the ground, figured out train schedules, and spent a ton of time getting excited and ready to watch Test cricket at one of the most beautiful grounds in the world.
Then, two weeks before the game, with no warning, the BCCI (Board for Cricket Control in India) announced that it would be [shifting](https://www.espncricinfo.com/story/india-vs-australia-bgt-test-series-what-about-the-fans-bcci-could-have-avoided-dharamsala-mess-1358810) the match away from Dharamshala to Indore. The financial losses we suffered were quite significant, and [went](https://indianexpress.com/article/sports/cricket/ind-vs-aus-venue-for-third-test-shifted-to-indore-from-dharamshala-8441386/) into several lakhs. We weren’t alone. Australian fans had travelled to India to watch the game, and had to incur heavy losses too.
That was two years ago.
Last week, I just came back from Australia after attending the Boxing Day Test Match. Even though India lost, I was fortunate to witness a thrilling, historic, epic cricket match for the ages. More memorably, I did it alongside some of my closest friends—the same ones who’d been stung by the BCCI two years ago. We didn’t miss a single ball, and were there for all five days, all the way to the end.
The most common reaction I’ve gotten from people when they find out I went for the Boxing Day Test is sympathy. India lost the game, after all. They ask me how disappointed I am. And my honest response to that is… not much. Sure, it would have been great if India won, but what I’ll always remember is the experience of watching a cricket game live at the Melbourne Cricket Ground.
If you set the cricket aside, here’s the most mindblowing aspect about this year’s Boxing Day Test match.
Not even the great Don Bradman drew such a crowd. At the MCG on Monday, 74,362 walked through the turnstiles, taking the total attendance of the Boxing Day Test between Australia and India to 373,691.
The five-day attendance is now the largest for any Test in Australia. It eclipsed the 350,534 which watched the six-day Test between Australia and England at the MCG in 1937, where Bradman scored 270 in one of the performances of his career.
Joel Morrison, Cricket Australia’s general manager for events and operations, said officials had been “blown away” by support of fans during the match. “The Border-Gavaskar Trophy is a blockbuster event, and it has been fantastic to see such strong attendances right across the summer,” he said.
Bigger than Bradman: bumper Boxing Day Test breaks record for cricket crowd in Australia, [The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2024/dec/30/boxing-day-test-record-cricket-crowd-australia)
So what drove the largest attendance for any Test ever held in Australia?
Well, you’ve probably guessed it.
Cricket Australia CEO Nick Hockley said India fans had come to the MCG from all around the world. “I think what’s been particularly special about this series is the number of India fans, from not just India but all around the world,” Hockley said. “I have met fans from the UK, from Canada, from the US. Obviously it is a fantastic time of year but it talks to, the MCG has almost got this spiritual place in cricketing folklore.”
India vs Australia at MCG records biggest Boxing Day Test attendance, [Times of India](https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/sports/cricket/india-in-australia/india-vs-australia-at-mcg-records-biggest-boxing-day-test-attendance/articleshow/116763784.cms)
I was there at the stadium when the announcement was made that the all-time attendance record was broken. There were just two words on the giant screen—THANK YOU.
Two years ago, when the BCCI moved the Dharamshala Test to Indore at the last minute, they issued a terse 76-word statement.
There was no apology.
If there’s one thing that the Boxing Day Test showed me, it’s how painfully behind India is in terms of stadium experiences, infrastructure, and simply… niceness. Toilets. Water. Gates. Ticketing. Security. Food. The list is endless. As someone who has attended cricket matches in Indian stadiums under horrific conditions, it’s an easy decision for me and millions like me to just abandon the Indian event experience altogether.
There’s a fundamental truth that’s becoming increasingly apparent to many Indians—if you want to attend live events like concerts, sporting events or performances, it’s not worth doing it in India. The experience overseas is enormously better, and you don’t have to worry about all the unpredictability that goes into attending events in India. It’s always been fashionable for a certain class of Indians to fly out of India to attend events, but after witnessing the Boxing Day Test, I’m convinced that the intensity with which this will happen in the future is going to surprise a lot of people. We are at the early stage of a major inflection point in event tourism—millions of Indians will prefer to take their passport and fly 4,000 km to Singapore to watch a concert instead of travelling 50 km by road to NICE Grounds in Madavara, Bengaluru.
One fundamental reason for this shift is because live events have one startling feature. Live events are one of those things that force everyone, irrespective of class and privilege, to confront India’s cities with all of its glory. It requires people to step out of their gated communities and travel on India’s roads. It requires you to breathe the air outside. It requires you to go through the experience of booking tickets and using bathroom facilities. None of these can be bought. None of these can be escaped from. Nobody can get a live event delivered to your doorstep in 10 minutes using an app.
And this experience doesn’t just destroy people who want to attend these events, but also the performers themselves.
One year ago, the comedian Trevor Noah announced two shows in Bengaluru. I had friends who’d flown in for the event. People arrived at the venue after braving hours of traffic and rain, only to find out that the show was cancelled.
Trevor Noah found the experience so hilarious that he even incorporated it as material for a subsequent standup set.
Trevor Noah has revealed details of the chaos at the venue of his Bengaluru show which was cancelled due to technical issues. He recalled his ordeal in Bengaluru when performing in Mumbai on September 30.
Narrating the Bengaluru experience to his Mumbai audience, Noah referred to the Manpho Convention Centre in Bengaluru, the location of the performance, as a “semi-permanent tent,” and claimed that dogs in cages were barking on the path leading up to it.
He mentioned that the seating arrangements were poor and that the air-conditioner units were blowing hot air. The audience was not able to listen to the performance due to bad sound quality at the venue.
Noah, in his comical style, talked about Bangalore traffic and the difficulties he faced in reaching the venue. Several video clips from the Mumbai performance show Noah joking about his Bengaluru experience.
Trevor Noah shares details after Bengaluru show cancellation; Kiran Mazumdar-Shaw says it is a wake up call, [Deccan Herald](https://www.deccanherald.com/india/karnataka/bengaluru/trevor-noah-shares-details-after-bengaluru-show-cancellation-kiran-mazumdar-shaw-says-it-is-a-wake-up-call-2708959)
Noah is not the only one. Diljit Dosanjh, in a moment of frustration, [declared](https://www.hindustantimes.com/entertainment/music/diljit-dosanjh-backtracks-on-not-performing-in-india-without-better-infrastructure-vow-deletes-post-later-101734419598559.html) that he’s no longer perform in India until the right infrastructure exists. The BCCI is the richest cricketing board in the world. The Indian Premier League is one of the biggest cricket spectacles ever. And yet, when the IPL final was played in Ahmedabad [last year](https://www.espncricinfo.com/story/can-indian-crowds-ever-expect-a-pleasant-stadium-experience-1389258), fans were subjected to some of the worst experiences they’ve ever witnessed.
Even immense privilege and money cannot solve the live event experience in India.
Some see this opportunity. Like Deepinder Goyal, CEO of Zomato, who [indicated](https://www.moneycontrol.com/news/business/companies/how-zomato-plans-to-win-events-biz-invest-in-stadium-infra-hope-swiggy-doesnt-buy-bookmyshow-12837811.html) his intention to invest and build out stadium infrastructure. Sure. But how far can private capital go to improve the live event experience? Zomato can build stadiums, and Blinkit can launch ambulances, but who’ll build roads?
Until that happens, if it ever does, a growing number of Indians will keep traveling abroad to get the experience they deserve, and will find the value trade-off to be much better. I expect this to grow enormously, and I wonder what the implications will be. I can imagine scenarios where access to live events become prohibitively difficult for locals in the countries that Indians travel to. How much longer before Australia imposes restrictions on how many Indians can buy tickets for the next Boxing Day Test match? Or reserve a chunk of tickets for locals? I can imagine Singapore instituting country-wise quotas for the next Taylor Swift tour. And above all, I can foresee discontent in countries around the world against hordes of travelling Indian tourists madly pouring into their cities to experience a live event, just to escape the ordeal of experiencing an event in India.
A few weeks ago, Manu Joseph wrote something trenchant about Indians escaping India, and the costs of doing this.
In the best areas of London or New York, you pay a premium for what the city offers, and what the city offers is available to everyone. In India, it is the opposite. The city is the problem, and you pay to shut it out, along with most Indians.
I wonder what it is about money that it does not help one escape the miseries of this country—the air and traffic congestion of its vast urban cancers that keep growing. Could class have helped them?
The upper middle class has developed ways of exclusion that cost nothing or very little. They use what is called “culture” and a bit of sophistication to exclude most Indians from their daily lives. In the Madras of my childhood, for instance, it was classical music and dance.
The upper middle class also uses high education and narrow specializations to nurture exclusive clubs where the other India simply has no chance to present itself.
The super-rich, on the other hand, only have money. And money has long divorced class, so some old-money people with class do not see the luxury in having to share their enchanting social circuits with others who have money today.
The super-rich across the world face a general problem. Capitalism, ironically, does not serve its true masters well. There are simply no real products for the very wealthy that only they can afford and enjoy. The best phone, cinema or even holiday is available to the merely affluent.
Manu Joseph: Escaping India within India is an exorbitant exercise | [Mint](https://www.livemint.com/opinion/columns/manu-joseph-escaping-india-within-india-is-an-exorbitant-exercise-super-rich-gurgaon-apartment-price-urban-infra-11734593396658.html)
Going out of India is easier than going out in India, not just for the super rich, or the rich, but also for the merely affluent.
And there are a lot of merely affluent people in India and much fewer great live event experiences for all of them.
Regards,
Praveen Gopal Krishnan