---
subject: "In Defense of Made-Up Metrics"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <byrne@thediff.co>"
to: ""
date: 2023-06-05 13:06:22
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
|
In this issue: - In Defense of Made-Up Metrics
- Scaling the Non-Scalable
- VR and Platform Ownership
- What is a Bank?
- The Non-Recession Recession, in One Graph
- Going Direct
- Diff Jobs
In Defense of Made-Up MetricsA common complaint about public companies, especially growth companies, is that they hate talking about net income but love talking about "Adjusted EBITDA," or even wilder metrics than that like WeWork's " From the outside, this looks like an incredibly aggressive form of accounting. The article linked above quotes a bond researcher as having said: "I've never seen the phrase 'community adjusted Ebitda' in my life." But if that bond researcher had looked at many restaurants and retailers, the metric itself would be familiar: "Community-adjusted EBITDA" is just a (ludicrous) euphemism for what's otherwise called contribution profit, four-wall profitability, or another measure of - The long-term evolution of unit economics for whatever unit the economics focus on. A well-run restaurant chain should be able to gradually trim food waste, improve labor efficiency, optimize locations, tweak opening hours, etc., in order to drive higher margins at established locations. If nothing else, regulars are a good source of predictable margin, and it takes a long time to establish them.
- The operating leverage as relatively fixed corporate costs get spread out over more units. Those costs do rise over time; a streaming media company with 100m subscribers will have more people working in HR, finance, and other back-office roles than a streaming company with 1m subscribers. But the relationship is much less linear, especially if some of the fixed internal expenses are simultaneously investments in better margins. (A tiny streaming company probably shouldn't invest much in optimizing bandwidth; nobody says "their content library is absolute garbage, but it loads fast and the video quality is impeccable." But at larger scale, extra bits do take a meaningful bite out of margins.)
There is, of course, the cynical reason managers prefer to report these kinds of metrics: they look better. EBITDA itself was originally created as a way to talk about the cash economics of the business independent of how it was financed—if a company has high depreciation charges for assets that don't need to be replaced after they depreciate to zero, it can lose money based on conventional accounting while still generating cash flow. And if those reported losses make the stock cheap, the optimal decision for management is to finance the company more with debt and use some of the cash to buy back stock. The move from EBITDA to "Adjusted EBITDA" came a bit later. There are some adjustments that do genuinely make sense; if a company has one-time costs or one-time gains, it makes sense to strip those out of its economics. But many companies go further than that, and exclude stock-based compensation from their adjusted EBITDA calculation. This, too, can be defended, at least slightly: stock-based comp can be lumpy (though it's certainly possible to exclude one-time adjustments while keeping run-of-the-mill stock-based comp in the numbers). And they're a non-cash expense. Looking at non-cash expenses is good for basically one reason: it tells you whether or not a company will need to raise additional funding before it gets to breakeven, and offers some sense of the timing. A company that's GAAP-unprofitable but adjusted EBITDA profitable is still a company that is, in some sense, losing money—but it's also a company whose losses don't need to be immediately funded by shareholders. Since stock prices are determined by supply and demand, just knowing the company doesn’t need cash, i.e. knowing that there doesn't need to be a sudden increase in supply any time soon is helpful. In practice, professional investors will come up with their own metric; if you were an analyst, and you pitched a stock based uncritically on its multiple to some metric management has invented, you could expect a good portfolio manager to make you defend every single adjustment the company made. Unfortunately, there are two kinds of companies that focus more than anyone else on custom metrics that nobody else uses: the worst companies, and the best. For the worst companies, it's a simple calculation: the GAAP numbers look bad, so any alternative scorecard will look better. For some businesses, adjusted EBITDA just means "this would be a pretty solid business if we didn't have to pay people." But at the other end of the spectrum, companies with a unique model will manage themselves according to metrics that highlight that uniqueness. Salesforce put a great deal of effort early in its life as a public company into explaining to investors why annual recurring revenue didn't mean the same thing as revenue. What started out looking like a vanity metric became an industry standard, in part because it was a metric chosen by a company that set up the playbook for the rest of the industry. This doesn't mean that the metrics companies share necessarily correspond to how they judge themselves internally, though. Meta doesn't like to give a time spent metric for Facebook, for example, even though this is a very important data point; there's too much competitive intelligence at risk. Using unconventional metrics is a map and territory problem. The right map depends on the purpose; the most useful map of the continental United States will vary depending on whether you're flying or hiking. Generally accepted accounting principles are also an imperfect map. They will eventually correspond to the cash a company can deliver to investors, but only at the end of that company's life. The growth of intangibles has changed the meaning of operating expenses and capital expenditures—the money Palantir or Servicenow spends on sales and marketing is analogous to the money that US Steel spent on building new steel mills, but it doesn't get the same treatment on paper. And even the nature of capital expenditures has changed; when the WSJ When management presents a non-GAAP view of profits, or they point to some new metric that they say matters more than revenue to them, they aren't telling you everything. But they're certainly telling you something. Disclosure: Long META. Doing this repeatedly over a long period is one reason, though not the only reason, that John Malone is so rich. [↩︎](#fnref1)Of course, stock-based compensation is its own form of supply. But there isn't a 1:1 relationship between new shares issued as equity compensation and new shares that get dumped on the market. This creates a fun nonlinearity, since employees' propensity to sell their shares as they vest is partly a function of optimism about the company. This creates a self-fulfilling dynamic; higher morale increases productivity and also gets rid of an ongoing supply of shares. If a given company's stock tends to go up, employees hold on to more shares. When they're feeling pessimistic, they sell as soon as they vest. And a great predictor of morale, especially at a business whose compensation is weighted towards equity, is the last six months of market performance. No wonder these stocks can be so volatile; one of the biggest investor constituencies is structurally likely to sell at the low, and when persistent good news restricts the supply of stock. [↩︎](#fnref2)The traditional way to do this is to make lots of jokes about how often "non-recurring items" keep recurring. [↩︎](#fnref3)The main exception here is a case where a company's capital structure is partly a function of its growth. Think of a BNPL business that keeps some loans on the books and puts others into structured products, a cruise line that gets customer deposits six months before the ship sails, Starbucks' app deposits, or a bank that acquires cheap deposit funding by building branches. In this case, there are a few different ways to handle it. The most useful, but most dangerous, is to mark things to market: value a bank branch based on the net present value of all the interest the bank saves from getting more zero-interest checking accounts and low-interest savings accounts. Another more useful but harder to manage option is to loosen the rule of valuing the business first and applying a capital structure second. Instead, you'd treat the financing that's directly tied to the business as part of operations, rather than financing. The meta rule of thumb might be that regardless of what the balance sheet says, if an investment bank can't help you refinance it, it's not the kind of debt you account for as part of the capital structure rather than as part of operations. [↩︎](#fnref4)The negative view of this is that they don't want to tell investors how much growth comes from ad load and ad pricing versus usage, except in the most general qualitative terms—or when they're talking about how a product like Reels started out purely dilutive to monetization but then started producing meaningful revenue from ads. But this is unlikely; using ad load to hit revenue targets when usage doesn't measure up is just a Martingale strategy, since it means responding to lower usage by making the product worse. A maximally cynical wealth-maximizer wouldn't do that, since its net present value is lower than that of a graceful decline. [↩︎](#fnref5)
You're on the free list for The Diff. Upgrade today to get access to more company dives, strategy breakdowns, and live analysis. A Word From Our SponsorsTegus is your go-to research destination for bold investing. We curate expert insights, analysis, and financial data to give you a powerful perspective for your investment decisions. With lightning-fast access to over 60,000 transcripts across 20,000 companies, you’ll discover a wealth of unique insights to fuel your fundamental research. For free trial access to Tegus, ElsewhereScaling the Non-ScalableBloomberg has But there are at least two justifications for the model: - Some strategies require variable amounts of capital. A portfolio of strategies that produce good returns but are capacity-constrained past $10m is really a portfolio of options on whichever one of those strategies will suddenly experience an increase in opportunities such that its capacity is more like $100m. (SPACs present some obvious and not-so-obvious trading strategies, for example, and SPAC IPO value went from $3.5bn in 2016 to $162.5bn in 2021. Hard for a single-strategy firm to figure out the optimal level of assets under management to within an order of magnitude in that environment!)
- Being the only person who runs a particular trading strategy is a lonely place to be. Talking shop means leaking alpha. This suits some people just fine, but in a few cases it gets old. "Hedge fund" has always been a protean category—"a compensation scheme masquerading as an asset class" is a running joke for a reason—and thinking of a hedge fund as a social club where it's safe to talk about big wins and huge drawdowns may not be too far off the mark.
(Via VR and Platform OwnershipAs has been widely reported, Apple is planning on announcing their new VR headset today. VR companies If this thesis works and Apple validates virtual reality as a general category, there will be one big irony: the reason Facebook's parent company is Meta and not Facebook is that the business now known as Meta made a very public pivot towards the metaverse, and one reason for that was that they were just a bit too late to have a big impact on mobile, which has turned out to be a costly outcome. For Meta, the best possible outcome is for Apple's new announcement to be unimpressive, and to make the rest of the world more doubtful about the metaverse thesis; the only thing worse than being right-but-early is being right about how big a deal a market is, but wrong about how to capture it. What is a Bank?The WSJ has a The Non-Recession Recession, in One GraphWhen there's a contentious ongoing debate over any topic, especially in economics, one way to break down the question is to not just ask why it's hard to come to an agreement, but why the question is a live issue in the first place. Right now, one such question is, depending on exactly who's asking, "Are we on the brink of a recession?" or "Are we already in one?" There are definitely parts of the economy that are stressed right now, but aggregate data has been surprisingly strong. So one reason for the divergent trend is that Going DirectAmerican Airlines is Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. A sampling of current open roles: - A vertically integrated PE-backed cannabis company is looking for a data analyst with visualization experience. Excel wizards encouraged to reach out. (Little Rock, AR—no remote, but relocation assistance is possible)
- A VC backed company reimagining retirement wealth and building a 401k alternative is looking for GTM/BizDev generalists with banking and fintech startup experience in sales. (NYC)
- A firm using machine learning to customize investments is looking for a data engineer. (NYC)
- A startup that connects companies' sources of financial data across different systems, helping engineers build workflows and offering a no-code interface for finance teams, is looking for a new team member to focus on growth and operations. (Bay Area, hybrid)
- A startup building a new financial market within a multi-trillion dollar asset class is looking for generalists with banking and legal experience. (US, Remote)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. |
||
|
|
|
|||
|