---
subject: "Childhood and Education Roundup #7"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-12-09 13:01:21
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Since it’s been so long, I’m splitting this roundup into several parts. This first one focuses away from schools and education and discipline and everything around social media. Table of ContentsSometimes You Come FirstYes, sometimes it is necessary to tell your child, in whatever terms would be most effective right now, This seems like the ultimate ‘no, what is wrong with you for asking?’ moment:
JD Vance often has moments like this, where he manages to pitch things in the worst possible light. Actually telling your child to be quiet in this spot is, of course, totally appropriate. The amount of childcare we are asking mothers to provide is insane, matching the restrictions we place on children.
Let Kids be KidsI mostly support giving parents broad discretion. I especially support giving parents broad discretion to let kids be kids. Alas, America today does not agree. Parents walk around terrified that police and child services will be called if a child is even momentarily left unattended, or allowed to do what were back in 1985 ordinary childhood things as if they were an ordinary child, or various other similar issues.
Whereas this would the The Good Place:
The key detail is that they did this in Copenhagen, where you don’t have to worry about anyone calling the cops on you for doing it, despite the associated interpretations of ethics. So this was entirely derisked. The idea that a nine year old being allowed to go out on her own is ‘free range parenting’ shows how pathological we are about this. Not too long ago that was ‘parenting,’ and it started a lot younger than nine, and we didn’t have GPS and cell phones. By the time you hit nine, you’re mostly safe even in America from the scolds who would try to sic the authorities on you. It does happen, but when it happens it seems to plausibly be (low-level) news. I was told a story the week before I wrote this paragraph by a friend who got the cops called on him for letting his baby sleep in their stroller in his yard by someone who actively impersonated a police officer and confessed to doing so. My friend got arrested, the confessed felon went on her way. This is all completely insane. There are no consequences to calling CPS, you can do it over actual nothing and you cause, at best, acute stress and potentially break up a family. If we had reasonable norms once CPS showed up this would presumably be fine, because then you could be confident nothing would happen, and all have a good laugh. But even a small chance of escalating misunderstandings is enough.
Whereas Megan McArdle points out that at that age her parents rarely knew where she was, and also, do you remember this? That was the rule. If it was 10pm, you should check if you knew where your children are. Earlier on, whatever, no worries. As it should (mostly) be. It is odd to then see advocates
Notice the assumption here. Reporting potential problems is considered a hostile act. The whole idea is to protect the child, who is also black. If the impact of reporting a drug problem in a black child is net negative to black people, then that is the same as saying reporting drug problems is net negative. So stop doing it. Or, if it is not net negative, because it protects the child, then not reporting would be the racist action. For the other stuff, all right, let’s talk more broadly. If you think that drug use by a pregnant mother should not prompt a child welfare intervention, at least not automatically? I can see arguments for that. What I cannot see is a world in which you get your child potentially taken away when they are allowed to walk two blocks alone at age eight, but not for parental drug use. In general, I see lots of cases of actively dangerous homes where the case workers feel powerless to do anything, while other parents go around terrified all the time. We can at least get one of these two situations right. Similarly, I kind of do think that it is pretty crazy that you can anonymously say you think I am a terrible parent, and then the authorities might well turn my life upside down. And that it has terrible impacts when you legally mandate that various people be snitches, driving people in need away from vital help and services. The flip side is, who is going to dare report, in a way that will then be seen as attempting to ruin someone’s life and family, and invite retaliation? So it is not easy, but I think there is a reason why we have the right to face our accusers.
A generalized version of this theory Now we do the opposite of all of that and more and are surprised kids often get screwed up. We are not giving them the opportunity to learn how to exist in and interact with the world.
Also, don’t you dare be competitive or play at a high level. Unacceptable.
If you think playing Hide and Seek is dangerous you flat out hate childhood. This comes from
Lenore is too kind. I mean, yes, sometimes they do call 911, and it would be a vast improvement to simply say ‘thanks, ma’am’ and ignore. But the correct answer is not ‘thanks, ma’am.’
There is another way.
There are a number of European cities that have permanently shut down many of their roads, and they seem better for it. We should likely be shutting down roads simply for children’s play periodically in many places, and generally transition out of needing to use cars constantly for everything. The other finding is that this led to many more connections between neighbors, as families realized they lived near other families, including classmates, and made friends. You start to get a real neighborhood, which brings many advantages. But even if we don’t do that, you can also simply let the children play anyway. Even the cars do not pose that big a threat, compared to losing out on childhood. Location, Location, Location
There is one huge downside, which is that it costs a lot of money. Space here is not cheap, and neither are other things, including private schools. Outside of that consideration, which I realize is a big deal, I think NYC is obviously a great place to raise kids. It is amazing to walk around, to not have to drive to things, to not even have to own a car, to have tons of options for places to go, people to see and things to do. Connection
First, we have the sharp decline in time spent with friends, especially after Covid. And we also have the same decline in time spent with friends plus children, which includes playdates. Whereas time with children has not actually increased? Which is actually odd, given the increasing demands for more and more supervision of children.
Whole thread is worthwhile. I essentially buy the thesis. When kids are involved, we increasingly are on hair triggers to disapprove of things, tell people they’re doing something wrong, and even call social services. And everyone is worried about everyone else. It is infinitely harder to start up conversations, make friends with other parents, chill, form an actual neighborhood and so on. Also, of course, the competition for your attention is way higher. It’s so, so much harder than it used to be to engage with whoever happens to be there. Phone beckons. The Education of a GamerFirst you tell them they cannot play outside. Then you tell them they can’t play inside. Multiplayer online games (and single player games too) have varying quality, and many have questionable morality attached to their content. But for those that are high quality and that don’t actively model awful behaviors, they seem pretty awesome for teaching life skills? For socialization? For learning to actually do hard work and accomplish things? I mean, yes, there are better options, but if you won’t let them do real work, and you won’t let them be on their own in physical space,
My principle has consistently been that if my kid is trying to improve, is working to accomplish something, and is not stuck in a rut, then that is great. Gaming is at least okay by me, and plausibly great. You do have to watch for ruts and force them out. Cognitive endurance is important. Getting kids to practice it is helpful, and Priorities
I can’t help but notice the part about higher mental well-being? What a notion of ‘quality’ and ‘human capital’ we have here, likely the same one contributing to Korea’s extremely low birth rate. The proposed mechanisms are ‘lowered parental expectations’ and adverse selection. But also, perhaps these parents were and found a way to be less insane, and are making good decisions on behalf of their children, who are like them? From everything I have heard, South Korea could use lowered parental expectations. ChildcareIf you use price controls, then there will be shortages, episode number a lot.
Allocation by waitlist rather than price seems like a rather terrible way to get child care, and ensures that many who need it will go without, while some who value it far less do get it. Seems rather insane. Seriously, once again, can we please instead Give Parents Money (or tax breaks) already? Sweden is going the other way. Tyler Cowen approves, noticing the gains from trade. I have worries (about intrinsic motivation, or about the ease of fraud, and so on). But certainly paying grandparents to do childcare seems way better than paying daycare centers to do childcare? It is better for the kids (even if the daycare is relatively good) and better for those providing care. Indeed it seems massively destructive and distortionary to pay for daycare centers but not other forms of care.
The obvious case for the subsidy is that it is profitable. Even if you assume a relatively low 20% marginal tax rate, for every $1 in costs spent here, parents will pay an additional $1.38 in taxes, and also collect less from other benefit programs. Perhaps parents should be willing to pay up in order to internalize those gains. But the results show very clearly that they are not willing to do that. In practice, if you want them to do the work, they need the extra push, whether or not that is ‘fair.’
My response is: Good. Not good enough.
As in, we have massive government regulation of those providing childcare, requiring them to get degrees that are irrelevant to the situation and needlessly driving up costs, along with other requirements. Prices are nuts. Skill in childcare is not going to correlate with ‘tests of cognitive ability’ nor will it be improved by a four-year college degree let alone a master's. The real problems with childcare are that it is: Too expensive. Often too hard to find even at expensive prices. Often understaffed, because staff is so expensive. Hard to monitor, so some places engage in various forms of fraud or neglect.
I would much rather have cheaper childcare, ideally with better caregiver ratios, using a larger amount of ‘lower skilled’ labor. Division of Labor
Would you pay $225 per trunk to have everything washed, folded and returned to your front door? I wouldn’t, because I presume I could get a much cheaper price. But I’d pay rather than actually have to handle the job myself. My hourly rate is way higher. I do not think this task helps us bond. I do find the ‘won’t let the housekeeper do it’ takes confusing, but hey. Now suppose the camp costs $15,000, and comes with a 100+ item packing list. Would you outsource that if you could? Well, yes, obviously, if you don’t want to have your kid do it as a learning experience. I sure am not doing it myself. The camp is offloading a bunch of low value labor on me, is this not what trade is for? Also, 25 pairs of underwear and 25 pairs of socks for a seven-week camp? What? Are they only giving kids the chance to do laundry twice? This is what your $15k gets you? Otherwise, what’s going on? A lot of this seems really stupid. Can’t the camp make its own arrangement for foldable Crazy Creek chairs? Another example:
The packing service price is higher than I’d prefer, but it sure beats doing it slower and worse myself:
I see why people mock such services, but they are wrong. Comparative advantage, division of labor and trade are wonderful things. Early Childhood
No, I would not think that. I have children. It does confuse me a bit, once they get a few years older than that, why things remain so difficult even when you provide clear incentives. It is not obvious to me that it is wrong, from their perspective, to continuously push some boundaries, both to learn and to provide long term incentives to expand those boundaries and future ones. The issue is that they are not doing this efficiently or with good incentive design on their end. Often it is version of ‘if I give you some of nice thing X, you will be happy briefly then get mad and complain a lot. Whereas if I never give you X, you don’t complain or get mad at all, so actually giving you a responsible amount of nice thing X is a mistake.’ The obvious reason is that kids are dumb. It is that simple. Kids are dumb. Proper incentive design is not hardwired, it is learned slowly over time. And yeah, ultimately, this is all because kids are dumb, and they don’t have the required skills for what Hanson is proposing. Great Books
The context is reports that many new college students are saying their favorite books involve Percy Jackson.
I cannot endorse actual lying, but I do want people to be tempted. I want them to feel a bit of shame or embarrassment about the whole thing if they know their pick sucks, and to have motivation to find a better favorite book. You have a lot of control over the answer. For all I know, those Percy Jackson books are really great, and you definitely won’t find my favorite fiction book being taught in great works classes (although for non-fiction you would, because my answer there is Thucydides). Mental Health
Obviously, when there is a sufficiently clear problem, you need to intervene somehow. At some point that intervention needs to be fully explicit. But the default should be to treat problems as ordinary problems in every sense.
Decrease in stigma leads to an increase in reporting [1](https://substack.com/redirect/44c5758e-5a49-4b26-9344-94f720435382?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Increases in reporting lead to a further decrease in stigma Repeat steps 1 and 2 over and over
That’s effectively the same thing. Reducing stigma and increasing resulting social status should look very similar. Could this all be ‘a change in coding,’ a measurement error,
No. It is not simply a ‘change in coding,’ as discussed above. There is a vast increase in kids believing they have mental health issues and acting like it. This is not mainly about what is written down on forms. Nor does a change to how you record suicidal ideation account for everything else going up and to the right. Are we getting ‘better’ at looking into mental health issues? We are getting better at finding mental health issues. We are getting better at convincing children they have mental health problems. But is that… better? Or is it a doom loop of normalization and increasing status that creates more real problems, plausibly all linked to smartphones? I think any reasonable person would conclude that: Older data was artificially low in relative terms due to undermeasurement. Changes in diagnosis and communication around mental health, some of which involves smartphones and some of which doesn’t, have led a feedback loop that has increased the amount and degree of real mental health issues. Phones are an important part, but far from all, of the problem here.
Nostalgia
I don’t know that this is ‘anemonia’ so much as a realization that many of the old ways were better. You don’t have to miss the 90s to realize they did many things right.
Good video games are awesome. They are absolutely a large chunk of my top memories. Don’t let anyone gaslight you into thinking this is not normal. Some People Need Practical Advice
It is a deeply silly thing to claim, yet people commonly claim it. I do not care what statistical evidence you cite for it, it is obviously false. Please, just stop.
The LLM answer is ‘it is close and it depends on details,’ which seems right. There are ways to do it, for some age distributions, but it will be a tight squeeze. And if you have to move those seats to another car, that will be a huge pain, and you cannot count on being able to legally travel in any given car that is not yours. Prospective parents mostly think it cannot be done, or are worried that it cannot be done, and see one more big thing to stress about. So I think in practice the answer is ‘mostly no,’ although if you are a parent of three and do not want a minivan you should totally at least try to make this happen.
I am not always up for working to make new (adult) friends, even though I should be (he who has a thousand friends has not one friend to spare). But I am always looking for my kids to make more friends here in New York City. You're currently a free subscriber to |