---
subject: "Rent Seeking for Four Generations"
from: "Marginal REVOLUTION <donotreply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-05-21 11:24:57
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tyler Cowen", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2466199532210586699", "UNREAD"]
---
Amazing story in the Gothamist about a family that has[ occupied the same rent-controlled apartment for four generations](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=faa600cbc2b87091303da9de2b2e2808e06f45157fac98ff7fbd557fe6f4552d&blog_id=42693868&post_id=90705&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=aa76b6fb9ece2f17817445681ddfaf0e&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly9nb3RoYW1pc3QuY29tL25ld3MvNHRoLWdlbmVyYXRpb24tcmVzaWRlbnQtb2YtcmVudC1zdGFiaWxpemVkLW1hbmhhdHRhbi1hcGFydG1lbnQtZmlnaHRzLWV2aWN0aW9u&email_id=25fd3c8607690183ebe95fd88eb95072) and the last generation is not eager to give up the benefits:
For decades, Vines’ grandmother lived in the rent-stabilized, two-bedroom apartment around the corner from Fort Tryon Park. The unit has housed her family since 1977, Vines said, when her great-grandmother, a Cuban immigrant, moved in. Vines said she started living there part time in August 2021, when she enrolled in college in Westchester.
The building’s owner, Jesse Deutch, told Gothamist in an email that “an apartment is not an inheritance” and that Vines has not submitted the necessary documents to prove she has the right to succeed her grandmother as a tenant.
...Family members — by blood, marriage or
[emotional and financial dependence]— can claim[succession rights]for a rent-stabilized apartment, but only if they can prove they lived there with the tenant for at least two years immediately before their death or permanent departure. There are exceptions to the two-year requirement, including for people who are full-time students, like Vines was when she says she was living with her grandmother.Vines doesn’t contest that she lived part of the week in her dorm. But she said she spent long weekends, holidays and spring break with her grandmother and sometimes slept over when she had time in the middle of the week.
Now you might think you understand this story. The landlord wants to kick out the current tenant to raise the rent to the new tenant, right? No. Landlords are no longer allowed to raise the rents to new tenants (!!!). Unless the new tenant is themselves getting rental assistance!
...the owner might also be able to boost his income if a new tenant with a housing subsidy moves in. Property records for the building show the owner is allowed to collect more than the rent-stabilized amount for tenants receiving rental assistance....As of January 2024, the maximum amount the federal Section 8 program and the city’s own aid program would pay is $3,027. That’s more than three times the approximately $900 a month Vines said her grandmother paid.
Did you get that? The city’s rental subsidy programs (like Section 8 and CityFHEPS) will pay more than three times what the current tenant does — creating a surreal incentive where landlords prefer subsidized low-income tenants over potentially middle-class legacy-tenants. Note that whether Vines gets the apartment at the rent-controlled rate has nothing to do with her income. Vines could be middle-class or a multi-millionaire and still be entitled to inherit the apartment at the rent-controlled rate, assuming her claims of having lived in the apartment hold up.
New York has outdone itself with a rent control system so dysfunctional it manages to achieve the worst of all worlds. Not only does it suffer from the usual problems of reducing the supply of housing and dulling incentives for maintenance, but it has transformed over time from a safety net into a hereditary entitlement. Thanks to succession rights, what was meant to help the poor now functions as a kind of family heirloom — a subsidized apartment passed down like grandma’s china set.