---
subject: "Survey Results: PMS Symptoms"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-04-26 06:29:54
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
In November 2022, Aella posted 19% of women without post-menstrual symptoms believed in the supernatural, compared to 39% of women with PMS. I can’t do chi-squared tests in my head, but with 1,074 votes this looks significant. Weird! Now 72% of people with PMS self-describe as neurotic, compared to only 45% without. Aella writes more about this I tried to replicate this on These are a numerical scale, compared to Aella’s Y/N, so to start I dichotomized them: “have PMS” was defined as a score of 3+, and “believe in supernatural” was 2+. I freely admit these were post hoc choices intended to capture as much variation as possible. I selected for cis women only, to avoid any confounds with hormones and whatever trans people’s menstruation situation is: 30% of those without PMS believed in the supernatural, compared to 48% of those with symptoms. Chi-square was significant at the < 0.001 level. 55% vs. 61% anxious, chi-square was 0.046. Going back and disaggregating the data, we find: T-tests find both of these are significant: Weird! I asked Aella why she even thought to do a poll on this. She said:
Sebastian proposes the alternative possibility that it’s I tried correlating PMS symptoms with lots of other things I had to see what turned up. This is bad practice and for exploratory purposes only, but here’s what I found: No correlation with any political opinion (there was a slight, likely random correlation with YIMBYism, not included on this table). Correlations with feeling negatively affected by various scary things, potentially related to neuroticism. Some correlations with what appears in their dreams (???). I didn’t have a big enough sample to do much work with psychiatric conditions. This maybe slightly contradicts a suggestibility hypothesis (lots of people say Donald Trump is bad; wouldn’t that convince more suggestible people that Donald Trump is bad?). But also, on many questions where men and women differ (for example, on wokeness, not pictured on the table), there was no PMS effect. Maybe that argues against hormones? I had two other questions about conditions which sometimes get classified as psychosomatic: …but neither of them are correlated with PMS. I’m pretty confused by this whole area. As always, you can try to replicate my work using the publicly available You're currently a free subscriber to |