---
subject: "Living by Numbers"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-09-03 10:27:21
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
I remember some of the first health-insurance-sponsored wellness drives at my workplace, back in the aughts. We were all issued a little pedometer to hook onto our belts and a log book in which we could record our progress with stickers. It seemed ridiculous — who would want to keep track of the exact number of steps they took in a day and then share it with HR? But we got a discount on our insurance premiums for participating, so I dutifully logged my steps (or at least entered reasonable-seeming estimates of my step numbers… don’t tell United HealthCare). The corporate wellness initiative industry soon branched out, and I was asked to log not just my steps but the number of minutes I spent on exercise and mindfulness activities. There were nifty websites to collect my data, so I signed up for the portals and entered all of my numbers (or, again, reasonable-seeming guesses). It felt farcical, but, hey, I’m not above jumping through some hoops to save money. Then I got my first Garmin watch so I could keep track of bike rides and runs. I got a sense of accomplishment from seeing the number of miles pile up over the years. I could keep track of whether I was getting faster or slower, which was nice (when I was getting faster). But my watches (pretty low-end ones as far as Garmins go) didn’t just keep track of my speed and distance. They’ve been recording everything. Last time I went running, I had an average ground contact time of 254 ms. My average vertical oscillation was 9.8 cm, with a vertical ratio of 7.9%. My cadence was 160 spm, and I lost 553 ml of sweat. I am not telling you all this to brag. In fact, I have no idea what these numbers mean, or why anyone would want to know them. I also imagine that many of them are just guesses (how would my watch know how much I sweat?!), even though the precise figures make them seem like real measurements. My watch offers to tell me all sorts of other stuff, too, even when I’m not exercising. It can tell me my heart rate and how many stairs I’ve climbed today. It can tell me how well I slept last night (gosh, thanks, how would I have known otherwise?). It also has a bunch of weird made-up metrics. I get a “body battery” score, a stress score, and a “fitness age.” If I wanted to, I could take things to the next level. I could get a ring to keep track of my blood oxygen levels (complete with an AI chatbot). I can also purchase something called a Whoop ( The question, of course, is why? Why do we want to quantify so much about our lives? What do we think this data will tell us? I suppose we should ask Sanctorius Sanctorius (AKA Santorio Santorio), an Italian physician who lived in the late 1500s and early 1600s. He may have been one of the first people to live the quantified life. Sanctorius believed, like many of his contemporaries, that health was all about balance. If you kept an equilibrium between what you ingested and what you excreted, you’d be in good shape. So he invented a “weighing chair” that would allow him to measure his weight moment-to-moment. He would set himself an ideal amount of food and drink to ingest, and then, when he’d hit that amount, he’d stop eating (some So Sanctorius weighed himself, he weighed his food, and, at least indirectly, he weighed his pee and his poop. For good reason, people Though this sort of obsessive self-measurement was ridiculous to most, it was one of the first examples of weight tracking. By the 1700s, diet gurus were While food and weight tracking may have been the earliest way for people to quantify themselves, they weren’t the last. Yuan Huang was a midlevel bureaucrat in Ming Dynasty China. Just after he died in 1606, his letters of advice to his son were published. Like many fathers, Yuan wanted to make sure his son was a good person. Unlike other dads, he thought the best way to accomplish this was through meticulous record-keeping. Yuan’s practice probably came from Buddhism, whose adherents believed that they were building up a balance of karma merits and demerits with the universe that would affect them in the next life. But Yuan started keeping track of his habits systematically while preparing for the all-important imperial exams; he was the first person in his family to sit for them, and failed them five times. Only after he started keeping track of life’s minutiae in his ledger did he pass, unlocking the gate to success. How did the ledger work? We don’t have Yuan’s exact system, but, as his advice was republished in China, people added details to his system. Essentially, every deed was worth a certain number of positive or negative points, and people would add up their balance every day.
If you died with a positive total of 200 points, you were a good person worthy of being remembered fondly, and your descendants would be prosperous. Negative 60 points would render you childless, and negative 300 points would curse your children and grandchildren to poverty. Ledgers based on Yuan’s advice became a common self-improvement tool in China, but it took a founding father to make something similar popular in the West. Benjamin Franklin identified He kept track of these virtues on a grid; if he failed to uphold a certain virtue on a certain day, he would place a dot in the corresponding box. Franklin came to believe that this practice made him a better person — he was able to keep track of his moral progress by working on improving his score from week to week. If Google search results are any indication, Franklin’s ideas about self-improvement through measurement still have life — they’re a staple of Other people took the impulse to track their activities further. In 1813, the former French revolutionary Marc-Antoine Jullien published a book he called a “biometer,” in which people could keep track of the amount of time they spent working on the four main areas of life: “ Eventually, people invented more precise instruments than the diary. By the middle of the 1800s, people could buy thermometers. No longer did you have to go to the doctor to discover if you had a fever; you could measure your temperature all day, every day. Thermometers especially allowed women to track their monthly cycles, an early advance in family planning. Other medical devices, like the blood pressure cuff, eventually made their way into the home, too, allowing people to keep track of their own health statistics. As the scientific study of food and its effects on the body improved, calorie-counters rose to prominence. By the 1910s, people had a rough idea of how many calories a serving of a certain food contained. Doctors established ideal weights, and people — especially women — felt great pressure to conform to these standards. Dr. Lulu Hunt Peters made a splash with her book Diet and Health with Key to the Calories, published in 1918. The book emphasized the importance of thinness and told women that calorie restriction was the way to achieve their desired body type. Peters Girls all over the country wrote letters to Peters explaining their “success” with calorie counting. Peters What would these pioneers of obsessive self-analysis think about the fact that the age of digital technology has opened up so many new opportunities for tracking our lives? Their heirs, who sometimes call themselves the quantified self movement, take the project pretty far, testing their blood regularly and paying minute attention to their daily habits. But even for those of us who don’t take it that far, we all live a much more quantified life than people did even a couple of decades ago. It’s not just the sports watches, either. Our phones and social media apps are constantly harvesting data from us; I’d wager that TikTok has a better sense of many people’s attentional capacity and interests than the users themselves do. All this data collection can be useful — again, it’s nice to know whether my runs are getting faster or slower — but it can have its downsides, as well. People can get sucked into an obsession with maximizing their metrics even if they’re meaningless. I’ve known people who would walk in place to get a few hundred more steps so their watch won’t yell at them. And we should be very wary of what companies are doing with all of that data. After all, if a corporation has a way to make money off of my running cadence, I suspect it will. The quest for a quantified life is based on an old impulse to control and measure how well we’re living. And, despite all our attempts, that ultimate metric is still impossible to quantify.This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are three ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: You can share the newsletter with others: You can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week! You're currently a free subscriber to |