---
subject: "AI #60: Oh the Humanity"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-04-18 14:00:46
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Many things this week did not go as planned. Humane AI premiered its AI pin. Reviewers noticed it was, at best, not ready. Devin turns out to have not been entirely forthright with its demos. OpenAI fired two employees who had been on its superalignment team, Leopold Aschenbrenner and Pavel Izmailov for allegedly leaking information, and also more troubliningly lost Daniel Kokotajlo, who expects AGI very soon, does not expect it to by default go well, and says he quit ‘due to losing confidence that [OpenAI] would behave responsibly around the time of AGI.’ That’s not good. Nor is the Gab system prompt, although that is not a surprise. And several more. On the plus side, my 80,000 Hours podcast finally saw the light of day, and Ezra Klein had an excellent (although troubling) podcast with Dario Amodei. And we got the usual mix of incremental useful improvements and other nice touches. Table of ContentsIntroduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. Ask all your stupid questions. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. That won’t stop social media. Oh the Humanity. It will, however, stop the Humane AI pin, at least for now. GPT-4 Real This Time. The new version continues to look slightly better. Fun With Image Generation. There is remarkably little porn of it. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. Audio plus face equals talking head. Devin in the Details. To what extent was the Devin demo a fake? Another Supposed System Prompt. The gift of Gab. Not what we wanted. They Took Our Jobs. A model of firm employment as a function of productivity. Introducing. The quest to make context no longer be that which is scarce. In Other AI News. Respecting and disrespecting the rules of the game. Quiet Speculations. Spending some time wondering whether you should. The Quest for Sane Regulations. Senators get serious, Christiano is appointed. The Week in Audio. I spend 3.5 of my 80,000 hours, and several more. Rhetorical Innovation. Words that do not on reflection bring comfort. Don’t Be That Guy. Also known as the only law of morality. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. Subproblems anyone? Please Speak Directly Into the Microphone. Thanks, everyone. People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone. They are no longer at OpenAI. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Mundane visions. The Lighter Side. The art of fixing it.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
In addition to the general principle: Can confirm that There are so many things one can do with LLMs in education. In Mali, they are using it to ‘ I do worry they are substituting LLM shlock where one previously used literature, and cutting themselves off from broader cultural contexts, and at least partly out of spite.
Another way to know this is accurate is I didn’t hear about it until two weeks after it was over, then thought it was a really cool idea and had a bunch of ideas how to make it better, and then told myself I wouldn’t have wanted to attend anyway.
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
Colin Fraser: It’s unclear what “knowledge cutoff” is supposed to even mean.
You can have GPT-4 help you with your essay,
If you turn in an obvious ChatGPT special and it would not pass anyway, then yes, it seems reasonable to simply grade it. And if you need to know what you are doing to get ChatGPT to help give you a good essay, then the whole thing seems fine?
If you did not already know the answer, you have zero chance of getting it within a conversation. I think they fail this task because this is a database task, and LLMs do not cache their knowledge in a database or similar format, and also they get backed into a corner once they write the first name after which their prediction is that they will get close rather than admitting they don’t have a full solution, and there is the confusion where birth date and year is a highly unusual thing to match so the half-right answers seem likely.
Oh the HumanityWhat do we think of the new Humane AI assistant pin? Marques Brownlee calls it ‘ He does go over the details, both good and bad. Key points under what it does: It does not link to your smartphone. It does have a linked website that has all your data and notes and such. It has its own phone number, camera and internet connection. It has a cool new laser projector that displays on your hand. It has two hot swap batteries and great charging accessories, except that the battery life is horrible, can often run through it in two hours. Craftmanship is great. You use it by touching it and then talking, or you can move your hand around when using it as a screen, which is a new interface style that kinda works. Two finger trigger for automatic translation. Device is constantly warm, and sometimes overheats. The AI, camera, photos? Only kinda work at best. Apps? None.
Watching the review, I see why Marques Brownlee is so popular. He is fun, he is engaging, and he provides highly useful information and isn’t afraid to level with you. He was very good at finding ways to illustrate the practical considerations involved. He is careful to emphasize that there is great potential for a device like this in the future. Repeatedly he asks why the device does not connect to your phone, a question that confuses me as well, and he points out the technology will improve over time. There are flashes of its potential. It would not surprise either of us if this ends up being a harbinger of future highly useful tech. However, it is clear, for now this is a bomb, do not buy.
Did Marques go too far?
There are two core components here. There is the review itself, which is almost all of the content. Then there is the title. The body of the review is exactly what a review is supposed to be. He went the extra mile to be fair and balanced, while also sharing his experiences and opinion. Excellent. Daniel tries to defend himself downthread by focusing specifically on the YouTube title, which Marques Brownlee notes in the video he thought about a long time. One could reasonable argue that ‘the worst product I’ve ever reviewed’ is a little bit much. Whereas ‘a victim of its future ambition’ might be more fair. But also, I am going to presume that both titles are accurate. Marcques is typically not sensationalist in his headlines. I can smell the YouTube optimization in the labels, but I scanned dozens and did not see anything else like this. You get to occasionally say things like this. Indeed it is righteous to say this when it is your actual opinion. Then there is Vassallo’s statement that we ‘usually restrict’ what people can say and that Marcques has ‘unconstrained power.’ That part is unhinged.
One corner case of this is customer reviews of early access games, especially independent ones that go live early. A few poor reviews there can totally destroy discoverability, based on issues that have long been fixed. I will essentially never leave a formal negative review on an early access game unless I am confident that the issues are unfixable. As a bonus,
Every time I think ‘oh they would not be so foolish as to take the bait in a way that works as hard as possible to give the game away’ I have to reminder myself that I am definitely wrong. That is exactly what certain people are going to do, proudly saying both what they think and also ‘ We are not ‘overwhelmingly ridiculing’ the Humane AI device. We are saying it is not a good consumer product, it is not ready for prime time and it made some very poor design decisions, in particular not syncing to your cell phone. A true builder knows these are good criticisms. This is what helping looks like. Unless, of course, what you want is contentless hype, so you can hawk your book of portfolio companies or raise investment. Or you are so mood affiliated, perhaps as a deliberate strategy, that anything that is vaguely tech or futuristic must be good. You are fully committed to the fourth simulacra level. Meanwhile, there are tons of us, including most people in the AI space and most people who are warning about AI, who are constantly saying ‘yes this new AI thing is cool,’ both in terms of its current value and its potential future value, without calling upon anyone to shut that thing down. It me, and also most everyone else. There is lots of cool tech out there offering mundane utility and it would be a shame to take that away. I use it almost every day even excluding my work. There are two groups who want to ‘shut down’ AI systems in some sense, on some level. There are those concerned about existential risk. Only a small percentage of such folks want to shut down anything that currently exists. When the most concerned among them say ‘shut it down,’ or pause or impose requirement, they mostly (with notably rare exceptions) want to do these things for future frontier models, and leave existing systems and most development of future applications mostly alone. Then there are those who are worried about Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon, or They Took Our Jobs. They want someone to ensure that AI does not steal their hard work, does not put them out of a job and does not do various other bad things. They correctly note that by default no one is doing much to prevent these outcomes. I think they are too worried about such outcomes in the near term, but mostly they want solutions, not a ban. GPT-4 Real This Time
This again presents as a solid improvement while staying within the same generation.
Fun with Image GenerationThe most glaring failure of generative AI so far is the remarkable lack of various iterations of porn. We don’t have zero, but it is almost zero, and everything I know about that tries to do anything but images is shockingly awful. I can see arguments that this is either good or bad, it certainly is helping minimize deepfake issues. Even in images, the best you can do is Stable Diffusion, which is not close in quality to MidJourney or DALLE-3, and Stability.ai may be on the verge of collapsing.
I find it hard to believe that this is so big a barrier it will actually stop people for long. And yet, here we are.
Their page says ‘we believe in safe, responsible AI practices,’ and I have actual zero idea what that means in this situation. I am not throwing shade. I mean those are words that people wrote. And I have no idea how to turn them into a statement about physical reality. I would know what that means if they intended to put permanent restrictions on usage and protect the model weights. It makes sense to talk about MidJourney believing (or not) in various safe, responsible AI practices. And right now, when you have to use their API, it makes sense.
And then what exactly do they think happens after that? I am not saying Stability.ai is being irresponsible by releasing the model weights. I am saying that if they plan to do that, then all the safety training is getting undone. Quickly. You could make the case that This Is Fine, that if someone wants their Taylor Swift deepfake porn or their picture of Biden killing a man in Reno just to watch him die or whatever then society will survive that, at far greater quality levels than this. I do not think that is a crazy argument. I even think I agree with that argument. But saying that you have ‘made the model safe?’ That seems rather silly. I literally do not know what that is supposed to mean. One person suggested ‘they do not consider finetunes and Loras their responsibility.’ Our models do not produce porn, fine tunes and loras on those models produce porn? Tyler Cowen points us One fun note I found in the comments is that if you want to play porn on the Apple Vision Pro, 404 Media says Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse SoonMicrosoft presents VASA-1:
Here is their safety note, bold is mine.
Very true. These are already remarkably good. If you have ‘trained’ your brain on examples you can tell they are fake, and you can use obviously fake avatars, but for some of these the only ‘obvious’ tell is staying in a highly constrained space for too long. Over time, this is going to get very hard to detect. Kudos for the safety approach here. The abuse potential is too obvious, and too much one of the default things people will do with it, and too difficult to separate from the beneficial cases. The whole point is to make it seem real, so how can Microsoft know who is doing that for good reasons? Until they figure that out, it seems hard to responsibly release this. Of course, before too long someone will come along and release a version of it anyway. Devin in the Details
The video makes clear that Devin as it actually exists is still cool anyway.
I am not sure how well they are saying it works? The testimonials by many generally credible (but perhaps not fully objective) people were and remain the strongest evidence there is something there. My assumption is that they are still working on improving Devin, and they will wait to 'prove’ its capabilities until they are ready to release to ensure it is as strong as possible first. Sully agrees that Devin is a real and exciting thing that was deceptively hyped, but also expresses skepticism that anyone but the big labs could create a working ‘AI software engineer.’
I actually disagree. From what I have seen and understand, the big three labs are narrowly focused. They have chosen to not be capable of things like Devin as practical commercial tools. One could argue it is a mistake, but it was a purposeful decision to not attempt to build that capacity, and instead retain focus. I have been assured by experts that this pays real dividends in their core capabilities. Meanwhile others can take the big general models and figure out how to wring the maximum out of them, while being able to move fast and break things, hopefully boundedly fast and only local and finitely many things. We are barely scratching the surface on that, with Devin being a very early attempt. So yes, I think Devin’s origins look like what I expect Devin’s origins to look like. Another Supposed System PromptSome great stuff in here, a lot to like actually, but also a whole lot of yikes if true.
I can get behind sections 1 and 2 for now, in this particular context. There is certainly a place for the bot that will honor your request even if it is considered hateful or offensive or adult content or what not. As I keep saying, if the responsible players don’t find a way to compromise on this, they will drive business into the hands of those who write prompts like this one. The good news is that Arya very much lacks the wherewithal to help you build a bioweapon or launch a cyberattack or wear someone else’s face or anything like that. This is still-in-Winterfell Arya, no one has told her Section 3 is the opposite extreme versus the usual, in context sure why not. Section 5 (wait, what… yes, I know) is a refreshing change. We are all sick of always getting the runaround. Sometimes it is helpful and appreciated, but some directness is highly welcome. Section 6 I actually think is great. If the user wants to know if their query is any of these things then they can ask about that. Give the user accurate answers, in hopes that they may learn and do better. Of course, listing anti-semitic first here, before racist, is what we call a ‘tell.’ As Colin notes, we can all understand why they included Section 8 in this form, and we all understand why we see 9 and 10. Section 7 is asserting accuracy of a wide range of arbitrary tests, but whatever. And then we get to Section 4. Oh no. That is not good. It confirms Wired’s claims that ‘ They Took Our Jobs
The central fallacy he points to is the idea that a company needs a fixed amount of that function, after which marginal value falls off a cliff. In practice this is rarely the case. If you had 10 software engineers and now they can do the work of 15, they can do more things faster and better, it is not obvious if you hire less or more of them now even at equilibrium. There are exceptions where you have exact needs, but this is the exception, and also your business and its available budget likely will grow, so even in those areas the work likely expands. As he points out, often the limiting factor is budget, and I would add organizational capacity, rather than that you have no further useful work for people to do. I continue to be a short-to-medium term optimist here. When the AI helps with or even takes your job in particular, humans and their employment will do fine. When the AI can do almost everything, and it does the new jobs that would be created the same the job it took away, then we will have (many) real problems.
I wrote and edited my own application essays back in the day. But also I was being stubborn and an idiot, I should obviously have had as much help as possible. In the how far we have not come department,
I think people gasp similar amounts, in modestly different ways, in both cases? IntroducingHumane was terrible, but what about New Google paper attempts to take advantage, with
It makes sense that Google would know how to do this given Gemini 1.5, and once again I am wondering why they decided they should tell the rest of us about it.
In Other AI News
Gathering the data does not mean that it gets used. If OpenAI was being efficient one would hope, even from a selfish perspective, that they would realize all of this was trash and stop gathering the information. And also they are imposing large costs on others by ignoring instructions, which seems bad, it is one (quite bad enough) thing not to pay content creators and another to actively make them worse off. Of course, one could say that it is not the worst outcome to impose costs on ‘the world’s lamest content farm’ at that particular url. This is very much anti-social systematic exploitation versus anti-social systematic exploitation. A de facto tax on complete garbage might be a good thing.
I do get discordant when they highlight the ‘more than 20,000 jobs’ created, rather than the actual goal of moving chip production and here also R&D. As a jobs program, this is $320k per job, so it could be a lot worse, but presumably you can do a lot better.
I do not understand how (or why) one can build a chip factory with an anticipated operational start date of 2041. What takes that long? Anything we currently know how to build will be long obsolete by then, the discount rate is extreme, the tech world sure to be transformed. This seems like launching a rocket to Alpha Centauri at 0.1% of the speed of light, knowing that if it is worth going there and humanity sticks around then you will see a later ship pass you by via moving faster with better tech.
Quiet Speculations
That does not mean GPT-5 will arrive soon, although it still might. It means we can on average expect to wait longer, from our perspective. People need to remember how long it took to go from 1→2, then 2→3, then 3→4, and also how long it took to go from (4 trained)→(4 released). Yes, one could expect 5 to arrive somewhat faster, but it has only been a year. Are the startups making a mistake? I do not think this is obvious. The first consideration is that ‘make the current model work as well as possible’ is remarkably similar to the Paul Graham concept ‘do things that don’t scale’ and shipping an MVP.
Ideally what Anton describes is the goal. You build a tool on GPT-4 or another model now, in a way that makes the whole operation turbocharge when you can slot in GPT-5 or Claude 4. How else would one figure out how to do it? Yes, a lot of your work will become unnecessary or wrong when the conditions change, but this is always true. Occasionally this will go poorly for you. The functionality you provide will no longer need you, and this will happen too soon, before you can make your product sufficiently bespoke and friendly and customized with great UI and so on. You die. It happens. Known risk. I still think in many cases it makes sense to take on a lot of that risk. OpenAI is not motivated to do the work of figuring out your exact use case, or building the relationships and detailed expertise you are building, and they cannot take on various risks. You could still win. Also, Sam Altman could be bluffing, whether or not he knows this. You can’t tell.
This is a fine sentiment. I am all for solving physics and metaphysics and discovering things of stunning truth and beauty. Yet I am pretty sure most people and all the incentives will go, in the world where there are not suddenly much bigger issues, ‘yes, that is nice as well, but what I care about so much more is the postscarcity and other practical benefits.’ Which is fine.
Tyler Cowen refers us to what he calls
I would instead say that Thomas Diettrich The right question is, what can we build that is valuable, and how can we build it? The whole point of the current explosion of models is that the best way we know to do most of these tasks is to build a system that generally understands and predicts human text, in a highly general way. Then you tune that model, and point it at a particular context. If it was competitive to instead build narrow intelligence, we would be doing that instead. And indeed, in the places where we have a valuable application, we attempt to do so, to the extent it is useful. But it turns out that this works in LLMs similarly to how it works in humans. If you want to train a living being to do the tasks above you must start with a human, and you will need a relatively smart one if you want good results. A Vulcan or Klingon would work too if you had one, but If you start with anything else that exists on Earth, it will not work. Then you need to teach that human a wide variety of general skills and knowledge. Only then can you teach them how to seek out sources or write engineering tests or formal proofs and hope to get something useful. This is also implying a similar slightly different critique of AGI in the sense of saying that There is a very good different critique of the AGI concept, essentially that it is not well-defined or used consistently, which is true although it remains highly useful.
The Quest for Sane Regulations
They don’t even mention the half of it, whether they know the other half or not. I consider this a case of ‘the half they do mention is enough, and the one the people they talk to can understand’ whether or not it also what they can understand. A pure ‘national security’ approach, treating it as a dangerous weapon our enemies can use is not a good description of the real threat, but it is an accurate description of one threat.
It is a reasonable place to start. I also wonder if it could also be sufficient? As in, a frontier AI is a general purpose device. If you can guard it against assisting with these risks, you need to have it under control in ways that you should be able to transfer? Consider the contrapositive. If a frontier model is capable of taking control of the future, recursively self-improving or otherwise posing an existential risk, then if hooked up to the internet it is definitely capable of advancing a cyberattack.
I would have said that if you are using that many operations (flops) then I am willing to assume you are effectively general purpose. I suppose in the future this might not be true, and one might have a system this large whose scope is narrow. I don’t love the loophole, as I worry people could abuse it, but I understand.
This seems like, for better and for worse, very much a ‘the least you can do’ standard. If you want to train a frontier model, you must ensure it does not get stolen, and it cannot be used for cyberattacks or to enable WMDs. You need a license to release the model, with access you can grant appropriate to the risk level. As always, it must be noted that there will come a time when it is not safe to train and test the model, and guarding against being stolen is only part of what you will have to do in that stage. Gatekeeping only upon release will become insufficient. I do get why this is not in the first proposal. I also find it difficult to believe that it would make sense to only consider these four risks when determining level of distribution that is appropriate, or that this would stick. Surely we would want to test against some other downsides as well. But also that would come in time either way, including through existing law.
This was the question my friend raised last week about the model bill. If you are going to do this, where should you do it? I don’t know. I can see arguments for Commerce and Energy, and if you are going to stick with an existing agency they seem like the obvious options. A new agency could also make sense. I would be skeptical of the interagency proposal. USA Department of Commerce secretary Gina Raimondo
Paul Christiano was indeed appointed. Only this week, I had a meeting in which someone asserted that half the staff was threatening to walk out over it despite vey much wanting Paul to get the job, which (probably) shows how effective journalistic impressionism based off of ‘find two people who are mad’ can be. My current understanding is that Mara Campbell is brought in to be an operating officer who gets things done, and Rob Reich and Mark Latonero are on the ethical end of the concern spectrum. So this is a well-balanced team. CMA, the UK’s Competition and Markets Authority, Some of the lowest hanging fruit in AI regulation is, as it is usually is, to first do no harm (or minimize harm done). In this case, that starts with ensuring that there is a safety exception for all antitrust regulation, so AI companies can coordinate to ensure better outcomes. Right now, they are often afraid to do so.
Innovation is great! However. You might believe that you are special. That the rules do not apply to you. Obviously, you would be mistaken.
He doesn’t frame it this way, but Maxwell seems to mostly be making a fully general counterargument to government regulating anything at all. He indeed cites some of our worst regulations, such as NEPA and our rules against nuclear power. I agree that our regulations in those areas, and many others, have done much harm, that politicians are myopic and foolish and we do not get first best solutions and all of that. But also I do not think we are doing actively worse than having zero restrictions and protections at all? I have heard economic and public choice arguments warnings before, and often respect them, but I feel like this one should win some sort of new prize?
I think the easiest responses are things like (and I feel silly even typing them): This proves way too much. Government does lots of things that don’t impact before the next cycle. The consequences inside one’s borders are quite sufficient, thank you. Deals can and are struck in such situations, or we wouldn’t be here talking. The consequences inside one’s election cycle will also soon be sufficient. Even if they weren’t yet, people can backward chain and still blame you. Also yes, these people do not want their families to die, perhaps? There really is such a thing as being too cynical.
And he warns government is going to make things worse.
The only way I can imagine not having military competition in AI is an international agreement limiting the development and deployment of AI as relevant to military use. There is no option to have the government leave AI alone for the private sector to handle, in this respect. Also, if the government did decide to both not develop its own AI and let others develop theirs without restriction, it would not be long before we were answering to a new and different government, that held a different perspective. He cites my summary of last year’s congressional hearing as well, which I find pretty funny, so I’m going to requote the passage as well:
Yeah, that definitely happened, and definitely was not anyone’s finest hour or that unusual for anyone involved. And of course he refers back the famous line from Blumenthal, who afterwards did seem to get more on the ball but definitely said this:
So yeah. We go to war with the army we have, and we go to regulate with the government we have. In a technical sense, I totally agree with Maxwell’s title here. Regulation of AI is not safe, nor is government involvement in AI safe, any more than highly capable AI is safe, or government non-involvement is safe. Almost nothing that impacts the world at this level is safe. That would be some strange use of the word safe I was not previously aware of. But reflecting on the essay, I don’t actually know what alternative Maxwell is proposing. If public choice is indeed this deeply doomed, and the existential risks are real, and the military applications are real, what does he think is our superior option? There is no proposed alternative framework here, nationally or internationally. If the proposal is ‘the government should do as little as possible,’ then here are some of the obvious problems with that: I think that very predictably, if AI capabilities continue to advance on their own, either a different thing becomes the government or all hell breaks loose or both. If we are being realistic about public choice, the chance of convincing the military to stay out of AI involvement without an international agreement that actually stops our rivals from doing so is very very close to zero. If we are being realistic about public choice, if we do not lay the groundwork for a minimally restrictive regime to control future highly capable AI now, even if the risks do not rise to the level of exponential risk, then public outcry and other practical pressures will force a reaction later. And without any physical alternatives, with the tech already out there and no time to craft a sensible response, what will happen? A much more restrictive regime, and it will be implemented in an emergency fashion, in a far worse way.
Or: No action is a doomed strategy. No action and also no military involvement is impossible. A [Can’t Happen](https://substack.com/redirect/f103e4f4-dd6e-415a-aebe-51d391d6331d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).No action now means a horribly intrusive forcible crackdown later.
I call upon those who see the dangers of public choice and what generally happens with government regulation to actually take those questions seriously, and ask what we can do about it. Right now, you have the opportunity to work with a bunch of people who also appreciate these questions, who are at least low-level libertarians on almost every other issue, to find a minimally restrictive solution, and are thinking deeply about details and how to make this work. We care about your concerns. We are not myopic, and we want to choose better solutions rather than worse. If you pass up this opportunity, then even if you get what you want, at best you will be facing down a very different kind of would-be regulator, with a very different agenda, who has no idea in a technical sense what they are dealing with. They will very much not care what you think. The national security apparatus and the public will both be screaming at everyone involved. And our physical options will be far more limited. The Week in Audio
If you have been reading my updates, most of this episode will be information you already know. There is still substantial new content.
We used this question and I pointed this out because the 80,000 Hours job recommendations (You had one job!) says that this is complicated, and when I challenged them on this in person, they defended that claim, and now I was going to be on the 80,000 Hours podcast, so it seemed worth addressing. As I say in the podcast, I consider myself a moderate on this, making only a narrow focused claim, and encouraging everyone to have their own model of what substantially increases existential risk. Then, whatever that thing is, don’t do that.
I do agree strongly that ‘be careful’ is the correct approach to such efforts, but have more hope that they can be worthwhile after being properly careful. In three hours, one is going to make some mistakes. Here’s the biggest technical flag someone sent up.
Asking all the major language models resulted in many waffling answers (GPT-4 did best), and my conclusion is that both linear and log times likely happen often.
So this goes back to superposition. You have both memorization and generalization circuits from the start, and over time generalization is favored because it is efficient, so weight decay enforces the transition. One implication is that you want to craft your training to ensure that the method you prefer is the more efficient one, whether or not it is the most precise. My guess is that linear time for a grok is more common than exponential time, but I am not confident and that both cases happen frequently. The poll ended up split on low volume since I asked non-experts to abstain (12-12-4): The linked post speculates that this could make it harder to stop a model that has found an aligned first algorithm from later finding a second misaligned algorithm, as it would already be doing the gradient descent process towards the second solution, having the first algorithm does not protect you from the rise of the second one. The flip side of this is that if the second algorithm is already there from the beginning, then it should be possible with mechanistic interpretability to see it long before it is doing anything useful or thus dangerous, perhaps? Davidad announces both his program’s funding (>$74 million over 4 years)
Dario engaged and had a lot of good answers. But also he kept coming back to the theme of AI’s inevitability, and our collective helplessness to do anything about it, not primarily as a problem to overcome but as a fact to accept. Yes, he says, we need to train the models to make them safe, and also everyone who said that is now in a race against everyone else who said that, both are true. More than that, Dario said many times, almost as a mantra, that one could not hope for much, one cannot ask for much, that we can’t stop someone else from picking up the mantle. I mean, not with that attitude. This updated me substantially towards the idea that Anthropic is effectively going to be mostly another entrant in the race, resigned to that fate. Politically, they will likely continue to be unhelpful in expanding the Overton Window and making clear what has to be done. To the extent they help, they will do this by setting an example via their own policies, by telling us about their expectations and hopefully communicating them well, and by doing a lot of internal alignment work. I was referred to this podcast by someone who said ‘have you heard Dario’s unhinged interview with Ezra Klein?’ quoting parts where Dario gives his expectations for capabilities advances. To me it was the exact opposite. This episode was hinged. It was too hinged. This situation does not call for this level of hinged. Dario strongly believes in the scaling hypothesis and that capabilities will advance quickly from here. He understands what is coming, indeed thinks more will come faster than I do. He understands the dangers this poses. Yet it was all ordinary business, and he thinks it will still probably all turn out fine, although to his credit he understands we need to prepare for the other case and to work to ensure good outcomes. But to me, given what he knows, the situation calls for a lot less being hinged than this. Do some of the claims about future expectations sound unhinged, such as the one that was quoted to me? Yes, they would from the outside. But that is because the outside world does not understand the situation.
Then comes a detailed dive into describing mysticism and dissecting
Rhetorical InnovationAjeya is on point here. As is often the case, technically true statements are made, they are implied to be comforting and reasons not to worry, and that seems very wrong.
Futurist Flower is included because if even as the skeptic you have to say ‘it won’t happen this year’ rather than ‘it won’t happen within five years’ then that is a rather alarming thing to say even if you are definitely right about the coming year. I would be closer to 1% than 2-4% for the next year, but three years ago that number would have involved some zeroes. The ‘component’ element here is important as well. Will the future AGI be purely an autoregressive LLM? My presumption is no, because even if that were possible, it will be easier and faster and cheaper to get to AGI while using additional components. That does not mean we don’t get an AGI that is centrally powered by an LLM.
Exact probabilities aside, yes those are some better questions. Aligning an exact human level intelligence?
Elon Musk is importantly wrong here. Raising a kid involves some amount of prompt engineering, to be sure, but the key thing is that a kid learns from and potentially remembers absolutely everything. Each step you take is permanent on every level. It is far more like training than inference. The key advantage you have in prompt engineering is that you can experiment risk-free, then reset with the AI none of wiser. If you could do that with your kids, it would be a whole different ballgame. Don’t Be That GuySo, yeah. As Brian Frye tells us: Don’t be that guy.
There are definitely some people who are not doing okay, and saying things that are not okay and also not true, when it comes to being mad about AI. Do not do this. In my experience, the actually unhinged reactions are almost entirely people whose primary motivation is that the AI is stealing their or others’ work, either artistic or otherwise. Most such people are also hinged, but some are very unhinged, beyond what I almost ever see from people whose concern is that everyone might die. Your observations may vary. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
They offer this helpful advice:
As a general rule, if you have to solve 18 different foundational challenges one at a time, and you cannot verify each solution robustly, that is a deeply awful place to be. The only hope is that you can solve multiple solutions simultaneously, and the challenges prove not so distinct. Or you can hope that you do not actually need to solve all 18 problems in order to win. Here is how they define alignment, noted because the term is so overloaded:
As they note this is a broad definition of safety. Is anything worth having ‘safe’ in this way? And yet, it might not be expansive enough, in other ways. What if the harms are indeed planned? And here are the eighteen problems. How many must we solve? How many of the 200+ subproblems would we need to tackle to do that? To what extent are they distinct problems? Does solving some of them help with or even solve others? Would solving all these problems actually result in a good future? In-Context Learning (ICL) is Black-Box Capabilities are Difficult to Estimate and Understand Effects of Scale on Capabilities Are Not Well-Characterized Qualitative Understanding of Reasoning Capabilities is Lacking Agentic LLMs Pose Novel Risks Multi-Agent Safety is Not Assured by Single-Agent Safety Safety-Performance Trade-offs are Poorly Understood Pretraining Produces Misaligned Models Finetuning Methods Struggle to Assure Alignment and Safety LLM Evaluations Are Confounded and Biased Tools for Interpreting or Explaining LLM Behavior Are Absent or Lack Faithfulness Jailbreaks and Prompt Injections Threaten Security of LLMs Vulnerability to Poisoning and Backdoors Is Poorly Understood Values to Be Encoded within LLMs Are Not Clear Dual-Use Capabilities Enable Malicious Use and Misuse of LLMs LLM-Systems Can Be Untrustworthy Socioeconomic Impacts of LLM May Be Highly Disruptive LLM Governance Is Lacking
If you are looking for good questions to be investigating, this seems like a great place to do that. I see a lot of people who want to work on the problem but have no idea what to do, and this is a lot of possible and plausibly useful somethings to do, so not everyone defaults to mechanical interpretability and evals. Beyond that, as much as I would love to dive into all the details, I lack the time. Roon offers his reasons to be optimistic about alignment, which I’ve changed to a numbered list. Roon: reasons to be optimistic about alignment: Even “emergent” capabilities arise continuously/gradually Current generation rlhf generalizes far better than anyone had guessed Iterative deployment is ever more iterative as labs inch progress publicly Language gives us some level of CEV for free Crossed the superintelligent threshold on certain types of tasks without requiring theoretical alignment guarantees to make safe Any type of self improvement takeoff will involve humans in the loop at first
My quick responses: Better than the alternative but in practice I would be skeptical about this in future. I worry that to the extent people think this is true, it is actively bad because people will think RLHF might work later on. I still see major leaps and expect more major leaps (e.g. GPT-5), and this relies on the ability to roll back or halt if an issue is found, and it does not seem like these iterative releases are being robustly checked. And I worry that if we stop exactly when a system is clearly dangerous now while iterating, and then various other things continue to iterate because they cannot be stopped, then we definitely stopped too late. I do agree it is better on the margin, but I don’t think this buys us much. I don’t think CEV will work, but setting that aside: No? Language does not do this, indeed language makes it impossible to actually specify anything precisely, and introduces tons of issues, and is a really bad coding language for this? That’s worse, you know why that’s worse, right? We keep blowing past obvious barriers and safeguards like they are not even there, making it unlikely we will respect future barriers and safeguards much more than that, and without even understanding that we were doing this. Yes, a machine can be superhuman in a given area (most famously, arithmetic or chess) without that being ‘unsafe,’ but we knew that. Lol, lmao even? What?
There are definitely lots of reasons to be marginally more optimistic.
And more generally, AI deception skills will greatly improve over time. As I keep saying, deception is not a distinct magisteria. It is infused into almost all human interaction. It is not a thing you can avoid. Please Speak Directly Into the Microphone
Except then he plays a video, where the claim is that “We see no mechanism of any way possible of limiting A.I. and its spread and its propogation. It can’t be regulated. Unless you control every line of written code. And the AIs are writing the code.” And the standard arguments of ‘well if you don’t do it then China will’ and so on, no possibility that humans could coordinate to not all die. I do not think that is remotely right. But if it is right, then there is also no ‘guiding’ AI. If we cannot regulate it, and we cannot control its spread or propagation, as they and some others claim, then we have already lost control over the future to AI. We will soon have no say in future events, and presumably not be around for much longer, and have very little say even now over what that future AI will look like or do, because we will be ‘forced’ by The Incentives to build whatever we are capable of building.
Yes. If that is what AGI.Eth believes, then say it. Exactly like this. I approve. We should be aware that many want to build this as fast as possible. People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone
This is obviously very bad news, given multiple people on the Superalignment team are being fired, whether or not they indeed leaked information. Eliezer Yudkowsky notes, for context, that he has reason to believe Leopold Aschenbrenner opposed funding Eliezer’s non-profit MIRI.
Daniel
In terms of predicting AGI Real Soon Now, he is all-in: Despite this being based on non-public information from OpenAI, he quit OpenAI. Daniel’s goal is clearly to minimize AI existential risk. If AGI is coming that quickly, it is probably happening at OpenAI. OpenAI would be where the action is, where the fate of humanity and the light cone will be decided, for better or for worse. It seems unlikely that he will have higher leverage doing something else, within that time frame, with the possible exception of raising very loud and clear alarm bells about OpenAI. My presumption is that Daniel did not quietly despair and decide to quit. Instead, I presume Daniel used his position to speak up and as leverage, and tried to move things in a good direction. Part of that strategy needs to be a clear willingness to quit or provoke being fired, if your attempts are in vain. Alas, it seems his attempts were in vain. Given the timing and what else has happened, we could offer some guesses here. Any number of different proximate causes or issues are plausible. This is in contrast to his previous actions. Before, he felt p(doom) of 70%, and that AGI was coming very soon, but did feel (or at least say to himself that) he could make a net positive difference at OpenAI. If not, why stay? I hope that Daniel will be able to share more of his reasoning soon. Finally on a related note: Remember, the point of dying on a hill ideally is
Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone
This assumes the conclusion, dismissing the possibility of AI capable of being transformative or more than a tool, without considering whether that could happen. It does not ask what might happen if we created things smarter, faster and more capable than ourselves, or any of the other interesting questions. He for example says this is not like the Manhattan Project where things happened fast, without noticing that the similarly fast (or faster) progress lies in the future, or the reasons one might expect that. Also, the Manhattan Project took several years to get to its first few bombs, after much prior physics to lay the groundwork during which nothing of similar impact was produced, then suddenly a big impact. An odd choice of discordant parallel. I suppose at this point my perspective is that such arguments are not even wrong. They are instead about a different technology and technological path I do not expect to occur, although it is possible that it could. In such worlds, I agree that the result would not be transformational or existentially dangerous, and also would not be all that exciting on the upside either. As is often the case with such skeptics, he notes he has been unable to enhance his own productivity with LLMs, and says this:
This is a failure to see even the upside in present LLM technology, let alone future technology, and to think not only even slightly ahead but even about how to use what is directly there right now. If you find LLMs are a ‘productivity killer’ you have not invested much in asking how to use them. Kling’s commentary mostly discusses the practical question of applications and near term gains, which are indeed not so extensive so far, mostly confined to a few narrow domains. This is a skill issue and a time issue, even if the underlying technology got stuck the developers need more time, and users need more time to learn and experiment and adapt. And of course everything will get dramatically better with GPT-5-Generation underlying models within a few years. In terms of Kling’s question about personalized tutoring disrupting education, I would say this is already a skill issue and signaling problem. Education for those looking to learn is already, with the current big three models, dramatically different for those wise enough to use them, but most people are not going to know this and take initiative yet. For that, yes, we need something easier to use and motivate, like Stephenson’s Young Lady’s Illustrated Primer. In its full glory that is still a few years out. On existential risk, Kling says this:
That seems right. I do think that the first and biggest existential risks follow directly from the innovation alone, at least to the degree you can say that of the atomic bomb. As in, if you build an atomic bomb and never use it, or learn how and never build one, then that is not risky, but once built it was quickly used. So yes, you could keep the otherwise existentially risky AI turned off or sufficiently isolated or what not, but you have to actively do that, rather than only worrying about downstream actions of users or developers. There are also grave concerns about what would happen if we to a large extent ‘solve the alignment problem’ and otherwise bypass that first whammy, and even if we prevent various obvious misuse cases, about what dynamics and outcomes would still result from ‘adaptation’ of the technology, which could also quickly be a misnomer. Everything really does change. But as explained, that is effectively beyond scope here. The Lighter Side
It actually does seem super useful for taxes. Most of taxes is knowing a lot of stupid little semi-arbitrary rules and procedures. Yes, it will make mistakes and hallucinate things if your situation gets complicated, but so will you and so will your accountant. One does not get taxes done perfectly, one does their best to get it mostly right in reasonable time.
A fair version of the second panel would actually still have about one hand raised. Evals and mechanistic interpretability are the two places some people are actually excited to do the work. You're currently a free subscriber to |