---
subject: "Bubble, Bubble, Toil and Trouble"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-10-20 13:13:21
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
We have the classic phenomenon where suddenly everyone decided it is good for your social status to say we are in an ‘AI bubble.’ Are these people short the market? Do not be silly. The conventional wisdom response to that question these days is that, as was said in 2007, ‘if the music is playing you have to keep dancing.’ So even with lots of people newly thinking there is a bubble the market has not moved down, other than (modestly) on actual news items, usually related to another potential round of tariffs, or that one time we had a false alarm during the So, what’s the case we’re in a bubble? What’s the case we’re not? My Answer In BriefPeople get confused about bubbles, often applying that label any time prices fall. So you have to be clear on what question is being asked. If ‘that was a bubble’ simply means ‘number go down’ then it is entirely uninteresting to say things are bubbles. So if we operationalize ‘bubble’ simply means that at some point there is a substantial drawdown in market values (e.g. a 20% drop in the Nasdaq sustained for 6 months) then I would be surprised by this, but the market would need to be dramatically, crazily underpriced for that not to be a plausible thing to happen. If a bubble means something similar to the 2000 dot com bubble, as in valuations that are not plausible expectations for the net present values of future cash flows? No. [Standard disclaimer: Nothing on this blog is ever investment advice.] Before I dive into the details, a time sensitive point of order, that you can skip if you would not consider political donations: Time Sensitive Point of Order: Alex Bores Launches Campaign For Congress, If You Care About AI Existential Risk Consider DonatingWhen trying to pass laws, it is vital to have a champion. You need someone in each chamber of Congress who is willing to help craft, introduce and actively fight for good bills. Many worthwhile bills do not get advanced because no one will champion them. Alex Bores did this with New York’s RAISE Act, an AI safety bill along similar lines to SB 53 that is currently on the governor’s desk. By far the strongest argument against the bill is that it would be better if such bills were done on the Federal level.
As always, remember while considering this that political donations are public. (Note: I intend to remove this announcement from this post after the 24 hour window closes, and move it to AI #139.) So They’re Saying There’s a Bubble
So a month ago things most people thought things were fine and now it’s a bubble? This is a very light bubble definition, as these things go. Nothing importantly bearish happened in that month other than bullish deals, so presumably this is a ‘circular deals freak us out’ shift in mood? Or it could be a cascade effect. AI Is Atlas And People Worry It Might ShrugThere is definitely reason for concern. If you remove the label ‘bubble’ and simply say ‘AI’ then the quote from Deutsche Bank below is correct, as AI is responsible for essentially all economic growth. Also you can mostly replace ‘US’ with ‘world.’
Can A Bubble Be Common Knowledge?Not quite, at this size you need some doubt involved. But the basic answer is yes.
It is definitely possible to get into an Is it evidence for or against a bubble when everyone says it’s a bubble? My gut answer is it depends on who is everyone. If everyone is everyone working in the industry? Then yeah, evidence for a bubble. If everyone is everyone at the major economic institutions? Not so much. So I decided to check. There was essentially no correlation, with 42.5% of AI workers and 41.7% of others saying there is a bubble, and that’s a large percentage, so things are certainly somewhat concerning. It certainly seems likely that certain subtypes of AI investment are ‘in a bubble’ in the sense that investors in those subtypes will lose money, which you would expect in anything like an efficient market. Steamrollers, Picks and ShovelsIn particular, consensus seems to be, and I agree with it (reminder: not investment advice), that investment in ‘companies with products in position to get steamrolled by OpenAI and other frontier labs’ are as a group not going to do well. If you want to call that an ‘AI bubble’ you can, but that seems net misleading. I also wouldn’t be excited to short that basket, since you’re exposed if even one of them hits it big. Remember that if you bought a tech stock portfolio at the dot com peak, you still got Amazon. Whereas if you had a portfolio of ‘picks and shovels’ or of the frontier labs themselves, that still seems to me like a fine place to bet, although it is no longer a ‘I can’t believe they’re letting me buy at these prices, this is free money’ level of fine. You now have to actually have beliefs about the future and an investment thesis. What Can Go Up Must Sometimes Go DownNoah Smith speculates on bubble causes and types when it comes to AI.
You could have a speculative bubble, or an extrapolative bubble, or simply a big mistake about the value of the tech. He thinks if it is a bubble it would be of the later type, proposing we use Bezos’ term ‘industrial bubble.’
I don’t think that’s quite right. The market reflects a variety of perspectives, and it will almost always be way below where the ardent optimists would place it. The ardent optimists are the rock with the word ‘BUY!’ written on it. What is right is that if AI over some time frame disappoints relative to expectations, sufficiently to shift forward expectations downward from their previous level, that would cause a substantial drop in prices, which could then break momentum and worsen various positions, causing a larger drop in prices. Thus, we could have AI ultimately having a huge economic impact and ultimately being fully transformative (maybe killing everyone, maybe being amazingly great), and have nothing go that wrong along the way, but still have what people at the time would call ‘the bubble bursting.’ What Can Go Up Quite A Lot Can Go Even More DownIndeed, if the market is at all efficient, there is a lot of ‘upside risk’ of AI being way more impactful than suggested by the market price, which means there has to be a corresponding downside risk too. Part of that risk is geopolitical, an anti-AI movement could rise, or the supply chain could be disrupted by tariff battles or a war over Taiwan. By traditional definitions of ‘bubble,’ that means a potential bubble.
Even a small chance of a big upside should mean a big boost to valuation. Indeed that is the reason tech startups are funded and venture capital firms exist. If you don’t get the fully transformational level of impact, then at some point value will drop. Consider the parallel to Bitcoin, and in thinking there is some small percentage chance of becoming ‘digital gold’ or even the new money. If you felt there was no way it could fall by a lot from any given point in time, or even if you were simply confident that it was probably not going to crash, it would be a fantastic screaming buy. Step Two Remains ImportantAI also has to retain expectations that providers will be profitable. If AI is useful but it is expected to not provide enough profits, that too can burst the bubble.
To say confidently that there is no bubble in AI is to claim, among other things, that the market is horribly inefficient, and that AI assets are and will remain dramatically underpriced but reliably gain value as people gain Oops We Might Do It AgainAlternatively, how about the possibility that there could be a crash for no reason?
The Derek Thompson Breaks Down The ArgumentsDerek Thompson provides his best counterargument, saying AI probably isn’t a bubble. He also
Well, yeah, when there’s a bubble everyone goes around saying ‘there’s a bubble’ but no one does anything about it, until they do and then there’s no bubble? As Tyler Cowen sometimes asks, are you short the market? Me neither. Derek breaks down the top arguments for a bubble.
A lot of overlap here. We have a lot of money being invested in and spent on AI, without much revenue. True that. The AI companies all invest in and buy from each other, at a level that yeah is somewhat suspicious. Yeah, fair. The chips are only being discounted on five year horizons and that seems a bit long? Eh, that seems fine to me, older chips are still useful as long as demand exceeds supply. So why not a bubble? That part is gated, AI Revenues Are Probably Going To Go Up A LotTwo, the AI companies need AI revenues to grow 100%-200% a year, and that sounds like a lot, but so far you’re seeing even more than that.
Frankly, OpenAI is downplaying their expectations because if they used their actual projections then no one would believe them, and they might get sued if things didn’t work out. The baseline scenario is that OpenAI (and Anthropic) blow the projections out of the water.
True Costs That Matter Are Absolute Not Relative
The thing about AI is that it might in total cost a lot, but in exchange you get a ton. It doesn’t have to be ten times better to have the difference be a big deal. For most use cases of AI, you would be wise to pay twice the price for something 10% better, and often wise to pay 10 or 100 times as much. Always think absolute cost, not relative. We Are Spending a Lot But Also Not a Lot
It is, but is it? I spend more than that on one of my AI subscriptions, and get many times that much value in return. Thinking purely in terms of present day concrete benefits, when I ask ‘how many different use cases of AI are providing me $1,800 in value?’ I can definitely include taxes and accounting, product evaluation and search, medical help, analysis of research papers, coding and general information and search. So that’s at least six. Similarly, does this sound like a problem, given the profit margins of these companies?
Valuations Are High But Not Super HighSimilarly, Vinay notes that the valuations are only somewhat high.
That’s a P/E ratio, and all this extra capex spending if anything reduces short term earnings. Does a 28x forward P/E ratio sound scary in context, with YoY growth in the 20% range? It doesn’t to me. Sure, there’s some downside, but it would be a dramatic inefficiency if there wasn’t.
Official GPU Depreciation Schedules Seem Pretty Reasonable To MeOne thing I find confusing is all the ‘look how fast the chips will lose value’ arguments. Here’s Vinay’s supremely confident claims, as another example of this:
Hedgie takes a similar angle,
No one I have seen is saying that chip capability improvements are accelerating dramatically. If that is the case we need to update our timelines. When Nvidia releases a new chip every year, that doesn’t mean they do the 2027 chip in 2026 and then do the 2029 chip in 2027. It means they do the 2027 chip in 2027, and before that do the best chip you can do in 2026, and it also means Nvidia is good at marketing and life is coming at them fast. Huang’s statement about free hoppers is obviously deeply silly, and everyone knows not to take such Nvidia statements seriously or literally. The existence of new better chips does not invalidate older worse chips unless supply exceeds demand by enough that the old chips cost more to run then the value they bring. That’s very obviously not going to happen over three years let alone one or two. You can do math on the production capacity available. If the marginal cost of hoppers in 2028 was going to be approximately zero, what does that imply? By default? Stop thinking about capex depreciation and start thinking about whether this means we get a singularity in 2028, since you can now scale compute as long as you have power. Also, get long China, since they have unlimited power generation. If that’s not why, then it means AI use cases turned out to be severely limited, and the world has a large surplus of compute and not much to do with it. It kind of has to be one or the other. Neither seems plausible. I see not only no sign of overcapacity, I see signs of undercapacity, including a scramble for every chip people can get and compute being a limiting factor on many labs in practice right now, including OpenAI and Anthropic. The price of compute has recently been rising, not falling, including the price for renting older chips.
Could recent trends reverse, and faster than expected depreciations and ability to charge for older chips cause problems for the accounting in data centers? I mean, sure, that’s obviously possible, if we actually produce enough better chips, or demand sufficiently lags expectations, or some combination thereof. This whole question seems like a strange thing for those investing hundreds of billions and everyone trading the market to not have priced into their plans and projections? Yes, current OpenAI revenue is on the order of $20 billion, but if you project that out over 3-10 years, that number is going to be vastly higher, and there are other companies. The Bubble Case Seems Weak
Unlike Charles, I am not about to use leverage. I consider leverage in personal investing to be reserved for extreme situations, and a substantial drop in prices is very possible. But I definitely understand.
Most of what changed, I think, is that there were a bunch of circular deals done in close succession, and when combined with the exponential growth expectations for AI and people’s lack of understanding the technology and what it will be able to do, and the valuations approaching the point where one can question there being any room to grow, this reasonably triggered various heuristics and freaked people out. If we define a bubble narrowly as ‘we see a Nasdaq price decline of 20% sustained for 6 months’ I would give that on the order of 25% to happen within the next few years, including as part of a marketwide decline in prices. It has happened to the wider market as recently as 2022, and about 5 times in the last 50 years. What It Would Mean If Prices Did Go DownIf a decline does happen, I predict I will probably use that opportunity to buy more. That does not have to be true. Perhaps there will have been large shifts in anticipated future capabilities, or in the competitive landscape and ability to capture profits, or the general economic conditions, and the drop will be fully justified and reflect AI slowing down. But most of the time this will not be what happened, and the drop will not ultimately have much effect, although it would presumably slow down progress slightly.
You're currently a free subscriber to |