---
subject: "Book Review: The Arctic Hysterias"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-04-06 18:25:31
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
I. Strange things are done in the midnight sun, say the poets who wrote of old. The Arctic trails have their secret tales that would make your blood run cold. The Northern Lights have seen queer sights, but the queerest they ever did see are chronicled in For example, kayak phobia:
Or qivitoq, aka “hermiting behavior”:
Or sociogenic suicide:
But the granddaddy of them all - and the namesake of Foulks’ book - is Arctic hysteria, aka piblokto. A sufferer suddenly snaps, engaging in bizarre, dangerous, and violent behavior. She may tear off her clothing, run out naked into the tundra, and jump into the icy water. Or she may try to kill herself or others, sometimes even her own children. Other behavior is simply bizarre: trying to walk on igloo ceilings, or gathering random rocks as if they are great treasures. When the hysteric’s friends and family notice the attack, they restrain the victim - usually it takes more than one person; an Arctic hysteric has the strength of several men. After a few minutes, the victim returns to her normal self. She remembers nothing. In 1911, explorer Harry Whitney described a case of Arctic hysteria in Greenland:
Robert Peary, on his way to discover the North Pole, wrote:
Dozens of other Europeans traveling through the Arctic in the first half of the 20th century told similar stories. Foulks’ book starts as a survey of Eskimo mental illness, but soon focuses into his investigation into the causes of Arctic hysteria. As a psychiatrist in northern Alaska, he was well-qualified to study this topic. But progress was slow. He originally thought calcium deficiency might cause Arctic hysteria. The Eskimo diet was calcium-poor, and the long polar night prevented the body from producing Vitamin D. Calcium deficiency sometimes causes weird mental health problems. It all seemed to fit. But it wasn’t calcium. A team of epidemiologists tested Eskimos living a traditional lifestyle in Alaska, and found that their calcium was normal (nobody is sure why; something they’re doing seems to work for them). A psychiatrist in New York, overly invested in the hypothesis, ate a traditional Eskimo diet for one year, but found his calcium levels didn’t change. And Foulks was able to test calcium levels in ten piblokto patients at his psych hospital; they were all normal. It wasn’t calcium! Other biological hypotheses - like hypervitaminosis A - fared equally badly. Foulks eventually accepted that piblokto was probably a culture-bound illness. Most his patients were from unusually traditional backgrounds. Larger, more Westernized villages had lower piblokto rates (and higher rates of Western illnesses like depression and alcoholism). In Foulks’ explanation of piblokto is none of these. He thinks Eskimo society is so different from Western society that Eskimos end up with a different psychic structure, one that handles stress in different ways. (if you haven’t already, consider reading my review of Jaynes’ You can start to sketch out his thesis from the descriptions of kayak phobia and qivitoq above. At the risk of sounding like a judgmental Westerner who thinks other societies are worse than his own, Eskimo society is worse than mine. There is no privacy - after all, igloos have no walls. Nobody ever gets a moment alone, except on hunting trips. Everyone is watching each other and talking to each other all the time. In all this watching and talking, nobody ever compliments or praises anyone else, or expresses happiness or gratitude (the closest Foulks comes to admitting an exception to this rule is that a wife may sometimes smile when her husband arrives home from a weeks-long hunt). But they mock each other’s failures all the time, forever. That quote about qivitoq at the top of this post is pretty typical. Any Eskimo who makes a mistake or just fails to conform will be the butt of everyone’s barbs until they die - often of suicide² (if you haven’t already, consider reading I guess this is what the trads mean when they talk about “tight-knit community”, and it certainly has its advantages:
But it takes a toll. Foulks, writing in 1970 before they invented political correctness, describes the Eskimos as having a “childlike” mental structure. He is not certain they even have an unconscious. The unconscious handles feelings of guilt, but the Eskimos have only endless omnipresent shame. Rather than a Jungian collective unconscious, the collective is their unconscious. So piblokto (Foulks suggests) is something like a child’s temper tantrum, a response to stress from a mind without the complicated hydraulic pumps we use to repress and sublimate it. Or at least it has different hydraulic pumps, shunting it in different directions. If this were true, we should expect to see similar conditions in other shame cultures; Foulks does not explore this as much as I would like, but at least gestures at II. Like koro, neurasthenia, and other culture-bound illnesses, piblokto is endangered. Peary saw plenty of piblokto just hanging out in 1910s Greenland, but Foulks had to spend years in an Alaskan psychiatric hospital just to see a handful. The contrast is actually very striking. Every Arctic explorer from about 1900 to 1930 had the most amazing stories about piblokto. Every Eskimo village he encountered would have jaw-dropping piblokto incidents (sometimes caught on grainy black-and-white film). It seemed like one of the defining features of Arctic life. Foulks could barely find any. The ten or so cases he scrounged up after years of searching probably vaguely qualified, but seemed less intense than the explorers’ descriptions. A few seemed to fade into more Western disorders like schizophrenia. And this was in the 1970s. I cannot find primary sources reporting any cases of piblokto after Foulks’. Western writers have had a field day with this, suggesting maybe piblokto was a racist invention of the early explorers, or part of a racist plot by psychiatrists to to denigrate/romanticize/annoy the Eskimos (eg Although these papers are long on name-calling and short of explanations of exactly what was going on, I don’t want to throw them out entirely. Something does seem odd about the situation. Some writers say that Eskimo oral tradition doesn’t talk about it as much as you would expect from how often the explorers reported it (or at all). Everything we know about this condition comes from about fifty case studies, most by explorers with no medical training. Sometimes they did rape/colonize/oppress the natives, and even when interactions were friendly, they were often in inherently stressful contexts like serving as native guides on expeditions to discover the North Pole. I can’t figure out what it would mean for the whole thing to be fake; there were too many clear stories by too many different explorers, all similar to each other and to Foulks’ own report. The explorers were usually in multi-person parties who read each others’ memoirs and could have mentioned if they were false. There were too many photographs. Maybe some people could have exaggerated a little, but not much. I’m left with two hypotheses: First, piblokto, like koro, dies out as its host culture westernizes. Even a little bit of westernization is fatal to piblokto; the only people who encountered truly uncontaminated Eskimo societies were the early explorers. Everyone else was too late. Second, piblokto was a reaction to the very particular stress of being an Eskimo meeting a Western explorer for the first time. This isn’t how mental disorders usually work, right? Exotic stress responses for one particular kind of stress that you can only have once, and then you never experience it again? The only reason I take it seriously is that it exactly matches III. I said before that for any culture-bound illness, you can find one or two scattered examples far away from the relevant culture. So: I’ve seen one US case that sort of looks like piblokto. The diagnosis I ended up giving was “panic disorder with psychotic features”. The psychiatrically knowledgeable among you might notice this isn’t a real diagnosis. But I think it fits. The attacks usually happen during times of stress or disturbed somatic state (eg after a hangover), and a reliable trigger seems to be worrying that the attacks might occur, starting to obsess over the possibility, and gradually psyching himself into believing he’s having one. They last about a panic-attack-length-of-time, and are treated by the same drugs that treat panic disorder. Could piblokto also be a panic attack variant? I notice that one of the most common symptoms is trying to escape. Everyone talks about “running out of the igloo into the dark winter night”, but remember that igloos on dark winter nights are very crowded spaces with a bunch of Eskimos huddled together. This sounds a lot like the traditional panic symptom of claustrophobia/need to escape confined spaces. One of Dr. Foulks’ patients described a ringing in the ears just before a piblokto episode, which I associate with panic attacks as well. I looked to see whether there was any reason to think panic attacks could cause people to jump into icy cold water, and I found that one common treatment for panic attacks is called Panic attacks aren’t a perfect match: piblokto can involve making creepy animal noises and attempting to kill family members. I’m not sure how to think about this. I notice that Arctic Hysterias includes dozens of stories of hysterics trying to kill themselves or other people, and none of them succeeding (except for one man who lit a fire that he then died in). Does this mean they’re not really trying that hard? Is this the culture-bound part, where people think that’s how you’re supposed to behave during a panic episode? Or am I wrong, and this is completely unrelated? One more thing: Dr. Foulks found that all ten of his piblokto patients had a history of severe otitis media, ie ear infection, including some partial deafness. He didn’t know what to do with this information. Perhaps all Eskimos have otitis media - they’re huddled together in very dry, cold air a lot of the time, and had no access to antibiotics until recently. Sometimes ear infections spread to the brain; maybe this signifies some kind of brain damage. Maybe it’s a vestibular thing? So far it’s all pretty mysterious. IV. Foulks is an old-school medic, not the flavor of modern anthropologist who uses the word “colonialism” a dozen times per page. This makes him a remarkably good recorder of all the colonialism going on around him. He’s not there to judge; he is as close to having no political motive as a chronicler ever gets. He’s just taking psych histories in the middle of a slow-motion breakdown of his patients’ society. The typical Eskimo who Dr. Foulks examines came from a small village that still practiced the traditional ways. The older men were hunters, and wanted their children to be hunters too. But the village might have also had a church (staffed by white missionaries), a school (perhaps linked to the Bureau of Indian Affairs) and maybe a clinic or general store. Many older people would be dependent on welfare from the Alaskan government. Children would live their early years in the village, then:
Descriptions like these leave me at a loss. Clearly Eskimos have not had a fun time assimilating into Western society. Equally clearly, we err by romanticizing the societies they had pre-contact - something the Eskimos themselves have no interest in doing. Reading this book, I was left with a sense of hopelessness, like these people are cursed, and all the West has done is offer them a new poison to break the monotony of the old. Despite these sorrows, people no longer protest their lot by tearing at their clothes, jumping into frozen water, and trying to kill everyone they see. Instead, they’ve just turned Northern Alaska and Greenland into the dual alcoholism capitals of the world. Long live social progress! 1 I follow Foulks’ lead in using “Eskimo” instead of the alternative “Inuit”. The Eskimos include two subgroups, the Inuit and the Yupik, and Foulks is writing about both. Previous claims that “Eskimo” had an insulting meaning have not been borne out by the latest scholarship. Cf. 2 In You're currently a free subscriber to |