---
subject: "The year that was. And wasn’t"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2020-12-13 03:31:58
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
Have you seen the advertisement for this dating app called Match? Written by actor Ryan Reynolds, the ad is a not-so-subtle nod to what 2020 was like for most of us.
In the ad, Satan hops on to the Match app, gets matched with a lady named 2020, and the couple go on to spend the whole year together. They go picnicking in an empty stadium, steal toilet paper rolls, exercise in empty gyms, and in one of the finest bits in the ad, they take a selfie in front of a literal dumpster fire. The ad conveys how the year has been for everyone, and raises hope for a better 2021.
This week’s stories at The Ken mirrored the advertisement. Of lost opportunities, long, drawn-out battles, and a glimpse at what the future holds.
On Monday, Pranav told the [story](https://the-ken.com/story/pos-and-effect-why-jios-point-of-sale-disruption-bombed/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) of what happened to Reliance Jio’s failed disruption—Point-of-Sale, or PoS, devices. In a market that’s gravitating towards digital payments, Jio's struggled to get PoS machines into mom-and-pop stores the way it had imagined. Instead, it now faces disruption from newer, more sophisticated “Dukaantech”—shop tech— products.
Tuesday’s story by Maitri and Olina, our [free story](https://the-ken.com/story/the-hidden-second-epidemic-of-long-covid/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) of the week, was a comprehensive look at the future of those who’ve recovered from Covid-19. And how, for some people, the end of the infection was just the start of a long-drawn battle with lingering but devastating symptoms. The story also delves into how healthcare providers have an uphill battle ahead— dealing with these symptoms without regular follow-ups and solid data.
There’s a controversial concept of “back burning” which involves lighting a forest fire to combat a raging forest fire. These are used in desperate times, and 2020 is surely one such year for the travel industry. But the prevailing Covid-19 pandemic could, counter-intuitively, help hotel aggregator OYO not just withstand the onslaught, but emerge even stronger from the experience, [writes](https://the-ken.com/story/the-pandemic-wont-kill-oyo-it-might-actually-save-it/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) Sumanth in Wednesday’s story.
Four years in, India looks good on its Paris Agreement promises. Emissions per dollar of GDP are down, renewables are looking up. But, as Sreedhar, Sharath, and Seetharaman [show](https://the-ken.com/story/indias-post-paris-climate-change-targets-its-solar-ambitions/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) in Thursday’s story on renewable energy sources, it's India's solar power plan that'll make the world sit up and take notice
The concept of Buy Now Pay Later is at an interesting phase in India. The companies offering small-ticket credit have stickiness but low margins. Bigger lenders offering big-ticket loans repayable through EMIs have the margins, but not the stickiness. In our final piece of the week, Bhumika [explores](https://the-ken.com/story/simpl-lazypay-and-the-future-of-buy-now-pay-later-in-india/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) what the future of the BNPL space will probably look like.
As Saturday dawned, the [latest edition](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/whatsapp-to-whatsshop/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) of The Nutgraf by PGK dropped. This one was about the other significant development around Facebook these past few days—the public launch of a shopping cart feature on WhatsApp. WhatsShop, PGK’s term for the new iteration of WhatsApp, is one of Facebook’s biggest bets when it comes to changing the face of online e-commerce. Crucially, it could have a deep impact in one country—India.
That’s all for this week. Do let me know your favourite advertisements from recent times, and what specifically made you sit up and take notice.
Stay safe and wear a mask,
Sameer Mohan
[sameer@the-ken.com](mailto:sameer@the-ken.com)
|
What you just read is The Ken's weekly recap of its stories. Written by a different person each week. Often insightful, sometimes witty, and very rarely boring. Someone sent this to you? [Sign up for free](https://the-ken.com/?modal=register&utm_source=footer&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=in_recap_email). Don't like these? You can [unsubscribe](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/unsubscribe/?user_id=2349339&data=D0tIWqPpAuKZ2uOr5OgYoMsDd6rZAvCCTbqY23Iku4qHhCYLQnjYr2lh3hhk3KFmnBkI93WImzL_avd6otaWoDyu2GuFq4UIS7Cz4ZkNlMTUtFARYa5KS6GcT456fhHajqDBCmB7QJ7curJIBXMhEvf-N8ujshuM6iPqYlzUTCL7ghiZskT1EWi1ogDVlVhNtvUlMqwaqP24mDywuMwRwjmln6LWJgs_E0Mjs0OmyZBQXC7Zmeu6kD5OclCPKEzzBV7S0EegtUelDS-6t1GO36YPwWwzslFL1PyK9uZD-vwzkmycmXNTydLHIIaFGg1nbKi9YAYbISlxmjAOPnWo-2CSsoa8bfQXyPaJOklzTTgry69Iphp_o-Od2lwUqGrp0vukaL8rWqne0esq6v5jjXYxkHBhfKdmsDq4yu3aRxOT3FzulgRgq-KdjD7mc3QVUrvpk7_Z2vatmmOUENzO2z0r_aoetwJvO0pu7v0mJFOrH3EB1eBjplTE1xokEi6ms52ZzneIFsEcVgl_Mf2UykWpXugWdVXh2938IwcaZnVj55etWJadUiJq7W9LQvuq8w4kJbB-kW9ZD2sUzDI2gA==). Want to manage your emails? Click [here](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/?user_id=2349339&data=0O2RKXGb3wmcp5e1_B9y9fr4eipt-5ctQZNQ-_FyfrpUuQfbq8ItWAH1KTwZ4v6zboq0S4wFqzQmynE1YxqbZRDGvXOcVI53jvwaq7rdQMsogDQ5_lJUzR7X2JqAcUsOoi1I1_QcHWA1q1h3TEcN_N0JrRcoAAZpgoL21rlkb9f9QxxReRuuXrjHpOVjTrC35YFT3UJp-kGGXJdqsEC2k1lsPuIeXwg-2Uy5LsDnsSZWW5xWp9OthRvf5zI4ZEbSBj9qzAExMlg-hBNS2aptYFAoNqDgrssFrGgcKuf5VmDkPaU_uAd-Kb5geoe_B-5Q9fvUH9jd6k68RWOyZR2cuLw-tzVMDJcvXG_fNpQ6udv-rTAVfvlAN54ZirdV6106O5oNDqdOk70zteCP1nA08Mh2-Jc-fYUM8e0HzbS_JbEmTKcq_fBjxCCYdQ-XO-4kwyV6BGbIqG3h9tV2Xm60xiFKrKFWxQPYsdnikPG_6ZV8I7liS86QhbCCycALFcROIX7ukeShOUAKORYJmJTGgALQOvm5hg-Arp5lmvlP6d9BQ-d6_cPjusLBMTffIcc4).
|
|
|
|
|