---
subject: "100M diabetics. Still no country for insulin"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-05-05 04:31:48
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031"]
---
|
|
Make India Competitive Again
Mon, 05 May 25
What India is doing, will do, and should do—to not just survive but thrive in the chaos unleashed by Trump.
Good Morning Ishan,
When big ships turn, they displace a lot of water. And the Danish giant Novo Nordisk is making a sharp turn. It’s phasing out insulin, the life-saving drug that has been in the market for over 40 years, to make way for newer, better, and more expensive products.
In India, some [11 million](https://indianexpress.com/article/health-wellness/novo-nordisk-phase-out-insulin-pens-globally-disrupt-dosage-9960036/) diabetics are on insulin, and Novo commands 60% of the nearly Rs 5,000 crore market. Sanofi, the leader in long-acting insulin with a market share of 70% (brand name Lantus) is also exiting this business. The French major has put up Lantus [for sale](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/healthcare/biotech/pharmaceuticals/sweet-surrender-sanofi-puts-star-insulin-brand-lantus-up-for-sale-eyes-rs-2000-crore-from-indian-pharma-giants/articleshow/120289524.cms?from=mdr) in India because its global [strategy](https://www.wsj.com/articles/sanofi-to-buy-cancer-biotech-company-synthorx-for-2-5-billion-11575888370) is shifting away from insulins at large.
The third large insulin maker in India, Eli Lilly, markets its products through Indian pharma companies Lupin and Cipla, for which the active pharmaceutical ingredients (API)—the insulin crystals—come from the US; only the fill-and-finish work happens in India.
All three global majors had to slash prices in the US in 2023 when insulin prices went through the roof and people took to streets demanding government intervention. Soon after, and unsurprisingly, the pharma companies started exiting some of those products. That decision also coincided with Novo and Lily discovering a new [GLP-1](https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/treatments/13901-glp-1-agonists) class of drugs for diabetes and obesity, which is as much a scientific wonder as a once-in-a-generation business opportunity.
In a market economy, these are as astute as business decisions can get—pull resources away from price-controlled products to invest in newer, more lucrative ones. According to the February 2025 price list of India’s National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority, the price of a 10ml vial of human insulin is capped at Rs 636, while 10ml of long-acting insulin (glargine) is capped at Rs 2,030. But for a country that has [101 million](https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-65852551) people with diabetes, and another 136 million with pre-diabetes, the pharma giants’ exit is a wake-up call no one is prepared for.
Incidentally, India is also home to the world’s fourth-largest insulins producer, the Biocon Group, which along with its new [commercial partner](https://www.biocon.com/biocon-biologics-enters-a-long-term-commercial-collaboration-with-eris-lifesciences-to-expand-patient-access-in-india/) Eris Lifesciences, is probably looking at a windfall as the giants vacate the space.
Still, one group’s windfall cannot be a country’s healthcare sanctuary. Particularly today, when India is going all-out to encourage manufacturing, and insulin, nearly a century after its discovery, has become a game of titration—between economies-of-scale grade plants, assured markets, and capped but predictable prices.
The Ken’s premium audio experience is here!
From original podcasts to writer-narrated versions of our subscriber newsletters, you can now listen to The Ken each day. Discover them all at [the-ken.com/podcasts](http://the-ken.com/podcasts).
Existing Premium subscriber? You already have FULL access to ALL our premium audio. They are available exclusively via our subscriber apps. If you don’t have them, just download one and log in to unlock everything. Subscribers on the app can listen to this edition of Make India Competitive Again [here](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/make-india-competitive-again/100-mn-diabetics-still-no-country-for-insulin).
Not a Premium subscriber? You can subscribe to [The Ken Premium](https://podcasts.apple.com/in/channel/the-ken-premium/id6744577070) on Apple Podcasts for an easy monthly price (Rs 299 in India). The channel includes other premium podcasts such as The Nutgraf and First Principles.
In the past year alone, as Novo began scaling down, many countries such as the US, Malaysia, and Brazil have reported insulin shortages. The company will pull seven brands from India, of which Mixtard, a mixture of fast and long-acting insulin sold in penfills, is the mainstay of Indian patients.
Novo has said it will continue to sell this product in vials, but that accounts for less than a third of the sales and is mostly used in hospital settings. For retail users, it’s either painful, awkward-to-use syringes or dash to find a substitute.
At Eris Lifesciences in Ahmedabad, founder Amit Bakshi is gearing up to grab “60% of the vacated market”. As someone who started his career selling insulins at these multinationals, he’s been eyeing an entry into the insulin business for a while.
In the past, Bakshi went to China looking to procure APIs for insulin. But he also knew it would not “make commercial sense and I’d have to discontinue in between”.
When he found Pune-based MJ Biopharm scaling up its insulin API, he entered the business with Eris’ own brand named Xsulin. Last year, Eris acquired Biocon’s India formulation business for Rs 1,242 crore along with the latter’s insulin brands Insugen and Basalog. The two companies also signed a 10-year partnership under which Biocon Biologics will manufacture insulin.
Now that global giants have announced their retreat, Biocon [says](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/prime/pharma-and-healthcare/as-novo-nordisk-scales-back-eris-and-biocon-biologics-hit-the-sweet-spot-in-indias-insulin-market/primearticleshow/120697277.cms) it’ll ramp up production. But here’s the market skew one can’t ignore: in nearly 20 years of selling in India, Biocon couldn’t beat the MNCs to gain more than 10% market share and began to focus on global markets. It is now approved in 40 countries and has more than 80% market share in countries like Malaysia and Mexico. Even in the US, it enjoys a bigger market share than in India. The Bengaluru-based company wants to be a global player in insulin, reaching 1-in-5 people globally.
Evidently, there’s a limit to how much Biocon can serve the Indian market—especially given it remains pretty low-value compared to other markets, even when the insulin is a government-tendered product.
As part of the deal last year, Biocon sold its under-construction Bhopal plant—which was being readied for the ROW (semi-regulated) market—to Eris, and Bakshi hopes that this will help him serve the India market better. His confidence comes from the fact that he has improved the business Eris bought from Biocon—growing a Rs 16 crore per month business to Rs 22 crore a month in just about a year.
For more than two decades, Novo and Lily between them enjoyed 100% market dominance in human insulin in India. Along with Biocon, there were a few others including Wockhardt, USV, and Russia’s Shreya which launched their own insulin products. But the perception among doctors that insulin was a “hard-to-make product which only MNCs could deliver with high quality” made it harder for others to break into.
Additionally, the prowess of the Indian pharmaceutical industry at large resides in chemistry-based drugs. Biotech products which have a complicated and long manufacturing cycle because they deal with living organisms didn’t catch anyone’s fancy.
So the Indian market pretty much remained in the shadows of Novo, Lily, and Sanofi.
More than 100 years after insulin was discovered in Canada and a non-profit body named Nordisk Insulin Laboratory—parent of Novo Nordisk—brought it to Denmark for production, this life-saving drug still remains inaccessible to more than half of the people in the world who need it. (By some [estimates](https://www.economist.com/podcasts/2021/08/03/the-shot-of-the-century-100-years-of-insulin), only 10% can access it.)
Even though better and long-acting insulins—which need to be injected only once every few days—are going to enter the market, basic insulin will always be needed for the rising diabetic population across the world. Ironically, it’s also a product whose price has rarely fallen. (In India, when Biocon entered the market in 2004 with a lower price, global companies had to drop their prices too.)
To fully appreciate what’s unusual about insulin’s price spike, think back to 1996. That’s the year that drugmaker Eli Lilly introduced Humalog, the first fast-acting insulin. It’s also the year that Nintendo debuted the N64 video game system.
The N64 was state of the art — for its time. It cost $199 at first. But within six months, Nintendo [cut the price 25%](https://www.ign.com/articles/1997/03/18/n64-slashed-to-149) to match the rival Sony PlayStation. [More price cuts followed](https://www.gamespot.com/articles/n64-and-playstation-now-99/1100-2450448/), until the companies launched new gaming systems.
Humalog insulin, by contrast, [has gone](https://khn.org/news/how-much-difference-will-eli-lillys-half-price-insulin-make/) from $21 a vial, in 1996, to $275 in 2017. Even [adjusting for inflation](https://data.bls.gov/cgi-bin/cpicalc.pl?cost1=21.00&year1=199607&year2=201905), that list price is eight times the original.
“Insulin manufacturers charge so much for a really simple reason: because they can,” said Shannon Brownlee, co-chair of the Lown Institute’s Right Care Alliance, a Brookline nonprofit that advocates for affordable health care.
Why Insulin Defies The Normal Rules Of Economics And Keeps Getting More Expensive, [Wbur](https://www.wbur.org/news/2019/06/25/why-insulin-defies-the-normal-rules-of-economics-and-keeps-getting-more-expensive)
Bakshi is aware of the responsibility of entering this space. He’s done the math.
“If you put your money in an FD (fixed deposit), it gives you a 7% post tax return. Any ROCE (return on capital employed) which is more than 12–13% is a good ROCE. And we are getting that on insulin,” he said.
Since insulin is price-controlled, the price increase is minimal, linked to India’s Wholesale Price Index.
Bakshi is investing, both in the product and its marketing, because he thinks the competition cannot disrupt him. “It’s such a basic business; the product is required across [a vast population]. The volumes are getting bigger and every year it’s getting depreciated. I start with 18–20% return on capital and by the time my plant is depreciated, I get to 22–23%.”
It’s a fantastic business to be in, he says with an air of satisfaction.
But inside the policy circles in New Delhi, officials have no reason to be satisfied. Rather they should be paranoid; thinking about systemic solutions so that shortages, price gouging, or inaccessibility do not make diabetes a demographic catastrophe. Because it’s not just type-1 diabetes but a good portion of type-2 diabetes that requires insulin treatment.
Insulin has always had a “black box” aura around it. It doesn’t need one.
Regards,
Seema Singh and Sudeshna Ray