---
subject: "Equity as an Option on Future Reinvestment"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <byrne@thediff.co>"
to: ""
date: 2023-01-30 13:14:23
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX"]
---
|
|
In this issue: - Equity as an Option on Future Reinvestment
- Apple AR
- Car Loans and Non-Stationary Distribution
- Shorting
- Working Capital
- Acceleration
- Diff Jobs
Note: We've onboarded a new Diff Jobs company. If you're looking for a design or engineering role at an AI startup, be sure to check the new listings. Equity as an Option on Future ReinvestmentA good intuition pump for thinking about companies in general, and the stock market in particular, is to ask: why does the average company trade at a premium to book value? The S&P 500's total market cap is about $32tr, and it trades at 4.1x book value, so for a mere(!) $7.8tr you could replicate all the assets—buildings, factories, equipment, inventory, receivables, cash on hand, etc. And yet investors are overwhelmingly more likely to allocate their money to an existing public company at some premium to book value than they are to rebuilding the same business at a discount. This is not an entirely silly question. Some of it comes down to accounting: the book value of $100m of last year's branding, employee training, etc. cost is $0, but obviously that kind of work still has value. And there are other accounting elements: a nuclear power plant's book value will drop over time as it depreciates, but its replacement value has gone up as Of course, it's easy to think of companies that are worth more than more than the money that's gone into them, even if we correctly capitalize upfront costs that have long-term payoffs. In other words, the premium to book value does make sense even in a world where capital is mobile and competition is ubiquitous, in part because the best companies have assets that are worth more than their accounting value and in part because the biggest chunk of some companies’ economic value is the fact that they can keep reinvesting in good assets. There are many ways to model this out. One fruitful option is to take the nuclear power plant comparison from before, and apply it to other kinds of investments that are cheaper to make upfront. For example, setting a high standard for product quality, customer service, unwillingness to offer discounts, etc. has some cost. The cost of maintaining such a standard is lower. So the right time to obsess over it is from day one; when the "customer support" team is every cofounder checking a shared inbox, the cost of responsiveness is low because there simply aren't that many customers. And maintaining this—both keeping latency down and treating customers well—is partly a matter of tracking metrics and partly one of setting a good example. Being tough to negotiate with on pricing is another sort of asset whose value compounds; being stubborn early on (especially when there's room to be flexible on what gets delivered in exchange for delivering it at a particular price) establishes a norm internally and externally that can scale as revenue grows. For reputational issues in general, the "reputational replacement cost" goes up as a function of the size of a business; when a big company messes up, or is perceived to, it's a long and daunting process to get back to even. It wasn’t easy for Google to make “Google” a verb, but whatever it cost, it would be much, much more expensive to convince people to stop “Googling” and start “Binging” or “DDG-ing” instead. There are other practices in the broader world of "get things right the first time" that can produce compounding returns. The more equity someone has in an early-stage business, the more their de facto part-time job is recruiting; this applies to VCs and to early employees. And it means that hiring and raising capital are also decisions about which network to tap into (when a company has a founder from a name-brand tech company, it doesn't just mean that the founder has been vetted by that company—it means that the hires they make through their network will include a subset of people vetted by that company and by the founder.) And there are some kinds of expenses that are closer to a bet on the future state of the world. For some categories of product, the world needs 1 +/- 1 of them, so building it means some chance of a total loss, some chance of a monopoly, and the possibility of a cozy-or-not duopoly. Distribution networks and AI models both fit this category; the right time to build one is before it's obvious that it will get a good return, because that's also the time when it's plausible to be the only company building it, and there are plausible future worlds in which it's lucrative to be the only company to have built it. Working backwards, the big companies must have been good at at least one of two things: - Raising money.
- Getting an above-average return on the money they raised.
And the bigger a company gets, the more difficult it is for point #1 to remain an advantage. A company that's better at raising than at investing can do fine in private markets (and can, with a bit of luck, evolve into being good at both—some of the skills required to negotiate with VCs translate nicely into the skills required to negotiate with key hires). But as such a company gets bigger, the due diligence process gets stricter, and once it's public there's a very strong incentive for short sellers to identify flaws in its economics. Warren Buffett has a nice quote on the matter of ROE that's worth thinking about: "If you earn high enough returns on equity and you can keep employing more of that equity at the same rate—that’s also difficult to do—you know, the world compounds very fast." That's a deep point, because there are many businesses that can achieve a high return in retrospect, but not in prospect. Take the biotech industry: The biotech ETF, XBI, has produced an overall growth rate of 10.8% since its 2006 inception, about a point ahead of the S&P but with sharper drawdowns. Within that industry, though, we might treat each company as a business that has a 10% shot at a ~110%+ return on the fixed investment in a single drug, or a 90% chance of liquidating without achieving anything. Looking backwards, publicly-traded biotechs will have good returns on investment, but that's because they're the most successful subset of the entire industry. Much rarer and more precious is the kind of company that can both produce a high return on its existing capital and continuously reinvest at above its cost of capital. Take Buffet’s Berkshire Hathaway as an example: the company is really a collection of two types of companies: those that will get minimal reinvestment and produce steady returns (think Buffalo News, which was acquired when it was the strongest paper in a two-paper town, and which had many years of profitable monopoly status before cable TV, AM radio, and finally Craigslist devoured its economics) and those that can take some of that harvested cash flow and reinvest it in something that will get a decent return. Berkshire's utility holdings (Berkshire Hathaway Energy) and its quasi-utilities (like the BNSF railroad) send lots of their cash flow back to the home office, but collectively they'll absorb around $12bn in incremental capital expenditures this year (Energy's capex plans are When companies are valued based on a discounted cash flow analysis (explainer Of course, part of the trick is trying to find such a company. Peter Lynch seemed to use this pattern; from
Once a chain has gone from regional to working well in two regions, the way to bet is that it'll work just about everywhere. Some things have changed since Lynch's day. Unfortunately for buy-what-you-love stockpickers with a penchant for fast food, the market has gotten pretty good at slapping a high multiple on chains that can show good unit economics and can plausibly talk about reaching "the other 90% of the country." Still, it's a strong model, and it applies to many kinds of businesses. When you're underwriting some long-term growth trajectory for a business, a good question to ask is "what is it that makes their dollars the kind that produce a return on equity of 15%? (or 20%, or 25%) when the rest of corporate America mostly earns its cost of capital?" There isn't necessarily a good answer; some businesses started with a lucky break and converged on the median performance for their overall industry; last week, paying subscribers But these companies do still exist. And they're usually priced accordingly: - TSM is buying equipment that other semiconductor manufacturers can buy (at least if they're not under sanctions), but their process knowledge and long-term customer relationships create persistently higher returns on equity.
- Every successful creative effort at Disney turns into an opportunity for more capital expenditures: a popular character from a movie franchise can get their own Disney+ show, or can become an attraction at a park.
- Cintas (written up for subscribers
[here](https://www.thediff.co/r/7d039dd6?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)($)) already delivers company uniforms to over a million businesses, so adding other products to that delivery has a low marginal cost. - Microsoft (disclosure: long) has a more abstract distribution network, but when a new business tool gets identified, like video chat or, well, chat, Microsoft can throw it into the bundle.
- Salesforce, of course, can do this too, often through acquisitions like their purchase of Slack. Nobody said this was easy.
A good company is a carefully-constructed bubble of negentropy; it's an environment in which high returns, on capital and people, are sustained over long periods, creating a company that’s worth more than the sum of its parts. But fighting entropy is hard, and only gets harder with scale; the bigger a company becomes, the more of its surface area is exposed to uniqueness-sapping, ROI-depleting problems. Some of these are internal; it's hard to maintain a distinctive company culture while adding massive headcount. Some are external: if the company does something special and profitable, competitors will try to figure out how they can do it, too, and other companies in the supply chain will try to weaken this advantage so the high profits accrue to them, instead. So the end conclusion of searching for the ability to continuously reinvest at high returns is a search for companies that have beloved brands, favorable regulations, or a relentlessly paranoid management team that's obsessed with delaying the onset of mediocrity. This doesn't mean that short sellers have to bet that the company goes to zero; there are plenty of businesses that are merely okay, but are valued as if they're good or great. Since many short sellers are trying to balance out a long book, a trade where the thesis is "this company won't do much over the next few years" is perfectly acceptable. Especially because if such a company is raising money from public markets, the short seller solves the problem of what catalyst will lead people to sell; when the seller is the company itself, all you have to do is keep an eye on cash balances and assume that they'll tap markets when they need more funding. [↩︎](#fnref1)
You're on the free list for The Diff—which means you're missing out on the most in-depth writeups. A Word From Our SponsorsHere's a dirty secret: part of equity research consists of being one of the world's best-paid data-entry professionals. It's a pain—and a rite of passage—to build a financial model by painstakingly transcribing information from 10-Qs, 10-Ks, presentations, and transcripts. Or, at least, it was: If you've ever fired up Excel at 8pm and realized you'll be doing ctrl-c alt-tab alt-e-es-v until well past midnight, you owe it to yourself to ElsewhereApple ARThe Information has a
It's tempting to look at this as a sign of Apple's underlying philosophy about technology. The company tends to make tools that are good for interacting with an external world, like a better phone that taps into legacy phone networks, an iPad that's good for reading books and magazines, a watch that tracks users' heart rate and nags them to avoid being sedentary. A purely escapist device doesn't fit with that model. Whereas one of the advantages of AR, from a company's perspective, is that if it's augmenting reality, and reality goes away, it's possible to reach a world where the device never comes off. Which would make the 100+-pickups-a-day interaction level of phones seem like a comparatively low usage level. Car Loans and Non-Stationary DistributionsWhen recessions hit, default rates for just about every kind of loan go up. But there are always surprises in the details. One of the unique elements of the Great Recession was that car loans held up relatively well, with delinquencies below their mid-90s peak. ShortingSo far, Working CapitalThe total amount of working capital needed to ship raw materials around the world AccelerationBig tech companies have But that doesn't mean those big tech companies aren't benefiting from AI. The WSJ has a
The piece also has a notable tidbit for anyone hoping to call inflections in the datacenter and semiconductor cycle: "But even with that spending, the recent AI efforts have stretched Meta’s processing capabilities to its limits, according to the internal documents. One November memo said that Facebook engineers not working on AI would have to abstain from building computing-heavy features on company servers—and delete some of their existing work." Software businesses still have near-zero marginal costs on average. But as AI increases global demand for compute, "near-zero" doesn't round to zero. Disclosure: Long META. Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively seeking talent! If you're interested in exploring growth opportunities at unique companies, please reach out. Some top current roles: - A new health startup that gives customers affordable access to preventative care and lifestyle interventions seeks a founding engineer. 7+ years of JavaScript experience preferred (TypeScript is ideal), and payments experience is a plus. A great opportunity for anyone excited to make healthcare better by treating problems cost-effectively before they're catastrophic. (US, remote; Austin preferred)
- An AI company building new services to help small companies accelerate their growth is looking for an experienced product designer who can create interfaces for products that haven't existed before. (SF)
- A fintech startup that lets investors trade any theme as if there were an ETF for it is looking for a senior backend engineer. (NYC)
- A well funded early stage startup founded by two SpaceX engineers is building the software stack for hardware companies. They're looking for a backend engineer who can build services that quickly process large amounts of data. (Los Angeles)
- A new AI company is looking for senior engineers with experience building scalable systems with Node and Typescript on AWS. Management experience is a plus. (SF)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. |
||
Give feedback on this post
|
|
|||
|