---
subject: "Supertzar, or the Hand of Doom"
from: "Maxim Raginsky from The Art of the Realizable <realizable@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-08-02 20:11:37
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Maxim Raginsky", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3440436245007788095", "UNREAD"]
---
These days, The first mention of the concept in a technical publication seems to be in a 1966 paper
The beginning paragraph of Section 2 also cranks it up to eleven right away:
The concept of “intelligence explosion” (which was articulated by Good in an This thought experiment and its conclusion are the substantive core of all subsequent invocations of the idea. Its psychological appeal is undeniably powerful, but therein lies its potential weakness. To pinpoint this weakness, let us first inquire into the nature of this possible world and, in particular, whether Good’s definition of ultraintelligence does not do too much violence to all the usual ceteris paribus clauses one would have to invoke in order for the inference to the stated theory to be unproblematic. In other words, if we postulate this one small difference between Good’s world and ours, we better hope that it does not explode into a whole mess of differences that would make the background of the theory as strange and counterintuitive as the theory itself. Small worlds vs. large worldsThe key distinction here is between small worlds and large worlds. In the context of statistical decision theory, this distinction was made by To all of this, Savage attaches a key caveat that it is only rational to apply all these constructs to “small worlds,” i.e., those in which we can always look before we leap. In other words, we know all the states of the world and can anticipate the consequences of all our acts. This is needed, for example, so that the notion of expected utility is well-defined. As Savage says,
In other words, Savage argues that the concept of expected utility maximization only makes sense in a world where the decision-maker can take all conceivable information into account before choosing an act. All possible mistakes that could have been made will already have been corrected. There are
The world Good invites us to imagine is just such a large world because his definition tacitly rolls up scientific inference, macroeconomics, finance, and psychology into one tangled mess. For one, the definition of an ultraintelligent machine as one that surpasses humans in any intellectual activity is too open-ended. Is it possible to enumerate all conceivable human intellectual activities in advance? From history, we know that the introduction of new technologies, machines, social-economic arrangements, and political systems unlocks new intellectual activities and interests by amplifying human abilities. Asking us to imagine a machine that surpasses humans in any such activity tacitly assumes that we can forecast any such developments. So, the world that differs from ours “only” in one respect (ultraintelligent machines exist in that world but not in ours) is not a small world in Savage’s sense, it is a large world with huge indeterminacy in just about any realm we can think of: sociology, economics, technology, science, psychology. Before we can even begin to deduce intelligence explosion, we are confronted with an explosion of differences that makes Good’s world utterly incomparable to ours. It has too many bridges we can only cross when we get to them. Establishing the phenomenonFundamentally, Good’s thought experiment is not a scientific one, it is psychological. Thought experiments of this type are not uncommon in analytic philosophy, and this is the domain where analytic philosophy can often become indistinguishable from science fiction. The 1980 book Real People: Personal Identity without Thought Experiments by the philosopher
In other words, successful thought experiments can be about small worlds only, and it is precisely the impossibility of adequately describing the background of the large world that prevents the offered thought experiment from successfully establishing the phenomenon. As an example of this, Wilkes takes aim at
Good’s, and everyone else’s, visions of superintelligence are equally incomprehensible for more or less the same reasons. They fail to successfully establish the phenomenon because the definitions they take as self-evident are anything but self-evident. One way in which this is evident is the unwarranted intermixing of mathematical or logical arguments with psychological notions, such as desire or drive. Psychologism and its discontentsAs I already noted above, Good’s definition of ultraintelligence is unworkable because it discusses human intellectual activities in a timeless setting of Savage’s smal world. It assumes that human psychology is fixed and that the range of human intellectual activities can be circumscribed in advance. From this, Good argues, ultraintelligent machines will be able to bootstrap their abilities in an intelligence explosion. This sort of “recursive self-improvement” is now one of the core concepts taken for granted in all the discussions on AI risk. However, a more explicitly psychological argument was put forward in 2008 by Omohundro starts from the same premises as Good, but invokes the idea of dominated strategy in game theory to argue for the inevitability of recursive self-improvement by advanced AI systems. In a
Omohundro’s concept of drives is vulnerable to the same critique: It either does not admit a psychological interpretation (in which case it can be formalized without appealing to vaguely Freudian terminology, but then it applies to any technological system) or it does (but then it is purely incidental to the mathematics, and there is no need to appeal to the trappings of mathematical rigor to discuss it). Leaving aside the mathematical content of Omohundro’s argument², the psychological appeal of these ideas is undeniable. But it is precisely the psychologism that undermines them because, once again, it forces us to give up a tidy small world where utility maximization makes sense in favor of a nebulous large world, where the relevant background is just as incomprehensible as the one in Parfit’s discussion about creatures that divide every autumn and fuse every spring. The fables of subcreationI am not arguing here against the need to envision possible catastrophic risks of advanced technologies and to use these analyses to influence policy. There is a need for such 1 In accordance with the classics, Pandora is Binmore’s moniker for an archetypal decision-maker. 2 Elliott Thornley The Art of the Realizable is free today. But if you enjoyed this post, you can tell The Art of the Realizable that their writing is valuable by pledging a future subscription. You won't be charged unless they enable payments. |