---
subject: "Medical Roundup #4"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-18 13:33:16
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
It seems like as other things drew our attention more, medical news slowed down. The actual developments, I have no doubt, are instead speeding up - because AI. Note that this post intentionally does not cover anything related to the new Administration, or its policies. Table of ContentsSome People Need Practical Advice
Good News, Everyone
Naloxone alone did not do much to reduce opioid deaths,
That is not quite the same as saying the residency slots cost too much, but it also is not that different. One of the costs of providing a residency slot is the training time, which requires doctor time, which is expensive, increasing staffing needs. If pricing that in still leaves profit, including accounting for transitional costs, you’d see expanded residency slots, so I presume that after taking this into account adding new slots is not actually profitable, even if current slots do okay. Bad News
Life Extension
Another claim of Still very early, also starting to get interesting.
Doctor Lies to PatientIf you are terminally ill and ask how long you have the doctor will overestimate your time left, I find it hard to believe this is not motivated. Even if the doctors consciously believe the estimates, they almost have to be offering optimistic outlooks that are ‘on purpose’ in various ways. If they started out optimistic by a factor of five as an honest mistake and were trying to be accurate, it wouldn’t take long for them to notice their patients all keep dying way too soon, and adjusting their estimates. Potential motivations include preventing the patient from giving up hope or seeking expensive and painful alternative treatments they doubt will do anything useful, telling them what they want to hear, avoiding the whole ‘doctor said I would die soon and here I am’ thing and so on. I do sympathize. I also find it weird to assess a prediction for ‘accuracy’ based on the actual time of death - a prediction is over a distribution of outcomes. You can only properly judge prediction accuracy statistically. Is there a relation to this next story, if you look at the incentives?
Based on my personal experience as well, in America you really, really need to be ready to advocate for yourself when dealing with pregnancy. Some doctors are wonderful, other doctors will often flat out give you misinformation or do what is convenient for them if you don’t stop them. Also don’t forget to consult Claude. Study Lies to Public With StatisticsInequality is always a function of how you take the measurement and divide the groups.
It is important to generalize this mode of thinking. Sorting people by Y, and and saying the top X% in Y have most of the Y, is typically not so meaningful. What you want is to say that you sort people by Z in advance, and then notice that the top X% in Z then later accumulate a lot of the Y (where Z can be ‘previous amount of Y’ or something else). Then you are more likely to be measuring something useful, and smaller imbalances mean a lot more. If you must measure top X% in Y as having most of the Y, then you have to at least ensure you are doing this over a meaningful period, and put it in sensible context. Area Man Discovers Information Top Doctors Missed
Sometimes, yes, you will see something the world’s top scientists and doctors missed. Far more often, you will see something that the ‘consensus’ of those scientists and doctors missed. Yes, somewhere out there one of them already had the same idea, but this fact does not, on its own, help you. Far more often than that, you will come up with something that was not successfully communicated to your particular average doctor, who also does not share your internal experiences or interest in your case. Or where ‘the system’ follows procedures that let you down, and it is very easy to see they are not doing what is in your best interest. That should be entirely unsurprising. Also of course sometimes the system plays the odds from its perspective, and it turns out the odds were wrong, and you may or may not have had enough information to know this any more than the system did. So we have personal In the broader case where you actually are defying a clear consensus, and doing so in general rather than for you specifically, you should of course be more skeptical that you’re right, but if you are reading this, it’s entirely plausible. And as always, of course, don’t forget to ask Claude. Psychiatric Drug Prescription
Certainly this is all a key contributing factor, the inconvenience and cost considerations matter, and people let them matter more than they should. The first question to ask would be, given this, should we make these drugs easier or harder to get? Cheaper or more expensive? H5N1
It is of concern, but it isn’t that different from the background level of concern from flu pandemics anyway. We really do have a lot of pandemics in general and flu pandemics in particular. We should be preventing and preparing for them, we are not doing much of either, and this is mostly just another example of that. My guess is that the odds are worse than that, but that the fundamental takeaway is similar. That matches how I have been thinking about this for a while. I’ve made a deliberate decision not to cover H5N1, and all the ways in which we are repeating the mistakes of Covid-19. If we do get a full pandemic I will feel compelled to cover it, but until then I don’t think my observations would cause people reading this to make better decisions. I essentially despair of actually changing the policy decision that matter, for any amount of attention I might reasonably direct to the subject. WHO Delenda EstWHO has a public health emergency for Monkeypox Medical Ethicists Take Bold Anti-Medicine StanceThe reason medical progress is so slow is largely the types of people who, Often those people call themselves ‘ethicists.’ This high quality application to the Delenda Est club has been noted. Rewarding Drug DevelopmentI strongly agree with Tyler Cowen that we do not provide enough financial incentive to those who create new drugs. The question is, should the world be doing this in the form of America paying super high prices while everyone else shirks? As in, no, price controls are bad… …because price controls everywhere else leaves it entirely on us to subsidize drug development. And we do it in a way that limits consumer surplus, since marginal costs are low. How do we address this? One possibility is that patent buyouts seem better than indefinite high prices. The government can borrow cheaply and assume the variance, and marginal cost is low, so we can increase efficiency twice over, and also improve distributional effects, if we can negotiate a fair price. And it helps the pharma companies, since they realize their profits faster, and can plow it back into more investment. The other half is that we are subsidizing everyone else. This is better than not doing it, but it would be nice to get others to also pay their fair share? One obvious brainstorm is to do a price control, but as a maximum markup over the first-world average price. We will pay, say, five times the average price elsewhere. That way, the companies can negotiate harder for higher prices? Alas, I doubt a good enough multiplier would be palatable (among other issues), so I guess not. On the research side, we win again. We can safely pay well above the net present value of cash flows from the monopoly, because the surplus from greater production is that much higher. Meanwhile, we reduce uncertainty, and Novo Nordisk gets the payout right away, so it can do far more R&D spending with the profits, and can justify more investment on the anticipation of similar future buyout deals. It’s win-win. Not Rewarding Device DevelopersThe supervillains?
Several commenters at MR pointed out that these areas of the DME industry are rife with fraud and abuse, and indeed Claude noted without direct prompting that is largely what motivated the price cuts. It is not obvious that we would have wanted all this lost ‘innovation,’ as opposed to it being set up to take advantage of the government writing the checks. Addiction
Our Health Insurance Markets are Broken
If we want to do progressive transfers of wealth we should do them directly, not via health You're currently a free subscriber to |