---
subject: "new year, new ideas, new ways"
from: "web3 newsletter from a16z crypto <a16zcrypto@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-01-08 21:00:39
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "STARRED", "YELLOW_STAR", "a16zcrypto"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "STARRED", "YELLOW_STAR", "Label_2535365729249697677"]
---
📝⚡New year, new ideas: 2024Since a16z released its omnibus list of “big ideas in tech” #1 Entering a new era of decentralizationAs we keep seeing over and over again, when However, thanks to the “ #2 Resetting the UX of the futureWhile it has been much-lamented, the fundamentals of user experience in crypto haven’t actually changed much since 2016. It’s still too complicated: self-custodying secret keys; connecting wallets with decentralized applications (dApps); sending signed transactions into increasingly many network endpoints; and more. It’s more than we can expect users to learn in their first few minutes in a crypto app. smart accounts, which make accounts themselves programmable and therefore simpler to manage; embedded wallets, which are built into an application and can therefore make onboarding frictionless; MPC (multi-party computation), which makes it easier for third parties to support signing without custodying users’ keys; advanced RPC (remote procedure call) endpoints that can recognize what users want and fill in the gaps; and much more.
All of these not only help web3 go more mainstream, but can make the UX better and more secure than in web2. ~Eddy Lazzarin, CTO ( #3 The rise of the modular tech stackIn the world of networks, one force invariably dominates all others: But the biggest advantage of an open-source, modular tech stack is that it unlocks permissionless innovation; allows participants to specialize; and incentivizes more competition. We need more of that in this world. ~Ali Yahya, General Partner ( #4 AI + blockchains come togetherDecentralized blockchains are a counterbalancing force to centralized AI. AI models (like in ChatGPT) can currently only be trained and operated by a handful of tech giants, since the required compute and training data are prohibitive for smaller players. But with crypto, it becomes possible to create multi-sided, global, permissionless markets where anyone can contribute — and be compensated — for contributing compute or a new dataset to the network for someone who needs it. Tapping into this long tail of resources will allow these markets to drive down the costs of AI, making it more accessible. We also need to figure out ways to decentralize generative AI and govern it democratically, so that no one actor ends up with the power to decide for all others; web3 is the laboratory for figuring out how. Decentralized, open-source crypto networks #5 Play to earn becomes play and earnIn “play to earn” (P2E) games, players would often make real-world (not just virtual) money based on their time and effort playing games. This trend is related to the broader shifts that have been transforming gaming and beyond — from the rise of the creator economy to the changing relationship between people and platforms. Web3 allows us to counter the current norm where all the proceeds of playing and transacting in games go only to gaming companies. Users spend so much time in, and generate so much value for, those platforms that they deserve to be compensated, too. Ultimately, however, this will not be a separate trend and will just #6 When AI becomes the gamemaker, crypto offers guaranteesAs someone who spends a lot of time thinking about In this sense, “AI alignment” is really an incentive design problem, in the same way dealing with any human agent is an incentive design problem… and is what crypto is all about. ~Carra Wu, investing partner ( #7 Formal verification becomes less, well, formalWhile With increased adoption of formal methods-inspired tooling among developers and security specialists, we can expect the next wave of smart contract protocols to be more robust and less prone to costly hacks. ~Karma (Daniel Reynaud), Research Engineering Partner ( #8 NFTs become ubiquitous brand assetsMore and more established brands have been introducing digital assets to mainstream consumers in the form of But brands can do so much more: They can use NFTs to represent and reinforce customer identity and community affiliations; This year, many of the conditions are in place for NFTs to become ubiquitous as digital brand assets — as Steve Kaczynski and I explain in a #9 SNARKs go mainstreamTechnologists have historically had the following strategies for verifying computational workloads: 1) re-executing the compute on a trusted machine; 2) executing compute on a machine specialized to the task, aka (TEE trusted execution environment); or 3) executing compute on credibly neutral infrastructure, like a blockchain. Each of these strategies has had limits in terms of cost or network scalability, but now, SNARKs therefore become viable in situations where the initial compute provider can bear a 10^6 overhead and the clients cannot re-execute or store initial data. The use cases that result are many: Edge devices in the Internet of Things can verify upgrades. Media editing software can embed content authenticity and transformation data; while remixed memes could pay homage to initial sources. LLM inferences could include authenticity information. We could have self-verifying IRS forms, unforgeable bank audits, and many more uses that benefit consumers ahead. ~Sam Ragsdale, Investment Engineer ( 🟧📖 New year, new ways: The Read Write Own book table of contents revealThe internet of today is a far cry from its early promise: of a decentralized, democratic network of innovation, connection, and freedom. But in the upcoming new book Read Write Own: Building the Next Era of the Internet (available January 30 in the U.S. and February 1 in the U.K.) — Chris Dixon argues that the dream of an open network for fostering creativity and entrepreneurship doesn’t have to die. Blockchain networks — which create a radical new way to design fair and freely accessible internet services that put users in charge — can provide a solid foundation for everything from social networks and marketplaces to AI products and immersive virtual worlds. Dixon distinguishes this blockchain movement from the cryptocurrency speculation that it is unfortunately lumped together with, labeling the distinction “the computer vs. the casino” in one of the book chapters… ☁️⚕️New year, new resolutions: From lifespan to healthspanOur annual a16z crypto Founders Summit — where we gather top leaders in crypto for a few days of connection and inspiration — covers themes in art, engineering, and building in web3; as well as intersections and inspirations from other fields. You can find some of the talks that took place at our most recent summit We just released, in the new year, two new videos with Dr. Matt Kaeberlein (CEO of Optispan; director of the University of Washington Healthy Aging and Longevity Research Institute; co-director of the Dog Aging Project; and fellow at the American Aging Association and Gerontological Society of America). Kaeberlein delivered a short presentation on understanding biological mechanisms of aging — followed by a discussion with a16z crypto’s Guy Wuollet on promoting healthspan and improving quality of life for people, and companion animals: ➡️
You’re receiving this newsletter because you signed up for it on our websites, at an event, or elsewhere (you can opt out any time using the ‘unsubscribe’ link below). This newsletter is provided for informational purposes only, and should NOT be relied upon as legal, business, investment, or tax advice. Furthermore, the content is not directed at nor intended for use by any investors or prospective investors in any a16z funds. Please see a16z.com/disclosures for additional important details, including link to list of investments. subscribe to our podcast ' |