---
subject: "Tell Good Stories"
from: "Not Boring <notboring@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-02-14 13:45:12
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Not Boring"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_2982495070691762429"]
---
Welcome to the 990 newly Not Boring people who have joined us since last Tuesday! If you haven’t subscribed, join 185,857 smart, curious folks by subscribing here: Hi friends 👋, Happy Tuesday, Happy Valentine’s Day — love you all — and an extra special Happy Valentine’s Day to Puja 😍 We’re still reeling from the Eagles’ Super Bowl loss over here at Not Boring HQ, so we decided to turn up the optimism dial to 11 to combat the sting. Today, You might remember Rahul from the essay he wrote in July, Let’s get to it. Today’s Not Boring is brought to you by…
The brainchild of Andrew Herr, who ran ran human performance efforts for the US military and designed programs for Navy SEALs and fighter pilots, Fount analyzes your body with cutting edge technology and protocols, sets you up with a team to personalize and guide your plan (my coach is an ex-Navy SEAL), and designs a plan you’ll actually stick with. I’ve been on the Fount program for about a year and a half, and it’s been a complete game changer. When I Simply put: Fount Pro works. Whether you want to improve your energy and focus, get back in shape, manage the stress of a high-pressure job, or increase your longevity, the Fount team designs a plan that works for you specifically. Fount isn’t cheap, but you get what you pay for. It’s the single highest-ROI thing I’ve done for my performance. Book a free consult with one of their world-class performance advisors at the link. Plus, if you mention Not Boring during the consult, they’ll give you $500 off your first month. Tell Good StoriesBy
In the first chapter of While the American economy suffered through the worst decade in its history, optimistic storytellers painted visions of a better future grounded in an understanding of the technological capabilities of the era. Hall cites H.G. Wells’ 1935 film Things to Come and the 1939 World’s Fair – with its “Dawn of a New Day” slogan – as two tangible examples of the promised future. In Things to Come, Wells predicts the impending Great War with spooky prescience. As The New York Times wrote in a Between the Depression and the World War, things were undeniably bad for the average person alive at the time, but despite that, the outlook was bright. The 44 million attendees of The World’s Fair entered “The World of Tomorrow” and experienced wonders like air conditioning, personal robots, super-highways, FM radios, fax machines, and the television. The present is bleak – the Fair said – but the future looks bright. The optimists were right. World War II spurred a wave of technological innovation that worked its way from military applications into peoples’ homes. In Unfortunately, Wells was also correct in his prediction of a future in which technological progress is unwelcome, or as Hall describes it, “it is the Doers attacked by the Do-Nots.” Today, we live in an upside-down version of the 1930s: the present is actually bright, but the future looks bleak. Every week, we write about new breakthroughs and advances in the Weekly Dose of Optimism. The costs to pull power from the sun, send things into space, and map the human genome are declining precipitously, opening up new avenues for exploration and commercialization. It may take longer than SpaceX suggests, but Mars seems like it’s within reach within our lifetimes. While transformers may not be the architecture that gets us there, AGI, too, seems possible in our lifetimes. Even wars are more autonomous now, saving countless human lives. As Elliot recently tweeted, we can now “hot-wire a patient’s own T cells to attack certain types of tumors.”
The fact that we can hot-wire a patients own T cells to attack certain types of tumors is absolutely incredible.
And the thing is, we're just scratching the surface when it comes to cell therapy. |