---
subject: "AI #79: Ready for Some Football"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-08-29 13:27:05
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
I have never been more ready for Some Football. Have I learned all about the teams and players in detail? No, I have been rather busy, and have not had the opportunity to do that, although I eagerly await Seth Burn’s Football Preview. I’ll have to do that part on the fly. But oh my would a change of pace and chance to relax be welcome. It is time. The debate over SB 1047 has been dominating for weeks. I’ve now said The other is a (hopefully last) illustration that those who obsess highly disingenuously over funding sources for safety advocates are, themselves, deeply conflicted by their funding sources. It is remarkable how consistently so many cynical self-interested actors project their own motives and morality onto others. The bill has passed the Assembly and now it is up to Gavin Newsom, where the odds are roughly 50/50. I sincerely hope that is a wrap on all that, at least this time out, and I have set my bar for further comment much higher going forward. Newsom might also sign various other AI bills. Otherwise, it was a fun and hopeful week. We saw a lot of Mundane Utility, Gemini updates, OpenAI and Anthropic made an advance review deal with the American AISI and The Economist pointing out China is non-zero amounts of safety pilled. I have another hopeful iron in the fire as well, although that likely will take a few weeks. And for those who aren’t into football? I’ve also been enjoying Table of ContentsIntroduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. Turns out you did have a dog. Once. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. The AI did my homework. Fun With Image Generation. Too much fun. We are DOOMed. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. The removal of trivial frictions. They Took Our Jobs. Find a different job before that happens. Until you can’t. Get Involved. DARPA, Dwarkesh Patel, EU AI Office. Last two in SF. Introducing. Gemini upgrades, prompt engineering guide, jailbreak contest. Testing, Testing. OpenAI and Anthropic formalize a deal with the US’s AISI. In Other AI News. What matters? Is the moment over? Quiet Speculations. So many seem unable to think ahead even mundanely. SB 1047: Remember. Let’s tally up the votes. Also the poll descriptions. The Week in Audio. Confused people bite bullets. Rhetorical Innovation. Human preferences are weird, yo. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. ‘Alignment research’? People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone. The Chinese, perhaps? The Lighter Side. Got nothing for you. Grab your torches. Head back to camp.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
Essentially, you ask the LLM for an .ics file, import it into Google Calendar, presto.
What is causing
My view is that as long as we can convince the paper to at least use GPT-4, I’m willing to allow that. So many papers use GPT-3.5 or even worse. For most purposes I prefer Claude Sonnet 3.5 but GPT-4 is fine, within a year they’ll all be surpassed anyway.
My diagnosis is that Spotify would obviously be capable of creating an algorithm that did this, but that most users effectively don’t want it. Most users want something more basic and predictable, especially in practice. I don’t use ‘play songs by [artist]’ on Amazon Music because it’s always in very close to the same fixed order, but Amazon must have decided people like that. And so on.
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
That’s rather grim. I do agree a lot of people won’t be willing to type much. I don’t think you need consistent 10/10 or anything close. A 5/10 is already pretty great in many situations if I can get it without any work.
In five years, I would expect that ‘ask ChatGPT to do it’ would work fine in this spot. Right now, not so much, especially if the humans are rushing. Fun with Image Generation
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
Everyone knows that what was done here is bad, actually, and even if this one turns out to be fake the real version is coming. The solution inevitably is either to reintroduce the friction or allow some other form of costly signal. I do not think ‘your AI applies, my AI rejects you and now we are free’ is a viable option here. The obvious thing to do, if you don’t want to or can’t require ‘proof of humanity’ during the application, is require a payment or deposit, or tie to proof of identity and then track or limit the number of applications.
We have had this solution forever, in various forms, and we keep not doing it. If you place a phone call (or at least, if you do so without being in my contacts), and I decide you have wasted my time, either you pay in advance (with or without a refund option) or I should be able to fine you, whether or not I get to then keep the money. Ideally you would be able to Name Your Own Price, and the phone would display a warning if it was higher than the default. There was a bunch of arguing over whether We Have the Technology to stop the robocalls otherwise, if we want to do that. Given how they have already gotten so bad many people only answer the phone from known contacts, my presumption is no? Although putting AI to the task might do that. This is a special case of negative externalities where the downside is concentrated, highly annoying and easy to observe, and often vastly exceeds all other considerations. We should ask both of: What would happen if we were facing down ubiquitous AI-driven advertising and attempts to get our attention for various purposes? And what would happen if we set up systems where AIs ensured our time was not wasted by various forms of advertising we did not want? Or what would happen if both happen, and that makes it very difficult to make it through the noise? A fun intuition pump is the ‘Ad Buddy,’ from Netflix’s excellent Maniac. You get paid to have someone follow you around and read you advertising, so you’ll pay attention. That solves the attention problem via costly signaling, but it is clearly way too costly - the value of the advertising can’t possibly exceed the cost of a human, can it? The economics of the underlying mechanism can work. Advertisers can bid high to get my attention. Knowing that they bid that high, I can use that as a reason to pay attention, if there is a good chance that they did this in order to offer good value. The obvious issue is the profitability of things like crypto scams and catfishing and free-to-play games, but I bet you could use AI plus reputation tools to handle that pretty well.
This one was weird, so I looked and the account looks very human. Except that also it has a bot attached. It’s a hybrid. A human is using a tool to help him craft replies and perhaps posts and look for good places to respond, and there is a bug where it can be attacked and caused to automatically generate and post replies. My guess is under other circumstances the operator has to choose to post things. And that the operator actually does like AI and also sees these replies as a good engagement strategy. What to think about that scenario? One could argue it is totally fine. You don’t have to engage, the content is lousy compared to what I’d ever tolerate but not obviously below average, and the bug is actively helpful. They Took Our Jobs
Simple things done well, ultimately mostly via simple algorithms is the best way to do far more things than you would think. Figuring out the right algorithms, and when to apply them, is not so simple. Meanwhile, Roon’s advice is going to become increasingly difficult to follow, as what counts as a machine expands - it’s the same pattern I’ve been predicting the whole time. Life gets better as we all do non-machine things… until the machine can do all the things. Then what?
Get Involved
Introducing
Testing, Testing
This was something that the companies had previously made voluntary commitments to do, but had not actually done. It is a great relief that this has now been formalized. OpenAI and Anthropic have done an important good thing. I call upon all remaining frontier model labs (at minimum Google, Meta and xAI) to follow suit. This is indeed the least you can do, to give our best experts an advance look to see if they find something alarming. We should not have to be mandating this. More related In Other AI News
I would instead say that AI skepticism is ‘having a moment.’ The biggest update this past 18 months was not the things Anderson says were learned in the last year but that yes everyone pretty much assumed back in 2016 and I was in the rooms where those assumptions were made explicit. Instead, the biggest update was that once a year passed and the entire world didn’t transform and the AIs didn’t get sufficiently dramatically better despite there being a standard 3-year product cycle, everyone managed to give up what situational awareness they had. So now we have to wait until GPT-5, or another 5-level model, comes online, and we do this again.
Quiet SpeculationsWhile so many people are disappointed by models not seeing dramatic top-level capability enhancements in the 18 months since GPT-4 (2 years if you count when it finished training), saying we aren’t making progress? In addition to the modest but real improvements - Claude Sonnet 3.5, GPT-4-Turbo and Gemini Pro 1.5 really are better than GPT-4-original, and also can do long documents and go multimodal and so on -
You can do a lot at $0.75 that you can’t do at $180, or even can’t do at $7.50. Imagine if any other product, in any other industry, only showed this level of progress within 18 months. All it did was get modestly better, add various modalities and features, oh and drop in price by two orders of magnitude.
Four years is a long time. Very little writing is still used after four years. That long tail does represent a lot of the value, but also the ones that would have survived are presumably the ones most important to feed into future LLMs.
Unless capabilities progress stalls or we redirect events, which the labs do not expect, it (by which we will rapidly mean Earth) will all mostly be about the AIs and their capabilities and intelligence.
It matches what we have seen so far. Over and over we get slightly more obvious fire alarms about what is going to happen. Often they almost seem like they were scripted, because they’re so obvious and on the nose. It doesn’t seem to change anything. One obvious next move here is to ask labs like OpenAI, Google and Anthropic: What are the conditions under which, if another lab reported a given set of behaviors, you would take that as a true fire alarm, and what would you then do about it? How does this fit into your Safety and Security Protocol (SSP)? If the answer is ‘it doesn’t, that’s their model not ours, we will watch out for ours,’ then you can make a case for that, but it should be stated openly in advance. What would automated R&D look like?
Looking at the full report I very much got a ‘AI will be about what it is now, or maybe one iteration beyond that’ vibe. I also got a ‘we will do what we are doing now, only we will try to automate steps where we can’ vibe, rather than a ‘think about what the AI enables us to do now or differently’ vibe. Thus, this all feels like a big underestimate of what we should expect. That does not mean progress goes exponential, because difficulty could also greatly increase, but it seems like even the engineers working on AI are prone to more modest versions of the same failure modes that get economists to estimate single-digit GDP growth from AI within a decade. It is one thing to shout from the rooftops ‘the singularity is near!’ and that we are all on track to probably die, and have people not appreciate that. I get that. It hits different when you say ‘I think that the amazing knows-everything does-everything machine might add to GDP’ or ‘I think this might speed up your work’ and people keep saying no. SB 1047: Remember
Final vote was 46-11, with 22 not voting, Here’s an earlier tally missing a few votes: Democrats voted overwhelmingly for it, 39-1 on the earlier tally. Worryingly, Republicans voted against it, 2-8 in that tally.
It is now up to Governor Gavin Newsom whether it becomes law. My bar for future coverage has gone up. I’ve offered a Guide to SB 1047, and a roundup of who supports and opposes. This section ties up some extra loose ends, to illustrate how vile much of the opposition has been acting, both to know it now and to remember it going forward. For the record, if anyone ever says something is a push poll or attempt to get the answer you want, compare it to this, because Yes, bill opponents have been systematically lying their asses off, but this takes the cake. I mean wow, I’m not mad I am only impressed, this is from the Chamber of Commerce and it made it into Politico. The fact check: This is mostly flat out lies, but let’s be precise. SB 1047 would not create a new regulatory agency SB 1047 would not determine how AI models can be developed SB 1047 would not impact ‘small startup companies’ in any direct way, there is way they can ever be fined or given any orders. SB 1047 does not involve ‘orders from bureaucrats.’ It does involve issuing guidance, if you want to claim that is the same thing. I can confirm some do indeed say that SB 1047 would potentially lead companies to move out of the state of California. So this one is technically true.
Now, by contrast, here is the old poll people were saying was so unfair: I trust you can spot the difference. Shame on the Chamber of Commerce. Shame on Politico. For those who don’t realize, the opposition that yells about the funding sources of those worried about AI is almost never organic and is mostly deeply conflicted, example number a lot: My guess is she thinks (and is not alone in thinking) This Is Fine and good even, based on a philosophy that industry funding is enlightened self-interest and good legitimate business, that isn’t corruption that’s America, whereas altruistic funding and trying to do things for other reasons is automatically a sinister plot. I am most definitely not one of those who makes the opposite mistake. Business is great. I love me some doing business. Nothing wrong with advocating for things good for your business. But it’s important to understand that this playbook is a key part of the plan to attempt to permanently discredit the very idea that AI might be dangerous. The Week in Audio
Honestly, it’s heartbreaking to listen to, as you realize Garry Tan can’t fathom the concept of ASI at all, or why anyone would worry about it, other than that someone else might get to ASI first - but if it’s ‘competitive’ between companies then how will these superintelligences capture the surplus? It’s all hype and startups and VC and business, no stopping to actually think about the world. And it’s so bizarre to hear, time and again, from people who claim to be tech experts who know tech experts and to have long time horizons, essentially the model of ‘well we expected big things from AI, but it’s been a year and all we had was a 10x cost reduction and speed improvement and the best models are only somewhat better, so I guess it’s an ordinary tech and we should do ordinary tech things and think about the right hype level.’ Seriously, what the hell? In Garry’s particular case I’d perhaps recommend perhaps talking more about this with Paul Graham, as a first step? Paul Graham doesn’t ‘fully get it’ but he does get it.
The correct answer, of course, if they can actually do this, is ‘all of them, as many as you can make, and then I set them to work making more robots.’ That’s how capitalism rolls, yo, until they can no longer make their owners money.
I thank him for coming out and saying ‘no regulation of any kind, period’ rather than pretending he wants some mysterious other future regulation, give me regulation, That said, can we all agree this both is a Can’t Happen short of an AI company taking over, nor is it the default of common law, and also this proposal is rather bat**** crazy? Also, if we want to actually analyze what those legal rules would mean in practice, let’s notice that it absolutely involves loss of human control over the future, even if it goes maximally well. That’s the goddamn plan. Everyone has an AI maximizing for them, and the President is an AI doing other maximization, all for utility functions? Do you think you get to take that decision back? Do you think you have any choices? Do you think that will be air you’re breathing? Indeed, what is the first thing that the AI president, whose job is collective utility maximization, is going to do? It’s going to do whatever it takes to concentrate its power, and to gain full control over all the other AIs also trying to gain full control for the same reason (and technically the humans if they somehow still matter), so it can then use all the resources and rearrange all the atoms to whatever configuration maximizes its utility function that we hope maximizes ours somehow. Or they will all figure out how to make a deal and work together, with the same result. And almost always this will be some strange out-of-distribution world we very much wouldn’t like on past reflection, and no all of your ‘obvious’ solutions to that or reasons why ‘it won’t be that stupid’ or whatever won’t work for reasons MIRI people keep explaining over and over. This is all very 101 stuff, we knew all this in 2009, no nothing about LLMs changes any of the logic here if the AIs are sufficiently capable, other than to make any solutions even more impossible to implement. Rhetorical Innovation
A flashback from June 2023, when Marc Andreessen put out his rather extreme manifesto, Definitely one of those ‘has it really been over a year?’ moments.
We’ve been saying versions of this a lot, but perhaps this is Roon saying it best? It is absurd to think that AI will create wonders beyond our dreams and solve our problems, especially via doing complex cognitive tasks requiring autonomy and creativity, and also think it will forever be, as the Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy has said about Earth, Harmless or Mostly Harmless. It’s one or the other. When people say that AI won’t be dangerous, they are saying they don’t believe in AI, in the sense of not thinking AI will be much more capable than it is today. Which is an entirely reasonable thing to predict. I can’t rule it out. But if you do that, you have to own that prediction, and act as if its consequences are probably true. Or, of course, they are engaged in vibe-based Obvious Nonsense to talk up their portfolio and social position, and believe only in things like profits, hype, fraud and going with the flow. That everything everywhere always has been and will be a con. There’s that option. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is DifficultWhat even is alignment research? It’s tricky.
As an intuition pump: I notice my functional definition of alignment work is ‘work that differentially helps us discover a path through causal space that could result in AIs that do either exactly what we intend for them to do or things that would have actually good impacts on reflection, and do far less to increase the rate at which we can increase the capabilities of those AIs,’ and then distinguish between ‘mundane alignment’ that does this for current or near systems, and ‘alignment’ (or in my head ‘actual’ or ‘real’ alignment, etc, or OpenAI called a version of this ‘superalignment’) for techniques that could successfully be used to do this with highly capable AIs (e.g. AGI/ASIs) and to navigate the future critical period.
I like the central distinction here. Ideally we would use ‘safety’ to mean ‘what we do to get good outcomes given our level of alignment’ and alignment to mean ‘get the AIs to do things we would want them to do’ either intent matching, goal matching, reflective approval matching or however you think is wise. Inevitably the word ‘safety’ gets hijacked all the time, and everything is terrible regarding how we talk in public policy debates, but it would be nice. I also like that this suggests what the endgame might look like. AGIs (and then ASIs) ‘running free,’ doing things we don’t understand, being at the helm. So a future where AIs are in control, and we hope that this results in good outcomes. The danger is that yes, you feel a lot better with your AI at the helm of your project pursuing your ideals or goals, versus a human doing it, because the AI is vastly more capable on every level, and you would only slow it down. But if everyone does that, what happens? Even if everything goes well on the alignment front, we no longer matter, and the AIs compete against each other, with the most fit surviving, getting copied and gaining resources. I continue to not see how that ends well for us without a lot of additional what we’d here call, well, ‘safety.’ People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone
They’re also likely going to set up an AI Safety Institute, and we’re the ones who might have ours not cooperate with theirs. All of that sounds remarkably familiar. And all of that is in the context where the Chinese are (presumably) assuming that America has no intention of working with them on this. Pick. Up. The. Phone. The Lighter SideAlas, even lighter than usual, unless you count that SB 1047 “poll.” You're currently a free subscriber to |