---
subject: "Highlights From The Comments On Nietzsche"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-08-08 10:32:55
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX"]
---
[original post Table Of Contents I. Comments About Master And Slave Morality I. Comments About Master And Slave Moralitynaraburns
But Kara Stanhope
In the end, I appreciate Nara’s perspective, and I think it’s a useful dichotomy. But I find it hard to interpret in the context of Nietzsche so frequently bringing up Achilles and Cesare Borgia, both of whom went further than just liking the Star Wars movies for the right reasons. I also don’t really get where Nietzsche thinks masterful values come from. Yes, you have to choose your own values, not the herd’s values - but where do your own values come from? He seems to write as if you’re born with a destiny written on your soul, and you become pathetic if you let the herd trick you into do something other than your soul-written destiny. That’s a little more hostile than I can justify. I can, if I try, sort through some of my actions and preferences, and find some that seem “purer” and more “part of who I am”, and others that have red flags for looking good and satisfy other people. For example, I’ve preferred suburbia as long as I can remember and I continue to hold that belief even though everyone around me is a rabid anti-suburb YIMBY. On the other hand, even though I think I like travel, whenever I actually travel I can never quite put my finger on the part where I’m having fun. So maybe my suburb preference is really written on my soul, and my travel preference is a fake one made up to please the herd. But I’m not sure that all the writing on my soul really adds up to a destiny, exactly. Hilarius Bookbinder
Maybe this gets to the heart of my confusion better than any other comment. Nietzsche keeps saying that the Superman is the one who can “write new values on new tablets”. But anyone can get a new tablet ( NLeusel
No, I take it back, this is my favorite comment. If Nietzsche is really saying “ignore the strictures of society; pursue the destiny written upon your own soul”, how does that differ from Instagram “find yourself” therapy culture? Other than that Nietzsche expects your soul to say “conquer Europe” and Instagram expects it to say “ditch your boyfriend and date a yoga instructor”? Also, why is everything that’s written on your own soul good? The Last Psychiatrist (who I usually think of as Nietzschean) had a scathing article about people who sink too much of their identity into their sexual fetishes, as if they were central personality traits to be proud of, rather than shameful vices to be indulged in secret. But aren’t fetishes, in some sense, the purest and most soul-written preferences we have? Preferences that date back from before we can remember, preferences which go so deep they can affect our very autonomic nervous responses, preferences which we stick to even when everyone else hates and shames us for them? I think of Nietzscheans as the sort of people who would usually shout “Stop wallowing in your fetishes and instead achieve great things!” But if your natural tendency is to wallow in your fetishes, and you’re only trying to achieve great things because people are shouting at you, should a Nietzschean keep wallowing in the fetishes? Without some external source of value, I don’t understand how you decide that one soul-written destiny (conquering Italy) is better than another (running off with the yoga instructor, or watching furry porn). Ascend
Okay, this is a potentially helpful corrective to the “furry porn” thesis above, but now I’m not sure what master morality even means anymore. There are plenty of people who follow their dreams, or who don’t act altruistically. What actions would I take if I wanted to embody the true pure master morality that nobody embodies? Sam Kriss writes a long blog post on these topics,
Metaphysiocrat writes:
I think you can always split things into more subcategories (or merge things into grander umbrella categories), but I appreciate this attempt to clarify things. Fern
I hate the terms “pro life” or “life affirming” for this. Vitalism isn’t literally pro life in the sense of “cause there to be more life” - it neither recommends preserving your own life (by being safe) nor preserving others’ lives (by being altruistic). More often, it’s used to recommend the opposite of those things. So in what sense is it about “being pro life”. “Well, you’re only truly living insofar as you follow our philosophy”. Very convenient redefinition you have there. AshLael
I think Orders - voluntary association groups that place strict demands on their members - II. Comments By People Named In The PostBentham’s Bulldog, whose surprise that anyone would endorse master morality inspired the post,
Yeah, this makes sense, I just wanted to make sure different people with different definitions weren’t talking past each other, and explain what I personally saw in master morality. Bulldog wrote a fuller reply on his own blog, (to be clear, I’m not suggesting Bulldog said the opposite; only riffing off the title) I did appreciate this meme, though: Walt Bismarck (whose
Several A slightly (but only slightly) more charitable version of the exchange might be: >> Bulldog: I don’t like master morality because it’s not altruistic and doesn’t care about suffering. >> Bismarck: Yes, in fact I don’t care very much about altruism and suffering. Here are some other values I care about more. I guess describing Bismarck’s answer as “I like being bad and cruel” is unfair, insofar as Bismarck didn’t endorse [violating his own moral system], and insofar as Bismarck has his own complex and consistent moral system he’s following. But I don’t really find this objection interesting. Suppose I call Hitler bad, and Hitler counters “No, see, I have my own moral system based on the purity of the German race, and according to that system I’m doing the right thing”. This doesn’t change my “Hitler is bad” opinion at all. It’s naturally implied that I’m using the word “bad” to refer to something like “bad within my own moral system” or “bad within the moral system which I believe to be true”. I guess maybe I committed a sin of obfuscation: “I like being bad and cruel” suggests that Bismarck himself thinks that what he’s doing is bad, whereas I meant that he’s saying “I like [being bad and cruel]”, where [being bad and cruel] is my (Scott’s) judgment of what he’s describing. Fine, I’m sorry and I’ll try not to do that in the future. Bismarck and I had a longer conversation about this starting Jason Crawford
Richard Hanania
I thank Hanania for some earlier discussion which probably helped inspire this article in some vague way. And Matt Yglesias Matt has a deal where every week, his subscribers can choose a question for him to answer at length. This week’s poll was deeply disappointing: …really? The military-industrial complex? Are Matt’s subscribers really able to will the eternal recurrence of that decision? Pathetic. III. Comments Making Specific Points About One Of The Thinkers In The PostYossarian
MaxEd
Jukka Välimaa
I like this reading of Rand, it feels like the sort of thing the steelmanned/perfected version of Rand in my head would say, and it’s definitely what I’d use if I were her PR person - but it’s not the impression I get from her books. I could be convinced otherwise if you could find her saying this in so many words. William H Stoddard
But Ultimaniacy
I’ve never read The Fountainhead and don’t have a position here. Tanthiram
Patrick F
Your gut was right; Tate is exactly what slave morality was designed to defend against
I admit that I know nothing about Tate except that I’ve seen some bad tweets by him and heard he was involved in sex crimes. I looked at IV. Other CommentsWesley Fenza
The blogpost’s thumbnail (which you can see at the link above) continues on our surprisingly-consistent theme of Nietzschean superman + furry porn. Tohron
I agree that “Christianity” can mean any tendency that anyone held at any time during 2000 years of Western civilization, and shouldn’t be taken as a monolith. Susan Greenberg
I’m skeptical of this. My favorite counterexample is the Torah, which says that Moses was the most humble man in the world (Numbers 12:3), plus In general I’m skeptical of most attempts to draw a bright line between Jewish and Christian philosophies (“Jews think like this, Christians think like that”). Christianity grew out of Judaism, and most post-1400s Jewish scholarship was written in Christian societies, so both religions had ample chance to influence each other. “Everybody knows” that Christianity judges you by belief and Judaism judges you by your actions, but Martin Susrik
That having been said, I agree anthropologists have proven pretty conclusively that the Jews didn’t invent slave morality and it’s as old as humanity itself. I included a tweet about the Mbendjele people in the original, but I could have emphasized this part more. I’ve heard stories of missionaries and philanthropists in Third World countries ending up dejected by how impossible it is to get a lot of primitive tribes to join the 21st century and do Capitalism. The suggest the tribespeople start some business to provide needed goods to their village, but the tribespeople complain that if they made money, they’d be socially required to give it to their inlaws/clan/spend it all in a huge feast for the village, so what’s the point? 10240
I think the way I wrote it is one end of the Overton Window, the way 10240 writes it is the other, and to me the window seems small enough that I don’t see much difference between our two formulations - but I appreciate the criticism. Walliserops
I like this way of thinking about “who you are doesn’t matter, only what you do”, but I find the connection to 4chan kind of tenuous. HumbleRando
I calculated it out based on statistics in There are about 1.2 billion total Africans, which suggests that if you save a random sub-Saharan African, there’s order of 1/8,000 chance they’ll go on to commit rape in Europe. I don’t think killing 8,000 people is worth it to prevent one rape. If you do think this, I think you should favor (for example) nuking random European cities, since I’m sure that you kill more than one rapist per 8,000 people. (as for killing gay people, probably the gay people they kill are also sub-Saharan Africans, and I’m not sure you’re really coming off super credible in your desire to save the lives of sub-Saharan Africans here). This reminds me of the section in Part IV of the post about how slave morality “ignores benefits and treats harms as infinity”. Sure, saving 8,000 Africans will save 8,000 lives - but it will also cause one extra European rape, so I’m “personally responsible” and “not considering downstream effects”. I think that saving 8,000 lives but causing one rape is better than killing 8,000 people and preventing one rape. This is the only deal on offer. If you want to take the opposite side, I think you have some personal responsibility of your own to consider. Jude
This is a good point. I agree that rap is a weird master morality relic. Patrick D Farley
More good points. Related: John
Zinjanthropus
I appreciate this perspective on the Iliad. Alastair Roberts
FurtherOrAlternatively
I’m not sold on art/epics/masterpieces as a grounding for morality or the good life. When I think about this philosophy, I ask questions like “Is art still valuable if nobody ever sees it?” Or “Is art still valuable if it’s an AI churning out 1 million great artworks per second in the Andromeda Galaxy?” Or “Is art still valuable if it’s a stalagmite in a cave that through freak coincidence formed into a beautiful statue, but literally nobody will ever see it, including a creator.” Or “is there more moral value in a world with a million pieces of pretty-good art, or one piece of great art”? These questions tempt me to think of art as having only instrumental value. Either it’s valuable because viewers enjoy it (in which case we’re back to utilitarianism), or it’s valuable insofar as it communicates something (but surely this only works if the thing it’s communicating is valuable). I can’t wrap my head around what it would mean for the art to be valuable in and of itself. Christina The StoryGirl
I agree that an underappreciated problem is how to stigmatize something in the sense of warning against it, without stigmatizing it in the sense of making the people who unavoidably have it feel bad. So for example, it would be nice to stigmatize obesity enough that most people who can easily lose weight do, without making people with medical conditions that make it hard to lose weight feel miserable or inferior. I don’t have a great solution here, but it seems that you can modulate the tone of your message to be more “warn people against” vs. “make people stuck in the situation hate themselves”, and I think the hypothetical person who wrote that paragraph above is failing at this. I agree that there will always be some people who aren’t warned by a polite warning, but would take an extremely mean warning seriously, and that in trading this off you’re harming that subset of people. Stackdamage
Checks out. You're currently a free subscriber to |