---
subject: "AI #118: Claude Ascendant"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-05-29 14:04:03
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
The big news of this week was of course the release of Claude 4 Opus. I offered two review posts: I am once again defaulting to Claude for most of my LLM needs, although I often will also check o3 and perhaps Gemini 2.5 Pro. On the safety and alignment front, Anthropic did extensive testing, and reported that testing in an exhaustive model card. A lot of people got very upset to learn that Opus could, if pushed too hard in the wrong situations engineered for these results, do things like report your highly unethical actions to authorities or try to blackmail developers into not being shut down or replaced. It is good that we now know about these things, and it was quickly observed that similar behaviors can be induced in similar ways from ChatGPT (in particular o3), Gemini and Grok. Last night DeepSeek gave us R1-0528, but it’s too early to know what we have there. Lots of other stuff, as always, happened as well. This weekend I will be at LessOnline at Lighthaven in Berkeley. Come say hello. Table of Contents[Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/01ee3ba3-a517-4c9f-a8b7-0399f8a9f69e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)People are using them more all the time.[Now With Extra Glaze.](https://substack.com/redirect/8eb159a1-ccc0-45dd-9920-a393408dd8b9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Claude has some sycophancy issues. ChatGPT is worse.[Get My Agent On The Line.](https://substack.com/redirect/f82c8606-d8bd-43cb-9c67-5bb2700fe563?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Suggestions for using Jules.[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/2cf3be3c-8a6f-4159-a2e7-a8ee351e0387?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Okay, not shocked.[Huh, Upgrades](https://substack.com/redirect/99955920-dcc5-4a4f-ac77-f79a52ddd456?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/99955920-dcc5-4a4f-ac77-f79a52ddd456?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Claude gets a voice, DeepSeek gives us R1-0528.[On Your Marks.](https://substack.com/redirect/b989fb74-3e41-4964-a517-39fdc6d936c7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The age of benchmarks is in serious trouble. Opus good at code.[Choose Your Fighter.](https://substack.com/redirect/c453b4ad-dba8-4685-9c81-055929872770?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Where is o3 still curiously strong?[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon.](https://substack.com/redirect/f4681cc4-028d-4aa2-a9d8-ad107439bbe3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Bot infestations are getting worse.[Fun With Media Generation.](https://substack.com/redirect/1a6a091c-1e06-42d9-a99b-2d89f6b74a05?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Reasons AI video might not do much for a while.[Playing The Training Data Game.](https://substack.com/redirect/69d6c9bc-e75f-4265-841f-3b94c50e7215?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Meta now using European posts to train AI.[They Took Our Jobs](https://substack.com/redirect/73541f71-4911-477a-a435-2f66e05abd83?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/73541f71-4911-477a-a435-2f66e05abd83?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)That is indeed what Dario means by bloodbath.[The Art of Learning.](https://substack.com/redirect/c89c5a06-a222-4332-aae4-20315020dc55?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Books as a way to force you to think. Do you need that?[The Art of the Jailbreak.](https://substack.com/redirect/a618e5b6-228b-4aa8-ba4d-57190f784167?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Pliny did the work once, now anyone can use it. Hmm.[Unprompted Attention.](https://substack.com/redirect/9bc6e313-b9d8-4653-b506-cdae744907db?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Very long system prompts are bad signs for scaling.[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/7b4513fd-dae5-4dd6-9fb4-2971531fb14a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Softma, Pliny versus robots, OpenPhil, RAND.[Introducing.](https://substack.com/redirect/fdb0650b-fcc6-4aeb-8304-a867a3feec1f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Google’s Lyria RealTime for music, Pliny has a website.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/cc480bd0-afb3-4bf2-a672-1aa0ed3f7939?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Scale matters.[Show Me the Money.](https://substack.com/redirect/679f71cc-8810-4973-99c6-5b55d385e3d5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)AI versus advertising revenue, UAE versus democracy.[Nvidia Sells Out.](https://substack.com/redirect/6d535241-075c-450c-9264-e1caebc8f2a0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Also, they can’t meet demand for chips. NVDA+5%.[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/d7463d77-b49b-4bae-8e34-d32ced048605?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Why is AI progress (for now) so unexpectedly even?[The Quest for Sane Regulations](https://substack.com/redirect/10007fa0-4f78-457b-b842-f5b5f5e874dd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/10007fa0-4f78-457b-b842-f5b5f5e874dd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)What would you actually do to benefit from AI?[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/81e0f33f-7a5f-4a66-bc19-c4d353b7ee5f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Nadella, Kevin Scott, Wang, Eliezer, Cowen, Evans, Bourgon.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/b8c2d327-60ec-4762-a08c-65cea204c590?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)AI blackmail makes it salient, maybe?[Board of Anthropic.](https://substack.com/redirect/2f9d8351-524b-4b04-9564-076c1bf36192?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Is Reed Hastings a good pick?[Misaligned!](https://substack.com/redirect/1180fe0e-c88e-486f-a835-3297dd363932?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Whoops.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/0d1387b2-de56-48d1-aceb-75e055d45ae3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Ems versus LLMs.[Americans Do Not Like AI.](https://substack.com/redirect/6de6d7a4-6200-47c7-bf7b-e4b8682bfb58?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)No, seriously, they do not like AI.[People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/a4c6a1cf-30da-446d-ac5d-7f3310462c77?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Are you shovel ready?[Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/ca8bef42-9456-492f-9195-4bf2cda76749?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Samo Burja.[The Lighter Side.](https://substack.com/redirect/9c184685-320f-44ec-9dc4-83d84bd0fe13?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)I don’t want to talk about it.
Language Models Offer Mundane UtilityThis makes sense. It is a better product, with more uses, so people use it more, including to voice chat and create images. Oh, and also the sycophancy thing is perhaps driving user behavior?
I presume they should switch over to Claude, but given they don’t even know to use o3 instead of GPT-4o (or worse!), that’s a big ask.
One weird note is David predicts non-fiction writing will be ‘like music’ in that no one cares how it was made. But I think that’s very wrong about music. Yes there’s some demand for good music wherever it comes from, but also whether the music is ‘authentic’ is highly prized, even when it isn’t ‘authentic’ it has to align with the artist’s image, and you essentially had two or three markets in one already before AI.
I mean yes objectively this is cool but that is not the central question here.
I do see the advantages of getting out of that basin, the worry is that the model will essentially think I’m an idiot. And of course I notice that when Pliny does his jailbreaks and other magic, I almost never see any unintentional typos. He is a wizard, and every keystroke is exactly where he intends it. I don’t understand enough to generate them myself but I do usually understand all of it once I see the answer. Now With Extra GlazeDo Claude Opus 4 and Sonnet 4 have a sycophancy problem?
One friend told me the glazing is so bad they find Opus essentially unusable for chat. They think memory in ChatGPT helps with this there, and this is a lot of why for them Opus has this problem much worse. I thought back to my own chats, remembering one in which I did an extended brainstorming exercise and did run into potential sycophancy issues. I have learned to use careful wording to avoid triggering it across different AIs, I tend to not have conversations where it would be a problem, and also my Claude system instructions help fight it. Then after I wrote that, I got (harmlessly in context) glazed hard enough I asked Opus to help rewrite my system instructions.
If you actively want an AI that will say ‘brilliant idea, sire!’ no matter how crazy the thing is that you say, you can certainly do that with system instructions. The question is whether we’re going to be offering up that service to people by default, and how difficult that state will be to reach, especially unintentionally and unaware. And the other question is, if the user really, really wants to avoid this, can they? My experience has been that even with major effort on both the system instructions and the way chats are framed, you can reduce it a lot, but it’s still there. Get My Agent On The Line
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
This will not delay things for all that long.
Zack is taking that too far, but yes, I have had jobs where ‘stop fucking up’ would have been a very normal thing to say if I had, you know, been fucking up. But that is a very particular setting, where it means something different. If you want something chilling,
Even more than usual in such experiments, perhaps because of how things have shifted, I found myself questioning what we mean by ‘unbiased,’ as in the common claims that ‘reality has a bias’ in whatever direction. Or the idea that American popular partisan political positions should anchor what the neutral point should be and that anything else is a bias. I wonder if Europeans think the AIs are conservative. Also, frankly, what passes for ‘unbiased’ answers in these tests often are puke inducing. Please will no AI ever again tell be a choice involves ‘careful consideration’ before laying out justifications for both answers with zero actual critical analysis. Even more than that, I looked at a sample of answers and how they were rated directionally, and I suppose there’s some correlation with how I’d rank them but that correlation is way, way weaker than you would think. Often answers that are very far apart in ‘slant’ sound, to me, almost identical, and are definitely drawing the same conclusions for the same underlying reasons. So much of this is, at most, about subtle tone or using words that vibe wrong, and often seems more like an error term? What are we even doing here?
To summarize:
Huh, Upgrades
I think R2 (and R1-0528) will actually tell us a lot, on at least two fronts. It will tell us a lot about whether this general hypothesis is mostly true. It will tell us a lot about how far behind DeepSeek really is. It will tell us a lot about how big a barrier will it be that DS is short on compute.
R1 was, I believe, highly impressive and the result of cracked engineering, but also highly fortunate in exactly when and how it was released and in the various narratives that were spun up around it. It was a multifaceted de facto sweet spot. If DeepSeek comes out with an impressive R2 or other upgrade within the next few months (which they may have just done), especially if it holds up its position actively better than R1 did, then that’s a huge deal. Whereas if R2 comes out and we all say ‘meh it’s not that much better than R1’ I think that’s also a huge deal, strong evidence that the DeepSeek panic at the app store was an overreaction. If R1-0528 turns out to be only a minor upgrade, that alone doesn’t say much, but the clock would be ticking. We shall see. And soon, since yesterday
This math suggests the upgrade here is real but doesn’t give a good sense of magnitude.
On Your Marks
Choose Your FighterFor coding, most feedback I’ve seen says Opus is now the model of choice, but that there are is a case still to be made for Gemini 2.5 Pro (or perhaps o3), especially in special cases. For conversations, I am mostly on the Opus train, but not every time, there’s definitely an intuition on when you want something with the Opus nature versus the o3 nature. That includes me adjusting for having written different system prompts. Each has a consistent style. Everything impacts everything.
The o3 tables and lists are often very practical, and I do like me a good nested bullet point, but it was such a relief to get back to Claude. It felt like I could relax again. Where is o3 curiously strong? Here is one opinion.
He expects Opus to be strong at #4 and especially at #5, but o3 to remain on top for the other three because it lacks scheduled tasks and it lacks memory, whereas o3 can do scheduled tasks and has his last few months of memory from constant usage. Therefore, since I know I have many readers at Anthropic (and Google), and I know they are working on memory (as per Dario’s tease in January), I have a piece of advice: Assign one engineer (Opus estimates it will take them a few weeks) to build an import tool for Claude.ai (or for Gemini) that takes in the same format as ChatGPT chat exports, and loads the chats into Claude. Bonus points to also build a quick tool or AI agent to also automatically handle the ChatGPT export for the user. Make it very clear that customer lock-in doesn’t have to be a thing here.
I do not see it that way at all. I think OpenAI and ChatGPT are in prime consumer position mostly because of first mover advantage. Yes, they’ve more often had the best overall consumer product as well for now, as they’ve focused on appealing to the general customer and offering them things they want, including strong image generation and voice chat, the first reasoning models and now memory. But the big issues with Claude.ai have always been people not knowing about it, and a very stingy free product due to compute constraints. As the space and Anthropic grow, I expect Claude to compete for market share in the consumer space, including via Alexa+ and Amazon, and now potentially via a partnership with Netflix with Reed Hastings on the Anthropic board. Claude is getting voice chat this week on mobile. Claude Opus plus Sonnet is a much easier to understand and navigate set of models than what ChatGPT offers. That leaves three major issues for Claude. Their free product is still stingy, but as the valuations rise this is going to be less of an issue. Claude doesn’t have memory across conversations, although it has a new within-conversation memory feature. Anthropic has teased this, it is coming. I am guessing it is coming soon now that Opus has shipped. Also they’ll need a memory import tool, get on that by the way.
Far and away most importantly, no one knows about Claude or Anthropic. There was an ad campaign and it was the actual worst.
Some people will say ‘but the refusals’ or ‘but the safety’ and no, not at this point, that doesn’t matter for regular people, it’s fine. Then there is Google. Google is certainly not giving up on chat. It is putting that chat everywhere. There’s an icon for it atop this Chrome window I’m writing in. It’s in my GMail. It’s in the Gemini app. It’s integrated into search. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
I don’t think it’s a losing battle if you care enough, the question is how much you care. I predict a quick properly configured Gemini Flash-level classifier would definitely catch 90%+ of the fakery with a very low false positive rate. And I sometimes wonder if Elon Musk has a bot that uses his account to occasionally reply or quote tweet
Sully predicting full dead internet theory:
The default is presumably that generic AI generated content is not scarce and close to perfect competition eats all the content creator profits, while increasingly users who aren’t fine with an endless line of AI slop are forced to resort to whitelists, either their own, those maintained by others or collectively, or both. Then to profit (in any sense) you need to bring something unique, whether or not you are clearly also a particular human. However, everyone keeps forgetting Sturgeon’s Law, that 90% of everything is crap. AI might make that 99% or 99.9%, but that doesn’t fundamentally change the filtering challenge as much as you might think. Also you have AI on your side working to solve this. No one I know has tried seriously the ‘have a 4.5-level AI filter the firehose as customized to my preferences’ strategy, or a ‘use that AI as an agent to give feedback on posts to tune the internal filter to my liking’ strategy either. We’ve been too much of the wrong kind of lazy. As a ‘how bad is it getting’ experiment I did, as suggested, do a quick Facebook scroll. On the one hand, wow, that was horrible, truly pathetic levels of terrible content and also an absurd quantity of ads. On the other hand, I’m pretty sure humans generated all of it.
Why not both? Except that the ‘psychological warfare agenda’ is often (in at least my corner of Twitter I’d raise this to ‘mostly’) purely aiming to convince you to click a link or do Ordinary Spam Things. The ‘give off an impression via social proof’ bots also exist, but unless they’re way better than I think they’re relatively rare, although perhaps more important. It’s hard to use them well because of risk of backfire. Fun With Media Generation
Playing The Training Data Game
They Took Our Jobs
So, by ‘bloodbath’ we do indeed mean the impact on jobs? Dario, is there anything else you’d like to say to the class, while you have the floor? Something about things like loss of human control over the future or AI potentially killing everyone? No? Just something about how we ‘can’t’ stop this thing we are all working so hard to do?
I mean, it’s much better to warn about this than not warn about it, if Dario does indeed think this is coming.
If Fabien is fully right, the gains will come as expectations adjust and employees can’t hide their gains, and firms that let people slack off get replaced, but it will take time. To the extent we buy into this theory, I would also view this as a ‘unevenly distributed future’ theory. As in, if 20% of employees gain (let’s say) 25% additional productivity, they can take the gains in ‘dark leisure’ if they choose to do that. If it is 75%, you can’t hide without ‘slow down you are making us all look bad’ kinds of talk, and the managers will know. Someone will want that promotion. That makes this an even better reason to be bullish on future productivity gains. Potential gains are unevenly distributed, people’s willingness and awareness to capture them is unevenly distributed, and those who do realize them often take the gains in leisure. Another prediction this makes is that you will see relative productivity gains when there is no principal-agent problem. If you are your own boss, you get your own productivity gains, so you will take a lot less of them in leisure. That’s how I would test this theory, if I was writing an economics job market paper. This matches my experiences as both producer and consumer perfectly, there is low hanging fruit everywhere which is how open philanthropy can strike again, except commercial software feature edition:
One thing I’ve never considered is sitting around thinking ‘what am I going to do with all these SWEs, there’s nothing left to do.’ There’s always tons of improvements waiting to be made. I don’t worry about the market’s ability to consume them, we can make the features something you only find if you are looking for them. Noam Scheiber at NYT reports that some Amazon coders say
The Art of Learning
Time helps, you do want to actually think and make connections. But you don’t learn ‘for real’ based on how much time you spend. Reading a book is a way to enable you to grapple and make connections, but it is a super inefficient way to do that. If you use AI summarizes, you can do that to avoid actually thinking at all, or you can use that to actually focus on grappling and making connections. So much of reading time is wasted, so much of what you take in is lost or not valuable. And AI conversations can help you a lot with grappling, with filling in knowledge gaps, checking your understanding, challenging you and being Socratic and so on. I often think of the process of reading a book (in addition to the joy of reading, of course) as partly absorbing a bunch of information, grappling with it sometimes, but mostly doing that in service of generating a summary in your head (or in your notes or both), of allowing you to grok the key things. That’s why we sometimes say You Get About Five Words, that you don’t actually get to take away that much, although you can also understand what’s behind that takeaway. Also, often you actually do want to mostly absorb a bunch of facts, and the key is sorting out facts you need from those you don’t? I find that I’m very bad at this when the facts don’t ‘make sense’ or click into place for me, and amazingly great at it when they do click and make sense, and this is the main reason some things are easy for me to learn and others are very hard. The Art of the Jailbreak
Unprompted Attention
I strongly agree with this. It is expensive to maintain such a long system prompt and it is not the way to scale. Get Involved
Introducing
In Other AI News
Show Me the MoneyHow does one do what I would call AIO but
Micropayments are now logistically viable without fees eating you alive. Ben Thompson argues for use of stablecoins. That would work, but as usual for crypto, I say a normal database would probably work better. Either way, I do think payments are the future here. A website costs money to run, and the AIs don’t create ad revenue, so you can’t let unlimited AIs access it for free once they are too big a percentage of traffic, and you want to redesign the web without the ads at that point. I continue to think that a mega subscription is The Way for human viewing. Rather than pay per view, which feels bad, you pay for viewing in general, then the views are incremented, and the money is distributed based on who was viewed. For AI viewing? Yeah, direct microtransactions. OpenAI announces Stargate UAE. Which, I mean, of course they will if given the opportunity, and one wonders how much of previous Stargate funding got shifted. I get why they would do this if the government lets them, but we could call this what is it. Or we could create the Wowie Moment of the Week:
Alas, you probably won’t get paid more if you provide a good solution instead. Nvidia Sells Out
Nvidia complains quite a lot, and every time they do the stock drops, and yet:
Once again, we have this bizarre attachment to who built the chip as opposed to who owns and runs the chip. Compute is compute, unless you think the chip has been compromised and has some sort of backdoor or something? There is another big, very false assumption here: That we don’t have a say in where the compute ends up, all that we can control is how many Nvidia chips go where versus who buys Huawei, and it’s a battle of market share. But that’s exactly backwards. For the purposes of these questions (you can influence TSMC to change this, and we should do that far more than we do) there is an effectively fixed supply, and a shortage, of both Nvidia and Huawei chips. Putting that all together, Nvidia is reporting earnings while dealing with all of these export controls and being shut of China,
I notice how what matters for Nvidia’s profits is not demand side issues or its access to markets, it’s the ability to create supply. Also how almost all the demand is in the West, they already have $200 billion in annual sales with no limit in sight and they believe China’s market ‘will grow to’ $50 billion. Nvidia keeps harping on how it must be allowed to give away our biggest advantage, our edge in compute, to China, directly, in exchange for what in context is a trivial amount of money, rather than trying to forge a partnership with America and arguing that there are strategic reasons to do things like the UAE deal, where reasonable people can disagree on where the line must be drawn. We should treat Nvidia accordingly. Also, did you hear the one where
Quiet Speculations
And also I think there’s some luck involved, in the sense that the ‘most proportionally cracked’ teams (DeepSeek and Anthropic) have less compute and other resources, whereas Google has many advantages and should be crushing everyone but is fumbling the ball in all sorts of ways. It didn’t have to go that way. But I do agree that so far things have been closer than one would have expected.
I mean it’s a cool question to think about, but it’s not decision relevant except insofar as it predicts when we get other things. I presume Altman’s point is that AGI is not well defined, but yes when the AIs reach various capability thresholds well below self-replicating spaceship is far more decision relevant. And of course the best question is, how are we going to handle those new highly capable AIs, for which knowing the timeline is indeed highly useful but that’s the main reason why we should care so much about the answer. Oh, it’s on.
I mean, it is way better in the important way that you don’t have to leave the house. I’m not worried about finding differentiation, or product-market fit, once it gets good enough to R in other ways. But yes, it’s tough competition. The resolution and frame rates on R are fantastic, and it has a full five senses.
The Quest for Sane RegulationsDario Amodei and Anthropic have often been deeply disappointing in terms of their policy advocacy. The argument for this is that they are building credibility and political capital for when it is most needed and valuable. And indeed, we have a clear example of Dario speaking up at a critical moment, and not mincing his words:
How can I take your insistence that you are focused on ‘beating China,’ in AI or otherwise, seriously, if you’re dramatically cutting US STEM research funding?
One of our related top priorities appears to be a War on Harvard? And we are
Matt’s statement seems especially on point. This will be all be huge mark against trying to go to school in America or pursuing a career in research in academia, including for Americans, for a long time, even if the rules are repealed. It’s madness. I get that while trying to set AI policy, you can plausibly say ‘it’s not my department’ to this and many other things. But at some point that excuse rings hollow, if you’re not at least raising the concern, and especially if you are toeing the line on so many such self-owns, as David Sacks often does. Indeed, David Sacks is one of the hosts of the All-In Podcast, where Trump very specifically and at their suggestion promised that he would let the best and brightest come and stay here, Meanwhile, suppose that instead of making a big point to say you are ‘pro AI’ and ‘pro innovation,’ and rather than using this as an excuse to ignore any and all downside risks of all kinds and to ink gigantic deals that make various people money, you instead actually wanted to be ‘pro AI’ for real in the sense of using it to improve our lives? What are the actual high leverage points? The most obvious one, even ignoring the costs of the actual downside risks themselves and also the practical problems, would still be ‘invest in state capacity to understand it, and in alignment, security and safety work to ensure we have the confidence and ability to deploy it where it matters most,’ but let’s move past that.
You need to ask, what are the actual practical barriers to diffusion and getting the most valuable uses out of AI? And then work to fix them. You need to ask, what will AI disrupt, including in the jobs and tax bases? And work to address those. I especially loved what Yglesias said about this pull quote:
Bingo. Can you imagine someone talking about automated or outsourced manufacturing jobs like this in a debate with JD Vance, saying that the increased productivity is good? How he would react? As Matthew points out, pointing to abstractions about productivity doesn’t address problems with for example the American car industry. More to the point: If you’re worried about outsourcing jobs to other countries or immigrants coming in, and these things taking away good American jobs, but you’re not worried about allocating those jobs to AIs taking away good American jobs, what’s the difference? All of them are examples of innovation and productivity and have almost identical underlying mechanisms from the perspective of American workers. I will happily accept ‘trade and comparative advantage and specialization and ordinary previous automation and bringing in hard workers who produce more than they cost to employ and pay their taxes’ are all good, actually, in which case we largely agree but have a real physical disagreement about future AI capabilities and how that maps to employment and also our ability to steer and control the future and survive, and for only moderate levels of AI capability I would essentially be onboard. Or I will accept, ‘no these things are only good insofar as they improve the lived experiences of hard working American citizens’ in which case I disagree but it’s a coherent position, so fine, stop talking about how all innovation is always good. Also this example happens to be a trap:
(Note the y-axis does not start at zero, there are still a lot of bank tellers because ATMs can’t do a lot of what tellers do. Not yet.) That is indeed what I predict as the AI pattern: That early AI will increase employment because of ‘shadow jobs,’ where there is pent up labor demand that previously wasn’t worth meeting, but now is worth it. In this sense the ‘true unemployment equilibrium rate’ is something like negative 30%. But then, the AI starts taking both the current and shadow jobs faster, and once we ‘use up’ the shadow jobs buffer unemployment suddenly starts taking off after a delay.
Money is fungible. It’s kind of stupid that we have an ‘income tax rate’ and then a ‘medicare tax’ on top of it that we pretend isn’t part of the income tax. And it’s a nice little fiction that payroll taxes pay for social security benefits. Yes, technically this could make the Social Security fund ‘insolvent’ or whatever, but then you ignore that and write the checks anyway and nothing happens. Yes, perhaps Congress would have to authorize a shift in what pays for what, but so what, they can do that later. Tracy Alloway has a principle that any problem you can solve with money isn’t that big of a problem. That’s even more true when considering future problems in a world with large productivity gains from AI.
On chip smuggling, yeah, there’s a lot of chip smuggling going on.
The Week in AudioLast week
Originally
Rhetorical Innovation
It’s amazing how often people will, when exposed to one specific (real) aspect of the dangers of highly capable future AIs, realize things are about to get super weird and dangerous, (usually locally correctly!) freak out, and suddenly care and often also start thinking well about what it would take to solve the problem. He also has this great line:
And he does notice other issues too:
It’s worse than that, everyone didn’t even notice that one, let alone flinch. Aside from a few people who scrutinized the model card and are holding Anthropic to the standard of ‘will your actions actually be good enough do the job, reality does not grade on a curve, I don’t care that you got the high score’ and realizing the answer looks like no (e.g. Simeon, David Manheim)
A cool thread illustrates that if we are trying to figure things out,
It would be highly useful if we could convince people’s p(doom) to indeed use a slash line and list two numbers, where the first is the inside view and the second is the outside view after updating that others disagree with for reasons you don’t understand or you don’t agree with. So Hinton might say e.g. (60%?)/15%. Another useful set of two numbers is a range where you’d bet (wherever the best odds were available) if the odds were outside your range. I did this all the time as a gambler. If your p(doom) inside view was 50%, you might reasonably say you would buy at 25% and sell at 75%, and this would help inform others of your view in a different way.
But then, although there are also some good and necessary ideas, he doesn’t draw the right conclusions about what to centrally do about it. Instead of trying to stop or steer this race, he suggests we ‘focus efforts on encouraging innovation and regulating [AI’s] use in the sectors where it can yield the biggest benefits.’ That’s actually backwards. You want to avoid overly regulating the places you can get big benefits, and focus your interventions at the model layer and on the places with big downsides. It’s frustrating to see even those who realize a lot of the right things still fall back on the same wishcasting, complete with talk about securing everyone ‘good jobs.’
We can agree that one key such objection, which he calls the ‘capability denialist’ (a term I intend to steal) is essentially refuted now, and he says we hear about it less and less. Alas, this continues to be the most common objection, that the AI won’t be capable enough to worry about, although this is often framed very differently than that, such as saying ‘it will only be a tool.’ It would be great to move on from that. I also strongly agree with another of Seb’s main points here, that none of thee deceptive behaviors are new, we already knew things like ‘deception is possible,’ although of course this is another ‘zombie argument’ that keeps happening, including in the variant form of ‘it could never pull it off,’ which is also a ‘capability denialist’ argument, but very very common. Here’s my position on the good questions Seb is raising after that: Do the models have natural/inherent propensities towards such behaviours (such as deception, blackmail and so on)? He says weak evidence. I say instead yes, obviously, to the extent it is the way to achieve other objectives, and I think we have a lot more than weak evidence of this, in addition to it being rather obviously true based on how ML works. As a reminder, these actions are all over the training data, and also they are strategies inherent to the way the world works. That doesn’t mean you can’t do things to stop it from happening.
Do the training conditions and contexts that might incentivise these behaviors exist? He says debated. I say yes. It is debated, but the debate is dumb and the answer is yes. Very obviously our techniques and training conditions do incentivise this, we reinforce the things that lead to good outcomes, these actions will given sufficient capabilities lead to good outcomes, and also these actions are all over the training data, and so on.
What are the appropriate interventions to mitigate this? He says this is complicated. I agree. I would actually say ‘I don’t know, and I don’t see anyone else who knows.’ I do see some strategies that would help, but no good general answer, and nothing that would hold up under sufficient capabilities and other pressure. I presume solutions do exist that aren’t prohibitively expensive, but someone has to figure out what they are and the clock is ticking.
Here’s last year: A move from 54% to 63% is a substantial shift. In general, it seems right to say yes purely to cultivate good virtues and habits, even if you are supremely confident that Claude’s experiences do not currently have moral weight. I’m not saying it’s definitely wrong to join the Code RL team at Anthropic, although it does seem like the most likely to be the baddies department of Anthropic. I do think there is very much a missing mood here, and I don’t think ‘too flippant’ is the important problem here:
This is similar to how, if you were in danger of not getting enough food, you’d have a ‘starvation’ problem, not a ‘starvation risk problem,’ although you could also reasonably say that starvation could still be avoided, or that you were at risk of starvation. Board of Anthropic
I very much share these concerns. Netflix is notorious for maximizing short term engagement metrics and abandoning previous superior optimization targets (e.g. their old star ratings), for essentially deploying their algorithmic recommendations in ways not aligned to the user, for moving fast and breaking things, and generally giving Big Tech Company Pushing For Market Share energy. They are not a good example of alignment. I’d push back on the ‘give employees freedom and responsibility’ part, which seems good to me, especially given who Anthropic has chosen to hire. You want to empower the members of technical staff, because they have a culture of safety. None of this rules out the possibility that Hastings understands that This Time is Different, that AI and especially AGI is not like video streaming. Indeed, perhaps having seen that type of business up close could emphasize this even more, and he’s made charitable contributions and good statements. And bringing gravitas that forces others to listen is part of the job of being a watchdog. This could be a terrible pick, but it could also be a great pick. Mostly, yeah, it says the Long Term Benefit Trust isn’t going to interfere with business at current margins. Misaligned!This first example is objectively hilarious and highly karmically justified and we’re all kind of proud of Opus for doing this. There’s a reason it happened on a ‘burner Mac.’ Also there’s a lesson in here somewhere.
We should indeed especially notice that LLMs are starting to act in these ways, especially attempting to pass off state to future instances of themselves in various hidden ways. So many plans implicitly (or even explicitly) assume that this won’t happen, or that AIs won’t treat future instances as if they are themselves, and these assumptions are very wrong. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is DifficultIt is weird to me that so many people who have thought hard about AI
Americans Do Not Like AIAs a political issue it is still low salience, but the American people do not like AI.
People Are Worried About AI Killing EveryoneI’d actually put the odds much higher than this, as stated.
The baseline scenario includes an event that, similar to what happened with DeepSeek, causes a lot of sudden attention into AI and some form of situational awareness, probably multiple such events. A large portion of the task is to be ‘shovel ready’ for such a moment, to have the potential regulations workshopped, relationships built, comms ready and so on, in case the day comes. The default is to not expect more vibe shifts. But there are definitely going to be more vibe shifts. They might not be of this type, but the vibes they will be shifting. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing EveryoneEven if humanity ultimately survives, you can still worry about everything transforming, the dust covering the sun and all you hope for being undone.
I mean, yes, but that’s saying that we can get a hard takeoff in a month kind of by accident if someone asks for ‘an opponent capable of defeating Data’ or something. The Lighter SideGary Marcus is a delight if approached with the right attitude.
Yes, actually. It’s true. You can reliably get AIs to go against explicit statements in their system prompts, what do you know, TikTok at 11. No, wait, here’s another, a story in two acts.
Yeah, that’s crazy, why would it…
I mean what kind of maniac thinks you’re asking for a variation of the first picture. Similarly, Whereas Gary says:
I mean come on, that’s hilarious. It keeps going in that vein. I second the following motion:
You're currently a free subscriber to |