---
subject: "The Sizzle and Steak Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-07-08 09:07:14
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
A WITI classic from the archives. Have a great weekend. -Colin (CJN) Colin here. I’m fascinated with the hidden alchemy that goes into making restaurants work. There’s obviously the stuff we see as customers: the light, the design, the greeting upon arrival, but then there’s a lot underneath the iceberg. We’ve talked in the past about the infamous Balthazar menu design, which cleverly uses psychology to nudge customers toward the more profitable items. In a New York magazine piece, they broke down all the sections, notably the
There are also sensory elements. I nearly fell out of my chair laughing Why is this interesting? Comedy aside, it is a thing: our primal senses are on high alert. A sizzling platter hits something in the brain, and makes you more hungry, or at the very least, have order envy. This tweet was a direct hit, judging by the retweets, responses, and smoke it threw off. A
It’s not just fajitas: if you’ve ever dined at a Ruth’s Chris Steakhouse, or at a Wolfgang’s in New York, they often send out your steak sizzling in a rich bath of butter. Ever had saganaki at a Greek restaurant, replete with flames? It is a multisensory experience: you hear the sound, you smell the food, you see this dish is presented in its ephemeral perfect prime, ready to eat. It’s not just about the food, it is about the theatrics of the food. Which often can cause the ever-important upsells or mini virality within the restaurant. It is making me hungry just thinking about it. I’ll have the steak, medium-rare. (CJN) — WITI x McKinsey: An ongoing partnership where we highlight interesting McKinsey research, writing, and data. State of fashion. Fashion suppliers and brands, like other companies, are facing significant economic and geopolitical challenges. How are the top-performing fashion suppliers and brands responding to these disruptions, and what can the rest of the industry learn from them? — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) —
You’re a free subscriber to |