---
subject: "The Bootleg Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-04 15:14:13
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Sam Valenti (SV) is an old friend of WITI. He’s the founder of Sam here. Even though GQ famously decreed last year that the Bootlegging is no longer the scourge of all brands and bands, unless you're say, a handbag maker (even that classic feud has since been mined Why is this interesting? In the '10s, luxury brands started to see the appeal of unauthorized goods. Between 2015 and 2022, under the creative direction of Alessandro Michele, Gucci sanctioned official items by artists known for bootlegging, like Today, the crowded collaboration field is a form of legalized bootlegging, and we are only beginning to make sense of it with some distance. Kaws, for instance, started as a graffiti artist known for Modern merch has formed a virtuous cycle between vintage, bootlegging, and reissues. Vintage becomes the proving ground for the value of merch (the $1000 Nirvana tee is a canonical baseline). The bootlegs that follow show the demand for more products as a form of street-level R&D that then can encourage brands to recommit to making new stuff. Even furniture brands like Ikea are Just as late-night TV juices its programming to output meme-able clips for social pulls the day after, if your brand can’t be bootlegged, it's possible your signal strength isn't high enough. As the late designer Virgil Abloh Bootlegging as a purely aesthetic form has been re-appropriated so many times that it’s perpetually at risk of losing its subversive oomph. After New York’s The music industry has traditionally (and predictably) looked down on bootlegs. However, with increased pressure to find a track that strikes as a viral moment, licensed or not, major labels are starting to look the other way if it means finding a ‘legitimate’ success. An unsanctioned remix of Madonna’s “Frozen” from 2021 started as a TikTok hit, and was then Some bands have shown the way of course, like the Grateful Dead, who were amongst the most ardent supporters of the bootleg merch and music concept, creating a fan ecosystem before the term UGC existed. Bands like Pearl Jam have followed suit, creating a healthy aftermarket for legal show recordings. Brand-builder and cultural reporter Ana Anjelic (whose excellent “To me, bootlegging is probably the most creative form of production in retail today. In the context when styles are copied at the speed of the social media algorithm (Shein, Zara), and when the time between a new look and its mass market copies is very compressed, bootlegging reaches the level of craft. It takes talent, and time, and quality materials to bootleg something, as well as a personal imprint. Human copy will always beat an algorithmic one.” As someone who watches this stuff, I can agree bootlegs often sometimes feel more “real” than the mass market versions many brands (and bands) spit out these days. The best ones feel like an authentic act of devotion. One of my favorite hats in my closet isn’t my original It’s not the scarcity or sentimental provenance that makes this cap great, but a third thing: a bottomless wealth of romantic intent. Brennan makes these “privates” (a riff on “private press”) for friends as some “atomic form of fan fiction.” Bootlegs like these further split our timelines and canon. No faceless companies produce them: Instead, eccentrics who want to create something that only exists in their brain—or exists already, but at a price point they can’t reach—conjure these items out of practically thin air. These people will always exist, and so will the sacred bootleg. (SV) You're currently a free subscriber to |