---
subject: "The Birth of the Modern Moral Panic"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-08-13 12:29:31
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
There was a new intoxicant loose on the streets of the big city. It was stronger than anything people had seen before — and cheap, too, which meant it was suddenly everywhere. It was so new and so readily available that leaders had no idea what to do about the wave of addiction that swept the country. The drug seemed to prey on a certain type of person — down and out, low on opportunities, looking for an escape from the difficulties and disappointments of life. In a society with weakening social ties, where people had less access to family and fewer friends than before, too many people seemed to find solace in intoxication. Though the stuff caused plenty of heartbreak and even death, improbable stories swirled about its effects. It inspired people to stop eating! It All this (well, not the spontaneous combustion stuff) was said about marijuana in midcentury, crack cocaine in the 1980s, and opiates and fentanyl today. But one of the earliest social panics about a drug took place over something that you may have in your liquor cabinet right now. The “gin craze” of the early 1700s captivated Britain and set a template for narratives about the impact of new drugs that is still influential today. Before 1700, it was hard to get dangerously drunk in England, even though the country was awash in alcohol. Rich people drank some wine, and folks in apple country consumed cider, but most people drank beer or ale. The beer of the early modern period was less a recreational beverage than a fortifying one. The alcohol in the brew kept dangerous bacteria at bay, and beer provided calories for people who had to work hard, physical jobs. It’s hard to tell for sure, but premodern beer was likely less intoxicating than what you can buy today. Since beer was a part of most people’s everyday lives, it was subject to social rules. Britons drank throughout the day — in agricultural societies, there was less of a sense of “being at work,” a time when you’d have to behave differently than when you were “off work.” Especially after the Protestant Reformation, people — mostly men — would also gather at pubs and other types of public houses to drink. Drinking, especially in public, was mostly a male activity; women were expected to drink less and to do so in private. This culture of drinking was widely accepted in England, but new technology threw everything into disarray. By the 1700s, people had figured out how to distill spirits (as opposed to fermenting drinks like beer and wine), which allowed them to make much more potent beverages. Though distillation was known to ancient cultures and was practiced in very limited ways in medieval Europe, the widespread use of distilling emerged in tandem with the advances in chemistry that came with the Scientific Revolution. A German author named Hieronymus Brunschwig published Liber de arte distillandi de simplicibus (Book on the art of distillation out of simple ingredients) around 1500, and the technology made its way into Britain by the 1600s with the help of The British government Gin found its way into England at a time of great social change. London was evolving into the first industrial metropolis in the history of the world; its population would As all of these people moved to the big city, they left behind rural social networks that had governed their behavior. Migrants found themselves in a giant, anonymous metropolis where anything went, and they often ended up living difficult, disappointing lives as the city turned out to offer less opportunity than they had expected. Women, especially, found themselves in new social circumstances. Gender norms were different in London. Women were more likely than their counterparts in other parts of the country to leave the house for work and pleasure and to have spending money of their own. This changed their drinking behavior. Into this unsettled society came gin, a beverage for which there were no established social rules. It was cheap, potent, and widely available. British people consumed vast quantities of it — And, yes, gin, like almost everything else in England, had class associations. Upper-class people like Henry Fielding It’s unclear whether gin took special hold among women, or whether observers just paid more attention to women’s drinking, since it had previously been socially constrained. Women weren’t welcome in alehouses, but they could buy as much gin as they wanted. They could
A poem called “
No social panic is complete without exaggerated stories of women’s moral depravity. During the gin craze, Britons obsessed over the story of a woman named Judith Defour, who lived in a workhouse for the poor. She was The most famous artifact of the gin craze is “Gin Lane,” a 1751 illustration by William Hogarth that combines many of the themes we’ve seen here — crime, sloth, financial ruin, wayward women, and abandoned children: It was originally published with this poem:
Parliament reacted relatively quickly to the concerns around gin. And, despite the fact that it sparked something with all of the characteristics of a In 1729, Parliament The government tried again with even stricter laws in 1736, but people again found ways around them. One particularly clever method was the “puss and mew,” which functioned like a vending machine. This allowed people to sell gin while concealing their identity. A 1738 article
In 1743 and 1751, the government passed more gin laws, but, crucially, they had In the end, the gin craze died down. Government policy had something to do with it, but changing cultural ideas, new products (people started to drink more The gin craze became a sort of template for how societies often see new drugs, associating them with scary big cities, lower-class people, loose women, and improbable tales of depravity and destitution. Over time, gin became just another drink, but the panic over it remains a model for our concerns about intoxicants today. This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are three ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: You can share the newsletter with others: You can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week! You're currently a free subscriber to |