---
subject: "Links For September 2023"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-09-28 02:28:30
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
[Remember, I haven’t independently verified each link. On average, commenters will end up spotting evidence that around two or three of the links in each links post are wrong or misleading. I correct these as I see them, and will highlight important corrections later, but I can’t guarantee I will have caught them all by the time you read this.] 1: This past summer didn’t just break temperature records in the US and Europe, it was an unprecedented increase from previous years. Climate change explains why temperatures are going up in general, but not why the rate of change increased so much this summer in particular, or why it was centered on the North Atlantic. The explanation there might be 2: Related: 3: Related: The recent Hunga Tonga volcanic eruption 4: 5: One of the largest planes ever seriously proposed was 6: I somehow forgot to mention this until now, but 7: “Adversarial examples” are a weird AI phenomenon where imperceptible changes to certain images can make AIs get them bizarrely wrong. For example, you can take a picture of a house, add a tiny amount of invisible noise representing “giraffe”, end up with a picture that still looks exactly like a house, but an AI will identify it as a giraffe. Now …and asked to choose which one looks “more cat-like”, people will choose the one with the adversarial example perturbation for “cat” slightly more often than the other. Or if you perturb one train picture to be “cat” and another to be “house”, people will be able to recognize better than chance that one of them seems more cat-like and the other more house-like. I have to admit I can’t see this at all and am very skeptical, but Ian Goodfellow who’s a leader in this field is involved in this paper, so I’ll wait and see. 8: Related: AI art has gone from copying humans to inventing entirely new styles. Like Or I recommend moving your head closer vs. further from your monitor and squinting a bit for the full range of effects. 9: Related: AI can now translate videos, audio-to-audio, into other languages, but the results 10: Claim: 11: Did you know: an honest-to-goodness Freemasonic conspiracy took over the French military in the early 1900s and may have damaged its ability to fight World War I. With a gravitas fitting its historical importance, it was dubbed 12: You’ve probably heard this already, but: 13: Unfortunately related: Anti-Ukraine-war website Grayzone 14: The Intercept writes about 15: European fertility rates over time. What happened in Czechia in the past ten years? (no, it doesn’t seem to be immigration). H/T 16: Freddie deBoer’s Derek Chauvin Defund Challenge asked defund-the-police advocates what their plan was for dealing with Derek Chauvin (the cop who killed George Floyd - presumably someone they think should face consequences, and presumably someone who wouldn’t voluntarily accept those consequences if there were no police to arrest him). 17: A while ago 18: How much does every country like every other’s country’s food? (source: 19: 20: Alex Kesin 21: Study: as far as anyone can tell, 22: From the subreddit: although it’s fun to invent clever ideas for efficient dating apps, 23: India is discussing 24: Ethan Strauss on 25: Effective Altruist Forum: The charity Pure Earth, sponsored by GiveWell, 25: Related: EA charity 26: A few years ago 27: Jobs with the highest and lowest divorce rates (h/t Gonna do some trauma re-enacting for a moment here, sorry: if you look at the lowest divorce rate, aside from clergy it’s all big nerd jobs. When I was young, all us nerds thought it was weird that nobody would date us, because we were nice and would probably be better at having good non-abusive relationships than all the successful serial-dater bartender types we knew. This got dubbed the “Nice Guy” argument and everyone agreed it was just a dog whistle for how we were actually rapists who believed we should be able to rape whoever we wanted with no consequences. And now someone gets data and finds that . . . actually nerds have unusually good and stable relationships. HMMMM SHOCKING WHO COULD HAVE GUESSED THIS? 28: Ascento robot security guard: Thirty years after the Mega Man video games came out, we’ve finally invented the low-level robot enemies you have to kill a few dozen of before you get to the main boss! But (unlike Mega Man enemies) these don’t have weapons, so I wonder what the advantage is supposed to be over having lots of CCTV cameras. Maybe psychological? 29: Re…lated? Blogger/model Aella is offering 30: DSL: 31: Leah Libresco interviews Freddie de Boer on his new book, partial transcript 32: A minister describes his experience with prayer: “In college, I started getting up at 5:30 every morning and praying until 9, because I wanted to hear God’s voice and it seemed crazy to spend less time on that than school work. Started hearing him about 5 months in. . . ” (h/t 33: 34: Neuroscientist Erik Hoel 35: Related: Adam Mastroianni: 36: Newly popular Republican candidate Vivek Ramaswamy runs a pharmaceutical company; his track record there will probably become an issue if his campaign goes further. Biotech blogger Ruxandra Teslo 37: In the US, big cities are further left than rural areas. Is the same true in other countries? See 38: 39: Emil Kirkegaard has 40: 41: 42: Related: one joke I keep hearing is that Anthropic will single-handedly put FTX back in the black - 43: 44: Little known grammatical tenses: the 45: 46: Related: @jeremychrysler 47: 48: Hyundai may have solved parallel parking forever ( You're currently a free subscriber to |