---
subject: "Our interview with Nobel Prize winner Joel Mokyr on how tech progress leads to economic growth"
from: "a16z crypto <a16zcrypto@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-10-18 15:30:28
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "a16zcrypto"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_2535365729249697677"]
---
IN THIS EDITION: How technological progress leads to economic growth — our conversation with Nobel Prize winner Joel Mokyr Continuing progress on state-of-the-art zkVM Jolt Governments, banks, and even more TradFi embracing crypto…
THE ARGUMENT How technological progress drives sustained economic growth (and on how to measure it)Joel Mokyr and Sonal Chokshi This week, Joel Mokyr, professor of economics and history at Northwestern University, was awarded the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences for explaining innovation-driven economic growth. “Stagnation was the norm throughout most of human history,” the committee But Mokyr a16z crypto’s editor in chief interviewed Mokyr in November 2016, shortly after his book sharing many of these ideas, A Culture of Growth: The Origins of the Modern Economy, was originally published. The book analyzes why Enlightenment culture sparked the Industrial Revolution. Why did the Industrial Revolution take place where it did, and then spread beyond? It had to do with a competitive, open market of ideas, Mokyr argues — a transnational “Republic of Letters” — not unlike the crypto ethos of open source, decentralization, and more. We’re sharing the full interview with Mokyr here, covering important themes relevant to the crypto industry and beyond, such as: going against ancient wisdom, and being able to contest ideas the role of trust, collaboration, and credit in collaboration competitive markets for ideas, elite vs. access in the printing press vs. the internet the role of institutions and emergent organizations 2 key ways to drive tech progress how to measure progress when technology is dematerialized …and more!
PROGRESS UPDATES: R&D zkVM Jolt goes from 32-bit to 64-bit proving, and without a slowdownMarkos Georghiades, Andrew Milson, Justin Thaler, Andrew Tretyakov, Julius Zhang, and Michael Zhu State of the art Over 500,000 cycles/sec on a MacBook Over 1,500,000 cycles/sec on a 32-core CPU
Why does 64-bit proving matter? And how did Jolt hit RV64IMAC speeds (cycles/sec), exceeding our RV32IM results from two months ago? Proving incentive compatibility in a decentralized storage networkMichael Crystal, Guy Goren, Scott Duke Kominers Decentralized storage is one of the most natural applications built on blockchains, and a central component of the web3 ecosystem. Yet despite a decade of active development — from IPFS and Filecoin to more recent entrants — most of these storage protocols have received limited formal analysis of their incentive properties. This gap matters: Without well-designed incentives, a system may distribute storage but fail to truly decentralize it. So we analyze Shelby — a storage network protocol recently proposed by Aptos Labs and Jump Crypto — and provide the first formal proof of its incentive properties. Our game-theoretic model shows that while off-chain audits alone collapse to universal shirking, Shelby’s combination of peer audits with occasional on-chain verification yields incentive compatibility under natural parameter settings. We also examine coalition behavior and outline a simple modification that strengthens the protocol’s collusion-resilience. NEWS AND MOVES …governments & blockchainsThe Himalayan kingdom of Bhutan integrated its National Digital Identity (NDI) platform with the Ethereum blockchain — “making it the first country to anchor a live, population-scale identity system on a public network”, as For more on identity online, including a brief discussion of government ID systems, [watch/ listen here](https://substack.com/redirect/5a1ec44d-0ebf-4750-89d4-3ceed2a156f0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).For more on regional innovation, [check out this conversation](https://substack.com/redirect/460e5895-8dd7-4d10-b97d-100d3c55af93?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).
…banks & digital assetsThis week, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), a bureau of the U.S. Department of the Treasury that regulates national banks, Meanwhile, Bridge CEO For more on the Genius Act, [check out our coverage here](https://substack.com/redirect/ecb3f531-06e4-496d-8079-58c069081ddf?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).For more on Stripe, Bridge, and stablecoins, [see this post](https://substack.com/redirect/a1a61369-63d3-478a-8927-c2c7983e3f6e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)from earlier this year.
…traditional finance embracing cryptoCiti, a global bank in 180 countries, is launching a service to custody crypto assets next year, as reported earlier this week BlackRock, the world’s largest asset manager with $13.46 trillion in assets under management, continues to push tokenization of assets, as reported in its Q3 earnings call this week. “We’re spending a great deal of time on the tech,” CEO Larry Fink stated. “I’m trying to develop our own technology related to this.” For more on blockchains for TradFi, [see our playbook](https://substack.com/redirect/33dc9a00-6c1b-45dc-9aa6-c8ba1ea684ec?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)on what banks, asset managers, and fintechs should know.
— a16z crypto editorial team You’re receiving this newsletter because you signed up for it on our websites, at an event, or elsewhere (you can opt out any time using the ‘unsubscribe’ link below). This newsletter is provided for informational purposes only, and should NOT be relied upon as legal, business, investment, or tax advice. This newsletter may link to other websites or other information obtained from third-party sources — a16z has not independently verified nor makes any representations about the current or enduring accuracy of such information. Furthermore, the content is not directed at nor intended for use by any investors or prospective investors in any a16z funds. Please see a16z.com/disclosures for additional important details, including link to list of investments. subscribe to our podcast ' |