---
subject: "Who Was the First to Fly?"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-09-17 10:33:45
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Like a lot of firsts, the first powered flight wasn’t all that impressive. After years of building bicycles, then gliders, and finally powered aircraft prototypes, the Wright brothers, Wilbur and Orville, took their invention to the beach at Kitty Hawk, North Carolina for testing. They chose Kitty Hawk because they could use the steady winds coming off of the ocean — and because the sand would provide a soft landing in the very likely event of a crash. After a botched takeoff on December 14, 1903, delayed their efforts for a few days, Orville managed to use strong winds to get his Flyer off the ground. The first powered flight, on December 17, traveled about 120 feet. It lasted 12 seconds, probably about as long as it took you to read this paragraph. The brothers made a few more attempts that day, managing a few more flights of less than 20 seconds. The day’s great achievement was a journey of 852 feet. It lasted 59 seconds. A little bit after this fourth flight, the winds picked up and caught the aircraft, flipping and badly damaging it. That unintentional flight would be the Wright Flyer’s last journey. A flight of 0.16 miles lasting less than a minute was proof of concept, but not much more. But at least the Wright brothers could stake a firm claim to being the first, right? Well, things didn’t seem that clear-cut back in 1903. There had been no outside observers at Kitty Hawk that day. The brothers themselves didn’t make much of a fuss about their achievement; they
The Wrights’ flight was Like many technological firsts, the reality becomes more complicated the more questions you ask. What, exactly, constitutes a flight? What does it mean for a flight to be powered? What does it mean for a flight to be controlled? The Wright brothers weren’t the only people to claim that they had made the first flight. Around the turn of the 20th century, independent inventors all over the world understood that powered aviation was right around the corner and were racing one another to be first. Several of them had at least semi-credible claims to have beaten the Wright brothers into the air. A German immigrant in Connecticut named Gustave Whithead had, like the Wrights, been plugging away in relative obscurity at the problem of powered flight. He built over 50 planes and gliders, and, according to him, beat the Wright brothers into the sky by two years. He claimed in Scientific American to have built a “
Whitehead wrote in to American Inventor magazine the next year with similar claims. The editors were skeptical:
Wait, who’s this Langley guy who supposedly beat Whitehead into the air? This would be Smithsonian Institution Secretary Samuel Langley. He wasn’t some obscure Ohio bicycle builder or immigrant tinkerer in Connecticut. He was an important figure whose aviation research was funded by the U.S. Army and conducted his tests over the Potomac River. Langley had repeatedly demonstrated “the possibility of mechanical flight” since 1896, when he launched an unmanned plane from a houseboat in Virginia and flew it some distance. He repeated the feat over the next few years. Langley then worked on a full-scale, manned version of his Aerodrome. He made two attempts to fly it, both of which predated the Wrights’ Kitty Hawk flights. Both are now considered failures; the aircraft fell into the Potomac both times without traveling very far. Some claim that a New Zealand farmer named Pearse himself, however, gave credit to the Wrights in later interviews, saying that he hadn’t “attempted anything practical with the idea” before 1904 and that his early flights had not been successful (he may have been One of the most interesting claimants in the race for the skies made his flight after the Wright brothers. The wealthy Brazilian coffee heir Alberto Santos-Dumont had been using his fortune to take to the skies for years by 1903. After a trip to Paris, the capital of hot-air ballooning, he built a series of balloons and airships in the 1890s. He flew his first heavier-than-air plane, the 14-bis, in Paris in September 1906. Why, if Santos-Dumont was three years late to the party, do many Brazilians still claim that he was the first? Well, some claim that the Wrights’ earliest flights were secret and could not be corroborated. Their first public demonstration in May 1904 was a flop — the motor wouldn’t start. Meanwhile, Santos-Dumont was rich and famous, and his exploits were well-covered. He made his flights in public view in Paris, in front of officials from the Aero Club de France (this Others emphasize the Wrights’ dependence on catapults to get their planes into the air, while Santos-Dumont’s planes got into the air under their own power. This, in the eyes of Santos-Dumont’s backers, makes his accomplishments more impressive than the Wright brothers’ So how did the world settle on the Wright brothers as the greatest pioneers in aviation? It didn’t at first. Many observers believed that flight was impossible, or that claimants like the Wrights had not sufficiently proven their claims. In December 1905, Scientific American It wasn’t until 1908 that the Wrights definitively convinced the world that they were for real — by traveling to France and performing a two-minute flight in 1908 (after A month later, the brothers demonstrated their plane for the U.S. Army, which had long doubted the Wrights’ claims. The flights impressed American officials, although one would crash, By 1909, the Wright brothers were heroes. The city of Dayton threw them a huge It seemed that everyone was convinced — except for the Smithsonian, the home of the Wrights’ rival, Samuel Langley. In 1914, the museum, which housed Langley’s ill-fated Aerodrome, lent the craft to motorcycling and aviation pioneer Glenn Curtiss. Curtiss was not a neutral in the aviation wars — he had been Curtiss modified the Aerodrome and managed to make it fly for a few seconds. This allowed him, Langley, and the Smithsonian to claim that Langley’s plane had been “capable” of flight and therefore counted as the first airplane. Orville Wright (Wilbur had died in 1912), tried to remain aloof for a while, but the lack of recognition irritated him more with the passage of time. By the 1920s, he was writing letters to anyone who he thought might be able to help him, including former president (and Ohio native) Eventually, he sent the original Wright Flyer to a museum in London out of spite. He
In the 1930s, Charles Lindbergh got involved in the dispute, suggesting a blue-ribbon committee to study the matter. Wright rejected the proposal. He stubbornly insisted that the Smithsonian admit that Langley’s machine had been heavily altered for the flights in 1914. Over time, the Smithsonian’s position began to look silly. The Wrights’ plane was widely assumed to have been the first to fly. Why was the museum being such a stick in the mud about it? The museum only reversed its position after the death of Orville Wright in 1948. Wright’s biographer had been working as an intermediary between the Smithsonian and Wright for years. Wright’s executors, acting on an unsigned draft of a will in which Orville had considered bequeathing the plane to the Smithsonian, allowed the museum to have it under one condition — the Smithsonian was forced to sign a The Smithsonian signed, and the matter was settled. As a matter of legal agreement and consensus, the Wright brothers were first. Their struggle for recognition — which only ended in the age of the jet and the rocket — had lasted much longer than it had taken them to invent flight in the first place. This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are three ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: You can share the newsletter with others: You can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week! You're currently a free subscriber to |