---
subject: "The Modern Private Equity Business was Invented in Beverly Hills in the 70s"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <the-diff@ghost.io>"
to: ""
date: 2024-11-18 15:39:12
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
In this issue: - The Modern Private Equity Business was Invented in Beverly Hills in the 70s—The PE business has evolved from making directional bets on equity to being in the business of providing capital more generally. This evolution ends up recreating some of the economic benefits of the original high-yield bond market, where a well-capitalized and exceptionally well-informed central intermediary kept the rest of the industry running smoothly.
- Product Convergence—TikTok experiments with longer-but-not-too-long videos.
- Musk v. Altman—Tech history is contingent.
- The Bundle—Be careful offering consumers too good a deal.
- Financing a Boom—AI offers opportunities on the credit and equity side.
- Investor Protectionism—Industries go to wherever they have the biggest advantage, and for capital-intensive technology companies, that's the US.
The Modern Private Equity Business was Invented in Beverly Hills in the 70sFinance combines abstraction and regulation in a way that leads to messy semantic drift: a term can keep its literal denotation while completely changing its denotation. A "hedge fund" in the mid-80s meant a highly levered investment partnership whose manager placed big bets on currencies, commodities, and interest rates. There are still such funds today, but a growing share of what hedge funds do is almost the exact opposite—quantitatively rigorous portfolio construction designed to isolate idiosyncratic return without any unnecessary exposure to easily-hedged risks. What's remained consistent is that it's structured as XYZ Capital LP, whose limited partnership is XYZ Capital Management LLC. Everything else is pretty different. Private equity has also gone through an evolution of its own: the earliest deals were, by modern standards, comically leveraged, with 10:1 being a pretty common number. They were often for fairly mediocre companies that would be sold for parts, but these early deals were also for incredibly cheap companies; it's perfectly fine to buy a marginally-profitable company in a declining industry with a lot of leverage if you can get back most of the capital you put into the deal in a busy year of liquidations. That model worked well for a while. There were some poorly-thought-out conglomerates that had been assembled in the 60s and 70s and needed a few amputations to stay viable in the 80s. Assets were cheap, though capital was expensive, but rates declined in the 80s, making those assets more valuable and making it easier for PE firms to refinance debt. Over time, though, the world So the PE model today looks like this: - Identify a set of companies where you can add value through both management advice and rearranging the capital structure.
- Identify a broad financial ecosystem that will be a good buyer for the parts you don't want to keep, with varying proximity between these capital providers and the PE firm.
- If something goes wrong and a company turns out to be over-levered, don't fret&dmash;recapitalize! As long as the company is fundamentally okay and just going through temporary issues, the current owner has an advantage in figuring out and funding whatever the revised capital structure is.
- Have enough of a balance sheet to keep whatever slice of the business is most attractive. Run multiple pools of capital, align people's compensation as much as possible with their own ability to produce, but lock up key employees' capital in deals for a long time so they're not tempted to quit.
This is the direction the industry has drifted over time, for many reasons: changes in regulation after the financial crisis made banks worse at warehousing risk; those same changes meant that banks paid less and more of their best people moved to PE; economic cycles create plenty of entry and exit opportunities for funds that have access to capital over a decade; and the growth of SaaS means that there's a larger set of companies that have predictable cash flows that can be levered up while the underlying business continues to grow. But this business isn't just a productof circumstances, because a fairly similar one existed in a completely different set of circumstances: this high-level model is a decent description of how Drexel Burnham Lambert dominated the high-yield bond market in the 70s and 80s. All of the pieces were there, as were some of the players (Apollo Global was founded shortly after Drexel's collapse, by Drexel alumni) and cultural norms (from Apollo's investor day last month: "We have woken the team up at 4:30 in the morning for meetings to prove to them that we need to do a wake-up call and something different"). The Drexel story starts with making a market. And, in this case, really making one. Corporate bonds trade less than equities, for a variety of reasons, and prior to Drexel, bonds rated lower than investment grade traded even less. The typical bond buyer was aiming to get some slight excess return while preserving their capital, and any time a company's bonds were downgraded to the point that the ratings agencies thought that 100 cents on the dollar was not the most likely outcome, they weren't serving their purpose. So a holder could mentally write those bonds down to zero, and hope that they bounced back, or sell them and perhaps recover a bit of the initial investment. But who, in the bond world, would be interested in buying something so sensitive to credit—an asset that was legally a bond but that behaved more like a stock? There weren't very many people willing to do this, but Michael Milken was one of them. Interestingly enough, he'd learned about high yield bonds from an early version of what today's investors would call a quant, economist Milken would have been happy just buying these bonds, but he was a small part of a mid-sized firm, so when he started out he had all of $500k in capital, and a deal that the department's bonus pool was 35% of whatever he could make from it. He might have done fine buying and holding, but could do a bit better trading: there were a handful of investors who were open to buying high-yield bonds, and Milken spent substantial time early in his career evangelizing them. (Later on, he didn't need to do nearly as much of this, and instead would have companies come to Drexel and take a meeting before the real workday started. Since Drexel was based on the West Coast but operated on Eastern Time, this meant flying into LA and showing up for a morning meeting at 4am or so. But by this time it also meant a good chance of finding out, at that meeting, that not only could Drexel raise the hundreds of millions you wanted, but they wanted you to raise even more.) The early high-yield market consisted of formerly investment-grade bonds that had fallen from grace, and of bonds that had been created for conglomerates' exchange offers. Part of the appeal of bonds is that they're a specific, quantified promise: this much every six months, this much at maturity. So junk bonds are a great space for contrarians: no matter how wrong the rest of the world thinks you are, bonds naturally drift towards their fair value, and there's a date on which you know that either you or your counterparty gets vindicated. So that's Drexel 1.0: central node in a growing network of bond traders who are willing to touch the junkier products, but need someone to provide liquidity. Over time, Drexel started tracking positions closely; their high market share meant that they knew roughly who owned what, and had a sense of when they'd be willing to buy more or sell some. That advantage compounds: a market-maker who has a buyer in mind can offer better pricing, so they get the deal and collect both a spread and a bit more data to inform the next deal. Things got more interesting once Drexel started doing new junk bond issues, too. These were typically small, had high interest rates, and often had weird terms. But they were a business necessity, because Milken had solved the supply overhang problem so well that he'd created a shortage of junk bonds. This would have struck investors just a few years earlier as a bizarre possibility, like a global shortage of pocket lint, but it happened: the bond funds that bought junk did better than the rest, and as rates declined and the typical bond no longer offered a double-digit return by default, investors reached for yield instead of accepting lower returns. When Drexel did these deals, it negotiated some onerous terms: underwriting fees were multiples of what they were for investment-grade debt, and the firm often asked for warrants in order to place the debt. These warrants were ostensibly something Drexel had to offer customers—if they're taking the risk, they need some upside to compensate. But in practice the company sometimes kept them. Or, to be more specific: Milken's group kept them, either on behalf of the firm or for various partnerships that Milken or close associates operated, which managed money on behalf of him, other Drexel employees, and favored outside clients. Who was issuing these bonds? Sometimes, it was exactly who you'd expect: a company that used to issue investment-grade bonds, had seen a deterioration in its business, and needed more capital to keep going even if it had to pay high rates. There were also growth companies, like MCI and Golden Nugget; paying 16% for debt is painful, but there were times when equity valuation wasn't too far off from that; when every kind of capital is painfully expensive, it's just a question of how much of the upside you want to keep if your business works out. One practice Drexel came up with was to first convince companies to raise more than they felt that they needed, and then to get them to invest the surplus in other high-yield bonds. This gives the companies some flexibility, but also means that they're paying yet another data dividend to Drexel, in addition to paying those 3-4% underwriting fees on a bigger deal. Put all of this together, and you have a suspiciously familiar financial ecosystem: there's a central node that 1) has a good fundamental understanding of the businesses it's involved in, 2) has essentially unlimited creativity for crafting new financial solutions if the old ones don't work out, and 3) has enough of its own capital to own the highest-upside piece of every deal and enough captive outside capital to place all the paper that gets sold. This is a very profitable way to dominate a market, though the cost of this is that you have to choose the right market to get obsessed with, and sometimes that means having the correctly quirky reading habits while you're in school. It does run risks, because there can be imbalances on the supply or demand sides, and because that central liquidity provider can quickly transmit risks throughout the system. But it has some general advantages, too: it creates an economic incentive to deeply understand companies, because distressed credit performs more like equity than like debt, and because these companies will keep coming back for more financing. And there's an incentive to understand how other investors think, to know what's going to keep them involved in the market and what's going to make them run away screaming. It's a subsidy for operational excellence, because the speed at which the dominant intermediary operates sets the pace for the entire industry. Combining all of these makes markets more efficient, and it pays extraordinarily well. It's also a model with natural conflicts. You have one party who's well-informed, and who exercises more discretion than everyone else: clients do the best trades they can, but the very best ones are trades they won't even see. Negotiating complex deals as both a principal and agent can leave plenty of profit for all sides when bid/ask spreads are wide, but the more asymmetric the information is, the longer those valuation gaps take to close. It's a fantastically profitable approach, but it requires inputs: not just capital and talent, but an accumulated stock of either trust or owed favors that can be tapped at will. Counterparties know that they're dealing with someone well-informed who aims to make a good profit from the transaction, and they're willing to do this if they trust their counterparty to make the right moves. But this kind of leverage is hard to measure, and like other varieties it cuts both ways. And there were other benefits, too; the higher a bond's interest rate, the less sensitive it is to broader interest rate changes. In fact, sufficiently low-rated bonds actually go up on average when interest rates rise, because the bond's value is more tied to economic growth than interest rates. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/b3bedabd?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)Conglomerateurs apparently picked up on investors' tendency to anchor bond prices at 100 cents on the dollar. That created an opportunity: offer to buy back stock, or buy out another company, with a package of securities that includes a bond yielding 5% when the borrower in question would actually have to pay, say, 8%. That bond would trade at 80 cents on the dollar, but a sloppy counterparty might assume it was worth closer to 100. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/003af024?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)Equities are more like this than they used to be, at least in the US, because of secondary offerings and buybacks. As long as you and management roughly agree on valuation, they're either buying back the stock and increasing its value per share if it's cheap, or they're issuing new shares if it's expensive. The latter leads to more convergence between the value of the company and the current share price (suppose a company has 90m shares trading at $10 and it's actually worthless. If they sell another 10m shares at $10, it's now worth $1/share instead of $0.) On the other hand, if you're a short seller this increase in supply may mean that you're paying less to borrow the shares you've sold. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/8966ce5f?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)This is one of those moments that illustrates how much finance has evolved, and why. It's hard to imagine hearing about a modern investment bank where some SVP is also running a hedge fund, which is managing client money and trading with the firm. To be fair to Milken, in at least one case the origin was that the firm felt he was taking too much risk on REIT bonds, and told him to sell them; he got permission to put together a fund to buy them from the firm, and that fund apparently did well. This trade features a fun indirect cameo: REITs were the investment that first led George Soros to codify his [theory of reflexivity](https://www.thediff.co/r/867af3c5?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99).[↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/bc2ae211?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
Subscribe You're on the free list for The Diff. Last week, paying subscribers read about Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. See a sampling of current open roles below: - A growing pod at a multi-manager platform is looking for new quantitative researchers, no prior finance experience necessary, 250k+ (NYC)
- An AI startup building tools to help automate compliance for companies in highly regulated industries is looking for a director of information security and compliance with 5+ years of info sec related experience at a software company. Experience with HIPAA, FedRAMP a plus. (NYC)
- YC-backed, post-revenue AI company that’s turning body cam footage into complete police reports seeks a senior founding engineer/tech lead who can build scalable backend systems and maintain best practices for the engineering org. (SF)
- A Google Ventures backed startup founded by SpaceX engineers building data infrastructure and tooling for hardware companies is looking for a staff product manager with 5+ years experience, ideally with AI and data intensive products. (LA, Hybrid)
- A well-funded startup that’s building the universal electronic cash system by taking stablecoins from edge cases to the mainstream is looking for a senior full-stack engineer. Experience with information dense front-ends is a strong plus. (NYC, London, Singapore)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. ElsewhereProduct ConvergenceTikTok is testing out a compromise between short clips and full-length videos: Musk v. AltmanThe internal OpenAI emails revealed in the OpenA suit are The BundleMeta has been Disclosure: Long META. Financing a BoomThe WSJ has a Investor ProtectionismFrench telecom billionaire turned venture investor Xavier Niel is |
||||||||||
|
|
|
||||||||||
|