---
subject: "Digital Tug-of-War"
from: "Anu from Working Theorys <anu@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-01-19 21:01:47
labels: ["Anu Atluru", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_2904166891572353451", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Hello loyal readers, I wanted to share where my mind has been with writing lately. If you’re curious, read on—or skip straight to today’s post in the next section (a refreshed format).
Last year, I wrote ~[50 essays](https://substack.com/redirect/8b2cc580-f80b-4410-a74b-ae0aaf41f572?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) (plus many unpublished ones), which taught me a lot about my interests, habits, and goals. This year, I want to put more energy into longer-term creative projects and be more selective with essays, putting greater intent into each one. To balance these demands, I’m going to experiment with new formats alongside my usual essays (a couple are already in progress).
Today’s post is one such experiment, refreshing a format I used last year for paid subs—quick thoughts on what’s happening now and what’s caught my eye recently. We’re living in an economy of takes and double takes, after all. I welcome your feedback: comment and share if you like it; if not, shake your head silently and DM me. :)
TikTok’s 12-hour [absence](https://substack.com/redirect/f94709bd-e41e-4e3e-acc0-02e9522f09df?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) gave us a glorious evening of collective commiseration. Platforms waited in the wings to [take advantage](https://substack.com/redirect/cd30710d-7378-4f82-820a-06799da49031?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) of the fallout (Substack’s app passed X briefly in the App Store rankings). Anthropologically speaking, people just want a spectacle to [talk about](https://substack.com/redirect/f4e26d6b-b4d5-4178-8bec-2c42c342bccf?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), something to force them out of their social silos, even if they retreat back in tomorrow. It seemed bittersweet—like people were losing something they loved but deep down knew [wasn’t good for them](https://substack.com/redirect/03771310-c515-4dee-9746-c88e2a772b12?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)—not pure celebration, not pure misery—celebrisery, perhaps.
[Digital trade](https://substack.com/redirect/37d9b9e3-39ac-4035-8b2f-e11abec43584?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) now makes up 25% of global trade— around $5 trillion—and is the fastest-growing segment. A D.C. think tank says we should “directly address the systematic economic mercantilism and lack of reciprocity that define the current digital market.” Big words, but they make a lot of sense. On Monday, when the big power is transferred, we’ll know more. We’re playing digital tug-of-war, and Trump clearly doesn’t want to let TikTok win or let it fall. The most likely outcome has to be the one that could boost sales of The Art of the Deal.
Every year, like clockwork, people screenshot-dunk on MBAs not getting jobs faster. (The real indictment of business schools isn’t their graduates but their struggle to fix their reputation.) And this isn’t a talent problem; it’s mismatch unemployment. People aren’t struggling to find a job—they’re holding out for the job, and macro cycles don’t help. (The WSJ has been telling this story since [2014](https://substack.com/redirect/5020f5f7-00ac-4f17-92ec-428f32b827c8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)!)
What’s true is MBA programs haven’t cracked hiring beyond consulting and finance. But the degree isn’t just about jobs. A slight provocation: it’s also a structured learning sabbatical—a chance to recalibrate ambitions, to start a business with a community’s support, to join an immersive cohort of a thousand ambitious peers—for the last time in your life. Yes, the cost is problematic, and people want better alternatives. Programs should at least bring in leaders who truly understand where the world is and where it’s heading. Education as we know it is undeniably racing toward obsolescence.
One more provocation: Why do MBAs get more flack than elite undergrads? Perceived ‘prestige games’ are judged more harshly later in life. And [‘little tech’s](https://substack.com/redirect/4ef1a7f0-6109-4c6a-8a90-1d11fdb82750?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) resentment toward MBA programs is mostly a fight to “own” business as a skilled execution discipline—though tech people still want to be invited to guest lecture and star in case studies. Stanford escapes much criticism because everyone either went there or wants to hire its grads, researchers, and dropouts.
Whitney Wolfe Herd is returning to Bumble as CEO, and [it can’t hurt](https://substack.com/redirect/ceb6a437-fd2a-4921-acf0-eb14792983b9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Steve Jobs did it with Apple, Howard Schultz with Starbucks, Jack Dorsey with Twitter, Bob Iger with Disney, Sam Altman with OpenAI. Donald Trump wins for the most impressive return to office. (The scarcity of female examples isn’t lost on me.)
Time away seems to give CEOs a jolt of perspective plus the freedom to go full ‘founder mode’ with reckless abandon. It feels like part redemption tour, part revenge tour, a rush to feel the adrenaline again, and the primal urge to make sure your life’s work doesn’t get obliterated in someone else’s hands.
Great title from [Astral Codex Ten](https://open.substack.com/pub/astralcodexten?utm_source=mentions), and it delivers: It's Still Easier To Imagine The End Of The World Than The End Of Capitalism. Everyone is wondering what a post-AGI techno-capitalist society could look like, and I am too. I’ll write more on this, but please share other good reads you’ve come across in the meantime!
It’s a 5-minute inspirational newsletter that goes out every Friday at 5 PM with a [cartoon animation](https://substack.com/redirect/3f71328f-e4a0-48ef-a677-f308323db05a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) of him reading it aloud. He’s using [Kit](https://substack.com/redirect/11dc142d-5b27-44a1-9d39-78a0430ddb53?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) and [getting free services](https://substack.com/redirect/c9625973-4b9d-4aa1-bc48-9bc098261240?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) but no equity. Newsletters are no longer the indie creators’ playground but a stage big enough for A-listers to act. It’s noisy and getting noisier. Three issues looming: the great inbox cluttering, stacking subscription costs, and time.
Season 2, Episode 1 was good. My favorite new conspiracy theory is about Helly R, but it might have already been debunked [here](https://substack.com/redirect/1481e8c1-965a-415f-bda3-041a777bd1bc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Also loved this soundbite from creator Dan Erickson on the show’s origin:
“I was walking into an office job one day, and I didn’t like it, and I wanted to jump ahead to the end of the day. And then it was just like, “Okay, well, let’s follow that to its logical conclusion. How would that work? What would that mean for me? What would that mean for the version of me stuck in the office?” … [Severance is] close enough to our reality that we can recognize it, but it also feels a little bit like we get to go on a fun trip to this other weird place.”
PMF or Die is a competition where contestants are confined to a studio apartment for 90 days with one goal: hit $1 million ARR. Last year [I predicted](https://substack.com/redirect/74237332-ab18-41bf-a5c0-623cdcc9a36b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) that more creators would specialize as producers, and it’s already happening at all levels of fame, from podcasters to Mr. Beast. More to come.
Notable because he’s someone I admire, and because it’s usually the reverse—tweets being posted to Substack. There’s a nugget of insight here on evolving platform dynamics, especially in the era of TikTok limbo.
This post turned out longer than planned, so thanks for reading. Always curious to hear your thoughts on any of the above, or whatever else is top of mind! — Anu
[Share](https://substack.com/app-link/post?publication_id=22717&post_id=154838149&utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email&utm_content=share&utm_campaign=email-share&action=share&triggerShare=true&isFreemail=true&r=8o54n&token=eyJ1c2VyX2lkIjoxNDU2MzMxOSwicG9zdF9pZCI6MTU0ODM4MTQ5LCJpYXQiOjE3MzczMjA1MzEsImV4cCI6MTczOTkxMjUzMSwiaXNzIjoicHViLTIyNzE3Iiwic3ViIjoicG9zdC1yZWFjdGlvbiJ9.YpSj5P7DNiG96v36iRICMVcdarIvUd2S1IrxjvpRq8k)