---
subject: "Links For December 2022"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-12-28 23:05:40
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX"]
---
[Remember, I haven’t independently verified each link. On average, commenters will end up spotting evidence that around two or three of the links in each links post are wrong or misleading. I correct these as I see them, and will highlight important corrections later, but I can’t guarantee I will have caught them all by the time you read this.] 1: In the context of Elon’s Twitter takeover, @Yishan talks about 2: 3: Stereotyping in Europe (h/t Related (18th century German version, I’ve lost the original source but there’s a secondary one 4:
How is this just sitting hidden in a random Wikipedia article? How come there’s no science museum or amusement park where I can use the see-the-impossible-color machine? 5: Elizabeth VN: 6: Apparently there’s 7: 8: @cube_flipper 9: Re…lated? Qualia Research Institute is selling extremely on-brand perfumes (
Also it costs $20,000 for some reason, but others are as cheap as $100. A steal! 10: Reason: 11: 12: City Journal ( 13: 14: People have a strong tendency to associate 1 with red and 2 with blue (is “One Fish Two Fish, Red Fish Blue Fish" a cause or a consequence?). See the post for other numbers, days of the week, months of the year, etc. Some make total sense (eg winter months are white, spring months are green), others are seemingly inexplicable (strong agreement on the pinkness of 8). 15: The High Holy Days (Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur) are two of the biggest holidays of the Jewish year, about a week apart. Many Jews only go to synagogue during the High Holy Days, just like so-called “Christmas-and-Easter Christians”, and synagogues get a lot of their yearly dues from Jews who want to make sure they have a seat at a High Holy Day service. During the early 20th century, entrepreneurs founded 16: 17: 18: Garrett Jones on the politics of COVID masking: I would never have predicted this; am I out-of-touch, are the anti-maskers just a lot louder than the pro-maskers, or are people giving weird responses to polls that don’t match their real-life behavior? 19: There is a lot of debate over whether “critical race theory” is being taught in schools. 20: Awais Aftab 21: Freddie deBoer: 22: Rumors of bad times on Mastodon ( 23: Re: 24: This month in interesting architecture - 25: Vox: the latest round of pro lab leak papers 26: Tumblr user suntzuanime talks anime history: 27:
@QiaochuYuan @goblinodds @maladrift back in my religious days if u independently rediscovered an idea already uncovered by some rabbi 400 years ago it was a big deal and great honor, the whole class would celebrate you. the bigger the rabbi the greater the honor |