---
subject: "AI #61: Meta Trouble"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-04-25 13:42:29
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
The week’s big news was supposed to be Meta’s release of two versions of Llama-3. Everyone was impressed. These were definitely strong models. Investors felt differently. After earnings yesterday showed strong revenues but that Meta was investing heavily in AI, they took Meta stock down 15%. DeepMind and Anthropic also shipped, but in their cases it was multiple papers on AI alignment and threat mitigation. They get their own sections. We also did identify someone who wants to do what people claim the worried want to do, who is indeed reasonably identified as a ‘doomer.’ Because the universe has a sense of humor, that person’s name is Tucker Carlson. Also we have a robot dog with a flamethrower. Table of Contents
Introduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. Take the XML. Leave the hypnosis. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. I have to praise you. It’s my job. Llama We Doing This Again. Investors are having none of it. Fun With Image Generation. Everything is fun if you are William Shatner. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. How to protect your image model? They Took Our Jobs. Well, they took some particular jobs. Get Involved. OMB, DeepMind and CivAI are hiring. Introducing. A robot dog with a flamethrower. You in? In Other AI News. Mission first. Lots of other things after. Quiet Speculations. Will it work? And if so, when? Rhetorical Innovation. Sadly predictable. Wouldn’t You Prefer a Nice Game of Chess. Game theory in action. The Battle of the Board. Reproducing an exchange on it for posterity. New Anthropic Papers. Sleeper agents, detected and undetected. New DeepMind Papers. Problems with agents, problems with manipulation. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. Listen to the prompt. People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Tucker Carlson. I know. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Roon. The Lighter Side. Click here.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
And of course, when we say ‘set up your own agent’ what we actually mean is ‘type into a chat box what you want and someone else’s agent creates your agent.’ Not only is this not empowering to individuals, it seems like a good way to start disempowering humanity in general.
The variable names it chose are… something. Yes. Of course it can. Hypnosis is a real thing, hypnosis over text is a thing, and it is relatively straightforward to do it to someone who is willing to actively participate, or simply willing to follow your suggestions. This falls under ‘things I was not going to talk about in public first’ but now that the ship on that has sailed, it is what it is.
This is the kind of product that is useless until it gets good enough and justifies investment, then suddenly gets highly valuable. And then when it works without the investment, it gets far better still. Identify drug candidates,
I do not know if this particular product is good. I do know that ‘talk to a real therapist’ is often not a realistic option, and that we are capable of building a product that is highly net positive. That does not mean we will succeed any time soon.
I love the mix of useful things and things that happen to make this user smile. Some great ideas in here, also some things (like all lowercase) I would actively hate. Which is fine, it is not for me. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane UtilityChris Rohlf says
But the fact that a defense was available does not change the fact that often it wasn’t used? What good is an LLM in your defensive toolkit unless you use the defensive toolkit? I totally buy that right now, LLMs are powering at most a tiny fraction of cyberattacks, and that this will continue in the near term. I also buy that if you used LLMs well, you could enhance your cyberdefenses. I would also say that, as Chris Rohlf indicates, the people getting into trouble are mostly failing to take far more rudimentary precautions than that. And if LLMs are being widely used to strengthen cyberdefenses, I have not heard about it. So it seems weird to turn this around and say this is actively helping now, as opposed to doing minimal marginal harm. And as always, this is a failure to be of much practical use in the task right now. That does not tell us much about usefulness in the future as capabilities advance. For that we need to look at details, and extrapolate future capabilities.
Genuine kudos to them for getting there first. The red card rule applies, if you are the first person to exploit a loophole then congratulations. White hat hackers unite. Longer term, this is going to be a problem once people figure out they can do it too. State Library of Queensland introduces an AI-powered WWI veteran for people to talk to, does this based on a basic system prompt, Llama We Doing This Again
What if Llama going open has the simplest of explanations?
Meta will be the biggest American consumer of Meta’s models, because Meta forces anyone similarly large to ask permission and pay Meta for using them. It is not obvious that Meta will be the biggest worldwide consumer of Meta’s models. There is nothing stopping all the Chinese companies from using it without paying. Several of them could plausibly end up as larger customers. Does the prospect of becoming faster justify the release on its own? That depends on both how much inference cost is saved, and how much Meta is helping its competitors and making its life harder in other ways. To take advantage, Meta would have to use the improvements found elsewhere for an extended period. That is not impossible, but remember that Llama-3 is only open weights, not fully open source. In other Meta opening up news, What does the market think? I previously noted that the market was not impressed. No, seriously.
Meta told investors it was spending lots of money on AI, and showed it the fruits of that spending. Investors went ‘oh no, you are spending too much money on AI despite still being profitable’ and took shares down 15% overnight and this held at the open on Thursday morning, wiping out $185 billion in market cap. Fun with Image Generation
You can guess how people reacted. Not great. He found himself in a hole. He kept digging.
The position of the artist community, and much of the internet, is clear. By their account, all use of AI artwork is stealing, from every artist. If you use AI art, to them you are dishonorable scum. It is not clear to me how they feel about using AI artwork for your powerpoint presentation at work, or if I put something into this column, where it is clear that if AI was unavailable it would never make sense to commission artwork, you would either use stock footage or have no art. What is clear is that they are, broadly speaking, having none of it. I do not expect that to change until there is an artist compensation scheme. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
It seems to have fooled at least some of the people some of the time, and that was enough to make Eiswert’s life rather miserable. But for now you still cannot fool all the people all the time, and the police eventually figured it out.
It starts with explaining why we should care about AIG-CSAM (AI generated child sexual material). I agree we should prevent this, but several of the arguments here seemed strained. I do think this is something we should prevent, but we should either state it as a given (and that would be totally fair) or give sound arguments. The arguments here seem like something out of Law & Order: SVU, rather than something from 2024. What are the actual things it asks participants to do? Things you really should not have needed a commitment in order to do. I am still happy to see everyone commit to them. Also, I do not know how to do several of them if you are going to release the weights to your image model? What am I missing? Responsibly source your training datasets, and safeguard them from CSAM and CSEM. That won’t fully solve the issue, but it helps. Incorporate feedback loops and iterative stress-testing strategies in your development process. Employ content provenance with adversarial misuse in mind. Again, right, sure. So how exactly is Stability.ai going to do this, if they open source SD3? Safeguard your generative AI products and services from abusive content and conduct. Responsibly host your models. “As models continue to achieve new capabilities and creative heights, a wide variety of deployment mechanisms manifests both opportunity and risk. Safety by design must encompass not just how your model is trained, but how your model is hosted.” Again, somebody explain to me how this is theoretically possible if I can download the weights and run locally. Encourage developer ownership in safety by design. Prevent your services from scaling access to harmful tools. Invest in research and future technology solutions. Fight CSAM, AIG-CSAM and CSEM on your platforms.
So yes, I am very much in favor of all these steps being formalized. Also, a quick word to everyone who responded on the internet with a version of ‘disappointment’ or ‘GPT-5 when’: That was bad, and you should feel bad.
And if you do reveal the passkey for any reason, you realize that it is no longer secure and you may be under attack, and respond accordingly. Right now, as Kaj notes, you can be confident that 99%+ of AI-enabled attacks are not going to be capable of a two-step like this, and scammers are better off finding softer targets. Over time that will change. Things will get weird. They Took Our JobsFirst they came for the translators and illustrators, and mostly that is all they have come for so far. Your periodic reminder that for now there will be plenty of other jobs to do to go around, but ‘there are other things that humans have comparative advantage doing’ may not last as long as you expect. That is on top of the question of whether the AIs are stealing people’s work without payment in various ways.
Yes, I suppose writing endless streams of drek is one job the AI is going to take. Who would you be? It seems you would be a general high performer, who understands the safety and policy spaces, rather than someone with deep technical knowledge. This seems like a highly impactful position, so if you are a good fit, again please consider. Get Involved
Introducing
In Other AI News
Excellent news. Also consider what this implies generally about productivity growth. If Moderna is claiming 1000% gains, perhaps they are in a uniquely strong position, but how unique?
The speed requirement is that you patch as fast as you get attacked. If AIs mean that in the future the attacks go out within an hour, then that is how long you have. It still has to actually happen, not only be possible in theory. So there will likely be a period where ‘hit everyone within an hour’ is technologically plausible, but no one does it.
Cognition Labs, the creators of Devin, OpenAI introduces additional ‘enterprise-grade’ features for API customers: Enhanced enterprise-grade security, better administrative control, improvements to the assistants API and more cost management options. All incremental.
Yes, actually. This effect all makes perfect sense. Why wouldn’t it be so?
Quiet Speculations
Whereas others are indeed spending quite a lot.
Alec Stapp: Has anyone ever done a deep dive on those Alexa numbers? Incredible to me that they have invested that much and produced so little It continuously blows my mind how terrible Alexa continues to be, and I keep forgetting how much money they are incinerating. I have no idea what all those people do all day.
I will only point out that I would (as regular readers know) go much farther than Tyler on expected future productivity growth. Tyler says 0.7% TFP (additional productivity growth per year) from AI in the coming decade is a reasonable estimate. I think that would be highly surprisingly low even if we assumed no foundation model gains beyond this point because we hit a wall. And to me it makes no sense if we assume 5-level and 6-level models are coming, even if that does not lead to ‘AGI’ style events. Washington Post’s Gerrit De Vynck writes a post with the headline
Right. But what does that mean you can do? That’s the thing, no one knows.
The conclusion is that proper prompting will continue to be super important. It won’t fully get there, but kludges could approximate what there would look like.
Well yes and no. The obvious trick is to ask it to iminiate a goal-seeking being, or tune it to do so. In order to predict text it must simulate the world, and the world is full of goal-seeking beings. So this seems like a thing it should at some level of general capability be able to do, indeed highly prima facie possible, if you ask it. And indeed, most people are highly willing to use various scaffolding techniques, the ‘beg and bargain’ phase perhaps, in various ways. But mostly I do not see the issue? Why other than the model not being good enough at text prediction would this not work? Rhetorical Innovation
A key crux in many debates is whether LLMs will be and remain tools,
I do think that as currently used tool is an appropriate description, even if Roon is right about what is happening under the hood. I do not think that lasts.
A long essay saying So, no. Mindspace is in some senses deep and wide among humans, but not like mindspace is deep and wide among possible minds. The fact that change always happens does not mean rapid unlimited unpredictable unsteerable change is an acceptable path to walk down, or that it will result in anything we value. Or that we should agree to a universe we do not value, or that this means we need to abandon our values for those of future minds, even complex minds. I will not accept a universe I do not value. I will not make the is-ought confusion. I will not pass quietly into the night.
I would not presume we have a good 5-10 years before confronting this. We are confronting the beginnings of autonomy right now. The threshold for self-replication capabilities was arguably crossed decades ago. The bigger question is, who is ‘we,’ and how does this we avoid those things? ‘Hope that lots of people and organizations each individually make the choice not to do this thing’ is a strategy we know will not work. Even if we figured out how to do that, and we all knew exactly how to not do these things, it still would not work. We need some other plan. We also need to know how not to do it while still advancing capabilities, which we do not know how to do even if everyone involved was on board with not doing them. Or we could at some point stop advancing capabilities. True this:
Scott Alexander ponders the whole Coffepocalypse argument, of the general form ‘people have warned in the past of things going horribly wrong that turned out fine, so AI will also turn out fine.’ Mostly this is Scott trying to find some actual good argument there and being exasperated in the attempt. This is the general case, so the ‘actually the warnings about coffee were correct, Kings worried it would forment revolutions and it did that’ is relegated to a footnote. One could also say less dramatically, that coffee arguably gives humans who take it an edge, but is an insufficient cognitive enhancer to allow coffee-infused humans to dominate non-coffee humans. But imagine the thought experiment. Suppose you found a variant that enhanced the effects of coffee and caffeine without the downsides. The new version does not create tolerance or addiction or a deficit to be repaid or interfere with sleep, it purely gives you more awakeness and production, at a rate many times that of current coffee. Except only some people get the benefits, in others it has no effect, and this is genetic. What happens in the long run? In the short run? How does it change if those people also gained other advantages that AIs look to enjoy? Wouldn’t You Prefer a Nice Game of Chess
(I intentionally wrote this without checking anything about how the games played out.) So essentially Caruana and Nepo had a game where a draw was almost a double-loss, a common situation on the Magic: The Gathering circuit. This is saying that it is the rational and correct choice to intentionally steer the game into a space where that draw is likely. Having done this on purpose, clearly you are the crazy one who will not back down. Then, the reasoning goes, the other player will be forced to take a big chance, to open themselves up, and you can win. This is a no good, terrible strategy. These players are in an iterated game over many years, and also everyone in chess will identify you as dishonorable scum. And the other player knows all eyes are on the game, and they cannot yield now. Even if those facts were not so, or the stakes here were sufficiently high that you did not care? It would still not work as often as agreeing to let the game be high variance and playing for a win. You see, when a person sees their opponent in a game do something like that, you know what most of them say back? They say f*** you. That goes double here. You have deliberately introduced a much higher chance of a double-loss in order to get them to likely hand you a win. You are a chess terrorist. If the other person gives in, they probably don’t do any better than not budging, even if you also don’t budge. There is a remarkably high chance they let the game draw. Can you lean into a little of this usefully, if it is not too blatant? You could try. You could, for example, go down a path as white that gives black a way to equalize but that would render the game drawish, on the theory that he will not dare take it. Or you can flat out offer repetition at some point, in a game where you have the advantage. You can be situationally aware. But I would not push it. (Note that in Magic, the normal way this plays out is that both players do their best to win, and then if it is about to end in an honorable draw, then often the player who would be losing if time was extended will give the other player the win. An actual recorded draw mostly happened here (back in the day) when the players could not agree on who was winning and neither was willing to back down, or one of the players pissed off the other one, such as by trying to play the angles too hard, or they simply preferred the player who would likely get displaced to their opponent. Or sometimes a player would have a weird code of honor or not realize the situation. However in chess it does not work that way and the players are not allowed to do any of that.) A lot of people think of game theory, and the logic of game theory, as if they were in Remembrance of Earth’s Past (The Three Body Problem), where everyone must constantly defect against everyone because hard logic, that’s simple math. And they ask why people quite often do not do this, and it quite often works out for them. Or you can realize that yes, humans have various ways to cooperate their way out of such situations, that even the single-move prisoner’s dilemma can often be won in real life, it has clear strong solutions in theory especially among ASIs, and the iterated prisoner’s dilemma is not even hard. (No, seriously, learn some functional decision theory. Humans should use it, and we will want our future AIs to use it, because other theories are wrong. You cannot implement it fully as a human, but you can approximate it in practice. And that’s fine.) If in international relations or business negotiations or elsewhere, where failure to reach agreement means everyone loses, you should absolutely work angles and maximize your leverage. Sometimes that forces you to increase the chance of breakdown of talks. But if your plan is to basically try to ensure the talks are likely to break down to force the other side to cave, when both of you know you are not fine with talks actually caving? That is worse than a crime. It is a mistake. The Battle of the BoardThere was a notable exchange this week discussing the implications of the events last year at OpenAI. Mostly I want to reproduce it here for ease of access and posterity, since such things are very hard to navigate.
All of this seems consistent with In brief I believe: The board failed to articulate compelling reasons it fired Altman, while affirming this was not about safety. The board member’s quoted statement was deeply unwise even if technically true, and was quite bad even in context. Without an explanation, the employees of OpenAI sided with Altman and were willing to risk the company rather than agree to Altman being replaced. The question this addresses is, what should now be done, if anything, to clarify OpenAI’s position, in the wake of I think the letter is mostly not ambiguous. The statement is being quoted in the context of that weekend, and in the context of what is seen as this severe failure of leadership. I do not think it is unfair that they thought that the statement was implying that the destruction of OpenAI here and now, due to this crisis, could be consistent with its mission when the alternative was a new board and the return of Altman and Brockman. And the employees, quite reasonably, strongly disagreed with that implication. I do think the broader situation would greatly benefit from clarification. As Roon says, there will be mercenaries at any organization. Not everyone will be a true believer. The thing is, from the outside, this is the place Rob is clearly right. If you think that everyone can tell from the outside that all of you care about safety and would be willing to make big sacrifices in the name of safety if it came to that? I assure any such employee that this is not the case. We cannot tell. It is perfectly plausible that the employees would mostly indeed do that. But from the outside, it is also highly plausible that most of them would not do this. It would be good to see explicit affirmation from a large number of employees that the mission comes first, and that the mission might mean things that hurt or even destroy the company if the safety concerns from not doing so grew sufficiently dire. It would also be good to see a strong explicit description from Sam Altman of his views on related matters. As of yet I have not seen one since the events. Also, a willingness in principle to make sacrifices if the dangers are sufficiently clear is very different from what outsiders would need to have confidence that such a decision would be made wisely. We would all love for the claimed positive scenario to be true. If we are in the positive scenario, I want to believe we are in the positive scenario. If we are not in that scenario, I want to believe we are not in that scenario. Litany of Tarski. Elsewhere, in the meantime:
I strongly agree it could have been much worse. I also think it could be a lot better.
If you think that the baseline scenario means no secrets, and you want to stay in the baseline scenario, consider what your Something to Protect will be. New Anthropic PapersI talked a bunch about the Sleeper Agents paper. I noted that many of the observed behaviors likely would happen if the agent in accordance with almost any goal at all. The new paper for this is entitled You can see the obvious objection right in the title. Aha, the critic says. You induced that ‘unprompted’ misalignment. It would never have been misaligned without you inducing it. Before answering that, let’s see what exactly is meant by unprompted and induced.
So how unprompted was this? Commenters found it not so unprompted, and thus unsatisfying.
The models vibe, so yes, I would predict that reinforcing ‘good’ or ‘bad’ as a vibe would have some impact on which vibe is seen. I continue to not think that ‘good’ and ‘bad’ are the central issue here. The problem is that if you want to get people to notice, it makes sense to try to get the AI to do something ‘bad’ and thus you give examples of something bad. But to me that is missing the point. The distinction that matters is not ‘good’ versus ‘bad.’ The distinction that matters is ‘strategic’ versus ‘non-strategic.’ What this paper found was that, once the AI was introduced to the idea of doing things for strategic reasons, that there could be motivations based on what broader impact the response caused in the world, that it then extended this to find various aims and motivations, in unpredictable ways. And it used that to choose various actions it knew were available to it, in unpredictable ways, with all the traditional signs of instrumental convergence and deception and all the other things we do not want to see. Essentially the fine-tuning did two things: Made the AI aware that it could do things for reasons. Made the AI aware that hacking and manipulation were things it could do.
The AI did the rest, doing a bunch of hacking for a variety of reasons it came up with. Alas, the paper makes it easy to say ‘well you told it to do hacking’ or ‘you told it to do bad things.’ So we are indeed back to that same problem, where the model had to be ‘taught’ to do this via the fine tuning. We do get to put a low upper bound on the amount of such fine tuning necessary, and notice that this tuning can then generalize widely to a variety of motivations and implementations. But that core issue is still there in this methodology. My prediction is that you do not actually need to trigger this objection. The AI already knows that it can do manipulation and hacking. It is GPT-4. It is trained on a wide variety of examples of those things. But the authors still do need to take that step, if they want to convince skeptics of the central point. They will need to find a way to get from here to there that overcomes the objection. Train the model to work towards what most would agree is a good objective, one that justifies (to many) some amount of misleading the user, and to do so strategically. And keep pushing to see how far you can take that. Even without showing any of that, yes, one can consider that many people will indeed do fine tuning of this sort for various reasons. There are obvious commercial and other reasons to want an AI to care about your broader goals and help you achieve them. And there are obvious reasons that you would want the AI to be willing to do things towards that, that some people would call ‘bad,’ or that would involve not being fully honest or helpful towards the user, and so on and so forth. The world and training set were not an Eden that previously did not involve hostile action.
This is very cool, they were surprised how well it worked. I’m happy they did this. Of course, I have concerns. I have talked a lot about how I think that ‘deception’ is not a distinct magisteria, rather it is imbued into everything we do and everything an AI would do if trained on our text. The same would apply to ‘dangerous.’ I have also discussed how if you use interpretability techniques to figure out when AIs are up to no good, or ‘believe’ in some sense via pathway activation that they are up to no good, then you are training AIs to disguise their calculations and become harder to interpret, and for the AI to internally represent the things in question as not ‘dangerous’ or ‘deceptive’ or whatever detectors people use. It is a very obvious logical result on many levels, far more robust than it might first appear. If this seems implausible, remember that humans do this constantly. We have various ways of interpreting what other humans are thinking and we then do our best to fool these systems. We constantly run versions of ‘it’s not a lie if you believe it’ and related strategies so we appear helpful and safe and genuine. We often very carefully learn or don’t learn things to help with this. And so on. What I definitely don’t want to do as a central strategy for future models smarter than us is to get into a game of training tug-of-war or escalating detection techniques similar to the longstanding social arms races in humans. We would not win. Defense in depth is definitely a thing. If you are worried about outside injections from small amounts of data, or other hidden attacks that are not central to what is going on, then if deployed carefully and precisely this might be a relatively safe tool to use, and might substantially raise the difficulty level of pulling off the trick.
So this clarifies that no, this will not work as a Trojan defense or sleeper agent detector. I also note that this for detection only works if you activate the sleeper agent or other undesired action in question? If I give you a model that may or may not have a sleeper agent within it, or has an unknown number of sleeper agent triggers, and ask you to find them, or am worried that there is some other case where something goes wrong, what happens? This certainly helps if reliable, as it dramatically lowers the cost of searching the space of potential queries and states. You do still have to search that space of potential situations sufficiently robustly to get this to activate.
I worded it differently and was less specific about the threat model, but I very much share Davidad’s concern. The easiest way to be misaligned in training will involve thinking about deception in a way that is obvious to you (and hopefully is distinct from the way the aligned version must also think about this). But if you introduce a loss term or other incentive not to go down that path, there are other paths available. I think this is remarkably general and multi-level and robust, and one must think about how much optimization pressure is being applied de facto at all levels combined towards defeating your interpretability techniques.
This does not give us good tools for knowing when the model starts getting sneaky about changing the outputs of our sneaky detector. New DeepMind PapersGoogle Deepmind asks: AI assistants could be profoundly impactful to every aspect of our lives. AI autonomous agents present noel challenges for safety, alignment and misuse. Proposed is a ‘a rich sociotechnical approach to alignment that factors in the needs and responsibilities of users, developers and society.’
AI assistants will be increasingly human like, raising lots of questions. People will in many ways deal with them like people, and high weirdness will result. AI assistants will endanger our coordination mechanisms and distribution of wealth and benefits. This could go either way. Proposed is ‘ensure the technology is broadly accessible and designed with the needs of different users and non-users in mind.’
Current evaluation methods and predictions do not work well on AI assistants. Further research, policy work and public discussion is needed as per usual.
This seems plausibly worth reading but I do not currently have the time to do so.
Before I get to anything else… That does not mean the distinction or exercise is not useful. Indeed, This is drawing a distinction between Simulacra Level 1 communications, motivated to inform, versus Simulacra Level 2 communications, motivated by desire to change the beliefs of the listener, and (less cleanly) also Level 3 statements about group affiliations and Level 4 statements consisting of (simplifying greatly here) associations and vibes. The default state is for humans to make statements based on a mix of considerations on all four levels. The better you are able to handle all of the levels at once, the better your results. The best communicators and persuaders are those capable of fully handling and operating on all four at once, traditional non-distracting examples being Buddha and Jesus. Even when doing highly ethical communication, where you are being careful to avoid manipulation, you still need to understand what is going on at the higher levels, in order to avoid anti-manipulation and self-sabotage. First, do no harm. There is also not a clean distinction between coercion, exploitation and persuasion. They attempt to define the subcategories here, note the definition of manipulation:
That is not a bad definition, but also it should be obvious that persuasion does not divide cleanly into this and ‘rational persuasion.’ Nor is it a reasonable project to get an AI to not do these things at all. A human can (and I like to think that I do) make an extraordinary effort to minimize these effects. But that is very much not the content most users want most of the time, and it requires a conscious and costly effort to attempt this. Looking at table three above, the one listing mechanisms, makes this even clearer. Again, the taxonomies offered here do seem useful. I am happy this paper exists. Yet I worry greatly about relying on the path. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
What does proper security mindset look like? It looks like OpenAI introduces
File under things one should obviously have. The question is implementation. They claim that they did the obvious straightforward thing, and it essentially worked, including generalizing to jailbreaks without having previously seen one, and without substantial degradation in ordinary performance. Neat. I say they did an obvious thing in an obvious way, but someone still has to do it. There are tons of obvious things no one has tried doing in the obvious way. People Are Worried About AI Killing EveryoneAll right, fine, we do now have one person actually suggesting rich people should hire saboteurs to blow up data centers. It is an interesting sign flip of the usual discourse, with Tucker Carlson making all the simplifications and mistakes that worried people are so often falsely accused of making. As a result, he suggests the action none of us are suggesting, but that we are often accused of suggesting. There is an internal logic to that. Whereas Bryan Johnson here (at least starting at the linked clip) takes the role I wish the non-worried would more often take, explaining a logical position that benefits of proceeding exceed costs and trying to respectfully explain nuanced considerations. I disagree with Bryan Johnson’s threat model and expected technological path, so we reach different conclusions, but yes, this is The Way.
Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing EveryoneA prediction.
I would respond that, if we built such a thing, we should remember: ‘can’ is not ‘will.’ The Lighter SideThe initiative everyone can get behind.
We need to use this superpower more. The obvious first suggestion is to make a rule that no one’s AI system is ever, ever allowed to Rickroll you in any way, on pain of a severe fine, and see if people can actually prevent it. Or, we could go the other way, and do this whenever anyone puts in an unsafe prompt. You're currently a free subscriber to |