---
subject: "The Monday Media Diet with Joel Condemi"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-07-07 10:33:10
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
I found Joel’s work on Substack, and loved his travel photography and excellent photos from a Tell us about yourself. I’m Joel Condemi and I work in Communications and Marketing by day for a large organisation in Melbourne, Australia. In January, I launched my Substack, I recently took a few months off writing to complete the Bachelor of Media and Communications I’ve been working towards since 2020. Thankfully, I’ve just finished, and I’m looking forward to getting back into the swing of regular writing. Describe your media diet. I’ve been a reader and subscriber of Monocle for more than a decade now and still get excited to receive the latest edition in the mail as I’m very much a fan of physical books and magazines. In the car on the way to work, I generally listen to the Monocle podcasts or some jazz. It’s perhaps the one time I can actually listen and focus on podcasts. At the office, I’m almost always listening to music, whether that be jazz or, if I’m writing something that requires more than my full attention, something ambient or downbeat. On the weekends, I often pick up a physical copy of The Saturday Paper, which I think is Australia’s best outlet for news and narrative journalism. It’s almost become a routine or ritual to head out to the newsagent on a Saturday morning and grab the paper and a coffee. I find it calming and the best way to unwind after a busy week. Having finished my degree, I’ve also enjoyed picking up novels again, either at home or on the go. I have a regular cafe that I visit near the office that I read or write at during my break and I find that I can switch on easily once I’ve ordered my espresso or batch brew and taken a seat near the window. I use social media as inspiration, and Instagram is where it comes from mostly. I follow lots of photographers, menswear icons and enthusiasts, jazz lovers, and fellow travellers. I’ve just started posting some of my travel photos there which has been nice to get them out of my Photos app. Speaking about inspiration, I’ve also got a stack of Japanese magazines which I bought on my travels, such as Brutus, Popeye, and 2nd, that I use for outfit inspiration or just to revel in and enjoy the wonderful imagery. What’s the last great book you read? I’ve been slowly making my way through the works of Bernard Malamud. I’ve loved all that I’ve read so far, but especially his 1957 novel The Assistant, which I think may be one of my very favourite novels. I just love the way Malamud writes characters and how they tackle the moral dilemmas they face. There’s a very simple plot, but so much is explored and the situations are relatable and unforgettable. This one looks at Frank, a man searching for a better life who becomes a grocer’s assistant where he falls in love with the grocer’s daughter. It’s simple, but derives much of its power from just how simple and ordinary it appears to be. What are you reading now? I’ve just picked up Young Man with a Horn by Dorothy Baker, which was published most recently I believe by the fabulous New York Review of Books. It’s inspired by the life of Leon (Bix) Beiderbecke, who was a musician in the 1920s, but takes a fictional approach to his story, charting the rise and fall of character Rick Martin. It is considered the first ever jazz novel so I naturally had to pick it up and read it at some point. There’s also a film adaptation which came out in 1950 directed by Michael Curtiz and starring Kirk Douglas and Lauren Bacall. I’m hoping to do a write-up about both soon. What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication? I used to be very strict on myself and made sure that I read any publication that I picked up front to back, regardless of whether or not the articles were of any interest to me. Today, with spare time being a luxury, I tend to flick through it first and eye off the articles I want to read. I’ll generally keep it on my desk until the next edition arrives so I’m always referring back to it for the month or week and will fill in the gaps that way. I prefer to dedicate short bursts to reading magazines and newspapers rather than extended periods, but I’m the opposite when it comes to reading novels! Who should everyone be reading that they’re not? I’m sure there are plenty of people reading these two authors, but I have to mention them because they’re my absolute favourites and I think they’re still perhaps not as popular as I think they should be: Antonio Tabucchi and Paul Auster. I don’t think it’s an exaggeration for me to say that I’d happily read furniture assembly instructions written by either of these two authors. I’ll also mention some Substack publications that I’m fond of. Firstly, What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone? Tough one. I’m always on my phone, but I guess it’s rare that I find my way to non-famous apps. How about the Shop app? I find that one really useful. It essentially brings together all your purchases in one place, lets you track new purchases, and keeps you updated with delivery estimates. You can even wishlist items and make purchases also. No clue how famous or not it is though! Plane or train? Definitely train, but unfortunately I live in Australia where our trains aren’t very good and we have to take a flight if we want to get anywhere interesting. One of my very favourite things when travelling is the train ride between cities, whether that’s from Tokyo to Kyoto, Madrid to Barcelona, or Florence to Rome. It’s such a great way to see the countryside or to relax and reset between busy days spent exploring the city by foot. I would take an 8-hour train ride over a 2-hour flight any day. What is one place everyone should visit? It would be remiss of me not to mention something jazz related, so I’ll say Miles, which is a jazz kissaten in Tokyo. The place holds a special place in my heart as I had one of the very best nights of my life there, and it was the place where I decided to finally start my Substack. Miles is the oldest currently active jazz kissaten in Tokyo and I spent my evening there chatting to the master and one local regular who thankfully spoke English. The pair ended up telling me about the history of the bar and how both John Coltrane and Pharoah Sanders visited many years ago and sat in the very seats we were sitting in and signed some records, which they showed me and let me look over. I spent hours there, alternating between them showing me amazing music and asking what albums I wanted to hear. It’s the one place I suggest any person visiting Tokyo should visit. I also just returned home from a week in Taipei, a city that I thought was so interesting, vivid, picturesque and exciting. It’s absolutely a place I think everyone should add to their travel wishlist. Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into. I find it far too easy to fall down online rabbit holes unfortunately! I really love anything travel related, so a recent one has been watching travel bloggers visit the most unusual and far flung destinations. In fact, I get easily sucked in and lose track of time, forgetting that I need to wake up early in the morning. I think this is my way of travelling vicariously as many of the places visited are ones that don’t necessarily make it to the top of my travel wishlist, but I’m still thoroughly interested in what life and travel is like in these places. An hour long video of someone arriving in and navigating the streets of Brunei? Sign me up. (JC) Invite your friends and earn rewardsIf you enjoy Why is this interesting?, share it with your friends and earn rewards when they subscribe. |