---
subject: "Why is Sedona Interesting?"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-05-05 10:07:52
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Stephanie Balzer (SB) is a writer, coach, and founder of Stephanie here. I had to write several drafts of what is interesting about Sedona to slough off or at least temper my conviction that the local experience, or the way it used to be, or what it’s really like is a more authentic story. I grew up in Flagstaff, thirty miles north of Sedona. And like many people from places that attract tourists, I seem to have a complicated relationship with them. Visitors to northern Arizona spend money and fuel the economy. Of course, we know this. But we don’t necessarily like our dependence on them. We don’t like the traffic they bring, or their big-city attitudes and privileges and complaints. We don’t like when they post photos of their marriage proposals or yoga poses or epic hikes on And yet a tourist’s experiences are not entirely unlike my own. As a kid, my family would take summer guests to Sedona and the neighboring Village of Oak Creek. We’d spend the day at I remember the electric buzz of the cicadas at And before it was an overrun destination, we would hike I asked my northern Arizona people what they like about Sedona today: “Yeah I don’t actually know that much about it anymore. I know there’s a bunch of legit mountain biking there these days.” “It’s super crowded and the traffic is horrendous.” “I try to go to places with as few people as possible so not sure that’s what you’re looking for.” West Fork, photo by my dad It’s not only that our Sedona felt undiscovered and under-developed, but it also seemed more honest, and I am stubborn about this. Even now I’ll sometimes describe it as a place with a rainbow trout farm and a Dairy Queen to people who I know want to be enchanted. In fact Sedona was a Films brought Sedona to the wider world. The intrigue accelerated in the 90s though, as travel photographers published images of monsoon clouds brewing over Cathedral Rock or dustings of snow covering Devil’s Bridge, and writers included it in almost every list of the most spiritual places on the planet, along with Jerusalem, Machu Picchu, Tulum, and Mecca. It boasts high-end resorts and spas, award-winning restaurants, and multi-million dollar homes nestled in the cliffs as a result.
And yet it does feel mystical. It is stunningly beautiful. The whole of Sedona is considered to be a The region’s Then there’s the sand itself, a fine dust that stains your socks, sticks to your sunscreen and hair, and coats the lenses of your sunglasses. No need to buy cheap trinkets, you will be taking it home with you. But if you want a more valuable treasure, my recommendation is Oak Creek from L’Auberge in December 2017, and that man on the far right in the hat is my dad Another thing about Sedona that may interest you: it’s the only place where McDonald’s golden arches are teal blue. The city has strict signage requirements to maintain its If I could wipe the slate clean and pretend Sedona were new to me today—and let’s also say that money is no object—here’s what I would do. I would eschew the newer luxury resorts and book a month-long stay at I imagine this would be a solo retreat but then I’d also make friends with fellow guests. We’d dine at — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Steph (SB) — Why is this interesting? is a daily email from Noah Brier & Colin Nagy (and friends!) about interesting things. If you’ve enjoyed this edition, please consider forwarding it to a friend. If you’re reading it for the first time, consider subscribing (it’s free!). |