---
subject: "The Nutgraf: India is the mark"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-04-05 05:14:54
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
Just a quick note, I recommend listening to the read-aloud version of today’s edition. It’s not just a regular read-aloud—I got a chance to try out some new things. In fact, in many ways, I think it works much better as a podcast than a newsletter. If you’re a subscriber, you can listen to it on The Ken’s [mobile app](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/the-nutgraf/india-is-the-mark/) or on [Apple podcasts](https://podcasts.apple.com/in/podcast/india-is-the-mark/id1794924619?i=1000702274934).
Listen to it and let me know what you think.
Now, on to the edition.
On Thursday, Piyush Goyal had a message for Indian startups.
Union Minister Piyush Goyal, speaking at the Startup Mahakumbh 2025 event on April 3, 2025, slammed Indian billionaire kids for opening ice cream and cookies businesses and calling themselves startups instead of focusing on the technological growth of the nation.
Questioning India’s vision for the future, Goyal asked whether or not India wants to focus on technological advancement or if the people are satisfied with ice cream brand startups.
“Fancy ice cream and cookies. I know at least three or four billionaires whose children make one brand or the other, very fancy ice cream and cookies, and run a very successful business,” said Piyush Goyal in his address.
The Union Minister shared his analysis of the startup success stories in India and said, “And I have no complaint against that. But is that the destiny of India? Is the future of India satisfied with that?”
‘This is not a startup…’: Union Minister Piyush Goyal slams billionaire kids ‘healthy’ ice cream startups; [Livemint](https://www.livemint.com/companies/start-ups/this-is-not-a-startup-union-minister-piyush-goyal-slams-billionaire-kids-healthy-ice-cream-startups-heres-why-11743757226124.html)
Goyal, who is India’s commerce minister, made this statement at an event called Startup Mahakumbh in New Delhi. Frankly, I have a lot of questions, starting with the name itself, but I’ll hold back and stick to what Mr. Goyal said—which was basically derived from a viral meme that was being forwarded on Linkedin and Whatsapp a few weeks ago.
Essentially, Goyal’s main complaint was… “why are Indian startups like this? Just look at China”
As the minister’s remarks went viral, India’s startup leaders, executives, and thought leaders took a break from making Studio Ghibli-style AI images and decided to hop on the next trend—posting their thoughts on Goyal’s comments on Linkedin and X. I could read out some of them, but they are all painfully tedious, and quite predictable. Most of them are variants of—“Don’t blame startups, look at how many jobs we created”, or “China also started with food delivery before they built deep-tech companies”, or the more aggressive version: “Maybe you should help startups instead of blaming them.” A few leaders, quite predictably, even agreed with the minister and exhorted startups to take it as “constructive criticism”.
These are all valid points of view, but as readers of this newsletter know by now, I’m more drawn to incentives than events. In other words, I’m less interested in what Piyush Goyal said and much more intrigued about why he said it.
On Wednesday, US President Donald Trump declared war on… well, almost everyone. He announced a sweeping new set of tariffs that apply to all US imports, intended to correct what Trump terms are unfair economic practices that have hurt American exporters and prevented manufacturing and jobs from taking off in the US. According to The New York Times, “the tariffs put a heavy burden on some of America’s biggest trading partners, including China, Japan, Germany, India, South Korea, Taiwan, and Vietnam.”
And how did the rest of the world respond to the US tariffs?
Well, on the same day that India’s commerce minister was chastising startups, China’s commerce ministry [struck back](https://www.reuters.com/markets/europe/europe-prepares-response-trump-tariffs-global-markets-plunge-2025-04-04/) against the US. It levied a 34% reciprocal tariff on imports from the US. It also placed restrictions on the export of rare earth metals, which are used to manufacture batteries and electric vehicles, and for good measure, filed a lawsuit against the United States at the World Trade Organisation.
This is a significant escalation.
China was the first major country to retaliate against the US, but it won’t be the last one. The European Union also signalled that it [wasn’t averse](https://www.cnbc.com/2025/04/04/how-the-eu-could-target-us-big-tech-with-its-tariff-response.html) to taking drastic measures of its own. France has suggested that it would levy a tax on online services from the US. Other countries like Japan and South Korea responded with statements that they were “alarmed” and how the US’s actions were regrettable.
And India, which got hit with a 26% tariff?
What is India’s response?
Well, to be honest, India’s stated position seems to be a bit of, “at least we don’t have it as bad as the others”, and a bit of, “this isn’t going to affect us much”. There’s some truth to this, but India’s actions say something else altogether. In the past few weeks, India has been feverishly giving the US concession after concession, dropping barriers that existed earlier. It scrapped import duties on 8,500 products, ranging from bourbon whiskey to expensive motorcycles. It also got rid of a 6% tax on ads with foreign digital platforms (Ok Google). It’s letting Starlink enter the telecom market.
India didn’t do all of these things out of the goodness of its heart. It did it because it really had no option. China can fight back because it has things the US wants. It has leverage. The EU can band together and figure out options. Japan and Korea make high-end tech products that US consumers use.
And India? Well, there’s not much leverage it can use unless it creates something that it can sell internationally. And apart from pharma, well, there isn’t much else.
Essentially, this is the source of frustration for Piyush Goyal.
And you don’t have to take my word for it.
Just listen to what he said on Thursday.
“We talk about a startup bridge, but I can’t take them to grocery stores and say—this is India’s offering for startups,” he said.
He further mentioned that we need to be ambitious and go beyond the boundaries of our own thinking. In this regard, the government is playing its part by signing agreements with bigger countries like Australia, the EU, the UK, the US, as well as Peru and Chile.
Indian startups need to think beyond selling fancy foods, instant delivery: Piyush Goyal, [The Economic Times](https://manufacturing.economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/industry/indian-startups-need-to-think-beyond-selling-fancy-foods-instant-delivery-piyush-goyal/119950416)
This week, Goyal externalised his frustration of not having leverage in bilateral deals at startups. But over the past few months, other leaders have brought this up too.
One of those leaders was Uday Kotak. Here he is, talking at another event, where he asks the [question](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t-MGREc5Xpg), “why are there no global Indian consumer brands?”
“Give me one global Indian consumer brand that you go to any corner of the world – from Boston to Paris to Bolivia to China to Sydney – where the global consumer recognizes an Indian consumer brand for what it is?” Kotak asked. “Frankly, I have struggled to find one. There are small pockets where progress has been made, but a global Indian consumer brand (doesn’t exist),” he said.
He then offered a series of comparisons, listing iconic global brands: “Apple, Meta, Google, Coke, Pepsi, PNG brands, Unilever brands, Chanel in Europe, BMW, Audi cars, Italian brands, Samsung, LG, Hyundai, Sony, Panasonic, Toyota, BYD, Lenovo, TikTok…”. Kotak said that there was no Indian brand that could be a part of this list.
Kotak says that India’s economy’s protected nature means that entrepreneurs are content to build their businesses in India, and not explore foreign shores. “I think we’ve got a very protected country, and people are very comfortable in the comfort of our 1.4 billion people. Home market is there, protection is in there. Why should Indian entrepreneurs really try to become a global brand? They’re making enough money (in India),” he said.
The question of why India does not have brands, technology, or startups that give it leverage internationally is something that’s being asked with more urgency and frustration now, because the current global climate has suddenly turned. We can go deeper into why we are in this place. I could explain to Piyush Goyal how India’s investments in R&D as a percentage of GDP have been [declining](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/india/indias-rd-spends-amongst-the-lowest-in-the-world-niti-aayog-study/articleshow/93024586.cms?from=mdr) [consistently](https://www.shankariasparliament.com/current-affairs/gs-i/status-of-indias-rd). I could explain how India’s investments in education have [reached](https://scroll.in/article/1063192/a-decade-under-modi-education-spending-declines-universities-struggle-with-loans) historical lows. I could even explain how India’s commerce ministry created a US$23 billion PLI scheme to rival China factories a few years ago. And how just last week, it let it lapse after it fell short of its goals. According to an [investigation](https://www.thehindu.com/business/Economy/indias-23-billion-pli-scheme-to-rival-china-factories-to-lapse-after-it-disappoints/article69357682.ece) by Reuters, there were two reasons why the scheme failed: “firms that participated in the programme failed to kickstart production, while others that met manufacturing targets found India slow to pay out subsidies”.
In sector after sector, India has been too slow, too late, too complacent, and refused to play the long game. And today, when the world is on fire, it’s looking for easy targets.
One of these targets is protectionism.
In some ways, this is the paradox. India’s industries and companies demanded protectionism and a “level playing field” so they could hold on to India’s market. And for the most part, in sector after sector, the state complied and gave it to them. And this resulted in companies and startups who tempered their aspirations and thought small, and built for India’s consumers. And as we know, India’s consumer market is not as broad nor as deep as we imagined. So we got companies that solved Indian problems—like getting Indians to transfer money to each other, to get groceries at home in 10 minutes, to teach courses so their kids could go to better colleges, and to eat vegan ice-creams. And we told ourselves that we were making progress and consoled ourselves that at least we were giving jobs to people. We didn’t think to ask what a nation of hired hands means for the nation itself.
There’s a saying that if you’ve been playing poker for half an hour and you still don’t know who the mark is, you’re the mark.
And right now, India is the mark. It’s an easy target for China, the US, and everyone else. Easy to leverage because India has little to fight back with.
The tall walls we created to keep others out also kept Indian companies inside and made their dreams much smaller. And right now, that model is under attack. And so we’re looking for someone we can hold responsible for this. Maybe it’s the startups. Maybe it’s the children of billionaires, who according to Piyush Goyal are building ice-cream brands, and according to Uday Kotak are content doing angel investing [over](https://www.moneycontrol.com/news/opinion/scions-of-india-s-old-family-businesses-are-just-picking-up-the-threads-financing-is-in-their-business-genes-12954849.html) running actual businesses. And we look across with envy at China, with their deep-tech startups, their incredible manufacturing, and their EV infrastructure, and wonder—why don’t we have any of these?
One such sector where India’s tall walls are under attack is electric vehicles. China and the US are in a trade war with each other, but they’re also competing fiercely to enter India, a market where India’s local car manufacturers couldn’t innovate.
America’s Tesla is at the gate. And BYD is coming from China. Just last week, there were reports that BYD would invest billions of dollars to set up a plant in Telangana. BYD swiftly denied the development, and said that it was still having trouble [getting visas](https://www.business-standard.com/industry/news/visa-blues-hit-chinese-automaker-byd-s-india-ev-manufacturing-plans-125040101015_1.html) for its top executives. This is a great example of India’s difficult position. On one hand, we want BYD’s investments and want to announce it proudly. On the other hand, we don’t because we’re worried what it’ll do to our local players.
And well, here’s Uday Kotak about BYD.
“I see reports of BYD coming into India… and you guys in the media seem more worried about Indian auto companies than they are!”
Regards,
Praveen Gopal Krishnan