---
subject: "The Monday Media Diet with Severin Matusek"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-03-13 12:26:28
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Severin Matusek (SM) is founder of Tell us about yourself. I grew up in the 90s with computers, video games and talking to strangers on the internet. This led me to study philosophy where I ended up focusing on media theory as the discipline that combined my interests in the various approaches about how we (may or may not) perceive the world and the emerging tools and technologies that radically challenge these frameworks. In short, I find it interesting how we create reality. I’m the founder of Besides that, I take pictures with small cameras, choose bicycles as my preferred way of transportation, try to be vegan as much as I can and am the father of a four year old human who just fell asleep next to me as I write this at 9PM on a Sunday. Describe your media diet. There are few things that make me happier than a print magazine in my mailbox. The New Yorker is my favorite - there’s no other which keeps quality journalism consistently at that level. I subscribe to Digitally, the stuff I actually read (amongst the random bits of information that capture my attention when my mind is attached to a screen) is mostly by writers who I trust for intelligent takes on contemporary culture, such as: Kyle Chayka, Jia Tolentino, Jenny Odell, James Bridle, Claire L. Evans, Elvia Wilk, Yancey Strickler, Emily Segal, Other Internet, Terry Nguyen, Adina Glickstein, Sari Azout, Tom Critchlow, Matt Klein, Emilie Friedlander & Andrea Domanick, Taylor Lorenz, Ezra Klein. I follow and subscribe to them across the usual channels. In terms of actual media, Finally, I often start and end the day listening to radio on my phone while making breakfast and dinner. It’s a mix of classical music, daily news and five minutes of learning about the lives of insects, fungi and other strange animals in a program called “Vom Leben der Natur” (The Life of Nature) on Austria’s national radio OE1. I like the idea that by listening to this radio station for the rest of my life I’ll eventually know something about classical music and nature by the end of it. WITI Classifieds: We are experimenting with running some weekly classifieds in WITI. If you’re interested in running an ad, The BrXnd Marketing X AI Conference is happening on 5/16 in NYC. Early Bird tickets are 20% off until the end of the month. Coefficient Capital and The New Consumer have teamed up to bring you fresh new insights in F&B ahead of Expo West! What’s the last great book you read?
What are you reading now? I’m re-reading Elias Canetti’s Auto-Da-Fé. It’s the book that sparked my interest in literature when I was 16. To me, Canetti is among the great authors and observers of the 20th century along with Nabokov and Kafka. It’s the first time I re-read a book and I’m curious to find out if it still speaks to me the same way it did 20 years ago. What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication? I always read the editors letter, then scan the table of contents and pick the story that interests me most. I then let the magazine rest at different places in my apartment so I can pick it up whenever I have a minute to spare. Often in the kitchen, while cooking, or next to my bed. I do this on purpose so I’m less tempted to check social media on my phone. Then I open a random page and read whatever is on there. Who should everyone be reading that they’re not? Emily Segal. The books that mean the most to me contain moments of personal truth. Words and passages that describe a person’s relationship to the world that might be similar to mine. I’ve had a few of these moments when reading Mercury Retrograde, Segal’s first novel. The same happens, but differently, when reading Nemesis’ memos (like their most recent one, What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone?
Plane or train? Train. I often take trains from Berlin to Vienna or Paris. I use the time for deep thinking that would normally take me a week to focus on. Wifi is off. Coffee and snacks from the train restaurant. My mind travels as we speed through the landscapes of Bohemia or Alsace at 300km/h. What is one place everyone should visit? Durmitor National Park in Montenegro. I’ve never heard about it until last summer when I went on a road trip with my girlfriend hunting for Spomeniki (aka huge, mostly abstract, concrete monuments built in the middle of nowhere across Yugoslavia). It’s breathtaking. I want to go back there for a week of bikepacking. Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into. The resurgence of community radio. Projects like — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Severine (SM) —
|