---
subject: "Is Desalination Everywhere Realistic?"
from: "Tomas Pueyo from Uncharted Territories <unchartedterritories@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-11-14 13:03:01
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tomas Pueyo", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_28238133486362596", "UNREAD"]
---
Earlier this week, Israel’s DesalinationIsrael has 9.5 million people and five big seawater desalination plants in operation. They produce enough freshwater to provide over half the country’s supply, including nearly all its tap water! When I quoted a cost of $0.40/ton of water in my previous article, the figure comes from a new desalination plant in Israel that is about to open, Today, Israeli households pay ~$30/month for their water. This is More than half of Israel’s water—including that for industrial and even agricultural uses—comes from desalinated water! This is a country that is poorer than the US but in the same wealth ballpark as countries like France, South Korea, or Japan. If Israel can do it, so can they. But the extent of Israel’s desalination plans are even more monumental. This is the Dead Sea between Israel, the West Bank, and Jordan: The sea is actually much smaller than the seabed, and about half of the remaining seabed is dedicated to salts extraction. The rest of the sea has been shrinking, as you can see in this video: If you don’t feel like clicking on it, here’s a before and after of the last 40 years: It’s been drying up for decades. This is happening because the main source of water for the Dead Sea is the Jordan River, and Israel has been using that water for irrigation. So much so that the Sea of Galilee started drying up. This was a national emergency, as it provided 25% of the country’s freshwater at the time. Now saltwater is heavier than freshwater, so the bottom of the sea is much saltier than the top, and if the freshwater at the top disappears, the lake’s surface water can become very salty very fast, in an irreversibly damaging process. That’s why the Israelis decided to reverse the flow of freshwater: In times of drought, when the Sea of Galilee runs low on freshwater, Israel desalinates water from the Mediterranean and sends it to the Sea of Galilee to refill it! This Refilling a lake with desalinated water! And the surplus of water is so high that Israel is becoming a freshwater exporter! Israel, therefore, exports the equivalent of about a third of its freshwater production. So yes, desalination can water a country. Can We Make It Even Cheaper?It’s going to be hard... Keep reading with a 7-day free trialSubscribe to Uncharted Territories to keep reading this post and get 7 days of free access to the full post archives. A subscription gets you:
|