---
subject: "Does All Semiconductor Manufacturing Depend on Spruce Pine Quartz?"
from: "Construction Physics <constructionphysics@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-11-08 13:01:31
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Construction Physics", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8588207018748827248", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Here’s an idea you see spreading across the internet every so often: that all semiconductor and solar PV manufacturing depends on extremely pure quartz from the town of Spruce Pine, North Carolina. This quartz is used to make the crucibles which hold the molten silicon as it gets turned into silicon ingots, which are then cut into wafers and made into chips. The quartz needs to be very pure to prevent impurities from seeping into the silicon, and Spruce Pine is where this very pure quartz comes from. Spruce Pine quartz started to get major attention after it was mentioned in Ed Conway’s 2023 book Spruce Pine quartz is often discussed in Is this true? Sort of. Quartz crucibles are indeed necessary for most semiconductor manufacturing, and Spruce Pine is where most of this quartz comes from. Spruce Pine quartz isn’t quite an irreplaceable linchpin in semiconductor manufacturing. But alternatives are all some combination of not yet developed, not quite as good, and not quite as cheap. Cutting off the supply of Spruce Pine quartz probably wouldn’t choke off the supply of semiconductors completely, but it would mean yields going down and costs going up. The industry is aware of the bottleneck: new sources of quartz are being developed, and new crucible materials are being investigated. A new crucible material, if found, would have a particularly large impact: not just because it would eliminate the Spruce Pine bottleneck, but because quartz is a major limiting factor in silicon ingot manufacturing, and a new, better material could potentially increase production efficiencies dramatically. Semiconductors and high-purity quartzMost modern semiconductors are made from very high-purity silicon: These grain boundaries create undesirable defects in the crystal structure, so for microchips and high-efficiency solar panels, we need monocrystalline silicon: ingots of silicon that are one single crystal.¹ Monocrystalline silicon is almost entirely made by the The high temperature of the process causes impurities in the quartz to migrate into the molten silicon, even through the protective coatings that the crucibles have. Because semiconductors are extremely sensitive to impurities — even a few parts per million of the wrong sorts of atoms can have disastrous effects — the quartz for the crucibles needs to be as pure as reasonably possible.² Because high-purity quartz is expensive, crucibles are made with a layer of high-purity quartz surrounded by a layer of cheaper, lower-purity quartz. The quartz crucible not only has a major impact on the quality of the silicon ingot, it’s a major determinant of the cost of ingot manufacturing. High-purity quartz costs on the order $10,000 a ton, and the crucibles themselves cost several thousand dollars apiece. What’s more, crucibles have short lifespans. Over time, the crucible degrades, and chemical changes caused by the high heat cause it to crack after it cools down. Manufacturers can stretch crucible life by pulling multiple ingots from them without cooling down the furnace, but a crucible is still limited to around 400 hours of operation. A CZ furnace will consume on the order of 20–25 crucibles a year, and a large ingot manufacturing operation might have dozens of CZ furnaces. Most of the high-purity quartz for these crucibles comes from Spruce Pine, from two companies that mine there: Spruce Pine quartz is desirable not just because it’s naturally high-purity, but because it’s amenable to further purification, allowing it to reach 99.999% purity or more.³ From The World in a Grain:
Spruce Pine isn’t the only source of natural high-purity quartz. Alternatives to Spruce Pine quartzBut Spruce Pine being the primary source of high-purity quartz doesn’t make it irreplaceable. In addition to efforts to find new sources elsewhere, there are a variety of ways that it could be substituted, though they’re not without difficulties. One option would be to use synthetic quartz rather than naturally mined quartz. Synthetic quartz can in fact be made far purer than natural quartz. The downside is that synthetic quartz is much more expensive, perhaps on the order of 5–10 times the cost of natural high-purity quartz. Chip manufacturers could probably absorb this cost, given that the silicon ingot is a relatively small fraction of the cost of a microchip, and as I understand it some chip manufacturers already use synthetic quartz crucibles, sold by companies like Similarly, manufacturers could use alternative, lower-purity quartz sources and refine them more to achieve the necessary levels of purity. This would also be more expensive, and the resulting quartz might still have more impurities than Spruce Pine quartz, causing lower yields and thus even higher costs, but it’s also probably doable. A Longer term, there’s the possibility of finding alternative crucible materials. Quartz’s ability to withstand high heat, its low coefficient of thermal expansion, and its relative unreactivity with molten silicon are difficult to substitute, and quartz crucibles are currently the only option for silicon semiconductor manufacturing (though if you use other materials like germanium or gallium nitride, there are more options).⁵ But researchers are exploring alternative crucible materials like It’s also technically possible to manufacture high-purity silicon ingots without crucibles at all, via the Because the float zone process doesn’t require the silicon to touch a crucible at all, it can achieve even higher purities than the CZ process. It’s used for things like power electronics where such purity is required. The float zone process, however, is more expensive than the CZ process, More critically, the float zone process is limited in how large an ingot (and thus wafer) it can produce. It maxes out around six inches in diameter, while since the early 2000s leading edge semiconductor nodes have used ConclusionSpruce Pine is indeed a key choke point in the modern semiconductor manufacturing landscape, but it’s not quite an irreplaceable, load-bearing column supporting all of the modern economy. It’s closer to occupying a relatively unique niche in a price-performance landscape: there are alternatives, but they’re all some combination of not as good, not as cheap, and not yet developed. Conway more or less confirms this in a
Most interesting to me isn’t the Spruce Pine bottleneck, but the limits that quartz crucibles place on silicon ingot manufacturing more generally. Finding an alternative crucible material would be a major win in helping solar PV costs continue to fall, and I’ll be interested to see if any progress gets made on new materials as solar PV adoption continues to rise. 1 Historically, solar panels were often made directly from polysilicon, but today they’re almost all made from monocrystalline silicon. 2 Quartz is silicon dioxide, or silica, a molecule consisting of two oxygen atoms bonded to a silicon atom. The molten silicon is hot enough that the crucible itself will 3 Spruce Pine quartz that doesn’t quite make the purity cut gets used for sandtraps in high-end golf courses.) 4 There are 5 One paper laments that high-temperature silicon “reacts with almost everything.” Construction Physics articles will always remain free, but if you find this work valuable, I encourage you to Construction Physics is produced in partnership with the Institute for Progress, a Washington, DC-based think tank. You can learn more about their work by visiting their You can also contact me on |