---
subject: "The 4DX Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-04-15 12:04:55
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Keith O’Brien is a content strategist, who writes about live music at Keith here. A few weeks ago, I accepted a friend’s invitation to go see Mickey 17 in 4DX, an immersive theater experience. Recently, he had mistakenly gone to the wrong theater to see a particular movie—having committed to the outing, he instead bought a ticket for Wolfman in 4DX. He told me it was “Dumb, but fun.” Created by South Korean megaplex operator As we waited for the movie to start, we began imagining studio heads asking actors and directors to plot out the 4DX experience. I imagined Tom Cruise spending 72 hours straight in the chair to get every little detail right. And Christopher Nolan sitting glumly throughout the entire experience, mentally outlining his future op-ed decrying the experience. Soon, the movie started. As Robert Pattinson tried to avoid various grizzly deaths, our seats rattled and plumes of smoke occasionally drifted in front of our eyes. (My friend had wisely encouraged us both to turn off the “mist” setting, not wanting to think about where that water was stored and how.) Why is this interesting? 4DX has been around for This is a big commitment: You can’t just make old seats shake. Theaters had to basically rip out their existing infrastructure to put in this new system. But it makes some sense: “Barbenheimer” aside, the movie business is somewhat in the doldrums. In 2024, Everyone seemingly has an idea for how to bring people back to the theaters, from It’s just like the movie business to resort to gimmicks instead of, you know, making better movies. Much ink has been spilled about the About those experiences: CJ 4DPlex also owns the ScreenX format, which blankets the entire theater in screens, and A recent visit to Regal’s page allows you to filter between standard, 3D, 4DX, and RPX, which is apparently 4DX but different. Why? Because they have 4DX for a Sunday Minecraft viewing was $27.99 per adult, RPX was $22.99 per adult, and standard was $17.99. Is getting shaken like someone comatose out of his or her stupor worth $10? I can’t answer that for you, but if you’re already paying good money and devoting your afternoon to the outing, it probably makes sense for the right type of movie. And to be honest, I don’t think I would have liked Mickey 17 that much if I wasn’t laughing to myself while bracing for the next gyration. You're currently a free subscriber to |