---
subject: "ERC standards; DeFi liquidity provision costs; regulatory roundup"
from: "web3 weekly from a16z crypto <a16zcrypto@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-10-30 16:05:58
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "a16zcrypto"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_2535365729249697677"]
---
1. Standards: Generalized property testing for ERC4626 vaults 🔐Daejun Park Tokenized vaults face a key composability issue: different implementation details can make integrating them a more complex (and error-prone) process for other apps and protocols (like yield aggregators). Earlier this year, ERC4626 was introduced to address this issue for Ethereum-based applications by defining a standardized set of tools and requirements that ensure composability across different vault implementations. As existing vaults adapt to this standard, however, we're seeing a new category of errors crop up. Discrepancies in subtle, easy-to-miss details in the standard requirements can lead to bugs, user experience issues, and even security vulnerabilities. So to help vault builders follow the standard, a16z crypto senior blockchain security engineer Park released property-based tests that systematically check code for small discrepancies before they become bigger problems. He covers the benefits of ERCs; common implementation pitfalls; and the result of testing ~100 ERC4626 in the wild. 2. Metrics: DeFi liquidity provision costs 📐Jason Milionis, Ciamac Moallemi, Tim Roughgarden, Anthony Lee Zhang We So in this special package, we share several more resources all about LVR, from head of research Tim Roughgarden and co-authors – including two newly released videos from the a16z crypto research
3. News & commentary: Crypto policy 🗞️a16z crypto Regulatory Team The following is a small selection of items covering the period from September 27 through October 17; be sure to 💲U.S. Department of the Treasury The Office of Foreign Assets Control and the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network announced settlements for over [$24 million](https://substack.com/redirect/be74f73b-8ae9-4dc9-a607-201e61bcffe0?r=8o54n)and[$29 million](https://substack.com/redirect/b13618ed-3002-4549-a086-90740b02dd7f?r=8o54n), respectively, with Bittrex, Inc. This is OFAC’s largest digital currency enforcement action to date, and it represents the first parallel enforcement actions by FinCEN and OFAC in this space.Nexo [announced](https://substack.com/redirect/1b9cad4d-049e-400c-9d17-4e180a502aaa?r=8o54n)that it acquired an undisclosed stake in the parent firm of Summit National Bank, a federally-chartered U.S. bank. Nexo is now the third crypto firm to obtain a federal bank charter (after Anchorage Digital and Protego Trust Bank), but the first to do so through an acquisition rather than the application process. It is not clear how banking regulators will react to Nexo’s purchase.
🏦Central banks Custodia Bank filed a [petition](https://substack.com/redirect/f59b65bb-a2db-487c-bbc0-124aedf2c8d0?r=8o54n)in court, arguing that the Federal Reserve demonstrated a double standard by allowing BNY Mellon to engage in crypto custody but not granting Custodia approval for a Federal Reserve master account.The Bank for International Settlements [announced](https://substack.com/redirect/66aa038b-74a4-4e51-a19c-239a222203ea?r=8o54n)the successful completion of the first central bank digital currency (CBDC) pilot involving four jurisdictions, Hong Kong, Thailand, China, and the United Arab Emirates. The trial was conducted on the mBridge Ledger, a custom-developed DLT platform.
🌍International 🇫🇷 France’s Autorité des Marchés Financiers [approved](https://substack.com/redirect/93728599-25f9-429d-ae5f-38176636f3e3?r=8o54n)the registration of Societe Generale’s crypto division, SG Forge, to offer buying, selling, trading, and custody of digital assets.🇯🇵 Japanese Prime Minister Fumio Kishida [stated](https://substack.com/redirect/cbf1a106-b13e-465d-af5e-6b94ca970452?r=8o54n)that Japan plans to invest in NFTs and metaverse services in a policy[speech](https://substack.com/redirect/473ecd13-d7f2-4518-b544-45eafb0c910f?r=8o54n).
--Robert Hackett, Stephanie Zinn, Tim Sullivan, Sonal Chokshi, and the a16z crypto team You’re receiving this newsletter since you signed up for it on our website(s) or elsewhere (you can opt out using the ‘unsubscribe’ link below). Please note that this newsletter is provided for informational purposes only, and should NOT be relied upon as legal, business, investment, or tax advice. Furthermore, the content is not directed at nor intended for use by any investors or prospective investors in any a16z funds. This newsletter may link to other websites or other information obtained from third-party sources, but a16z has not independently verified nor makes any representations about the current and enduring accuracy of such information. Please see a16z.com/disclosures for additional important details, including link to list of investments. subscribe to our podcast ' |