---
subject: "Should US homebuilders emulate Sweden?"
from: "Construction Physics <constructionphysics@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-01-01 13:03:05
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Construction Physics", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8588207018748827248", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
A common sentiment I see with folks interested in improving US homebuilding is that we should try and emulate Sweden. More specifically, that we should emulate Sweden’s large-scale adoption of prefabricated construction. Something like
According to this theory, prefab is like lots of other US building practices such as I think Swedish prefab construction is impressive, and there’s undoubtedly things US builders can learn from it. But for single family home construction, I don’t see much evidence that prefab has been particularly helpful in improving construction productivity, or driving down building costs. For multifamily, the evidence that prefab is helping drive cost savings is somewhat better, though I’m not particularly confident of that. Swedish construction statisticsOne nice thing about Sweden is that the government provides a lot of statistics on various aspects of the construction industry. The government provides both a Swedish vs US Construction Costs Construction price and cost indexes for single family (SF) and multifamily (MF) construction in the US and Sweden. 1968 = 100 And to focus on more recent trends, here’s the data since 1995: Swedish vs US Construction Costs Construction price and cost indexes for single family (SF) and multifamily (MF) construction in the US and Sweden. 1995 = 100 We can see that, as in the US, Swedish construction costs and prices for residential construction have risen faster than overall inflation. What’s more, since 1995 Swedish construction costs have risen at about the same rate as the price of US single family homes, but prices have risen much faster. This does not suggest to me that prefabricated construction has enabled substantial cost savings or productivity improvements. Similarly, when we looked at These are somewhat abstract measures, and high-level productivity estimates are always fraught. But we see the same thing if we look at Sweden vs US New Home Prices Average price per unit area for new single family (SF) and multifamily (MF) homes in Sweden and US, exclusive of land. Normalized to 1998 = 100. Since 1998, the price per unit area of Swedish homes (both single family and multifamily) has risen slightly faster than the average price of US single family homes. In fact, per Statistics Sweden, the average price of a new Swedish single family home was around $286 per square foot in 2023, compared to $166 per square foot in the US, more than 70% more. If you read between the lines of comments by Swedish prefab companies, they admit that their factory-based methods aren’t particularly inexpensive. In
One thing that is notable to me, however, is that Sweden’s multifamily prices per unit area were roughly flat between 2017 and 2023, even as costs were rising.¹ Without knowing more it’s hard to lay this entirely on the feet of prefabrication, since a fairly large fraction of Swedish multifamily projects have significant amounts of on-site work, and many things could be behind prices staying flat. But it nevertheless seems telling.² Swedish vs US build qualityWhen I mention the high build costs of Swedish houses compared to US ones, the most common response I get is that Swedish houses are built much better than US houses: specifically, folks will typically point out the much greater energy efficiency of Swedish houses. I’m not an expert on building energy efficiency (and I refuse to become one), but as far as I know it’s true that Swedish homes are much more energy efficient than the typical US home. Here’s a For one, the promise of factory-built construction is that it should achieve better quality AND greater productivity/lower costs, not trading off one against the other. Ford’s assembly line was But I’m also somewhat dubious of the idea that US homes would be much more expensive than Swedish homes if they were built to the same level of energy performance, and that Swedish prefab is efficiency improving/cost saving once you take this into account. The strictest energy efficiency standard I’m aware of (in Europe or anywhere else) is Unsurprisingly, there’s a cost premium for building to Passive House standards, but as far as I’m aware it’s a lot less than you might expect. ConclusionLower costs and greater productivity isn’t the only reason you might want to move to a factory-based construction model. Being able to pick a home out of a catalog and knowing exactly what you’re going to get and what the price is going to be is a big benefit for homebuyers. Reducing the amount of on-site time is often an attractive proposition, especially if you’re building somewhere cold (like Sweden!). There are good reasons to use prefab. But for single family home construction, I don’t see much evidence that Sweden has been able to use prefabricated construction to drive substantial efficiencies or cost reductions in the building process. Essentially every productivity or cost metric over the last 30 years shows Sweden looking at best similar to the US, and often looking worse. Average Swedish single family home costs per square foot are substantially higher than in the US. Higher energy efficiency of Swedish homes can partly explain this, but the idea that Swedish prefabrication is more efficient/cheaper once you take this into account seems hard to defend. For multifamily construction, the evidence is slightly stronger that there are some cost/efficiency benefits to prefab, but it still seems highly uncertain to me. 1 Interestingly, if you first convert to USD, you get a significant decline in the price of Swedish multifamily housing per unit area, due to fluctuating exchange rates. 2 I was also recently pointed to 3 One possible response here is that Sweden is much colder than the US, which might cash out to higher construction costs, so that comparing US average prices with Swedish average prices is misleading. But the US midwest is fairly cold ( Construction Physics articles will always remain free, but if you find this work valuable, I encourage you to Construction Physics is produced in partnership with the Institute for Progress, a Washington, DC-based think tank. You can learn more about their work by visiting their You can also contact me on |