---
subject: "The marrow of words"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2020-09-20 03:32:05
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
It has been a while since I wrote the Sunday email. I was hesitant. I felt like the pandemic, and the (un)lockdowns that ensued, had sucked the marrow out of life. What words could lift a virus-hardened spirit?
I know, you'll say, life has a way of squeezing in. I felt that too when I took a car ride across the city yesterday. The horizon was sufficiently mottled with haze. The metro slid in and out of stations, elegantly. On the roads below, masked riders weaved their way through traffic lights, their gait less elegant. And as we drove into a Delhi sunset, the lights came on. For a minute, everything felt like it had gone back to normal.
Just below the surface of this apparent normal-ness, though, I know the world is standing on its head. Businesses and people have been swallowed up whole. Others have done the swallowing. As I read through the stories we published this week, I realised that for some businesses, the pandemic had been an opportunity to grow and consolidate. And once and for all, to defeat their competition.
So on Thursday and Friday, we focussed on the company that has pushed several sectors to the brink of a near-monopoly. My favourite story of the week was
[written by Pratap](https://the-ken.com/story/tariff-hikes-a-game-of-snakes-and-ladders-for-indias-telcos/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter), who took us through the thorny problem of floor pricing for telecom tariffs. Reliance Jio famously caused a near-crash in prices when it launched; now, with its dominance fully established in the space, it's singing a different tune. One that puts the newly-minted Vi's fortunes at extreme risk.
While Jio may not flip the profitability switch just yet, the same can't be said for its all-in-one TV and OTT product, Jio Fiber. Reliance has been waiting for this moment, and in its wait, created a veritable battering ram of services, products, and infrastructure. All of which will now combine to form a content and distribution juggernaut. And Reliance is making sure that this outing is different from the flat reception the Jio Fiber rollout got.
[Pranav's piece](https://the-ken.com/story/jio-fiber-holds-all-the-broadband-cards-now-it-must-play-them/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) on Thursday is a must-read.
On Wednesday, Seetharaman wrote about the rising star of the solar industry. Adani Green Energy Limited (AGEL), with a value well north of $14 billion, is now the world's largest solar energy company. Great title. But what does it really mean, when China still controls over 90% of the value chain integral to solar energy manufacturing? Seetha digs into what Adani must do to make sure India meets its solar production targets. This was also our free story of the week, so hit that
[share button](https://the-ken.com/story/the-chinese-eclipse-over-india-adanis-solar-manufacturing-dreams/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter).
AGEL wasn't the only one to hit a milestone this month. India's edtech sector anointed its second unicorn—Unacademy. Fresh on their cap table is a familiar, if chastened, friend SoftBank. After all, why should SoftBank miss out on a seat atop India's edtech rocketship? On Tuesday, Sumanth and I
[pieced together](https://the-ken.com/story/softbanks-invests-in-unacademy/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) Softbank's interest in Unacademy, and why backing number #2 in a sector could be a whole new growth philosophy for the esoteric investor.
Paytm could also do with a new strategic direction,
[wrote Arundhati](https://the-ken.com/story/paytm-grasps-at-financial-services-straws-to-stop-its-slide/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) on Monday. Nothing has quite clicked for Paytm's payments business; its UPI transactions are at a distant third behind rivals, a far cry from its dominant position in 2018. Paytm's now taking a leaf out of investor Ant Financial's book with its new financial services play. With a few false starts already under its belt, is Paytm destined to be India's most valued startup and nothing more?
In the world of business, the pandemic has had a tragicomic effect. (I mean, just look at the stock market). The only way I can make sense of everything is through my words. There's still a little marrow left in them.