---
subject: "OpenAI: Altman Returns"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-11-30 14:08:19
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
As of this morning, Events seem to have gone as expected. If you have read my Still seems worthwhile to gather the postscripts, official statements and reactions into their own post for future ease of reference. What will the ultimate result be? We likely only find that out gradually over time, as we await both the investigation and the composition and behaviors of the new board. I do not believe Q* played a substantive roll in events, so it is not included here. I also do not include discussion here of how good or bad Altman has been for safety. Sam Altman’s Statement
Let that last paragraph sink in. The leadership team ex-Greg is clearly ready to run the company without Altman. That means that whatever caused the board to fire Altman, whether or not Altman forced the board’s hand to varying degrees, if everyone involved had chosen to continue without Altman then OpenAI would have been fine. We can choose to believe or not believe Altman’s claims in his Verge interview that he only considered returning after the board called him on Saturday, and we can speculate on what Altman otherwise did behind the scenes during that time. We don’t know. We can of course guess, but we do not know. He then talks about his priorities.
Research, then product, then board. Such statements cannot be relied upon, but this was as good as such a statement can be. We must keep watch and see if such promises are kept. What will the new board look like? Will there indeed be a robust independent investigation into what happened? Will Ilya and Jan Leike be given the resources and support they need for OpenAI’s safety efforts?
He says he is not focused on getting back on the board, that is not his focus, but that the governance structure clearly has a problem that will take a while to fix.
Yes. It is good to see this highly reasonable timeline and expectations setting, as opposed to the previous tactics involving artificial deadlines and crises. Mutari confirms in the interview that OpenAI’s safety approach is not changing, that this had nothing to do with safety.
Bret Taylor’s StatementWe also have the statement from Bret Taylor. We know little about him, so reading his first official statement carefully seems wise.
Mostly this is Brad Taylor properly playing the role of chairman of the board, which tells us little other than that he knows the role well, which we already knew. Microsoft will get only an observer on the board, other investors presumably will not get seats either. That is good news, What does ‘enhance the governance structure’ mean here? We do not know. It could be exactly what we need, it could be a rubber stamp, it could be anything else. We do not know what the central result will be. The statement on a review of recent events here is weaker than I would like. It raises the probability that the new board does not get or share a true explanation. He mentions safety multiple times. Based on what I know about Taylor, my guess is he is unfamiliar with such questions, and does not actually know what that means in context, or what the stakes truly are. Not that he is dismissive or skeptical, rather that he is encountering all this for the first time. Larry Summers’s Statement
Helen Toner’s Statement
Many outraged people continue to demand clarity on why the board fired Altman. I believe that most of them are thrilled that Toner and others continue not to share the details, and are allowing the situation outside the board to return to the status quo ante. There will supposedly be an independent investigation. Until then, OpenAI Needs a Strong Board That Can Fire Its CEO
The danger is that
Quite so. From our perspective, the board botched its execution and its members made relatively easy rhetorical targets. That is true even if the board had good reasons for doing so. If the board had not botched its execution and had more gravitas? I think things go differently. If after an investigation, Summers, D’Angelo and Taylor all decide to fire Altman again (note that I very much do not expect this, but if they did decide to do it), I assure you they will handle this very differently, and I would predict a very different outcome. One of the best things about Sam Altman is his frankness that
Good background, potentially influential in the thinking of several board members including Helen Toner: Former OpenAI board member Holden Karnofsky’s old explanation of why and exactly how Some Board Member Candidates
If he was counted as an Altman ally, as he presumably should, then he’s great. On top of the benefits to OpenAI, it would provide valuable insider information to Graham. Eliezer clarifies that his motivation is that he gives Graham a good chance of figuring out a true thing when it matters, which also sounds right. Emmett Shear also seems like a clearly great consensus pick. One concern is that the optics of the board matter. You would be highly unwise to choose a set of nine white guys. See Taylor’s statement about the need for diverse perspectives. A Question of Valuation
OpenAI is nothing without its people. That does not mean they lack all manner of secret sauce. In valuation terms I am bullish. Would the valuation have survived without Altman? No, but in the counterfactual scenario where Altman was stepping aside due to health issues with an orderly succession, I would definitely have thought $86 billion remained cheap. A Question of OpticsA key question in all this is the extent to which the board’s mistake was that its optics were bad. So here is
Bad optics can cause bad things to happen. So can claims that the optics are bad, or worries that others will think the optics are bad, or claims that you are generally bad at optics. You have two responses. That means it had bad consequences, which means it was actually bad. Nobly stand up for right actions over what would ‘look good.’
Consider the options in light of recent events. We all want it to be one way. Often it is the other way. You're currently a free subscriber to |