---
subject: "Apple e-ink displays 📱, Acer 3D screens 🖥️, DALL-E passes Turing test 🤖  "
from: "\"TLDR 🤖\" <dan@tldrnewsletter.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-05-19 10:11:55
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "TLDR", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_795315172960844453", "UNREAD"]
---
[Apple said to be testing coloured e-ink displays for a future foldable iPhone (3 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.whathifi.com%2Fus%2Fnews%2Fapple-said-to-be-testing-coloured-e-ink-displays-for-a-future-foldable-iphone%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000180dbcd704f-155629bd-396e-4037-bfa6-bf0f301c6aa6-000000/EShNNu9QNqlKqgcL0zrLsDXKe4cBtAiPw4nsM9u-vok=249)
Apple is trialing the use of E Ink electronic paper displays for applications on possible folding iOS devices. E Ink displays use electrophoretic ink technologies and are commonly used for signage and e-readers due to their slow refresh rate. They are up to 10 times more power-efficient than OLED and LCDs. The displays could be ideal for a screen that is constantly turning on and displaying notifications. Apple is rumored to be developing a foldable iPhone with an 8-inch QHD+ flexible OLED display.
|
[Microsoft previews a new, totally redesigned Outlook for Windows app (2 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Farstechnica.com%2Fgadgets%2F2022%2F05%2Fmicrosoft-previews-a-new-totally-redesigned-outlook-for-windows-app%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000180dbcd704f-155629bd-396e-4037-bfa6-bf0f301c6aa6-000000/_XmrlDluGJsEGA8HoXw42QLscuAbzdpaj2aorhukYLU=249)
Microsoft has introduced a new Outlook client for Windows users that closely mirrors the interface and functionality of the Outlook web client. It is currently only available to Office Insiders in the Beta channel who have work or school Microsoft 365 accounts. The new app will eventually replace the current Outlook app, as well as Windows' built-in Mail and Calendar apps. It is still in early development and is missing many common mail client features, such as support for IMAP and Outlook.com accounts. Screenshots of the new client are available in the article.
|
Science & Futuristic Technology
|
[Acer’s new portable monitors can make 2D look like 3D (4 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Farstechnica.com%2Fgadgets%2F2022%2F05%2Facers-new-portable-monitors-can-make-2d-look-like-3d%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000180dbcd704f-155629bd-396e-4037-bfa6-bf0f301c6aa6-000000/qXY3vzdgFRA0I2MFo18LaZ2vzs2oOSP3rbNIxS2F6Ws=249)
Acer's new SpatialLabs View and SpatialLabs View Pro monitors can convert 2D content into stereoscopic 3D. The 15.6-inch monitors use specialized optical lenses, two eye-tracking cameras, and AI to create the effect, which works with games, photos, and CAD designs. More than 50 games will be supported at launch and support for more games will be added every month. SpatialLabs View Pro will support all major 3D file formats and allow users to view images, models, and animations from 3D software in stereoscopic 3D. Many more details about the monitors are available in the article.
|
[My deepfake DALL-E 2 vacation photos passed the Turing Test (4 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.mattbell.us%2Fmy-fake-dall-e-2-vacation-photos-passed-the-turing-test%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000180dbcd704f-155629bd-396e-4037-bfa6-bf0f301c6aa6-000000/iu1btcsrCdelubiMxHxKNRFR5UtfZHR0R5iXoBqNFeA=249)
After a trip to Roatan, Matt Bell decided to run an experiment with his Facebook friends to see whether they could tell the difference between his real vacation photos and images generated by DALL-E 2, OpenAI's image generating AI system. 19 out of the 23 people who participated in a survey at the end of the photo reel missed the fact that there was something different about the DALL-E images. There could be many factors contributing to the results, such as it being a casual Facebook post and the fact that people are unfamiliar with ocean environments, but the experiment shows how far DALL-E 2 has progressed. The collection of images used in the experiment is available in the article.
|
Programming, Design & Data Science
|
[How to feel engaged at work: a software engineer's guide (6 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fjasont.co%2Fennui%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000180dbcd704f-155629bd-396e-4037-bfa6-bf0f301c6aa6-000000/I7kBVIXQSRBOgZyJRAbxzbhK_FRG8agGMMV1NUwVXX0=249)
Clocking into work every day can result in a vague sense of dissatisfaction when the work doesn't seem meaningful. This article discusses four different ways to ignite motivation for work. It talks about making time to be curious, viewing work from a CEO's perspective, framing one's career as a series of questions, and trying new things. Anything can be interesting if you ask the right questions, and this article presents techniques for finding the right questions to ask.
|
[LiveTerm (GitHub Repo)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fgithub.com%2FCveinnt%2FLiveTerm%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000180dbcd704f-155629bd-396e-4037-bfa6-bf0f301c6aa6-000000/3kHraaBO030NZ2Fa-y6DvMxqnp1PbqLksuzbArBY-5E=249)
LiveTerm is a highly customizable and minimal terminal-style website template powered by Next.js. It takes minutes to build a site with LiveTerm and developers only need to work with one config file. Live examples are available.
|
[New Bluetooth hack can unlock your Tesla—and all kinds of other devices (9 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Farstechnica.com%2Finformation-technology%2F2022%2F05%2Fnew-bluetooth-hack-can-unlock-your-tesla-and-all-kinds-of-other-devices%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000180dbcd704f-155629bd-396e-4037-bfa6-bf0f301c6aa6-000000/gumrYsAn5z8_FRtST2LJBsm45reZLKitdreGqpNHIm0=249)
A new Bluetooth hack that exploits weaknesses in the Bluetooth Low Energy standard can be used to unlock doors, open and operate vehicles, and gain unauthorized access to a host of security-sensitive devices. The relay attack requires two attackers, one close to the target device and one close to the authenticating device. The attackers relay information between the targets to authenticate credentials. The exploit targets the very lowest level of the Bluetooth stack and it is unlikely to be fixed. More details about the exploit, including information on possible countermeasures, are available in the article.
|
[Twitter turns the tables on Musk, will “enforce” merger (1 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.axios.com%2F2022%2F05%2F17%2Felon-musk-twitter-will-enforce-merger%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000180dbcd704f-155629bd-396e-4037-bfa6-bf0f301c6aa6-000000/iieOaEjMBrvb3StBoE-gTSg1GpapkGgI1C0r5lmOraE=249)
Twitter's board intends to enforce Elon Musk's merger agreement. Musk had agreed to a transaction at $54.20 per share, but put the deal on hold pending proof that less than 5% of users on the platform are bots or spam accounts. He claims that his offer was based on Twitter's SEC filings being accurate. Musk has a contractual obligation to buy Twitter at the agreed price.
|
I also write TLDR Crypto, a newsletter that follows tech and innovation in the blockchain ecosystem. If this is something you would be interested in, please [sign up here](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftldr.tech%2Fcrypto/1/01000180dbcd704f-155629bd-396e-4037-bfa6-bf0f301c6aa6-000000/EaYR0cULLSVilQZ-qHUpIVnseB4GDRLmzSd6KKVmlYM=249).
|
|
If you have any comments or feedback, just respond to this email!
Thanks for reading, Dan
|
|
|
|