---
subject: "Economics Roundup #2"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-07-02 12:36:52
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Previously: Let’s take advantage of the normality while we have it. In all senses. Insane Tax ProposalsThere is Trump’s proposal to replace income taxes with tariffs, but he is not alone. So here is your periodic reminder, since this is not actually new at core: Biden’s proposed budgets include completely insane tax regimes that would cripple our economic dynamism and growth if enacted. As in for high net worth individuals, taking unrealized capital gains at 25% and realized capital gains, such as those you are forced to take to pay your unrealized capital gains tax, at 44.6% plus state taxes. Austen Allred explains how this plausibly destroys the entire startup ecosystem. Which I know is confusing because in other contexts he also talks about how other laws (such as SB 1047) that would in no way apply to startups would also destroy the startup ecosystem. But in this case he is right.
I do think they are attempting to deal with this via another idea he thought was crazy, the ‘nine annual payments’ for the first year’s tax and ‘five annual payments’ for the subsequent tax. So the theory would be that the first year you ‘only’ owe 3.5%. Then the second year you owe another 3.5% of the old gain and 5% of the next year’s gain. That is less horrendous, but still super horrendous, especially if the taxes do not go away if the asset values subsequently decline, risking putting you into infinite debt. This is only the beginning. They are even worse than Warren’s proposed wealth taxes, because the acute effects and forcing function here are so bad. At the time this was far worse than the various stupid and destructive economic policies Trump was proposing, although he has recently stepped it up to the point where that is unclear. The good news is that these policies are for now complete political non-starters. Never will a single Republican vote for this, and many Democrats know better. I would like to think the same thing in reverse, as well. Also, this is probably unconstitutional in the actually-thrown-out-by-SCOTUS sense, not only in the violates-the-literal-constitution sense. But yes, it is rather terrifying what would happen if they had the kind of majorities that could enact things like this. On either side.
Don’t Mess With the Federal ReserveThe Orange Man is Bad, Also, if I was a presidential candidate running against the incumbent in a time when the Fed has to make highly unclear decisions on interest rates, I would not want to be very clearly and publicly threatening their independence. Don’t Mess With the New York Tax Authorities
What I did not see were stories about people who definitely actually left the state, and were not coming back on the regular. Yes, the state is being obnoxious, but if your flight arrives at 12:05am and then leaves at 11:48pm, then that is the game you decided to play. Seems fair. TariffsWho pays for tariffs? This chart is very much trying to have its cake and eat it too. It starts with a correct dilemma. Suppose a tariff is imposed. On any given purchasing decision, consider a customer who would have otherwise bought a foreign good. They can either substitute the domestic good, pay for the foreign good or (not listed) substitute away entirely. If widgets go from $100 to $115, perhaps you buy less widgets and more thingamabobs. If you get the customer to switch, no one pays the tariff. If you don’t get the customer to switch, no one is protected. The difference is that in the real world, preferences and use cases are continuous. What happens as you put in the tariff is that some of the customers switch. Some of the customers do not. The price of the foreign good is probably partially absorbed by the producer, partly by the domestic supply chain and partly by the customer. Economics of scale change production costs, expertise is learned, and so on. To the extent the foreigners eat the cost and still sell, and there is no retaliation, that is a pure win for team tariff. We get money in the public coffers at foreign expense. To the extent that purchases stay the same and we pay the cost domestically, that is indeed a tax paid by producers or consumers. Yes, it lowers their remaining capital, but is probably one of the least distortionary available taxes. In the terms described above, if you used the money to cut income tax rates, you’d probably be ahead. To the extent purchases are switched, this is then framed above as ‘Home pays.’ This is a weird way of looking at this. No one is paying a tariff per se, what happened was we substituted domestic production for cheaper imports. This is good for the domestic producer of the widgets, and that has spillover effects to the rest of the economy, as does substituting this activity for other potential production. Whereas the buyer is worse off, which has spillover effects in the other direction in various ways. The question is, do the benefits exceed the costs? That is hard to know. If you are using otherwise idle resources, gaining expertise and competitiveness and so on, then it could be good. If you are already at full employment and moving down the value chain, then this could be deeply foolish and bad. What is weird is the claim that the exporter of different goods pays if the value of home’s currency changes. Presumably home’s currency changes in value slightly. But as they say this offsets the higher price ‘somewhat.’ In most cases, this seems like somewhat is very little in practice? So yes, exporters are worse off, but my expectation is the vast majority of the impact is still absorbed as per the rest of the chart. How important is this good to the dollar’s price? My view of tariffs is that free trade is good. We should encourage more trade, not impose more tariffs, especially since they tend to trigger a response in kind. When Cato says that economists view tariffs as generally unwise and unhelpful, I agree. We would mostly be better off without them, even if others still imposed some on us. However, it is not like our other tax options do not suck. Income taxes punish and reduce work. Capital gains taxes punish and reduce savings and investment and value creation. Value added taxes punish adding value, and so on. Cabron taxes and unimproved value of land taxes are great where you can get them, but the Pigou Club and Georgist Club do not have enough members at this time. So if our other options are things like income taxes and capital gains taxes, a one-way tariff that doesn’t change anything otherwise seems to me like it should be about as bad as those. What (as I understand it) makes tariffs such bad taxes in the baseline case is that other countries respond in kind when you impose them, and those countries like you less on all levels, and international relations deteriorate, and so on. People Hate Inflation
Do wages lag behind prices? The argument there would be that only after prices go up can you then ask for a raise based on inflation. But that assumes that we have commodity-driven inflation, rather than wage-driven inflation. Alternatively, one could argue that wage-driven inflation would be concentrated in the places where workers have the leverage, so even then most workers would be responding to changes elsewhere, and lag behind. And also wages are sticky downwards and costly to adjust, so it makes sense that they would in some sense lag behind if there was a one-time inflation shock or shift in expectations. But also it seems odd to talk about ‘lag’ at all if inflation is steady. There was talk that we should be using an older inflation calculation. As Scott says, the question is what is the most useful measure. There is no one definitive inflation number, you are measuring many different things. Financing costs going up means that, for certain important purposes, costs really are way up recently, whereas the baseline cost of living for most people is not. I do think people are reacting to all of this in a not-so-crazy fashion. Still, he notes that inflation does look too high, and we should worry it is reaccelerating. And it is clearly central to why people think the economy is bad.
People disliking the economy predicts presidential approval and re-election. I had not properly considered that causation runs in both directions. I knew about the partisan split, but for Biden the Democrats don’t like him either. The campaign likely changes that, so we should expect net economic sentiment to rise if things don’t get way worse. Real Wages
The speculation is that this is largely due to compensation in the form of increased working from home. Working from home is now a luxury that you get in exchange for lower effective pay. It is definitely worth a 3% pay cut if you value it, but not everyone gets the benefit. If we estimate an additional 6% of workers are now fully remote and 20% have new hybrid arrangements, that implies a double digit pay cut for those workers to make this work out. That is less obviously worthwhile and suggests a mystery remains to reconcile this with the seemingly tight labor market. Can’t Get No SatisfactionAnother illustration of why people’s overall satisfaction with their situation does not tell you if times are good or people are happy with the times. People answer largely by comparing their situation to expectations. So you can get some very strange distributions. Employment
As always, one must ask over what time frame. The National Debt
If you look, ‘unsustainable’ is defined to be ‘the debt-to-GDP ratio goes up.’ Yes, in some sense that is ‘unsustainable.’ It could still be sustained for quite a long time, even if real interest rates exceed real growth. I am also confident that those simulations did not include plausible probability distributions for the impact of AI. What does seem clearly true is that if America fails to experience substantial economic growth going forward and things are otherwise ‘normal,’ our levels of government spending under current public choice are indeed not sustainable, and if unadjusted would cause a crisis within our lifetimes. I do not think it is that likely that we will get this kind of normal scenario. Yes, we could plausibly spend enough more than we could to get into avoidable trouble. Mostly this seems like Immigration
I believe the result, if you discount all the other various things that happen as the result of immigration.
I file both results under the standard ‘yes obviously but it is good to demonstrate this.’ With the caveat that they get this result by considering certain select secondary impacts of immigration, while not modeling others, such as shifts in political dynamics or the housing market. No, I do not expect any of this to change people’s opinions on immigration’s impact on their wages or the deficit, or their political or policy preferences. Financial Literacy
That is… not what financial illiterate means. The fact that the FDIC chair thinks that ‘financial literacy’ is the issue at hand worries me. This is exactly a lot of why SBF considered ‘adults in the room’ to be useless to him. SBF was a thief and a fraud and he got caught, that does not mean he was confused about what he was doing. I mean, yes, there were the parts where he was too scatterbrained and overloaded and indifferent to care what was going on or give decisions more than a minute’s thought, but that wasn’t because he lacked an education. Financial literacy can start early.
Everyone gets full credit. Reversal
FTX customers to Status Update
Scaling Hypothesis
PaymentsSeriously, charge more. Plagiarism checker sold for eight figures. It has a free plan and a $10/month plan. Buyer adds a $30/month plan and a $100/month plan.
Plasma donations are way more impactful than I would have expected. For the doners, that is, not those who need plasma.
That’s a huge decline in turning to very expensive alternative emergency funding mechanisms. Read that last line again. Plasma donation actually pays pretty decently. You can do it twice a week for $30-$50 a pop. No, it is not ideal if the poor are falling back on that to avoid payday loans, but it seems way better than actually falling back on payday loans. Which in turn is often better than actively running out of money, although I think this is less obvious than economists typically assume it is because behaviors adjust to the optionality. Pricing
Real ‘
That is to say nothing of the practical considerations of having to ‘disclose and explain’ changes in cost of goods sold, gross margins and pricing strategies on a quarterly basis. Never Reason From a Price Change
My brain wanted to roll its eyes and say ‘yes, yes, Scott, we all get it, but still, what if the price did change anyway?’ And then I went through several cycles of ‘no, wait, that actually does not make any sense, the price will not change unless you change something else to make it change.’ You can do that via government fiat or monopoly decision if you want, but that too has a story that tells you what will then happen. A Changing Price
I do not know. Certainly we all thought about it. But of course that is a hint. There was no rule saying the price had to come down quickly, or that it could not first go up quite a lot. And the borrow cost was something like 400% annualized.
I mean, I assumed when I saw it that Joe was joking. I agree that the easiest play in situations like this is to wait until the party is clearly over, then get in on the way down. But even that is not so clear or safe. There is reason one cannot start another party. One could say that the price of a DJT is not the real market. The real market is the price to short the stock, including all the risks that entails. That price is high, and plausibly efficient. You still can beat the market, somewhat, by avoiding being on the wrong side of this trade. You do not want to be long DJT while its borrow costs are over 400% (unless you are at minimum collecting that borrow, and also have very good other reasons, by default this is a no just no). In general, since it is expensive to short things, it it not even such a violation of EMH to say there are things you should know not to be long. When I buy individual stocks, I may not be that confident I can pick stocks to buy, but I am confident I can pick some of the stocks not to buy. The Price of TourismTourism is like anything else. If you have too much of it, as Tyler Cowen reminds us, The weird thing about experiential goods like tourism is that people often get super mad about fees that go to the provider of the experience, while being happy to fork over ten or a hundred times as much so they can travel to the experience, and they can rearrange their lives to allow them the time away, and even to scalpers and travel agents. This is backwards. You should be thrilled to support and reward those providing the actual value, not call them ‘greedy’ or accuse them of gouging. They are the ones producing the amazing value. Much better the value go to them than the scalpers and hotels and airlines. Thus Japan has this exactly right. Raise the tourist price of the bullet train. Not only is this charging money, it is charging money in a relatively socially acceptable place. Alcohol
I still think we should either repeal or enforce the law. Sam Bowman offers an interesting other argument, which is that The Efficient Company Hypothesis is FalseThe generalized Efficient Market Hypothesis, I hereby dub it the Efficient Company Hypothesis,
Similarly, did you know
|