---
subject: "Proof-of-Workout WITH task link"
from: "1729 <support@1729.com>"
to: ""
date: 2021-03-28 14:57:02
labels: ["1729", "CATEGORY_PROMOTIONS", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_1655087446004800712", "CATEGORY_PROMOTIONS", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX"]
---
|
|
|
Fitness leads to quantified self leads to transhumanism. We can use fitness as the backdoor to medicine, to drive a cultural change similar to crypto that begins with improving ourselves and ends with transforming society for the better. This means first taking care of ourselves, tracking our health, and being as fit as we can be given our age and pre-existing conditions. Then it means embracing the full panoply of technologies to get to healthy and beyond, from reviewing fitness trackers and blood-glucose monitors to destigmatizing discussion of enhancing technologies like This might seem crazy or it might seem obvious, but let’s break it down. Problem: Societal Defaults are Fat-EncouragingFirst, we know that exercise isn’t just What’s causing this? There are many possible culprits, from the USDA food pyramid and the sugar lobby to restaurant culture and how mobile made us sessile. The obesity epidemic might even be partially due to But the results are indisputable. Weight is a ratio-scale variable that can be compared across space and time, and people are getting fatter and getting diabetes. Society thus isn’t actually “fat-shaming”, it’s fat-encouraging. Instead, we should be fit-encouraging. Solution: Fitness Cults, Fitness Culture?The obvious solution to fatness is fitness. That’s just eating right, lifting weights, running, and sleeping properly. It’s certainly possible to do this in a Rocky-style low-tech way (not a smartphone in this Enter quantified self and health tracking. Track your weight with a As per above, this kind of regular social exercise is a form of medicine. Omada Health has commercialized something called the Diabetes Prevention Program which is a formal version of exactly this: progress tracking, groups communication, and knowledge sharing to drop weight and You can almost think of what these programs do as the Twice-Daily Call to Fitness, by analogy to similar daily social prescriptions from religion. In the first call to fitness you work out. In the second you log all your activities, post them to your friend group, and gain positive social reinforcement. In its own way this appeals to the entrepreneurial personality — In the gym, I found a world where I would be rewarded for doing 3x the amount of work. And it was liberating. I’d found, in the gym, a meritocracy. Where labor had visible, tangible results. Collective Solution: Fitness Culture → Fix the CultureBut there’s one more step. Once you get in the loop of thinking about health daily, both working out and tracking it, you start asking questions. - If you exercise to stave off osteoporosis, why not reverse it?
- If you exercise to look better, why not
[Korea-style cosmetic surger](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/pdf/10.1177/2059436418816649)y? - If you exercise to gain muscle, why not gain more?
The conventional wisdom is that side effects must exist, that there is no free lunch. But somehow we mastered electricity without electrocuting ourselves all the time. Somehow we routinely put planes in the air without constant crash landings. The mythical Yes, Lance Armstrong should not have won the Tour De France, but his chemists were candidates for the Nobel Prize. Whatever they pumped into that man took him from a Again, as with the discourse around Task: Earn $10 in BTCSubmit an inspiring healthie with a proof-of-workoutWe want to build a community that’s into not just exercise, but body transformation; not just into fitness tracking but transhumanism. Towards that end, we're trying an experiment where we pay you a small amount of money to upload inspiring "healthies", which are analogous to selfies but include a proof-of-workout of some kind. They can be the obvious gym photos on Instagram, or they can be more privacy-preserving shots of a treadmill screen or Fitbit dashboard. And you don't need to be in good shape right now; you can be 50 pounds overweight or in the best shape of your life, or somewhere in the middle. But we want to see whether people are interested in posting progress pics for prizes. We’ll give $10 prizes to the best 100 and feature them in a collage. |
|||||
|