---
subject: "BRIEFLY NOTED: Summer Reading"
from: "\"Mr. and Mrs. Psmith’s Bookshelf\" <thepsmiths@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-10-06 13:04:23
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Psmith", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_3517400622088263897", "UNREAD"]
---
My output this summer was small measured in number of posts, but large measured in number of words. Most of it went into two monster book reviews, each a story of war, government, and complicated personalities: [The Qualified Sales Leader: Proven Lessons From a Five-Time CRO](https://substack.com/redirect/d911adca-dfc2-4e72-913b-773f2174effc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), John McMahon (Self-published, 2021).
It’s interesting to consider which professions obsess over “lineages.” For instance an academic philosopher and a Brazilian Ju-Jitsu fighter may not have much in common, but they can both tell you not just who their teacher/mentor was, but who that guy’s teacher/mentor was, and so on, sometimes going back centuries.¹ This is not true in most fields, but you may be surprised to learn that it is true in You may never have heard of John McMahon, but he’s one of the most influential people alive today (there are many such people, because the world is fractally interesting). American economic growth is increasingly dominated by a handful of companies that sell software subscriptions at eye-watering margins to other large companies, and most such companies are run by John McMahon’s disciples. All enterprise software sellers today speak a common vocabulary, and that vocabulary was invented by John McMahon. Enterprise software sellers, like all professions, have weird feuds and religious disputes about what exactly the letters in various acronyms should stand for, but the acronyms were invented by John McMahon. The rival factions and schools in enterprise software sales mostly argue about the correct way to interpret John McMahon’s thought, because he is the great teacher and systematizer who laid down the laws of their world. The reason certain fields care about lineages is that they are dominated by Selling software (really, selling anything) is another such activity. And while John McMahon is the guy who has done the most to change it from an art into a science, he is acutely aware that nothing he writes down in a book can help you unless you already understand the thing that he is trying to say. So like all good religious teachers, he speaks mostly in koans and riddles and parables. It worked for the Zen masters, it worked for Nietzsche,
Further enhancing the book’s surreal and dreamlike qualities are the fact that it is entirely written in the first person, and includes countless seemingly irrelevant asides like: “I knocked back my styrofoam cup of stale Acela coffee and slapped Andy on the shoulder.” John McMahon is constantly invading the personal space of these imaginary people — poking them in the chest, or clapping them on the shoulders or pointing at them and saying: “Exactly.” His capitalization choices are bewildering, until the realization dawns that he is capitalizing terms that he, John McMahon, has coined. Here is a sample of the prose:
John McMahon is expounding a technique, a process, a science of selling that starts with the discovery of a concrete pain that the prospect is experiencing and ends with a signed deal. Each of the steps is simple and obvious, but that’s his whole point. Fields dominated by process knowledge tend to be fields that take five minutes to learn and a lifetime to master. He repeats over and over again that there is no magic shortcut, there is no golden key, there is only perfection of the basic techniques, perfection won through endless practice. His bumbling imaginary people use his vocabulary and follow his sales methodology, but they do it wrong, they know the words but they fail to grasp their true meaning. Some of them eventually are enlightened, at which point John McMahon points his finger at them and says: “Exactly.” He doesn’t just talk about sales. There are some very good reflections on leadership in a chapter titled “Caring is competence.” John McMahon’s lip curls in disgust as he describes a company that tries to show that it cares for its employees by having group hugs. No, he says, you show that you care for people by making them great and by making yourself great and by leading them to victory. Read this, and marvel at how similar it is to
I read this book right after Jane and I read “Exactly.” [p-adic Numbers: An Introduction](https://substack.com/redirect/362388e8-1646-42c7-86b7-5f304fb228fb?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), Fernando Q. Gouvêa (Springer, 1997).
The p-adic numbers are strange beasts, and the easiest way I can think of explaining them is sort of roundabout. Let’s take a normal, finite number: could be an integer, a fraction, a non-repeating decimal, whatever. What is its size? How do we define its “bigness”? No, don’t look at me like that, it isn’t a trick question. We generally think of its size as just being the number itself. Like the number 3 is “3 big.” Unless, y’know, it’s negative. In that case, it intuitively feels, at least to me, like a number is “bigger” if it’s more negative. So we can define its bigness as how negative it is, and declare that -5.67 is “5.67 big.” Now if you remember grade school, the phrase “absolute value” might be popping into your head. You may even recall your 7th grade teacher defining the absolute value as “distance from zero,” which is a nice geometric way to think about it, and even nicer since it still works when you move to the complex plane. Is that the only way to define the bigness of a number? Mathematicians love questions like that. Take a familiar concept, relax one of its assumptions, and then torture it until it squeals. You may end up discovering the true essence of your friendly old concept, or you may discover a new plane of reality populated by strange beings. So is it possible to have an alternative notion of size? To answer that, we have to answer a stranger question: “What even is a size?” It would take me too long to explain why this is the answer, but generally mathematicians say something counts as a size if it meets three rules: (1) The size of the number 0 is 0, and no other number has size 0. (2) If you multiply two numbers together, the size of their product is the product of their sizes. (3) If you add them together, the size of their sum is less than or equal to the sum of their sizes. Take a moment to think about how the familiar old absolute value follows these rules. Make sure you toss in some weird examples, like zeroes and negative numbers. That’s the only way to stress test a definition! It works? Great, that’s comforting. But is there any other concept of size that would work? Here’s a dumb one: we could declare that the size of 0 is 0, and that the size of every other number is 1. Check it against our three rules, it totally works. But it’s boring. Here’s a zanier one: pick a prime number, p. Now declare by fiat that the “size” of a number is the highest power of p that cleanly divides that number. So for example if p were 3, then the “size” of 18 is 2, because 18 is divisible by 9, which is 3 squared, but it is not divisible by 27, which is 3 cubed. This doesn’t quite follow our three rules, because for instance the size of a product is the sum of the sizes (just because of how exponents work). But we can paper over that by throwing some logarithms into our definition in various places. We can also extend this to fractions in a sensible way, and the result is a new definition of “size,” or rather an infinite array of such definitions, one for each prime. It turns out that when it comes to the familiar numbers these are the only other possible ways to define “size” besides the usual one and the dumb one. So far so good? Once you have a notion of “size,” you can move on to the idea of “distance.” Just define the “distance” between two numbers as the “size” of their difference.² That totally works with the size you know and love, but when you pull out one of these other sizes, things get pretty weird. In our wacky new world, numbers are closer together if they are separated by higher powers of p, so 1 and 10 are closer than 1 and 4. If we now Basically, you get the p-adics by taking this vast tree, and “filling in” all the gaps where the irrational numbers would have been. We can go much, much further. But at this point, my powers of visualization fail me, and I have to start scratching this out on paper with symbols, shuffling them around in accordance with truth-preserving logical rules like some peon. My nose is buried in the symbols, and I am clinging to them like Gouvêa is not helping this feeling, because he has written this book in exactly the spirit with which I wish I could read it. He’s breezy and informal, like your cool uncle. “Let’s not get hung up on technicalities, maaaaaan, just relax and ponder the sublimely infinite forest of numbers.” He does the thing I love where he introduces the subject Is this what it was always like for I’m not even mad, I’m just sad. G.H. Hardy has a [Can We Trust the Gospels?](https://substack.com/redirect/edbc4950-f486-4a30-9204-64213223777b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), Peter Williams (Crossway, 2018).
The Haskell programming language has the inspiring motto, A philosophy professor friend of mine once told me how his undergraduates got “one-shotted by Neoplatonism.” He had an introductory course full of freshmen, and decided to see what would happen if he tried to convince them that Plotinus and Iamblichus were right about everything. To his shock, they all totally caved, and whatever their backgrounds by the end of it they were firm believers in the Emanations. His theory about this was simple: they were an immunologically naive population. Neoplatonism was one of the most powerful memes around for centuries and centuries, and had duked it out with countless other philosophies. But by the time his students came around, it had been dead for millennia. So the ideologies they were raised with did not provide them with antibodies against Neoplatonist arguments, and it swept through them like smallpox through the Indians. I think something like this explains the strange revival of Christianity in some of the elite corners of the Anglosphere. The waves of disenchantment that started in the 18th century (or, if you want to be really based, in the 15th century) had finally swamped society to the point that many of us were raised in almost total ignorance of Christian arguments. So when we encountered those arguments for the first time, they felt exciting, fresh, exotic even. Chesterton once said that in order to really feel the power of Christianity, we have to step outside ourselves and For those of us raised with no religion or close to it, there’s a lot of remedial work to be done after we convert. When you’re raised in a miasma of secularist assumptions about the universe, some of them stick around subconsciously even after you take the plunge. For me, one of these was Biblical source criticism. If you were raised in the modern West, and haven’t every thought much about the topic, you probably have a background belief that the Gospels are not reliable historical sources and were assembled centuries after the life of Christ by pious scribes far removed from the events they describe. You believe this because in the 19th century there was a lot of very low-quality scholarship by people with an axe to grind, and people haven’t yet gotten the memo that it was all incorrect. Fortunately, Peter Williams is here to solve your problem. Like the Gospels themselves, Williams’ book is simple, short, and direct. It makes its case in plain and unadorned language. He is not here to bowl you over with rhetoric, but to make the reality so obvious that even a child could recognize it. Take the issue of geography: the ancient Mediterranean was not full of atlases or travel guides, and yet the Gospels teem with geographic detail. They name villages, and lakes, and particular roads, and include travel directions and durations in their account — and these details are all, invariably, correct. Sometimes the places they describe were obliterated just a few decades later, but have been rediscovered by archeological investigation, which causes a real problem for the theory that somebody wrote them long after the fact. What if they were written much later based on stories that had been circulating for a while? This is a favorite move of those who want to deny the divinity of Christ — just say that he was a great teacher, and the stories about him got more and more exaggerated over time until they were finally written down in their current form sometime after Constantine made it the state religion. But are we really to believe that the core point of the stories got totally corrupted in transmission, while all these hundreds and thousands of irrelevant geographic details made it through unscathed? That’s not how it usually works! Moreover, Christianity spread outlandishly quickly in the early centuries, across vast distances without modern telecommunications, and with no central authority trying to keep it all consistent. But it did stay consistent — the stories were the same in Spain and in Egypt, and in Southern India, and in Arabia. Consistent down to the minor geographic details of a place that none of the hearers had ever been. This historical reality only makes sense if the things that were spreading were not stories, but texts. This is the part where the avid reader of the New Yorker gets a very superior smirk and says, “Ahhh…but which Gospels?” Yes, a little knowledge is a dangerous thing, and Elaine Pagels has a lot to answer for. It’s true that there are apocryphal gospels, attributed to St. Thomas, or to St. Phillip (Dan Brown really likes that one), or even to Judas. But it is also true that from the earliest centuries of recorded Christian scholarship, nobody took these very seriously as eyewitness accounts and… oh, would you look at that! They don’t contain any geographic details. The “Gospel of Thomas” mentions Judaea once and literally no other locations. The “Gospel of Judas” literally mentions zero place names. The “Gospel of Phillip” mentions Jerusalem, Nazareth, and the river Jordan, and that’s it. It’s almost like these fake gospels are actually the thing that people accuse the real ones of being: texts written centuries after the fact by people with no real familiarity with the events that happened. The geographic details are just one tiny example of Williams’ method. The man is
That’s part of an extended discussion of the word “hosanna,” which is a very old and common Hebrew word, but which appears in the Gospels with an unusual spelling that was only commonplace during — you guessed it! — the first century A.D. The book is full of nuggets like this, none of them a slamdunk case in itself, but all of them adding up to a preponderance of evidence pointing in one direction. And by far my favorite of them is the names. Let’s suppose that the Gospels really are a historical account of real people and events, and not some later invention. Well the Gospels are full of named individuals, so we should expect the statistical distribution of their names to match that of the society from which they were taken. Sure enough, the fit is very good: if you go and tabulate the names found in first century Judaean ossuaries, the most popular ones by far are Simon and Joseph, and there are 8 distinct Simons and 6 different Josephs mentioned in the New Testament. The most popular female name at the time was Miriam (Mary). None of this is something that somebody making up a story centuries later would have known, and once again we find that the various apocryphal and gnostic gospels are full of weird names and names that were popular in other times and places. Because you see, the thing about names is they wax and wane in popularity very fast! The most popular names in first century Judaea were not the most popular names in third century Judaea. They weren’t even the most popular names in first century Alexandria! Most of the wealthy and assimilated Jews of the later Roman Empire, the ones that somebody trying to fake the Gospels would have known, were Alexandrine. But the name distribution in the New Testament fits the name rankings of cosmopolitan Alexandria very poorly (common Jewish names in Alexandria included Sabbatius and Dositheus), and that of backward and isolated Palestine very well. You can push the onomastics angle even further. Imagine that you have ten friends named Simon and one friend named Thaddeus. When you’re writing to somebody about Thaddeus, you might just call him Thaddeus, and when you’re writing about one of the Simons, you’d include extra information to disambiguate him. Every bit of the Gospels, down to the random side conversations, fits this principle perfectly. Here’s the list of disciples given in Matthew’s Gospel, with a number in brackets after each one designating the rank of that name among Palestinian Jews, and the disambiguating phrases in bold:
Note how the common names (Simon, James, Matthew, Judas) are disambiguated in some fashion, while the unusual names (Andrew, Philip, Bartholomew, Thomas) are not, presumably because people knew who they were talking about. Or as Williams puts it, “not only are the names authentically Palestinian, but the disambiguation patterns are such as would be necessary in Palestine, but not elsewhere.” The crazier thing is that this pattern also happens in speech, that is in quoted statements or recorded conversations within the Gospels. It seems unlikely that somebody making up those conversations centuries later would take care to have their characters specifically disambiguate the names that were most common back then, and not the others. There’s a lot more in this book besides names and places. I especially enjoyed the section on “undesigned coincidences,” where a story appearing in only one of the Gospels subtly or indirectly explains an occurrence mentioned in a different one. But perhaps we should turn to arguments against the historicity of the Gospels. What is the strongest argument that they must have been written much later? As far as I can tell, there’s only one: Jesus clearly prophecies the destruction of the Second Temple and the accompanying sack of Jerusalem, and those events happened in 70 A.D. In other words, if you start from the assumption that the Lord could not have known of future events then you are stuck with a timeline that strains credulity in every other way. There are none so blind as those who will not see. 1 For academics there’s a 2 This isn’t the only way to define a distance (which mathematicians call a metric). If we repeat our trick and boil down the concept of “distance” to its barest fundamentals, we can find all kinds of other ways to measure it. Like the You're currently a free subscriber to |