---
subject: "AI #81: Alpha Proteo"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-09-12 12:48:10
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Following up on Alpha Fold, DeepMind has moved on to Alpha Proteo. We also got a rather simple prompt that can create a remarkably not-bad superforecaster for at least some classes of medium term events. We did not get a new best open model, because that turned out to be a scam. And we don’t have Apple Intelligence, because it isn’t ready for prime time. We also got only one very brief mention of AI in the debate I felt compelled to watch. What about all the apps out there, that we haven’t even tried? It’s always weird to get lists of ‘top 50 AI websites and apps’ and notice you haven’t even heard of most of them. Table of ContentsIntroduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. So many apps, so little time. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. We still don’t use them much. Predictions are Hard Especially About the Future. Can AI superforecast? Early Apple Intelligence. It is still early. There are some… issues to improve on. On Reflection It’s a Scam. Claims of new best open model get put to the test, fail. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. Bots listen to bot music that they bought. They Took Our Jobs. Replit agents build apps quick. Some are very impressed. The Time 100 People in AI. Some good picks. Some not so good picks. The Art of the Jailbreak. Circuit breakers seem to be good versus one-shots. Get Involved. Presidential innovation fellows, Oxford philosophy workshop. Alpha Proteo. DeepMind once again advances its protein-related capabilities. Introducing. Google to offer AI podcasts on demand about papers and such. In Other AI News. OpenAI raising at $150b, Nvidia denies it got a subpoena. Quiet Speculations. How big a deal will multimodal be? Procedural games? The Quest for Sane Regulations. Various new support for SB 1047. The Week in Audio. Good news, the debate is over, there might not be another. Rhetorical Innovation. You don’t have to do this. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. Do you have a plan? People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone. How much ruin to risk? Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Moving faster. Six Boats and a Helicopter. The one with the discord cult worshiping MetaAI. The Lighter Side. Hey, baby, hey baby, hey.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
I worry it will be that second one. The problem is demand side, not supply side.
One way to interpret
ChatGPT is #1 on both, after that the lists are very different, and I am unfamiliar with the majority of both. There’s a huge long tail out there. I suspect some bugs in the algorithm (Microsoft Edge as #2 on Mobile?) but probably most of these are simply things I haven’t thought about at all. Mostly for good reason, occasionally not. Mobile users have little interest in universal chatbots. Perplexity is at #50, Claude has an app but did not even make the list. If I have time I’m going to try and do some investigations. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
In practice I’m somewhat under 10 minutes per day, but they are a very helpful 10 minutes.
Predictions are Hard Especially About the Future
When you look at the reasoning the AI is using to make the forecasts, it… does not seem like it should result in a superhuman level of prediction. This is not what peak performance looks like. To the extent that it is indeed putting up ‘pretty good’ performance, I would say that is because it is actually ‘doing the work’ to gather basic information before making predictions and avoiding various dumb pitfalls, rather than it actually doing something super impressive. But of course, that is sufficient exactly because humans often don’t get the job done, including humans on sites like Metaculus (or Manifold, or even Polymarket). Robin Hanson actively said he’d bet against this result replicating.
I think the usual meaning when people say this is close to Pareto, although not as strict. It doesn’t have to be better in every sense, but it does have to be clearly superior ignoring cost considerations, and including handling edge cases and not looking like an idiot, rather than only being superior on some average. There were also process objections, including from He does note that for near-term predictions like Polymarket markets the system does relatively worse. That makes logical sense. As with all things AI, you have to use it where it is strong. Early Apple IntelligenceApple Intelligence is, according to Geoffrey Fowler of WaPo who has beta access, Tyler Cowen says these are the kinds of problems that should be solved within a year. The key question is whether he is right about that. Are these fixable bugs in a beta system, or are they fundamental problems that will be hard to solve? What will happen when the problems become anti-inductive, with those composing emails and notifications pre-testing for how Apple Intelligence will react? It’s going to be weird.
Indeed, if you watch the Apple announcement,
My very early report from my Pixel 9 is that there are some cool new features around the edges, but it’s hard to tell how much integration is available or how good the core features are until things come up organically. I do know that Gemini does not have access to settings. I do know that even something as small as integrated universal automatic transcription is a potential big practical deal.
On Reflection It’s a Scam
Eliezer asks the good question, if Llama 3.1 fine tunes are so awesome, It all sounds too good to be true. Which means it probably is, and we knew that before we got the confirmation.
As I always say, wait for the real human users to report back, give it a little time. Also, yes, look for the clear explanations and other costly signals that something is real. There have been some rather bold things that have happened in AI, and there will be more of them, but when they do happen for real the evidence tends to very quickly be unmistakable.
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
As with the deepfakes and misinformation, is the problem primarily demand side? Perhaps, but the move to zero marginal cost, including for deployment, is a huge deal. And the forces that insist humans generate the human slop are not about to go away. The better hope, if I had to choose one, is that AI can be used to filter out the slop, and allow us to identify the good stuff. They Took Our Jobs
Masad reported it doing all the things, games, resumes, interview problems, etc. Is this the real deal? Some sources strongly say yes.
Definitely this is near the top of my ‘tempted to try it out’ list now, if I find the time.
Well, actually, pretty much everyone doesn’t get to v.0.0.1. Yes, then a lot of people don’t get to v.0.0.2, but from what I see the real biggest barrier is 0.0.1, and to think otherwise is to forget what an outlier it is to get that far. However, with experiences like Rohit’s the balance shifts. He very clearly now can get to 0.0.1, and the question becomes what happens with the move to 0.0.2 and beyond.
I would emphasize the role of busywork, of assignments being boring and stupid. It’s true that people dislike mental effort, but they hate pointless effort a lot more. He points out that copying off the internet was already destroying homework before AI. In practice, if the AI does your homework, it is impossible to detect, except via ‘you obviously can’t do the work’ or ‘you failed the test.’ It’s odd how we think students, even at good schools, are dumb:
They are quite obviously aware of why homework exists in the first place. They simply don’t care. Not enough. The Time 100 People in AI
How good is the list? How good are the descriptions? If we assume each section is in rank order, shall we say I have questions, such as Sasha Luccioni (head of AI & Climate for Hugging Face?!) over Sam Altman. There are many good picks, and other… questionable picks. I’d say half good picks, the most obvious people are there and the slam dunks are mostly but not entirely there. Common places they reached for content include creatives and cultural influencers, medical applications and ‘ethical’ concerns. Counting, I’d say that there are (if you essentially buy that the person is the locally correct person to pick if you’re picking someone, no I will not answer on who is who, and I had a very strict limit to how long I thought about each pick):
(If I’d been picked, I’d probably consider myself a reach.)
Yudkowsky, Brockman, Andreessen and Musk seem like very hard names to miss. I’d also add the trio of Yann LeCun, Geoffrey Hinton and Fei-Fei Li. Dan Hendrycks and Paul Christiano are missing. On the policy and government front, I know it’s not what the list is trying to do, but what about Joe Biden, Kamala Harris, Donald Trump or JD Vance? Or for that matter Xi Jinping or other leaders? I also question their pick of US Senator, even if you only get one. And a lot is hinging right now on Gavin Newsom. There are various others I would pick as well, but they’re not fully obvious. Even if you give the list its due and understand the need for diversity and exclude world leaders are ‘not the point,’ I think that we can absolutely mock them for missing Yudkowsky, LeCun, Andreessen and Musk, so that’s at best 14/18 very good picks. That would be reasonable if they only got 20 picks. With 100 it’s embarrassing. The Art of the JailbreakWelcome to
Get Involved
Alpha ProteoIntroducing
These results certainly look impressive, and DeepMind is highly credible in this area. This continues DeepMind along the path of doing things in biology that we used to be told was an example of what even ASIs would be unable to do, and everyone forgetting those older predictions when much dumber AIs went ahead and did it.
The key point Eliezer is trying to make is that, while intelligence is weird and will advance relatively far in different places in unpredictable ways, at some point none of that matters. There is a real sense in which ‘smart enough to figure the remaining things out’ is a universal threshold, in both AIs and humans. A sufficiently generally smart human, or a sufficiently capable AI, can and will figure out pretty much anything, up to some level of general difficulty relative to time available, if they put their mind to doing that. When people say ‘ASI couldn’t do [X]’ they are either making a physics claim about [X] not being possible, or they are wrong. There is no third option. Instead, people make claims like ‘ASI won’t be able to do [X]’ and then pre-AGI models are very much sufficient to do [X]. Andrew Critch here confirms that this is all very much a thing.
If the invalidation is actually daily, then the dwindling population to worry about, shall we say, would soon likely not be scientists, mathematicians or those with jobs. Rest of the thread is Critch once again attempting to warn about his view that AI-AI interactions between competing systems being the biggest future danger, putting loss of control above 80% even though he thinks we will figure out how to understand and control AIs (I hope he’s right that we will figure that one out, but I don’t think we have any reason to be remotely confident there). I think very right that this is a major issue, I try to explain it too.
The same goes not only for ‘can’t’ do [X] but even more so for ‘will never’ do [X], especially when it’s ‘even an ASI (superintelligence) could never’ do [X], whether or not humans are already doing it. Introducing
In Other AI News
A very good point:
Lead on the OpenAI ‘Her’ project ( Credit where credit is due: Quiet Speculations
This week’s AI in games headline:
To which I say yes, in 25 years I very much expect AI to be able to do this, but that is because in 25 years I expect AI to be able to do pretty much anything, we won’t be worried about whether it makes customized games. Also it is not as hard as it looks to move the next battle royale to a pirate ship, you could almost get that level of customization now, and certainly within 5 years even in AI-fizzle world. The thing continues to be, why would you want to? Is that desire to have customized details on demand more important than sharing an intentional experience? Would it still feel rewarding? How will we get around the problem where procedurally generated stuff so often feels generic exactly because it is generic? Although of course, with sufficiently capable AI none of the restrictions matter, and the barrier to the ultimate gaming experience is remaining alive to play it.
Roon makes an excellent point, but why wouldn’t it apply to Sam Altman, or Marc Andreessen, or anyone else talking about ‘beating China’ in AI? Indeed, didn’t Altman write an editorial that was transparently doing exactly the ‘get trillions in government contracts’ play? The Quest for Sane Regulations
Trump’s position on AI seems loosely held,
Hard to say. To the extent DC is ‘awake’ they do not yet seem situationally aware.
The Week in Audio
There was a presidential debate. The term ‘AI’ appeared once, in the form of Kamala Harris talking about the need to ensure American leadership in ‘AI and quantum computing,’ which tells you how seriously they both took the whole thing.
If that keeps up, and the God is indeed born, one might ask: What future generations? Rhetorical Innovation
A serious problem with no great solutions:
Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is DifficultPeople Are Worried About AI Killing EveryoneYes, this remains a good question, but the wrong central question,
Taleb is not a PauseAI hardliner (as far as I know), because he does not understand or ‘believe in’ AI and especially AGI sufficiently to notice the risk and treat it as real. If he did notice the risk and treat it as real, as something he can imagine happening, then probably yes. Indeed, it is a potential bellwether event when Taleb does so notice. For now, his focus lies in various elsewheres. The right question is, how do we get the best possible p(heaven), and the lowest possible p(doom), over time? If we did face a ‘go now or permanently don’t go’ situation, then Roon is asking the right question, also the question of background other p(doom) (and to what extent ordinary aging and other passage of time counts as doom anyway) becomes vital. If we indeed had only two choices, permanent pause (e.g. let’s say we can modify local spacetime into a different Vinge-style Zone of Thought where AI is impossible) versus going ahead in some fixed way with a fixed chance of doom or heaven, what would the tradeoff be? How good is one versus how bad is the other versus baseline? I think a wide range of answers are reasonable here. A lot depends on how you are given that choice, and what are your alternatives. Different framings yield very different results. The actual better question is, what path through causal space maximizes the tradeoff of the two chances. Does slowing down via a particular method, or investing in a certain aspect of the problem, make us more likely to succeed? Does it mean that if we are going to fail and create doom, we might instead not do that, and at least stay in mid world for a while, until we can figure out something better? And so on.
Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing EveryoneDon’t Panic,
Your ‘we are in the business of strapping rockets to dumpsters in the hopes of then learning how to instead launch nice satellites’ shirt is raising questions supposedly answered by the shirt, and suggesting very different answers, and also I want that shirt. Do not say that you were not warned. Six Boats and a Helicopter
The Lighter Side
LLMs really are weird, you know?
You're currently a free subscriber to |