---
subject: "There is no such thing as a particle!"
from: "Samir Varma from Samir Varma <samirvarma@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-04-07 14:03:26
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Samir Varma", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2890205615693839461", "UNREAD"]
---
Last week, I wrote for y’all that quantum mechanics is nowhere near as bewildering and mysterious as people claim. Now this week, I am going to extend my curmudgeonness. There is no such thing as a particle! Really! There are no electrons, protons, or neutrons. Have I lost my mind? Who is this nutcase anyway? Should the University of Texas be revoking my physics PhD, which by the way, is in “particle physics”? So, have I lost my mind? Well… read on MacDuff. Look, calling these things “particles” was one of the stupidest decisions made by particle physicists (PPs). PPs are fond of whimsical names, such as “quarks.” But at least, when you hear “quark” no picture comes to mind (it’s from James Joyce: “Three quarks for muster mark”). But when you hear “particle”, you cannot help but think of some pointy tiny billiard ball like object. The thing is, it really really really (really) isn’t that. In the most fundamental sense, only one type of thing exists in the universe. A field. The universe is simply a large collection of various kinds of fields all interacting with each other. What’s a field? Think of space and time (spacetime) as a collection of points (quite possibly an infinite collection). At each point in spacetime, you assign a collection of numbers. That collection of numbers is the state of the field at that spacetime point. The entire collection of all numbers at all spacetime points is the object that actually “exists.” And what PPs do is write down rules that relate the collections of numbers, each collection representing a different field, at different points in spacetime to each other. The set of rules that govern the fields that make up our universe is called “The Standard Model of Particle Physics”. So what is a particle then? Well, what we call a “particle” is a “quantized excitation of its field.” So an electron is a quantized excitation of the electron field, a photon is a quantized excitation of the photon field, and so on. So strictly speaking, there aren’t permanent, standalone “electron lumps” or “photon lumps” buzzing around in the old mechanical sense: there are just these fields. But it is a mouthful to keep referring to “quantized excitations of a field.” And, in lots of cases, it is convenient to act as if the excitation was an actual object: a particle. In many cases that quantized lump does behave like a particle. But, as the two slit experiment (which I discussed last week) shows, many times it does not! And this causes lots of confusion. For a PP, the loose terminology is no biggie. PPs talk in terms of mathematics anyway and it’s all perfectly clear there. But it confuses everyone else. And this confusion leads to all kinds of (what I like to call) “woo woo” stuff about quantum this and quantum that. So, for the second time in 7 days, I’m telling all of you to please knock off the “woo woo” shit. Quantum Mechanics is a subset of Quantum Field Theory, and there is lots that is complicated and difficult about QM & QFT, but there is nothing mysterious about it. Its just fields all the way down! My new book, "The Science of Free Will," talks more about fields and what they mean for all kinds of phenomena: https://www.amazon.com/Science-Free-Will-Determinism-Everything/dp/1803417315?crid=4RLH9J0JISS9&dib=eyJ2IjoiMSJ9.g9TwNNPn17kuRd-QxB5Yvg.raadypALJodwlMUK1OdXP-q8WMG0swZUJ41D5OESIEM&dib_tag=se&&&sprefix=isbn+9781803417318,aps,68&sr=8-1&&&&language=en_US&ref_=as_li_ss_tl Samir Varma is free today. But if you enjoyed this post, you can tell Samir Varma that their writing is valuable by pledging a future subscription. You won't be charged unless they enable payments. |