---
subject: "Gregor MacGregor’s Paper Kingdom"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-10-29 11:02:41
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Check out this lovely 1822 map of Central America, or, as the mapmaker calls it, Mosquitia, the Mosquito Coast. It’s a lovely and relatively accurate map, showing the topography of the American isthmus. You can see the territories of the major Central American countries here: Nicaragua, Honduras, Costa Rica. But what’s this? Something called the Sea of Poyais sits near the center of the map; snaking down along the Rio Tinto and Rio Grande, almost to the Lake of Nicaragua, is the “Territory of Poyais.” These names don’t just represent an old naming convention or a bygone colonial claim. Poyais didn’t exist, but a Scottish conman briefly convinced the world that it did. His scheme killed more than a hundred people and helped to bring about an economic crisis. The map above represents one of the most audacious fraud schemes in history. The conman in question was named, amusingly, Gregor MacGregor. He came from a prominent clan in Scotland — Rob Roy was a relative — that had been in and out of favor with the British crown over the years. By the time he was born, the MacGregors were back in the good graces of the monarchy, and Gregor followed his grandfather into service in the British Army at the age of 16, in 1803. The young man soon found himself in the middle of the Napoleonic Wars. He quickly moved up the military ranks, marrying the daughter of an admiral and purchasing himself the rank of captain. But MacGregor wasn’t a great soldier or leader. He developed a reputation for being a pretentious jerk who fixated on rank and the details of military dress. He left the army in 1810 after a petty dispute with a commanding officer. After the war, he All this happened before he was 23 years old. What would this strange and ambitious young man do next? He seemed dissatisfied with running his family’s estate in Scotland for the rest of his life, and an idea started to take hold in him after he ran into the independence leader General Francisco de Miranda, who made a splash with a visit to England just after establishing an independent Republic of Venezuela. South America seemed like the land of opportunity; MacGregor must have felt that he could get in on the ground floor of an exciting new venture. He sold his Scottish land and traveled to Caracas to work directly for Miranda. Though Miranda soon lost his position and was branded a traitor by his fellow revolutionaries, MacGregor found success in the Americas. He fought on behalf of several newly independent countries, eventually establishing himself as a general under Simon Bolivar, the eventual winner of the wars of independence against Spain. He took part in several celebrated battles, making sure to embellish his role in them every time he told the story. He married a legendary beauty named Josefa, who just happened to be Bolivar’s cousin. But MacGregor wanted to run his own operation. He focused on Spanish Florida, where he hoped that taking control of a useful port might give him a base of operations. He recruited soldiers and “investors” in South Carolina and Georgia, luring them with the promise of land in his new “republic.” MacGregor’s force attacked Amelia Island in northeast Florida, which was the largest settlement in the area. He bluffed the local commander into surrendering, but the venture soon fell apart. Many of his prospective soldiers were detained in the United States, and he was forced to pay his troops in worthless “Amelia dollars.” Spanish reinforcements soon chased him away, but MacGregor was able to convince people that he had defeated the Spanish, sold the island, and left voluntarily. MacGregor’s career continued on like this, marked by bombast, mercenary schemes, and incompetence. Eventually, Simon Bolivar, now the most powerful man in South America, tired of him and declared him a traitor. By 1820, he was back in Great Britain, having failed to conquer a kingdom in the Americas. While in Britain, MacGregor had a revelation: while leading an army and conquering land is difficult, convincing people that you have done so is much easier. MacGregor eventually left Britain under a cloud of suspicion and made his way to the Mosquito Coast, an area that was technically under British control, but only in name. There, he met with King George Frederick Augustus, the leader of the Miskitos, a tribe of people who had descended from Native Americans and shipwrecked slaves. He emerged from the meeting with the king with a deed to thousands of square miles in the region. How did MacGregor achieve this? Nobody really knows. Many later Whatever the reality, MacGregor could now paint himself as the rightful leader of a new country. He declared himself the Cazique (Prince) and called his new nation Poyais. He and Josefa traveled back to Europe and presented themselves as the rulers of Poyais. They began looking for investors in a new nation, showing potential investors the constitution, military uniforms, and banking documents for a place where none of those things existed. Lots of European investors were putting their money into bonds from the new American countries; MacGregor put Poyais’ bonds on the market next to those from Chile and Mexico. He commissioned The most popular
The book’s introduction promised that its author had
This was, of course, not true. The descriptions of Poyais were false. The soil was not ideal for tobacco plantations, nor was the climate especially good for the health of Europeans. The rivers were not rich with gold, nor were the plains of the area natural meadows for herds of cows. In addition to books, MacGregor MacGregor offered land certificates in Poyais at relatively cheap prices. You could buy an acre for a day’s middle-class salary, but at those prices, you’d be a fool to buy just one acre. But land certificates were just the beginning. MacGregor offered bonds on the London Stock Exchange. Investors could loan money to the nonexistent Poyaisian government at 6% interest — a higher But MacGregor’s scheme didn’t just risk people’s money; it risked their lives. He recruited potential colonists to move to Central America and build the new nation. MacGregor pitched his scheme to Scottish people, banking on his roots there and the Scots’ knowledge that they were losing out in the global race for colonies. He recruited hundreds of settlers to make the journey into the unknown, enrolling some of them in the Poyaisian Army. All of them gave “His Highness Gregor” British pounds in exchange for “Poyasian Dollars.” What was MacGregor thinking? Was he delusional, believing that he could somehow build a society in Central America? Was he the “dog that caught the car,” forced to play out a scheme once he’d gotten himself in too deep? Was he not thinking at all? It’s unclear, but his first settlers arrived in the Americas to find out that they’d been had. They were dropped off not at the bustling port they’d been led to believe existed, but in a remote area without resources. They quickly fell out with one another, burned through their provisions. A second ship arrived, depositing another group of disappointed colonists, a few months later. After about six months, when a third ship showed up and rescued the settlers, malnutrition, tropical diseases, and suicide had taken their toll. Only about Meanwhile, the market for MacGregor’s bonds and land certificates cratered, part of a larger panic around assets in the Americas. They’d lost most of their value even before the colony was exposed as a scam. Once the word got out that Poyais did not exist, the market completely collapsed. MacGregor’s fraudulent scheme helped to contribute to the British Panic of 1825, in which dozens of banks failed. Economists Stunningly, after all this, Gregor MacGregor tried to run his con a second time. He went to France, hoping that people there hadn’t yet heard that he was a crook. He tried to raise a new bond and signed up a few dozen potential colonists before the French government began to investigate him. Ever slippery, Gregor MacGregor avoided the worst consequences of his scheme. He managed to convince the French courts that his associates, not he, were responsible for the fraud. He was acquitted and, remarkably, tried to sell even more land certificates in Poyais (many of these were for land that the “King” of the Moskito people was also selling). After trying the same con over and over again for almost a decade, MacGregor finally left Scotland for Venezuela, where he lived for another seven years off his Venezuelan army pension. When he died at age 58, the Venezuelan government gave him a funeral befitting a war hero; no mention was made of the fact that he defrauded thousands and killed more than a hundred people. This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are three ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: You can share the newsletter with others: You can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading! You're currently a free subscriber to |