---
subject: "The Geosmin Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-10-15 15:34:50
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Cassandra here. On April 23, 1891, the French chemist Pierre Eugène Marcellin Berthelot and Monsieur G. Andre presented a short paper at a meeting of the French Academie des Sciences, titled “Sur l’odeur propre de la terre.” In English: “On the earth’s own smell.” They theorized that the scent of earth was related to a plant’s “essential oils,” and released into the air when displaced by rain. They were directionally correct, though the actual chemical compound and its associated processes remained undiscovered for the next eighty years. Then, in 1965, the chemists Nancy Gerber and Hubert Lechevalier, also French, isolated and named “geosmin” (meaning “earth smell”), having determined that it derived from a special genus of bacteria, Streptomyces, that live in the soil. Why is this interesting? Bacteria in the Streptomyces genus play an expansive and central role in decomposition. They break down complex organic matter, help to release nutrients into the soil, make other nutrients available for plant uptake, and produce a range of essential bioactive compounds, including antibiotics. Geosmin is just one byproduct of the life cycle of these bacteria, released simultaneously as they form spores for reproduction. Its earthy odor acts like a signal, attracting tiny soil animals like springtails, which brush against the spores, carry them on their bodies, and spread them to new places. Humans can detect geosmin at incredibly low levels—far lower than most other animals, From In that sense, geosmin doesn’t just signal “earth” to us, then, but specifically good earth. It means healthy, rich soil—teeming with life, invisible but deeply felt, threaded all the way into the oldest parts of our molecular formation. Fascinatingly, scientists also I see evidence of Streptomyces in my compost all the time, most often as I’m turning the heap. As they grow in volume and mature, they become visible as powdery gray blooms. As ever, it feels remarkable that such a simple and intuitive process as piling organic matter into a heap can produce such a wildly complex and essential property for all of life. Miracles, all around us. (CM) Invite your friends and earn rewardsIf you enjoy Why is this interesting?, share it with your friends and earn rewards when they subscribe. |