---
subject: "Thinking-Things-Through Privilege"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <the-diff@ghost.io>"
to: ""
date: 2025-04-21 14:46:48
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
In this issue: - Thinking-Things-Through Privilege—The more expensive it is to reproduce information, the better a strategy it is to instantly believe everything you read. But when information is close to free to generate and share, you need a different set of heuristics.
- Trade Negotiations—How long does it take to strike a trade deal?
- M&A—What the acquisition process looks like.
- AI and IP—Cheap signals of trustworthiness are most appealing to the least trustworthy.
- Consolidation—Waiting for the starting gun.
- Sourcing—Laggy supply chains as a competitive advantage.
This issue of The Diff is brought to you by our sponsor, Thinking-Things-Through PrivilegeLast month, the New York Times ran a fascinating story But the broader question is: how many people reviewed this and didn't check the calculation, or ask themselves what it would mean if the average age of housing stock declined nationwide. The article has an absolutely fascinating table of which locations have seen the fastest change in the median age of housing stock. It's a mix of oil and gas boomtowns (Williston, ND), extremely high-TFR religious enclaves (Monsey, NY; Lakewood, NJ), sun belt exurbs (Fort Mill, SC; Greenville, SC; Gallatin, TN), college towns (College Park, MD; Ithaca, NY; University Park, TX) and some recently-gentrified older cities (tear down an old building in Jersey City and replace it with a new high-rise and you can significantly decrease the average age of the housing stock even if population doesn't rise very much). So it really captures two phenomena: general growth, and a pattern of density, followed by urban blight, and subsequentgentrification. It also captures some noise, from very small metro areas where a single apartment building could swing the numbers, and presumably there will be a different mix if the snapshot captures a different one-decade range. All of this adds some texture to the issue, and spins off some other fun follow-up questions.^[Like: does this mean that cities with high economic growth create more consumer surplus in housing, since someone who has a preference for an old house with character or a new one with amenities can trade off between these desires while still staying within commuting distance? Does this mean that such cities have more aesthetic preference diversity? And does that mean that the city has less of a coherent identity? All fun things to consider! All of this illustrates an important, growing distinction in cultural norms: in a world with an unlimited supply of content and data, you can produce coherent-sounding prose without thinking things through. It's a useful skill in some contexts, like talking about most company mission statements and most political platforms—in both cases, there's usually some amalgamation of principle and opportunistic compromise, but cast entirely as principle. There are some subcultures that vigorously preserve the norm of treating everything as up for debate. I'm not a Some parts of capital markets and tech have this norm, too, but often in a more constrained form: there's a lot more risk-adjusted money in optimizing an existing process than in building a new one, and one part of optimization is having a nose for which projects will require high upfront effort before there's even any information on what their return will look like. It's hard to know what the optimum is: a company that never rethinks its business model will eventually die, because technology comes for every business eventually. One of the better ways to stay in reasoning-mode rather than the default is to get your ideas from text rather than video. There's something about the moving image that's incredibly persuasive to people, and that also seems to short-circuit questions like "is this real? Why am I seeing this?"[^This is getting harder as even text (or image) native platforms are becoming increasingly video-mediated. One example is Facebook, where the percentage of total time spent watching video on the platform is up from 10% in 2015 to almost 55% today.] This problem predates generative AI, and arguably the ability to cheaply create a clip of Text doesn't perfectly protect you, either, of course. There have been high-impact books about fiscal policy that Expect this problem to get much worse as thinking gets easier to outsource. You can and should use LLMs as a way to refine arguments, identify examples, etc. But getting in the habit of doing that increases the utility of having good judgment about which beliefs and outputs to question. An LLM makes you smarter when you run your own writing through it and ask for weaknesses, but it makes you dumber if you just run every argument you disagree with through the same process instead. Models have reached a level of sophistication, and their moderation has been hobbled enough that they can come up with a cogent case for or against any proposition you can think of, if that's what you ask them to do. And that means that having the habit of asking the right questions, even when it's uncomfortable, is the only hope for being right. This is especially easy to see when the parties flip positions on some issue, like trade, but keep their other positions. It's just not the case that someone sat down and thought really hard about what their views on abortion, gun control, and capital gains taxes imply about trade barriers and concluded that they'd gotten things backwards. Instead, a very successful coalition entrepreneur implicitly realized that he could mobilize older, less educated voters with a more protectionist message. Clinton was able to achieve something similar by making his party more of a college graduate-oriented coalition, and Reagan was good at uniting libertarian economic views with rising religious conservatism. On the corporate side, Google's mission is "Organize the world's information and make it universally accessible and useful." But there are some subsets of The World's Information that they are very reluctant to organize, such as information on suicide methods or data on what people look like when they aren't wearing any clothes. There are great business reasons to do this, and principled ones, too, but they don't fit into a mission statement unless it's going to be book-length plus appendices on special cases, or something terse and Orwellian like "Organize the world's information, remove all the bad kinds, and make the rest universally accessible and useful. Also, don't tell anybody that this is the real policy, lest they decide to see what secret naughty things they can find on Bing." [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/1918311f?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)For example, chauvinism raises the friction of dealing with the outgroup, but lowers it for dealing with the ingroup. And members of the ingroup are easier to reputationally punish if the dealings go badly. So there's an optimal level of bigotry that falls as a function of how effective the state is at enforcing contracts—one reason so many of the world's legal codes are descended from those of large ethnically and religiously diverse empires. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/7c939d2f?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)For the curious, I lean towards deontology over utilitarianism for roughly the same reason that rationalists, at their day jobs, import libraries and use API calls rather than constructing their own programming language and implementing everything from scratch—there are some domains that naturally abound with edge cases and paradoxical issues, and while it's incredibly gratifying to explore these, it's also important to actually get stuff done—and the doing-things process also produces information that mere theorizing won't. Solving morality is premature optimization, and finding some preexisting social structure that allows you to be, say, 85% compliant with a system that's 85% true is probably a better bet than getting to 99% compliance with something whose truth value takes a few generations to determine. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/b78c9f6d?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)Even the durable ones! There are universities, hotels, and banks that have been in almost continuous operation for centuries, but they all needed to adopt websites, electricity, and indoor plumbing, etc. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/c63605f1?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)One thing that's changed since that essay first came out is that defending the most deplorable things your side has done has become more of a default winning move in political circles. But sometimes you can tell that their heart isn't really in it or that they represent a fringe viewpoint within the side they're on. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/c14cc375?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)If higher housing costs drive a significant share of inequality, it's still a policy problem, but one that you solve at the level of a few high-rent cities rather than at the level of income tax rates, at least if you're trying to minimize deadweight loss. Demographic factors can also affect this: if people work longer, and if the value of their work compounds in the form of dense personal networks, then some of that value will be reflected in high real estate prices. But that remains a Georgist critique rather than an argument for social democracy. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/69621d95?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
A Word From Our SponsorsThe funds moving fastest in this market aren’t copy/pasting numbers—they’re clicking. Top hedge funds have shifted how they build and update models, source financials, and prepare for earnings calls. They’re using Daloopa to cut hours and days of manual work into seconds and minutes — and they’re not looking back. If you're still building and updating models from Qs and Ks by hand, you're already behind. If your team is triple-checking numbers, they’re losing precious time. And if you're not using Daloopa, your competitors are gaining that edge. Daloopa gives you 1000s of audit-ready, hard-to-get fundamental historical data to either build models or automate model updates all in one click. No more wasted time. Just faster, smarter work so you can do your job even better. The smartest teams are already in. Don’t get left behind. Start your free account now and see why everyone’s switching to Daloopa. ElsewhereTrade NegotiationsHistorically, So, these deals are hard to strike, except insofar as the deal is a return to the status quo. Even an effort to craft a deal that maximizes the perceived change while staying close to what already existed is a challenge—the original deal was already designed to be as politically popular as possible given its goals, so tweaks look bad. There's a M&AM&A deals underperform expectations notoriously enough that outlining how this happens is an entire academic subfield. One reason for this is that it's hard to forecast the future and very easy to fall prey to narrative bias. As it turns out, even the winning ones do. Meta's Disclosure: long META. AI and IPActors who licensed their likenesses to AI video companies are - At least some real actors will balk at jobs like being the spokesperson for an outright fraud, but
- Going to the trouble of producing a video does demonstrate some minimum financial investment in the outcome, which at least correlates with being on the level. As soon as the cost of some signal of trust declines, the people who exploit that the fastest are the ones least deserving of trust.
ConsolidationLast year, The Diff SourcingOne of the annoying features of a complex economy is that growth is sometimes an invisible process of some things getting slightly better and other things, having gotten better, getting gradually more expensive as companies harvest the surplus they've created. The WSJ has a fun portrait of this in the form of Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. See a sampling of current open roles below: - A Google Ventures-backed startup founded by SpaceX engineers that’s building data infrastructure and tooling for hardware companies is looking for a software engineering manager with 7+ years experience building large scale distributed systems. (LA, Hybrid)
- A multi-stage, fintech focused investment firm is looking for an investment associate to support thematic opportunity identification, diligence, and execution. Investing experience OR high-growth operating/investment banking/consulting experience and demonstrated interest in fintech required. (NYC, London)
- YC-backed company that’s turning body cam footage into complete police reports and automating other cumbersome law enforcement workflows with AI is looking for a junior backend engineer to operate in a forward deployed capacity. Entry-level ok, ability to pass an FBI background check required. (SF)
- YC-backed startup using AI to transform how companies quantify and optimize engineering productivity is hiring formidable full-stack and AI engineers. Experience with React + Typescript, Go, or Python on the ML side a plus. (SF)
- A hyper-growth startup (10x growth in 9 months) that’s turning customers’ sales and marketing data into revenue is looking for a head of deployments who is excited to work closely with customers to make the product work for them. Experience as a forward deployed engineer and leading enterprise deployments preferred. (NYC, SF)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. |
||||||||||||||||
|
|
|
||||||||||||||||
|