---
subject: "OpenAI's unique compensation model 💰, AWS's AI strategy 🤖, SpaceX's Starship upgrades 🚀"
from: "TLDR <dan@tldrnewsletter.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-06-26 10:25:17
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "TLDR", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_795315172960844453", "UNREAD"]
---
[Amazon's vision: An AI model for everything (7 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.semafor.com%2Farticle%2F06%2F23%2F2023%2Famazons-vision-an-ai-model-for-everything%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000188f73c81ed-b21d8cca-3ce6-448e-a15e-b53b2fa25c33-000000/wwlNoIPDXtX2dnEgUfggtrZOh91TEETEExDbaQR4P2A=306)
Amazon's long-term strategy is to create a single point of entry for businesses to tap into both open-source and closed-source generative AI models. Matt Wood, vice president of product for Amazon Web Services, is leading Amazon's response to the AI war. This article features an interview with Wood where he discusses how Amazon views the AI market, the company's approach to winning the AI battle between the tech giants, the future of the internet, and more. |
Science & Futuristic Technology
|
[Elon Musk outlines major upgrades before next launch of Super Heavy rocket (5 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.cbsnews.com%2Fnews%2Felon-musk-outlines-major-upgrades-before-next-launch-of-super-heavy-rocket%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000188f73c81ed-b21d8cca-3ce6-448e-a15e-b53b2fa25c33-000000/rufgLamKm7LZIHcDNf_zYtuUPZ1MOm-go4REIqyORIQ=306)
Elon Musk says that SpaceX needs another six weeks or so to finish implementing over a thousand changes to its Super Heavy/Starship rocket and launch pad before it will be ready for a second attempt to reach orbit. SpaceX will also need FAA clearance for the launch. The modifications include using hot staging for the stage separation system, redesigning the Raptor's hot gas manifold, and a stronger launch pad that will allow the rocket to take off at a higher throttle setting. The Super Heavy/Starship program has so far cost SpaceX over $2 billion and investment could approach $3 billion by the end of the year. |
[Stunning - Midjourney update wows AI artists with camera-like feature (3 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Farstechnica.com%2Finformation-technology%2F2023%2F06%2Fstunning-midjourney-update-wows-ai-artists-with-camera-like-feature%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000188f73c81ed-b21d8cca-3ce6-448e-a15e-b53b2fa25c33-000000/QaEyCHzZkKTbpUQ8reinhYTkK7H_y9zAgju-fgEmjlQ=306)
Midjourney 5.2 was released on Thursday. It includes a new zoom out feature that automatically builds larger scenes around a central synthesized image. Unlike similar features on other AI models, Midjourney's zoom out feature only works on images generated within Midjourney. The Midjourney Discord server is still the official interface for the model, but there are plans to change that. Examples of images generated with Midjourney 5.2 using the zoom out feature are available in the article. |
Programming, Design & Data Science
|
[embedchain (GitHub Repo)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fembedchain%2Fembedchain%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000188f73c81ed-b21d8cca-3ce6-448e-a15e-b53b2fa25c33-000000/vqX9aZfA4zlw03vTLh4fOTjylrpJ10DHQJqJ3GqCh44=306)
embedchain is a framework for creating large language model-powered bots over any dataset. It abstracts the entire process of loading a dataset, chunking it, creating embeddings, and then storing it in a vector database. Users can create bots by linking to media like videos, PDFs, blog posts, or websites. The project aims to make it easy for anyone to get a chatbot running over any dataset in less than a minute. |
[try (GitHub Repo)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fbinpash%2Ftry%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000188f73c81ed-b21d8cca-3ce6-448e-a15e-b53b2fa25c33-000000/Pc8rcX8cpKnBLfhut5VvMmqQAO3ZIZ3BEvyHrGSL2h8=306)
try allows users to test commands before using them on a live system. It will show the effects of a command and then prompt users to see whether they want to commit the changes made at the end of the command's execution. try is still a prototype and not a full sandbox so users should not use it to test commands that will remove everything or write zeros to a disk. |
[Has Xbox really lost the console wars? (15 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.theverge.com%2F2023%2F6%2F24%2F23772314%2Fftc-microsoft-day-two-hearing-summary-xbox-console-wars-sony-playstation-call-of-duty%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000188f73c81ed-b21d8cca-3ce6-448e-a15e-b53b2fa25c33-000000/5FZ8I_35pOyETuUU2Qgkj0Gqm8fP4jB51olnOEQtj5o=306)
Phil Spencer recently took the stand during the FTC v. Microsoft hearing to discuss Microsoft losing the console wars, competition with Sony, and Xbox's struggle to compete. Spencer's promises that Microsoft won't pull Call of Duty from PlayStation resulted in some testy exchanges with FTC's lawyer. A representative from Google also appeared at the hearing to talk about Stadia. This article takes a look at these testimonies and examines the arguments that the companies make. |
[OpenAI PPUs: How OpenAI's unique equity compensation works (10 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.levels.fyi%2Fblog%2Fopenai-compensation.html%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000188f73c81ed-b21d8cca-3ce6-448e-a15e-b53b2fa25c33-000000/aCbNken4nDnvpqKFyJy6SUqQZOqjhtn6C0PR5DCAM9k=306)
OpenAI's capped profit model means that the company will be able to generate more value than it would owe investors. Its employees receive a base salary and equity in Profit Participation Units (PPUs). This article explains how OpenAI's PPUs work, how OpenAI distributes them, and other benefits that OpenAI offers to employees. A link to a compensation benchmarking tool for employers is available near the end of the article. |
[TLDR Talent](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fdanni763618.typeform.com%2Fto%2FrSL4lOH3/2/01000188f73c81ed-b21d8cca-3ce6-448e-a15e-b53b2fa25c33-000000/JlKiY4pgbz37cfJezfYVmWY3QOmPWt3SMFfpPGSCCWo=306) is our exclusive community where we help world-class tech talent and get intros to companies of their choice, along with a number of exciting startups and tech companies curated by TLDR.
We give you full control of the process, you can specify if you’re actively searching or passively interested only if something amazing comes along. Set your preferred compensation, seniority/title/role, specific companies (or types of companies) you’d like to work for and more. [Click here to apply](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fdanni763618.typeform.com%2Fto%2FrSL4lOH3/3/01000188f73c81ed-b21d8cca-3ce6-448e-a15e-b53b2fa25c33-000000/dmQIf4Ek3pulbnAltkMIB_oEg2MGMwMrclPnCH-HaK0=306).
|
If your company is interested in reaching an audience of tech executives, decision-makers and engineers, you may want to [advertise with us](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fshare.hsforms.com%2F1OxvmrkcFS4qsxKpNXCi76wee466%3Futm_source=tldr%26utm_medium=newsletter/2/01000188f73c81ed-b21d8cca-3ce6-448e-a15e-b53b2fa25c33-000000/Ul1la-B1mPW1R9FF_bSX4zlzuVkJFqUEJ_OqSdy2MKE=306).
If you have any comments or feedback, just respond to this email!
Thanks for reading,
[Dan Ni](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2Ftldrdan/1/01000188f73c81ed-b21d8cca-3ce6-448e-a15e-b53b2fa25c33-000000/9I9rsBiBEaNX5EC2fmvkOweAoIno-6TOw3NQMo7cJMQ=306) and [Stephen Flanders](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2FSteveFlanders22/1/01000188f73c81ed-b21d8cca-3ce6-448e-a15e-b53b2fa25c33-000000/3CzEICls5p2L8RL4oRB2XCPNJ325EOXiFJkC7_MB8mM=306)
|
|
|
|