---
subject: "Monthly Roundup #16: March 2024"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-03-19 13:04:10
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
AI developments have picked up the pace. That does not mean that everything else stopped to get out of the way. The world continues.
There is also an art to avoiding power, and some key places to exercise it. Be keenly aware of when having power in a given context would ruin everything. Natural General Lack of Intelligence in Tech
Bad International News
Dopamine Culture
The illustrations here are excellent: I think it is very good advice to essentially never be on the true, de facto right side of this graph for most items. You want to be on the left as often as you can, and spend most of the rest of the time in the center. I suspect part of the issue is the conflation of old and traditional with slow, and new and modern with fast. There is a correlation, but it is incomplete. Were newspapers slow culture? In some sense yes, you sat down and focused on them, they were part of a morning ritual. But also they were kind of clickbait in print form quite a lot of the time. I would say that reading books, or in-depth blogs, constitutes much more of the long-term-better slow form of journalism here. I would say something similar about communication. Handwritten letters are slow, but that is a bug rather than a feature. Good slow communication is talking in person, or through longform or carefully writing. Which certainly can include email. Voice communication is quick in some senses, but is doing the thing that counts, I think. This is also the place where quick short bursts sometimes make sense, and you want a mix throughout. On video, I see film alone as the slow thing, TV as the fast thing, and other much shorter things as the dopamine thing. Similarly, shouldn’t music’s left be live music? Or more likely there are four levels, not every graph fits every concept. For images, there’s view on phone versus view on a computer or TV screen. Details matter. For sports, gambling very much depends on what exactly you are doing. If you are playing fantasy sports and counting stats, or betting on the next play, yeah, that’s dopamine. Whereas classic slower gambling is often if anything slower and more participatory than merely watching, rather than less. In any case, yes, we all constantly hear the calls for slower modes, slower living, unplugging periodically and all that. And we all know those calls are largely right. Then most of us keep ignoring them. Customer Service
As their scale also scales the rewards to attacks and as their responses get worse, the attacks become more frequent. That leads to more false positives, and a skepticism that any given case could be one of them. In practice, claims like Zuckerberg’s that only the biggest companies like Meta can invest the resources to do good content moderation are clearly false, because scale reliably makes content moderation worse. Environmentalists Sabotaging the EnvironmentIn case you were wondering what New York is doing to replace its nuclear power, well, Government WorkingOh. Right. That.
We could reverse this. Let’s instead charge airlines 25% on all fees and 2.5% on the fares themselves. Then there will be proper tension between ‘get listed first and look cheaper than you are’ versus ‘save money on taxes.’
If that is true, it sure seems like there are a lot of Title VII violations going on? For example, Also the government’s actions in the FAA case seem at first glance to have been rather corrupt as hell. Give out a ‘biographical test’ that eliminates 90% or more of candidates on the basis of questions highly unrelated to prospective job performance, and have favored groups get explicit instructions on what answers to give on the test to lie their way past it?
I worry that there are essentially no rating systems or other ways to verify you have found a decent lawyer (presumably because lawyers work to prevent this in various ways), and so the first question new prospective clients will ask is ‘did you pass the bar?’ because it is at least a legible question. So lawyers will effectively have to pass the bar anyway to get private clients, and those who can’t end up as public defenders and prosecutors. That doesn’t sound great.
I once again propose that we dramatically raise base pay for various government workers such as police, in exchange for getting rid of the various insane rules and loopholes they use to get far more pay than we allocate, while keeping average total pay similar. We would recruit far better, both in quality and quantity, by doing so, and elicit much better behaviors with far lower deadweight loss. Are we this obsessed with a low headline number? That thread includes this graphic, which likely requires periodic reminders:
You really can be the best if you actually read the materials and do your work. Of course, no one pays for this, and keeping it free is vital if it is going to deliver its value. So flagging this now. Once he graduates, EAs or others need to give him a full time job doing this as a public resource. Prospera forces you to choose whose laws you are subject to, and you must choose from the OECD countries. The good news is you can mix and match,
I would not go single-issue or anything but I would be strongly in favor. On this issue, Europe is obviously in the wrong and I have never heard an actual human argue otherwise. Sometimes all sides of other debates can come together.
I am no fan of the iPhone and avoid the Apple ecosystem, but this is very much destroying the core value Apple is offering. I continue to not look forward to when I finish reading the EU AI Act, which I am eventually going to have to do. On the Media
I think this is a serious mistake. I do understand that when you are hiring an all-star cast to do something explicitly prestige-level, you are doing a different thing. That’s fine. But yes, we really do love the thing that Suits is trying to do. There is a reason that what I watch when on the elliptical is Law & Order, and if I sustain that long enough to run out I’ll likely turn next to SVU. We need that reliability, that comfort, that volume, and it pays off. Not always, but sometimes. Everyone seems to reliably underestimate the value in increasing the quantity. I hate that our best people stop producing television so they can try to do movies. You’re giving me so much less content! Come back. On a related note, I am over the moon that I finally have a new late night show I can watch a recording of the next day. For many years I absolutely loved Craig Ferguson, alas he hated the job and quit. I very much enjoyed Chris Hardwick doing At Midnight, also great relaxed no-stakes comfort television that makes you think without demanding that you do so, but he quit too to do the rather stupid The Wall. And I’ve loved Taylor Tomlinson’s stand-up for a while now, including going to her So you can imagine my ‘no way, you’re kidding’ smile when I saw that the old Craig Ferguson slot was going to Taylor Tomlinson to do a show called After Midnight. Perfection. And it has delivered on its promise. Forty minutes of comedians improvising jokes and riffing off each other every night, such a great format. I presume it will only get better. This is The Way. Crime and PunishmentInteresting and also great fun, from a public defender:
Perhaps there is.
I am not saying all 1,126 arrests were justified, but surely something has gone horribly wrong with the punishments here. There is a clip of mayor Adams talking about subway crime. He repeatedly talks about ‘feeling safe,’ never talking about being safe. I do get that feeling safe is important, people who feel unsafe are unhappy and might not ride the subway, but our focus surely must be on actually being safe.
So the Governor sends the national guard in to check bags at Grand Central. Which is completely insane. The purported solution has exactly nothing to do with the cause. That is not even a way to feel safe, if you are anything like me. If anything, this is a way to make me feel actively unsafe and a reason to avoid taking the subway. I will never feel fully safe around inspection points and men with guns, for obvious reasons. Even if some might somehow feel more safe from this (why?) there is absolutely zero actual safety reason to do this, it in no way stops crime, even in theory anyone who actually did want to do crime with things in a bag could walk to the next stop and anyway this is crazy. We could use more people in uniform to make things more safe if we wanted to, but that would involve them being asked to do police work. Case of assault and being held for ransom at SFSU suspended as all charges are ‘alleged’ and ‘unfounded,’ California’s new $20 minimum wage rule Here is a rather crazy statistic:
These are all adaptees. There are still possible non-genetic factors, but this is also rather a large effect from a pool of people already in bad shape. This suggests that targeted interventions could be highly cost-effective. It also suggests that rational people would check such information and update on it, even if the government cannot and often makes such actions technically illegal.
I mean, yes, if you mess it up. Also the person did not want to die. There is that. Good News, EveryoneVery good So it is odd to see people comparing him to a very different Lex Fridman.
What is the Lex Fridman approach? Lex Fridman is there to ensure no listener gets left behind, and otherwise to let the subject talk at length. He is not there to challenge the guest or to dig deep into the technical details. When that approach works, The biggest takeaways from Patel’s story are that there are big returns to being Crazy Prepared, that you can optimize the hell out of things without worrying about hitting the Pareto frontier because there are always basic things others aren’t doing, and also big returns for asking people for help and what you want. He took a big swing, put in an extraordinary effort to take advantage, and it worked.
Except, of course, when you are ‘skeptical on full effect size’ that is not a great sign,
It goes on. I am including it because this got a lot of play, and one does not want to silently delete in such situations. The Time That is Given to Us
This is like one of those ‘help me my family is dying’ math problems. So let’s think step by step. Let’s start with sleep. Most people want about eight hours of sleep a night. 7*8 = 56. However, if your plan is to start the sleep process at 11pm and set an alarm for 7am, you are not going to get eight hours of sleep. There are a few lucky people who can fall asleep instantly without first getting too tired, and then reliably sleep through the night, and then wake up on a dime ready to go. But they are few. Realistically, if you want eight hours of sleep, you need to allocate nine hours for this process. So that’s 63 hours, and we are down to 40 to spare. What about a full-time job? Well, once again, 40 is the core baseline activity (and many people short on time work more). It is not the time it actually costs you. Even if you are not asked to work overtime or stay late, there is commute time. According to the U.S. Census, the average commute was 27.6 minutes each way in 2019. Yes, this is a choice, you can prioritize working from home or a short commute, but we cannot pretend this is free. Let’s be generous and say you can do this in three hours a week. That leaves 37. Is 18 hours a reasonable budget for exercise, grooming and food? A solid exercise program likely takes something like 5. Grooming including clothes is going to be several more. Food is something you can rush quite a lot if you want to exist on cereal, Mealsquares and Soylent and live without joy. Less extremely you can eat at your desk. So yes, I do think 18 is a realistic goal here for some, in the sense that we all make choices. But if you do that, it likely means you are not using this time as a psychic recharge or source of joy. You aren’t scoring your victory points. Another 7 hours for mandatory bullshit sounds nice. It is realistic if you keep things simple, or you are rich enough to hire a lot of help. In between, I am doubtful. Then there is everything not included here. Health problems and being sick will cost you a lot of time periodically, more so as you get older, even if things are mostly fine. Family emergencies are what they are. You can call having children ‘a choice’ but if your plan for living does not involve them it has no future, and this very much is not killing time on Twitter or Netflix. You get called into court, for jury duty or otherwise. A big one is that this plan does not charge you for transitions. The idea of ‘going every minute and there are no gaps’ is not so easy to pull off even if your brain could handle it. Lots of things get scheduled. Then you need to confidently be ready when they start, block off time, not start next thing until it finishes, and so on. How many hours does it cost to schedule a one-hour meeting? It varies, but ‘one’ is incorrect. The little things add up. And yes: You also have to stay sane, and have sources of joy, and have sources of energy, and have some time to process. You can say ‘time is not the issue here’ and ‘your real issue is energy or courage or gumption or money’ but time is one of the costs of maintaining such resources, so there is non-zero fungibility going on here. One does not (with notably rare exceptions) simply have maximum gumption and courage and energy all the time, and this does not mean that you aren’t running out of time. And you need to maintain various other relationships in your life, various social considerations and so on. And you need to be doing a bunch of information intake and exploration and playing around without strict particular goals you are maximizing. These things are not as optional as you might think. Also you need slack, on all these levels. If you are allocating every minute of the day, every day, that is generally not something I would advise. You certainly can spend periods of your life laser focused on one goal. I had a period where I did that. I woke up, I did work, I paused to grab two quick meals. When work involved keeping an eye on things, I would also often watch TV, which helped keep me sane. Modulo the minimum requirements on other fronts, that was pretty much it, for several years. I do not think that means that you can say to those refusing to do similarly that ‘time is not your problem.’ I am now someone who gets a lot done, in the sense that a lot of people tell me ‘I have no idea how you get all of that done.’ Simultaneously, I look at my time spent, and I notice I could be doing so much more, in theory, if I used all the hours in the day more efficiently. What is the right way to think about that? I do not know. Hotel Six Hundred
The rest is less convincing, unless you need a great view that badly to have ‘performed vacation.’ Yes, the WiFi is more reliable in expectation, and the beds are on average modestly better, but you don’t need to go this high for that, that is about avoiding the extreme low end, and reviews are a thing to help you. And as Tyler notes, they will attempt to make the $600 hotel effectively an $800 (or more) hotel in various ways. The rest is simply not so valuable, unless of course you are so rich you do not care. I think of this as ‘the $600 hotel is 1.1x better than the $300 hotel, but if you are a billionaire or expensing or signaling, or you want to form memories of the finest experience to save your marriage or what not, or this is a super high leverage moment in your life otherwise, you will choose it anyway.’ While I Cannot Condone This
I would instead say that true experts hedge in the right places. They are unafraid to, as Paul notes, say what is clearly not the case. You can often telling the difference even as a non-expert.
One reason to note this is that we are constantly thinking about the future and about AI as if there won’t be more large surprises waiting for us in physics. This suggests that there might be such surprises. This particular trick looks like it is not so practical at least for now, but what will be next?
However they are fake in the sense that they are easy to fool if you put effort into it and know how to do so, some people naturally are able to best them, and the error rate is substantial even in ideal circumstances.
Imagine if we had a machine
I hate when people do this. Text Über Alles. Forcing users to watch a video indicates and forces upon them a certain mindset. Yet the evidence it provides on overall lack of quality is not so strong. This has become the ‘standard’ thing to do, what people reveal they want. People like Paul and myself are mostly not the target. Rick’s extension, however, seems highly reliable. If they make you take a webinar at a given time, chances of value production greatly decline.
A
I love the structure of the description, wonderful use of the rule-of-three.
Sounds like it is time to solve for the equilibrium. Societal Tendencies
Mostly though I saw this as an excuse to ask better questions. The section on different communication norms has some great stuff, yes we know most of it but I like when such things are well-modeled and spelled out. Interesting that USA is dramatically low-context in relative terms, but is near the middle in confrontation and negative feedback. Mostly those two correlate rather strongly, and egalitarian-hierarchical looks like the same graph as well: So this means that America has this One Weird Trick where it is willing to aggressively communicate directly, without being otherwise confrontational and hostile. When I go even to other places in America that have this less than here in New York, it drives me insane. I bet that this trait does quite a lot of work for us. This then becomes so important that in many places only men who can and are willing to drink heavily and do associated activities like strip clubs can get ahead, women cannot do it because it is unsafe and if something goes wrong they will get the blame, and men who don’t want to play along also get left out. How do you solve this? Even if you can create a new organization that does not do these activities, and you then get to hire lots of great sober and female talent, you still need to solve the communication problem, or find a way to survive not doing so. You would have to make dramatic cultural changes that complement this move.
|