---
subject: "Looking Back, Looking Ahead"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-12-21 12:00:27
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
It’s close to the end of the year, so it’s time to look back, which should be something that comes naturally for this newsletter. First, let me say thank you. Having started this thing without a huge online following or any kind of public profile, I am really grateful every time a new reader finds their way to my writing. Substack is full of big names who suck up a lot of the attention, and you can be sure that we little guys are incredibly grateful every time we can attract a few eyeballs. So thanks to all of you who subscribed this year (there are about 800 people more than at this time last year!) and even more thanks to those who have been with me for longer. I owe an especially huge debt of gratitude to those of you who have signed up to financially support this newsletter out of the goodness of your hearts. This newsletter is a labor of love, and it really does mean a lot to be able to share my love of history with a supportive audience. A few posts this year have managed to find a readership beyond my wonderful weekly subscribers. They are, in ascending popularity: An exploration of the law code of Urukagina, which is very different from the more famous code of Hammurabi: An exploration of the ritual of the “Joyous Entry,” in which kings and queens would enter a city amidst elaborate ritual and pageantry: An explanation of how one man’s experiences at the Battle of Solferino led to the making of rules for war: A discussion of the art and technology behind ancient mirrors: And a post on the stunning portraits created by the French photography pioneer Nadar: I am bad at predicting which posts will attract a wider readership, but I did think that the Nadar post was a banger as I was putting it together, so I’m glad a lot of people were able to see it. I find it interesting that two of the top five here (and a few more in the top ten) are midweek posts that veered away from the image-heavy format I usually send out on the weekend, so I’ll try to do even more of those next year. This is as good a place as any, I suppose, to solicit subscriptions… so click below to sign up, and click on This week, we’re between series, having just finished six weeks of posts on the American West. If you missed some of those posts, there are links to all of the installments in last week’s newsletter: In this off week, I thought I’d give you something to read that will hopefully whet your appetite for our next series, which will investigate how humans have shaped rivers and rivers have shaped human history. I’ve been working really hard on it, and I’m excited to share it with you. I’d been wanting to write more about rivers since last September, when I wrote about I was sick recently, laid up in bed with a summer fever. As I lolled in bed enduring alternate sweats and chills, I decided that I needed some cinematic comfort food to get me through the afternoon. So I watched Terminator 2 for (approximately) the 753rd time. I think most of us have a movie like Terminator 2: something we’ve seen so many times that it can serve as comfort food and background noise when we don’t feel like thinking very hard. The movie still holds up whenever I want a big, loud action flick with cool special effects, huge guns, and huger explosions. It transports me to my teenage years, when I first saw it, awed by the liquid-metal special effects and extravagant destruction. Early in Terminator 2, Robert Patrick’s T-1000 chases Arnold Schwarzenegger’s T-800 and young John Connor through a bleak, litter-strewn series of culverts and drainage ditches in Los Angeles. It’s awesome: I watched this scene many times before I realized that it takes place in an actual river. It doesn’t look like a river — everything is concrete, there’s only a trickle of water, and there are more abandoned shopping carts than plants. But it is, in fact, what’s left of the Los Angeles River. The Los Angeles River wasn’t always a concrete-encased monstrosity, of course — it used to be a natural body of water that supported diverse ecosystems. But in the 20th century, it, like a lot of rivers around the world, was tamed. Many of the tamed rivers became more convenient for the urban areas that had sprung up around them, but they were eyesores, a shadow of their former selves. This week, let’s take a look at these lost rivers. What were they like before they were tamed? Why did people feel the need to change them? And can they be restored to anything like their past selves? Some urban rivers get used to death. They become lined with factories, which may use the water for power, take water out of the stream, or put it back, often with lots of added pollutants. They find themselves surrounded by dense human populations, whose excrement and litter have to go somewhere — so they often end up in the river. They’re rerouted to make things more convenient for their human neighbors. They’re pinned between concrete walls that keep their floodwaters in check. In the end, these urban rivers often become so disgusting that the cities abandon them, turning them into sewers because that’s what they’ve become. This happens most frequently to secondary waterways in cities. Paris was never going to abandon the Seine (no matter how The Bievre is about 20 miles long, running through the southern suburbs of Paris before it merges with the Seine in the central city: People have been modifying the Bievre for centuries. Medieval monks diverted its waters into a series of canals and moats. Manufacturers — most famously the Things got so bad that the street running along the river was named Rue Mouffetard, which is derived from the This painting by Hubert Robert from 1768 gives a sense of the heavy use the river received, along with the ways in which it had been tamed: And these nineteenth-century photos show the river near the Gobelins facility: Here tanners pose next to the Bievre: Bit by bit, Parisians made the Bievre an underground sewer rather than an open-air one. You can see part of its former route on the 1867 map: Around the turn of the twentieth century, Josef Huymans
London, like Paris, is a river city. And, as in Paris, London’s main river, the Thames, remains a central feature of the metropolis, but By 1612, the river was already famously disgusting. Ben Jonson wrote a
By 1725, the intersection of the two rivers looked like this: Centuries ago, the Fleet was a significant waterway. But as more and more people settled on its banks, it became surrounded by bustling, filthy neighborhoods that dumped their trash into its waters. One of its most notable neighbors was Smithfield Meat Market, which dates back to the Middle Ages. the market featured a wide array of meat-sellers, and, out back, the livestock awaited their fate: Jonathan Swift
One hundred and thirty-three years later, urban reformer T.J. Maslen saw Smithfield as a blight on the urban landscape.
Over time, the flow of the Fleet diminished, clogged with all manner of hideous waste; people started calling it Fleet Ditch rather than a proper river. Parts of it were canalized to regulate its flow. Eventually, London’s leaders treated the Fleet like Paris’ officials treated the Bievre — that is, they closed it off. Out of sight, out of mind. In the 1730s, part of the Fleet was capped, and Fleet Market was built on top of it, as you can see on this 1746 map: By the middle of the 1800s, the entire length of the river had been covered over. Joseph Bazalgette incorporated much of it into the sewer system he designed to stop the devastating disease outbreaks that kept hitting London. In some places, as shown in this 1845 drawing, the river was buried deep underground: And that’s where the Fleet stays today, an underground sewer rather than a living river. Los Angeles’ story is a little bit different. While people wanted to tame the Bievre and the Fleet because of pollution, they wanted to tame the LA River because of its unpredictability. The river flows down from the mountains that surround Los Angeles, as you can see from the 19th-century map: Rainfall in the area was quite variable, and so was the river’s flow. In rainy seasons, it filled up and moved about, flooding wetlands. In dry periods, it mostly disappeared. This was good for the local ecosystems, which were quite robust. It also suited the local tribes who lived there, as the river provided water, hunting grounds, and vegetation to eat. But it meant the river wasn’t useful in the way that white settlers wanted a river to be useful. This photo from 1911 shows a policeman crossing the river by horse; the river is still quite natural: The river’s unpredictability meant that it was pretty tame for years at a time, encouraging people to think that they could build near it. Then, when the rains came, the flooding was terrible. As LA boomed in the early twentieth century, there were bad floods in 1914 and 1934. The flood of 1938 was even worse: After the rains, North Hollywood looked like this: The city decided to channelize the river, getting its waters out to the ocean as quickly as possible (an interesting decision given that Los Angeles didn’t exactly have abundant water for drinking and irrigation; it chose to get its water from other parts of California and beyond while shuttling its local water into the Pacific as rapidly as possible). The project was massive: According to an excellent 99% Invisible
By midcentury, the river was walled off from the rest of the city, encased in concrete and looking nothing like its old self: Most, if not all, urban rivers have been profoundly altered by the people who live on their banks. Some of them have ceased to be rivers at all. But there is some good news. Modern cities don’t (or shouldn’t) dump untreated human and animal waste into their local waterways the way they did 100 years ago. We also have stricter regulations on other types of pollution. On top of this, there’s more interest in making some space for nature in our urban environments. Over the last few decades, some of these godforsaken rivers have gotten a new chance at life. Cities with buried rivers — You're currently a free subscriber to |