---
subject: "The Record Bar Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-12-23 15:03:14
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Colin here. I’m in Tokyo for a few days for the first time since pre-pandemic. And while the world has seen a proliferation of these Tokyo-style audiophile bars ( But the truth is something gets lost when you take the concept out of Japan. And I realized that each of the countless audiophile bars here (Buy Back, Bar Martha, Bar Track, etc.) has its own personality. It is the sensibility and the human that drives the experience, not the surroundings. While other bars fetishize and emphasize the aesthetic, the otaku (obsessive) and often gruff Japanese proprietors bring the intangible magic. Their unique point-of-view, and not just the cozy, photo-friendly interiors, are the draw. Why is this interesting? My case in point: My friend told me that the proprietor's knowledge goes so deep that it is often the subtext: this bass player also played on that record, or this cut was produced in the same studio by the same guy. Or other tiny details that are easy to miss. So rather than bouncing around based on algorithmic parameters, it is truly a journey dictated by the “if X then Y” logic inside one guy's head and based on his frame of reference. What’s more, when you revisit some pop tracks you think you have heard a million times on proper, beautiful vintage Altec Lansing loudspeakers, you notice nuances and elements that make you appreciate everything a bit more. U2’s With or Without You sounded particularly good on a Thursday night. The sound, combined with encyclopedic knowledge and a quirky, often hidden throughline, makes for a nice evening vibe. And that’s before you get to any of the rare bourbons. (CJN) WITI Classifieds: We are experimenting with running some weekly classifieds in WITI. If you’re interested in running an ad, Exhibit B. Books: true crime told and sold Why is your family interesting? With Storyworth, record their stories one weekly email at a time, and gift them a beautiful printed book. — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) —
|