---
subject: "AI #150: While Claude Codes"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-01-08 14:53:26
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Claude Code is the talk of the town, and of the Twitter. It has reached critical mass. Suddenly, everyone is talking about how it is transforming their workflows. This includes non-coding workflows, as it can handle anything a computer can do. People are realizing the power of what it can do, building extensions and tools, configuring their setups, and watching their worlds change. I’ll be covering that on its own soon. This covers everything else, including ChatGPT Health and the new rounds from xAI and Anthropic. Table of Contents[Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/ce99cf00-c77e-42ee-a3f9-d3fefc2704b5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Even Rufus, Amazon’s Choice.[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/b82b8604-d2f0-44ad-a1b9-dc202218b57d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)They don’t believe you.[Language Models Have All The Fun.](https://substack.com/redirect/ee2cb903-ab1c-46b0-9d86-a9a8c27e3e6b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)In glorious AI future, does game play you?[Huh, Upgrades.](https://substack.com/redirect/14cd19c4-d142-4bb8-a9d9-e0f57d8c97e0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Claude Code 2.1.0, and JP Morgan using AI for its proxy advice.[On Your Marks.](https://substack.com/redirect/45dba348-7f56-49bc-ac61-572b2d8a493e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Yes, Meta pretty much did fraud with the Llama 4 benchmarks.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon.](https://substack.com/redirect/4b9367b1-12a7-4019-a575-e484ebe3f905?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The year of doing real things?[Fun With Media Generation.](https://substack.com/redirect/60c55a54-2bf4-4110-9986-833460c018f5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The art of making people believe a human made it.[You Drive Me Crazy.](https://substack.com/redirect/080c551c-de48-4ff8-8ae8-2272347263b4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Crazy productive.[They Took Our Jobs.](https://substack.com/redirect/57e9a7ad-10e8-4c0b-bc28-be5bba19690a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Will no one be safe?[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/299e9f96-309b-4030-bf15-797bdfcf5de7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Charles looks to get involved.[Introducing](https://substack.com/redirect/1f89c25a-521b-4539-a3a2-ecc426898352?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/1f89c25a-521b-4539-a3a2-ecc426898352?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)ChatGPT Health.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/80eb49ce-2735-47d1-873d-e81316ae54fc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Dan Wang’s 2025 Letter and promised ‘super assistants.’[Show Me the Money.](https://substack.com/redirect/23fe978c-ece2-4b15-bf9d-48a828ed90df?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Anthropic is raising at $350 billion, xAI at $230 billion.[Bubble, Bubble, Toil and Trouble.](https://substack.com/redirect/da5126e9-cd52-4d21-95f6-8d852cd14da8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Bubble now means ‘number might go down.’[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/985da1e7-27ea-4d76-9268-34b14b7d2c54?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)More of the usual predictions and misunderstandings.[The Quest for Sane Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/92b9b8b6-6a47-4a85-a0b2-bb684951cd4b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A $1 million fine is not that motivating.[AGI and Taxation.](https://substack.com/redirect/a3fbad0b-9fc8-4b96-ad93-7f05fb2f3145?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Why is the United States Government collecting taxes?[Chip City.](https://substack.com/redirect/070e2c34-9c6f-4415-a804-15aa09da3bfb?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)China uses H200 sales to also ensure its own chips sell out.[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/dfaeb402-9f65-4f25-b96e-96bc7daaa446?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Shlegeris talks to Greenblatt.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/74c22c9d-c429-4ebb-b71f-a108bced2141?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Last year’s report today.[People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/cdf7a89b-88f3-4fab-80aa-4c14259064a9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Mostly act as if you’ll be okay?[The Lighter Side.](https://substack.com/redirect/1dd29121-b3fc-479a-80d9-bbf43f228f71?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Paul Feig is our director, now all we need is a script.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
On Twitter I jokingly said this could be a good test for politicians, where you feed your planned action into ChatGPT as something that happened, and see if it believes you, then if it doesn’t you don’t do the thing. That’s not actually the correct way to do this, what you want to do is ask why it didn’t believe you, and if the answer is ‘because that would be f***ing crazy’ then don’t proceed unless you know why it is wrong. Language Models Have All The Fun
The obvious way for this to work is that the game would then revert to its previous state. So the AI could show you what to do, but you’d still have to then do it. Giving players the option to cheat, or too easily make things too easy, or too easily learn things, is dangerous. You risk taking away the fun. Then again, Civilization 2 proved you can have a literal ‘cheat’ menu and players will mostly love it, if there’s a good implementation, and curate their own experiences. Mostly I’m optimistic, especially as a prototype for a more general learning tool. Huh, Upgrades
On Your Marks
Jack Clark of Anthropic predicts Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
It’s more nuanced than this, sports betting can be real or fake depending on how you do it and when I did it professionally that felt very real to me, but yes you mostly know a real experience when you live it. I hope that Lulu is right. Alas, so far that is not what I see. I see the people rejecting the real and embracing the fake and the slop. Twitter threads that go viral into the 300k+ view range are reliably written in slop mode and in general the trend is towards slop consumption everywhere. I do intend to go in the anti-slop direction in 2026. As in, more effort posts and evergreen posts and less speed premium, more reading books and watching movies, less consuming short form everything. Building things using coding agents.
The internet figured this one out, but not before quite a lot of people assumed it was real, despite the tale including what one might call ‘some whoppers’ including delivery drivers being assigned a ‘desperation score.’ Misinformation continues to be demand driven, not supply driven. Which is why the cost of doing this was trivial, the quality here was low and it was easy to catch, yet this attempt succeeded wildly, and despite that people mostly don’t do it.
Fun With Media GenerationThe existence of AI art makes people question real art, You Drive Me CrazyCrazy productive and excited to use the AI a lot, that is. Which is different from what happened with 4o, but makes it easy to understand what happened there.
They Took Our JobsIndeed:
Never sleeping, top performing generalist is only the start of it, we’re also talking things like limitlessly copyable and parallelizable, much faster, limitless memory and so on and so forth. Almost no one can actually understand what this would mean. And that’s if you force AI into a ‘virtual employee’ shaped box, which is very much not its ideal or final form.
At current growth rates, it will take a lot less than 10 years. Will AI take the finance jobs? To think well about that The conceptual division is between: The Chicago School, firms like Jane Street that treat finance like a game-theoretic competition, where the algorithms form the background rules of the game but traders (whether or not they are also themselves quants) ultimately overrule the computers and make key decisions. The MIT School, which treats it all as a big stats and engineering program and you toss everything into the black box and hope money comes out.
There’s a continuum rather than a binary, you can totally be a hybrid. I agree with the view that these are still good jobs and it’s a good industry to go into if your goal is purely ‘make money in worlds where AI remains a normal technology,’ but it’s not as profitable as it once was. I’d especially not be excited to go into pure black box work, as that is fundamentally ‘the AI’s job.’
Get InvolvedFrom his outputs, I’d say Charles is a great potential hire, check him out.
Introducing
It’s a good pitch, and a good product. Given we were all asking it all our health questions anyway, having a distinct box to put all of those in, that enables compliance and connecting other services and avoiding this branching into other chats, seems like an excellent feature. I’m glad our civilization is allowing it. That doesn’t mean ChatGPT Health will be a substantial practical upgrade over vanilla ChatGPT or Claude. We’ll have to wait and see for that. But if it makes doctors or patients comfortable using it, that’s already a big benefit.
In Other AI News
Her announcement reads as a shift, as per her job title, to a focus on product features and ‘killer apps,’ and away from trying to make the underlying models better. Show Me the Money
I can see the argument for OpenAI depending on the exact price. xAI at $230 billion seems clearly like the worst option of the three, although of course anything can happen and nothing I write is ever investment advice.
Bubble, Bubble, Toil and Trouble
This is pretty standard. Number go up a lot, number now predict number later, so people predict number go down. Chances are high people will, at some point along the way, be right. The Efficient Market Hypothesis Is False, and AI has not been fully priced in, but the market is still the market and is attempting to predict future prices. Quiet Speculations
Simon Lermen points out more obvious things about futures with superintelligent AIs in them. In such a case, it is human survival that would be weird, as such inferior and brittle entities surviving would be a highly unnatural result, whereas humanity dying would be rather normal. Property rights are unlikely to survive, as those rights are based on some ability to enforce those rights. Even if property rights survive, humans would be unlikely to be able to hang onto their property for long in the face of such far superior rivals.
Right now we are in a ‘slow’ takeoff with LLM-style intelligence, meaning the world transforms over the course of years or at most decades. That could, at essentially any time, lead to a new paradigm that has a ‘fast’ takeoff, where the world is transformed on the order of days, weeks or months.
I’d also note that ‘cosmic existential risk,’ meaning existential risks not coming from Earth, are astronomically unlikely to care about any relevant windows of time. Yes, if you are playing Stellaris or Master of Orion, you have not one turn to lose, but that is because the game forcibly starts off rivals on relatively equal footing. The reason the big asteroid arrives exactly when humanity barely has the technology to handle it is that if the asteroid showed up much later there would be no movie, and if it showed up much earlier there would be either no movie or a very different movie.
The Quest for Sane RegulationsWhy do I call the state regulations of AI neutered? Things like the maximum fine being a number none of the companies the law applies to would even notice:
Last week I mentioned OpenAI President Greg Brockman’s support for the anti-all-AI-regulation strategic-bullying SuperPAC ‘Leading the Future.’ Other million dollar donors to Leading the Future were Foris Dax, Inc ($20M, crypto), Konstantin Sokolov ($11M, private equity), Asha Jadeja ($5M, Blackstone), Stephen Schwarzman ($5M, SV VC), Benjamin Landa ($5M, CEO Sentosa Care), Michelle D’Souza ($4M, CEO Unified Business Technologies), Chase Zimmerman ($3M), Jared Isaacman ($2M) and Walter Schlaepfer ($2M).
I believe that the Leading the Future strategy of ‘openly talk about who you are going to drown in billionaire tech money’ will backfire, as it already has with Alex Bores. The correct strategy, in terms of getting what they want, is to quietly bury undesired people in such money. This has nothing to do with which policy positions are wise - it’s terrible either way. AGI and Taxation
I’d note that you can choose to raise or cut taxes however you like and make them as progressive or regressive as you prefer, there is no reason to presume that tax cuts need include the rich for any definition of rich, but that is neither here nor there. The main reason the ‘AGI types’ are not calling for tax cuts is, quite frankly, that we don’t much care. The world is about to be transformed beyond recognition and we might all die, and you’re talking about tax cuts and short term consumption levels? I also don’t see the ‘AGI types,’ myself included, calling for tax increases, whereas Tyler Cowen is here saying that otherwise we need to raise taxes. I disagree with the idea that, in the absence of AGI, that it is clear we need to raise taxes ‘even with significant cuts to the trajectory of spending.’ If nominal GDP growth is 4.6% almost none of which is AI, and the average interest rate on federal debt is 3.4%, and we could refinance that debt at 3.9%, then why do we need to raise taxes? Why can’t we sustain that indefinitely, especially if we cut spending? Didn’t they say similar things about Japan in a similar spot for a long time? Isn’t this a good enough argument that we already don’t need to raise taxes, and indeed could instead lower taxes? I agree that expectations of AGI only add to this. The response is ‘because if we issued too much debt then the market will stop letting us refinance at 3.9%, and if we keep going we eventually hit a tipping point where the interest rates are so high that the market doesn’t expect us to pay our debts back, and then we get Bond Market Vigilantes and things get very bad.’ That’s a story about the perception and expectations of the bond market. If I expect AGI to happen but I don’t think AGI is priced into the bond market, because very obviously such expectations of AGI are not priced into the bond market, then I don’t get to borrow substantially more money. My prediction doesn’t change anything. So yes, the first order conclusion in the short term is that we can afford lower taxes, but the second order conclusion that matters is perception of that affordance. The reason we’re having these debates about longer term policy is partly that we expect to be completely outgunned while setting short term tax policy, partly because optimal short term tax policy is largely about expectations, and in large part, again, because we do not much care about optimal short term tax policy on this margin. Chip City
The Week in Audio
Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
For those wondering or who need confirmation: Where I think it is outright wrong is claiming that ‘we have solved’ continual learning. If this is true it would be news to me. It is certainly possible that it is the case, and Fun fact about Opus 3:
People Are Worried About AI Killing EveryoneAs advice to those people, OpenAI’s The Bay Area Solstice gave essentially the same advice. “If the AI arrives [to kill everyone], let it find us doing well.” I strongly agree. Let it find us trying to stop that outcome, but let it also find us doing well. Also see my Boaz also thinks that you will probably be okay, and indeed far better than okay, not only in the low p(doom) sense but in the personal outcome sense. Believing that makes this course of action easier. Even then it doesn’t tell you how to approach your life path in the face of - even in cases of AI as normal technology - expected massive changes and likely painful transitions, especially in employment. The Lighter Side
The vibes are off. Also the vibes are off.
I would not, if I wanted to survive in a future AI world, want to be the bottleneck. You're currently a free subscriber to |