---
subject: "Credentialism and the Money Illusion"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <the-diff@ghost.io>"
to: ""
date: 2025-01-06 15:26:14
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX"]
---
|
|
In this issue: - Credentialism and the Money Illusion—Money and credentials are both useful abstractions that allow us to interact with a complex world without dealing with all of that complexity. But they run into a similar set of problems when they're overused.
- Capacity Constraints—A big fund makes the surprising choice to let itself get a little bigger.
- IPO Window—Time for the IPO cycle to turn?
- Strikes and Opportunity Costs—The same features that make ski resorts a good business to own make them a good business to unionize.
- The Upside and Downside of Ads—Running ads means running the risk of associating your brand with something unpleasant, and this risk ultimately helps make the biggest platforms more dominant.
- Backcasting Returns—Quantitative models are powerful, but you never sample from exactly the same distribution you backtested on.
Credentialism and the Money IllusionIn a financial system, you can get by with a sort of writing-free financial system, where tangible wealth is transferred in the form of physical coins that are made of precious metals, and intangible wealth consists of reciprocal obligations (so a medieval peasant probably gets protected by their local lord in exchange for definitely paying that lord a cut of the harvest, and some of that cut gets paid to the local monastery in exchange for which the monks periodically hold a mass for the soul of said lord's ancestors). These systems could be quite sophisticated, since so many obligations were in-kind trades of different varieties, and they implied a pretty elaborate system of exchange rates—the system above is implicitly setting an exchange rate between masses per year and pillagings averted, but it doesn't explicitly do this. A modern dollar-based system does set an implied exchange rate between all available goods and services, but we don't ask those questions ("How many bushels of apples did you say that Tribeca 3-bedroom was?") because the dollar is such a convenient tool for measuring everything. That convenience leads to a “money illusion,” where people fixate on nominal changes and don’t look at real numbers. But in a way, that’s perfectly rational, because the nominal values are right there, and the real ones are estimates. That shift to a more universal economic abstraction was supported by an edifice of more particular abstractions, namely ideas like: - Transactions are values-neutral by default; your obligation to Starbucks ends when you pay them, and their obligation to you ends when you get your order.
[[1]](https://www.thediff.co/r/926d6264?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)Similarly, your job is not some permanent, immutable, and possibly heritable aspect of who you are, but something that you or your employer can change their mind about at any time.[[2]](https://www.thediff.co/r/4ac07d16?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99) - Obligations are transferable, and that compounds: a house can support a mortgage, that mortgage can be bundled into a mortgage-backed security, that security can be referenced by a derivative, and that derivative can be used to neutralize or double-down on risk somewhere else.
- As a related note, most of the money people interact with is some form of credit, which almost never gets settled physically. You can buy something with a credit card and autopay your bill after receiving your salary in electronic form through direct deposit, turning one purchase into three separate transactions, not a single one of which involves ever touching cash or coins.
- As a corollary to that, these abstractions flex in size and importance based on confidence in the future, and the future they're confident in is increasingly the output of these complex layers of economic abstractions. The most important of these is credit: a credit crunch is partly a process whereby some market participants discover that things they thought were roughly equivalent to cash were riskier than expected, and when the moneyness of an asset declines after someone has levered up to borrow it, the moneyness of the lenders' assets declines, too. In the financial crisis, 2007 was the year that mortgages started getting impaired, but late 2008 was when that resulted in large swathes of the banking system lacking the liquidity necessary to roll over debts that propped up the value of mortgage-backed assets and derivatives.
Credentialism follows a similar parallel to this moneyness. Most of the time, and for most purposes, you do the rational thing and treat a credential as synonymous with the skill required. Years ago, I needed a lawyer to look at a contract for me, and I put very little effort into evaluating the skill of the lawyer in question—the skill to do that is pretty close to the skill required to just look at the contract myself and figure it out. There's a narrow band where you can hire service providers whose skill you're able to assess—plenty of people dining at restaurants are perfectly capable of cooking a meal at home—but also large areas of activity where the optimal strategy is to assume that credentials are a good guide to what's actually going on. Assuming that someone who went to law school and passed the bar knows how to read a contract is almost precisely analogous to assuming that the numbers on your screen when you check your bank account are equivalent to cash you can spend from that account. But, as with financial crises, credentials can get overextended, and sometimes they're borrowing against expertise that isn't really there. And that's hard to spot, because credentialing organizations are self-perpetuating. An accountant is anyone who's followed a formal process of convincing other accountants that they're an accountant; a dentist does the same thing with dentistry. It's like borrowing against a loan, which is something that banks do all the time—and that, from time to time, makes their depositors worry that the money's disappearing. In finance, you can trace the economic logic of some purely financial transaction like buying calls on the pound back to some real-world referent—Britain has an economy and produces goods and services. It has a government that taxes this output, and those taxes create demand for pounds. Pounds get borrowed and lent at some rate that's determined by policy in light of economic reality, and rate differentials tend to push currencies around. So, you can connect this abstraction to real-world behavior and ask if it makes sense. This kind of question is a useful one to ask, because sometimes it doesn't make sense. During DeFi Summer in 2021, there were lots of ways to lock up cryptocurrency and earn interest, but it was harder to understand what economic activity could be best funded with Terra, and which would earn a return higher than the 20% cost of capital. Trace the connections, and you found that these crypto rates were driven by one of three things: pure ponzi schemes, martingale bets against volatility (hello again, Terra!), or, at best, funding margin loans for crypto speculation. For credentials, the equivalent thought experiment is to replace "I heard it from a lawyer" or "I read it in the science section of the New York Times" with "I heard it from Some Guy." Some Guy might be right, or wrong, but it's good to trace the process whereby Some Guy becomes, say, a science correspondent, and to ask what this process selects for and against. This is also a useful heuristic when faced with Credential Smearing, where someone who has a meaningful title in one domain opines about something that's related but not necessarily adjacent. Doctors interact with health insurance companies all the time, and they're close to the front lines when patients find out that a proposed treatment isn't going to be covered. But they aren't looking at the margins of health insurance companies and comparing them to the financial performance of their own practices. (To the extent that you're worried that a small cohort of highly-paid individuals are responsible for American healthcare costs, it's good to know that This doesn't preclude them from being right! Nobody is stopping them from reading a few 10-Ks, or looking at differences in healthcare consumption per capita and how wages change as countries get richer. But the Some Guy heuristic helps to put this in context; there isn't a specific reason to think that doctors would have a deeper view of healthcare economics, as opposed to a view of what might be causing your symptoms, any more than you'd expect a plumber to be able to derive the Navier-Stokes equations. Credentials and credit are still enormously useful social technologies. The world is simply too complicated for everyone to be an expert on everything, and that complexity depends on both the existence of experts and some means for the rest of the world to identify them. But those mechanisms will never be perfect, and sometimes fall prey to incentive problems. Credentials and credit always want to expand, and the place where they want to do it the most is where they sacrifice a bit of quality. In light of that, it's something of a miracle that they work as well as they do, but it's never something to count on. In this sense, loyalty apps are a sort of first-principles recreation of a feudal system where both sides benefit from a less-than-purely-transactional arrangement. Starbucks would rather lose a few points of gross margin in exchange for getting you to have a coffee-every-workday habit, and if you were going to have that coffee anyway and you're indifferent between theirs and a free-but-worse cup in the office breakroom, you can come out ahead there, too. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/8db97977?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)The fact that occupational surnames like "Baker" or "Smith" are so common today is good evidence that these identifiers didn't shift around much. Compare that to today where it's not at all shocking to meet someone who's done several completely unrelated jobs in the first decade of their career. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/cb84d752?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)It's also useful to know that in retail finance, "doctor" is a synecdoche for "wealthy individual investor who will absolutely pay absurdly high fees for structured products.” [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/3697db6c?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
You're on the free list for The Diff. Last week, paying subscribers read about Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. See a sampling of current open roles below: - A premier proprietary trading firm is looking for smart generalists to join their investor relations team, working with external investors, rating agencies, and the internal finance team. Investment banking and/or investor relations experience preferred. Quantitative background and technical aptitude a plus. (NYC)
- A Google Ventures backed startup founded by SpaceX engineers that’s building the data infrastructure and tooling for hardware development is looking for a staff product manager with 5+ years experience, ideally with AI and data intensive products. (LA, Hybrid)
- Ex-Ramp, Truework founders and team are hiring a high energy full-stack engineer to help build the automation layer for the US healthcare payor-provider eco-system. (NYC)
- A well-funded startup that’s building the universal electronic cash system by taking stablecoin adoption from edge cases to the mainstream is looking for a senior full-stack engineer. Experience with information dense front-ends is a strong plus. (NYC, London, Singapore)
- The treasury management arm of an established stablecoin project is looking for a research economist to bring a macro perspective at the intersection of traditional monetary theory and digital currency innovation. Advanced degree and portfolio of high quality research output preferred; no crypto experience necessary. (Remote)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. ElsewhereCapacity ConstraintsWhen you look at the returns of the best hedge funds, one temptation is to think of them as compounding numbers. But the better the fund, the less compounding you get. (At Renaissance, for example, outside investors were unable to add new money after a while, and got bought out entirely in the early 2000s. For the last few years, Citadel has been letting outside investors maintain consistent positions, but not reinvest their profits. This year, IPO WindowMight Citadel (and perhaps others) be anticipating Strikes and Opportunity CostsIs it worth it for a fairly levered ski resort operator to risk a good ski season in order to save $2/hour on some of its labor costs? Vail is happy to tell investors that part of the bull case for their business is that there just won't be many more ski resorts in the US any time soon, and that building new brands is even harder. So funneling a growing number of customers into the same set of lifts, hotel rooms, equipment rentals, etc. is a winning model. Vail has also shifted its economics from selling one-off tickets to season passes, which means that one of the fixed assets they're trying to maximize utilization of is their brand name and customer database. Strikes have plenty of leverage in disrupting this, but it cuts both ways: Vail is negotiating against all future unions, not just the current one. As long as it has a longer time horizon than any given counterparty, it has an incentive to hold out for a slightly better deal. The Upside and Downside of AdsNews sites have struggled to attract display advertisers, who often Backcasting ReturnsCliff Asness has a piece |
||||||||||
|
|
|
||||||||||
|