---
subject: "Meta Pivots on Content Moderation"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-01-17 14:09:50
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
There’s going to be some changes made. Out With the Fact Checkers
He also admits that the majority of censorship in the past has flat out been a mistake. Zuckerberg later talked more about this, and many related and unrelated things, Zuckerberg is going to overhaul Meta’s entire moderation and censorship structure, replacing it over several months with something akin to community notes. He’s going to move standards back in line with actual community standards. And he’s going to move his content moderation teams from California to Texas, and push back against censorship worldwide, highlighting Europe and Latin America. What HappenedThe current review process reportedly started when one of Zuckerberg’s own posts got throttled because of concerns over medical content, and then snowballed from there. How did it all go so wrong? Zuckerberg tells the story on Rogan, that he took complaints about misinformation and the need for fact checking as sincere, then after he hired people for this the slippery slope took over and before long they were censoring things that are in the mainstream discourse.
Also he claims the Biden administration would yell and threaten various people in phone calls, demanded they take down even true information about Covid if it would discourage vaccinations, said not doing so was ‘killing people,’ and when Zuckerberg drew the line at censoring true information (I’d say, ‘somewhat?’) the Biden administration suddenly made good on its jawboning threats and all the investigations came down on Meta’s head. That’s his story. We have at least some documentary evidence that Facebook responded to White House demands Timing is EverythingNow that the Biden administration is on its way out, and the vibes have shifted, it’s time for a change. Zuckerberg explicitly says he waited until after the election (partly because during one is an awkward time for major changes) and that he was deciding largely based on the vibe shifts.
Having listened to the Rogan podcast, I do think Zuckerberg has some amount of preference for more free speech and other classical liberal preferences, but yes it all primarily sounds very pragmatic, and he’s definitely not left-wing in today’s parlance.
Balancing Different ErrorsSo what to do now? He’s going to focus his filters, rather than scanning for any violation at all, on illegal and high severity violations, and only act on low severity actions if and when someone reports them. I worry that if this is the policy than there will be various people who decide it is their job to use their AIs (or just their eyes) to go searching for violations to report, but it would still have humans in the loop in every step. Whereas ‘the filters make mistakes’ so he’s going to dial them back and require a lot more confidence than before (yes this is a trade-off, he discusses it more on Rogan, but there’s a lot of ‘what the hell were we doing before?’ here), essentially also admitting that there was no way to appeal to humans when those mistakes happened, or that those answering those appeals were insane. He’s going to ‘reduce the number of innocent people’s posts and accounts that we accidentally take down.’ Truth and ReconciliationAnd accounts? Yeah, this kind of used to happen a lot, with no way to fix the mistakes. The first reaction I saw to this change was ‘I’ll believe this change matters when [X]’s account, which was banned without explanation, gets reversed. I don’t see any indication of a plan to undo the mistakes of the past here? He says they’re going to ‘bring back more civic posts,’ because people want to see such content again. Why not let people choose which content they want to see? These are all highly welcome changes, especially the move to Community Notes and generally vastly raising the bar before things are censored, even if he basically admits that he was previously ‘going with the flow’ and bowing to pressure, and now he’s bowing to a different kind of pressure. I hate to kick even this man while he’s making great changes. I want to be clear, my primary response is that these are centrally great changes. It also seems like we need more before we can properly move on. There’s a lot of ‘you were doing WHAT?’ moments here, and a lot of ‘when did who know what about that exactly?’ all of which should rise to the level of requiring Truth and Reconciliation. In particular, we need a blanket reinstatement of accounts whose violations would not get you banned under the new rules. Meta’s AI can presumably do reviews of the past content based on new standards and reinstate many accounts. The new Texas crew can then manually review any cases where confidence is not super high.
Fact Check Fact CheckNate Silver writes of Whereas the best use of professional and distinct fact checkers is to use them on yourself, as Nate Silver did for If you want more detail on how insane ‘fact checkers’ and their claims of ‘misinformation’ had gotten, you can see That post includes this quote for the ages from one such person:
Any questions? Advocates for such policies are, as you would expect, ‘
One could say Zuckerberg ‘surrendered on speech’ by deciding that he is for it.
To be fair to Newton, it sounds like the end of fact checking was relatively non-alarming to Meta employees, who were instead worried about the loosening of the content guidelines and thresholds. He cites, as many others did, the one especially bonkers policy, which is the main topic of the next section. But the logic being argued for by such advocates is clear. They think that free speech causes harm, for very broad values of harm, so they are against free speech.
Mistakes Will Be Made
There are also some… interesting choices in Reading the entire rationale is looking into a world and philosophy very different from my own. I do want to emphasize that getting this kind of thing right is very difficult, mistakes will be made especially at first, they have to worry about laws and customs around the world very different from our own, and all that. It’s hard.
Both Claude and I think Victoria’s statement is accurate here? Which seems rather insane. I’m basically fine with ‘no one gets to call anyone mentally ill’ if you want to go that way. I’m also basically fine with ‘everyone gets to call everyone mentally ill for pretty much any reason, there’s a block button for a reason.’ But this? What? It’s even weirder when the whole concept is general prohibition of attacks on individuals on the basis of ‘protected characteristics’ (unfortunate acronym PC) that includes sexual orientation, sex, gender identity and serious disease. What are we even doing? At some point, [X] is going to say ‘[Y] is mentally ill’ and [Y] is going to say ‘how dare you accuse me of being mentally ill simply because I am mentally ill!’ and [X] is going to replay ‘it’s okay under Facebook rules, because that’s not why I said it. I said it because of your gender identity.’
There’s also this rather amazing special exception for those breaking up:
This isn’t an accident:
Movie ideas: Two people agree to fake a breakup in order to justify speech on Facebook. The speech escalates, they fight and targe each other for real, they of course fall in love. Two people are breaking up, but neither wants to alter their relationship status on Facebook, because the other would then be able to post horrible things about them. So they have to keep pretending they are together. You know the rest. Bonus version: A version set in a slightly different policy, where whoever changes their status first, the other one gets to do this as the dumped person. So the two of them do increasingly convoluted things to get the other to change their status and acknowledge the breakup.
Finally, there’s this, and I don’t know if they thought this through or not?
Where We Go From HereI expect the change in approach to content moderation to be broadly permanent at Meta and elsewhere, unless it is brought down by foreign legal action. I expect the new equilibrium to have a meaningful much higher level of allowed speech across the board. That doesn’t mean every individual change will stick. While humans are in charge, we will continue the dance of fighting over exactly what the rules are and should be. There are some rather obviously ludicrous rules that were discussed in the last section, hopefully they will quickly be addressed. The biggest threat to the new equilibrium will be foreign governments demanding various forms of censorship, especially the European Union. Facebook and Instagram are likely for this purpose a much bigger deal than Twitter, so they should put up a real fight, as their position on free speech is that they are strongly against it. I don’t know what will happen there. So far things seem unexpectedly quiet.
Something will have to give. The European Union is saying ‘thou shalt censor the ways we want’ and our largest tech companies are saying, ‘no actually we shalt not.’ I don’t know what happens. The EU demands here are not reasonable, but the EU very much sees it the other way around. If no one backs down, eventually the internet is going to fracture. I am confident Google and Meta do not intend to back down. On a personal level, this makes it in theory possible to consider posting on Instagram or Facebook at all. When I was posting on Covid, I had requests to post my content to Facebook to help reach people who would not otherwise see it. I was already (In terms of contacting me, I will see friend requests and Facebook Messenger messages about once every few months, with a roughly Poisson distribution, and will approximately never see a Facebook post of any kind.) Once these changes are made, it becomes an option again. I see no particular reason to take it, but doing a bit of exploration and controlled experimentation is non-crazy, and I will consider what might make sense.
You're currently a free subscriber to |