---
subject: "Why we stopped building subways cheaply"
from: "Works in Progress <worksinprogress+from-the-vault@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-05-28 13:14:17
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Works in Progress"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_1644361085112560554"]
---
The Linear No Threshold model says that there is no safe level of radiation exposure. There is overwhelming evidence it is false, yet it inspires the ALARA principle, which makes nuclear power unaffordable worldwide. Tunneling is one of the many technologies that make modern civilization possible. For one, a tunnel can dramatically reduce transportation costs by shortening travel times between two points. Prior to the construction of the Holland Tunnel beneath the Hudson River in New York, for instance, the only way across was via ferry, a journey that Historically, most subways were built using what’s known as ‘cut and cover’ excavation: digging an open trench, building the tunnel structure within it, and then covering the trench up. Cut and cover was used for the first London subway line, in 1860; it was used for the construction of New York’s first subway, in 1900; and for nearly a century it remained the preferred method of building subway tunnels. As late as the 1970s, most subway construction in the US was done using cut and cover. For many types of underground construction, especially in undeveloped greenfield land, Some transit experts believe that this transition was a misstep. Cut and cover is a much more disruptive construction method (since it tears up the street while construction is taking place), but it’s often much cheaper than using a TBM. During construction of the
But cut and cover has always been an unpopular method of construction, opposed by urban residents since the very first time it was used. Cut and cover may often be cheaper in terms of dollars, but as tolerance for the disruptive effects of construction has decreased, the political costs of using cut and cover have risen. And as other tunneling technology has improved, the relative advantage of using cut and cover has decreased. A brief overview of tunneling technologyUnderstanding why tunnel-boring machines replaced cut and cover requires knowing a little bit about how tunnel construction works. With cut and cover construction, the basic method – digging a trench and then covering the trench up – is simple. But there are a variety of ways that this can be done, depending on the specifics of the tunnel and where it’s being built. The most straightforward method is to dig a trench with gently sloping sides that require no additional support. Once you’ve dug down deep enough, you build your structure, and cover everything back up again. Because the sides of the trench slope outward, this method occupies a lot of horizontal space. And the deeper the excavation, the more space is required. This can make it a challenge to use in urban areas, where that space is occupied by buildings and other infrastructure. To avoid this, cut and cover construction will instead often excavate straight downward, using support structures to prevent the walls from caving in. These supports can be built in a variety of different ways. One common method is to use piles, large posts that are driven deep into the earth. Piles are typically made from either steel or concrete, and can either be spaced close enough together that they form a continuous wall (such as with Cut and cover also uses different methods for building the tunnel structure itself. In the conventional method, known as bottom-up, the trench is fully excavated and the tunnel structure is built up starting from the bottom. With the top-down method, by contrast, the tunnel is excavated only partway down, and then the roof of the tunnel is built using the existing soil as a vertical support. Once the roof is in place, the rest of the tunnel is then excavated below it. With top-down construction, the surface can be completely restored after the roof has been built; with bottom-up, the top of the excavation will often be covered with temporary decking to allow use of the surface while tunnel construction is taking place. With a tunnel-boring machine, the basic method is different. Instead of digging downward, TBMs use large rotating cutting heads to excavate horizontally through the ground. Behind the rotating cutting head will be conveyors for carrying away excavated material (known as muck), hydraulic jacks for pushing the machine forward, and machines for installing the tunnel lining. A modern TBM is very much like a mobile factory that pushes its way through the earth and leaves a completely constructed tunnel behind it. Like with cut and cover, TBMs comprise a variety of specific excavation technologies that vary depending on the project. At a high level, TBMs are categorized by whether they’re designed to tunnel through soil and soft ground or through rock (though today there are increasingly Soft-ground TBMs evolved from unmechanized tunnel shields, large hollow structures that supported the sides of the tunnel while it was being excavated. The tunnel shield was invented by Marc Brunel (father of Isambard Kingdom Brunel) in 1806 for tunneling under the Neva River in Russia, and was first used to Brunel’s shield consisted of a 21-foot-tall grid of iron frames, divided into 12 separate frames, each one consisting of three compartments stacked on top of one another. Within each compartment, the face of the tunnel would be supported by a series of boards called poling boards. A worker would remove a single board, dig away the soil behind it to a depth of around nine inches, and then replace the board and move on to the next one. After all boards had been dug out, the frame would advance forward with large mechanical jacks, and the process would repeat. Behind the shield, brick lining would be installed around the sides of the tunnel to form its structure. With Brunel’s shield, tunneling under the Thames proceeded at about eight feet per week on average. Brunel’s shield was rectangular in shape, but most subsequent tunnel shields were circular. Early shields used workers with picks and shovels to do the actual excavation, but over time mechanical excavation equipment was added. In the early 1900s John Price developed a tunnel shield that had a large, rotating disc mounted to the front. Bucket-shaped cutters attached to the front of the disc would scrape away soil as it rotated and feed it into a conveyor for removal. Price’s mechanized shields were an immediate success, and over the next several decades were used to dig subways around the world, and are the ancestor of modern soft-ground TBMs. The tunnel shield prevented the sides of the tunnel from collapsing while it was bored, but they still required some method to prevent the face of the tunnel from collapsing, and to prevent water from intruding when tunneling below the water table. By the late nineteenth century, the standard method was to use compressed air. By pressurizing the tunnel to several times atmospheric pressure, water would be kept out. Compressed air remained in use well into the twentieth century, and is still sometimes used today, but it has been largely supplanted by slurry machines and earth pressure balance machines, which respectively use a bentonite slurry and the excavated material itself to support the face of the tunnel. Today, earth pressure balance machines are the most common type of TBM for tunneling through soil. Rock TBMs evolved separately from soil TBMs. In soil, the task of excavation was comparatively simple, and the primary challenge was finding a way to prevent the tunnel from collapsing while it was being dug. In rock, the tunnel could often support itself while it was being dug, and the primary difficulty was building a machine robust enough to carve through rock. This second task proved much more difficult, and successful rock-tunneling machines were developed much later than soil-tunneling machines. Attempts to build rock-tunneling machines date back to the 1850s, but the first successes appeared in the 1950s, when Robbins’s disc cutter greatly increased how fast a rock-tunneling machine could tunnel. And disc cutters lasted much longer before needing to be replaced than drag picks, meaning the machines spent more time tunneling and less time down for maintenance. As a result, Robbins’s machine made it economical to mechanically tunnel through the rock for the first time. There are also other ways to bore a tunnel besides using a TBM. A
The Changing technology, changing economicsFor most of history, cut and cover was the cheapest way to build an urban tunnel, and boring was only done if cut and cover wasn’t an option. In the construction of But as tunneling machine technology continued to advance, this calculus changed. Brunel’s non-mechanized shield tunneled under the Thames at the glacial pace of eight feet per week. By the early 1900s, Price mechanized shields were achieving excavation rates of nearly 200 feet per week. And by the 1970s, TBMs were achieving rates of 1,400 feet per week in soft ground, and 1,900 feet per week in rock. As TBMs got faster, they also got cheaper, and became increasingly competitive with cut and cover. When a TBM was used to bore some of the tunnels on the Bay Area Rapid Transit (BART) project in the 1960s, its costs were just Depending on the nature of the project and how disruptive surface construction would be, TBMs in some cases began to be cheaper than cut and cover. A Similarly, TBMs have high fixed costs (in the form of the time, effort, and expense to buy the machine and get it set up) but low operational costs: once they are up and running, the marginal cost of additional excavation is low. TBMs are thus often particularly economical on large tunneling projects where the fixed costs of the machine can be thinly spread. When Madrid built 60 miles of underground tunnel when constructing its metro in the late 1990s and early 2000s, it achieved a famously low cost of €42 million per kilometer (about $73 million per kilometer in 2023 dollars) using TBMs. And the recent Underground construction is high variance, and the costs of construction can vary greatly depending on the nature of the project and the conditions of the ground.³ The best construction technology for a given project will depend on the specifics of that project. As Alon Levy notes, cut and cover is still a useful arrow to have in a tunneler’s quiver, as per the $400 million savings it achieved on the Canada Line. Given the comparative labor intensity of cut and cover (TBMs are highly automated, and can operate with a very small number of workers), it is likely especially appropriate for countries in Asia and Africa with low wages. But as TBM technology has advanced, it’s become more and more attractive for urban tunneling. Cut and cover gets harderWhile tunnel-boring technology has gotten better and better, cut and cover has steadily gotten more difficult. The chief issue is the fact that cut and cover creates an enormous amount of disruption on the surface while excavation is taking place. The construction creates dirt, noise, and flooding, and can damage nearby properties as the ground is dug up; this has resulted in Most importantly, in cut and cover construction the street gets torn up and portions of it become unusable, sometimes for years. Access to businesses is blocked, retail sales fall, and people complain. Disruption of traffic has been called ‘
Traffic disruption from cut and cover is especially egregious because the nature of subway construction projects means that construction is likely to take place in the most heavily congested areas of the city, making the problem worse until construction is completed. In The Great Society Subway, Zachary Schrag talks about the disruptions caused by cut and cover during the construction of the Washington, DC, Metro, stating that ‘cut and cover meant pain’:
Cut and cover can also cause subsidence in the ground surrounding the excavation site, damaging surrounding buildings. TBMs will sometimes be chosen as the excavation method even when they’re more expensive purely to reduce this risk. Because of the disruptions it causes, cut and cover transit construction has been unpopular since its inception. London’s In the construction of New York’s first subway, cut and cover was described as ‘
The disruptions caused by cut and cover often make using it difficult, even when it’s cheaper than other methods. In their During the construction of Atlanta’s subway, MARTA, in the 1970s, the planned use of cut and cover in the downtown area The ability for citizens and advocacy groups to oppose disruptive cut and cover projects has likely been strengthened by environmental laws, such as the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), that require government agencies to investigate and disclose the environmental impacts of their projects. These laws first began to appear in the late 1960s, and provide an avenue for affected parties to oppose projects by arguing that agencies haven’t followed the proper administrative procedures. The previously mentioned Canada Line project, for instance, The nature of cut and cover construction means that we might expect it to get more expensive over time. A major expense of cut and cover construction is having to relocate below-ground utilities, and the more that have to be relocated, the greater the cost. As cities age, and accumulate more buried services, this will naturally make relocating them more expensive compared to simply tunneling beneath them. With so much opposition to cut and cover, and the increasingly competitive costs of tunnel boring, it’s not surprising that developed countries have largely switched to the latter in built-up areas. And in fact, adopting a technology, then abandoning it later when its downsides are deemed to be too high, even if its replacement is more expensive, is a common arc of technological progression: until the 1940s, hydroelectric dams made up nearly a third of electricity generated in the US, but hydro plants stopped being built in the US in the 1970s, due largely to their disruption of river ecosystems and other negative environmental effects; aluminum wiring is cheaper than copper (which is why its used for In fact, the existence of subways at all is arguably a result of this sort of progression. Prior to the subway-construction era in the US in the early twentieth century, many cities had rapid transit systems based on elevated trains. New York built the first elevated train line in the world in 1868, and by 1890 its elevated trains gave New York the largest mass transit system in the world, ten years before it began construction on its subway. By 1900, elevated urban trains had been built in Kansas City, Sioux City, Chicago, and Boston. But, not unlike cut and cover construction, building an elevated train came at the cost of incredible disruption to the surrounding area (and unlike an elevated train, that disruption remained after construction was complete). The structures reduced sunlight to the street below, and steam-powered elevateds on steel frames were incredibly noisy for surroundings, lowering the quality of life and property values in their immediate vicinity. Urban elevated trains were thus frequently opposed by residents. When Los Angeles was The US is partly an exception: dozens of elevated railways have been built across the developing and middle-income worlds in the past few decades. A handful have been built in developed countries, including the Docklands Light Railway in London, in the late 1980s, and the Yurikamome which connects Tokyo with Odaiba artificial island, in 1995. But both of these were built into virgin terrain as part of redevelopments, and residents came along later with their impacts already ‘priced in’. Both are also automated and electric, and run on concrete supports, making them much quieter than early 1900s elevateds (though the DLR can screech when it turns sharp corners). Cut and cover will sometimes be the best choice from a basic cost-benefit perspective, as will elevated rail, and both are useful to have in the tunnel construction toolbox for that reason. But technological deployment decisions are This article originally appeared in Brian Potter is the author of the newsletter 1 722 Miles: The Building of the Subways and How They Transformed New York, Clifton Hood 2004, p. 86 2 Tracking down the costs of tunnel boring versus cut and cover for this project is difficult, but they appear to be similar. The initial, six-lane cut and cover tunnel was projected to cost 3 The previously mentioned French study found that in the most difficult ground conditions, tunneling costs per mile varied from ~250 million francs per mile to ~1,200 million francs per mile. Thanks for subscribing to |