---
subject: "SB 1047: Final Takes and Also AB 3211"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-08-27 22:02:17
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
This is the endgame. Very soon the session will end, and various bills either will or won’t head to Newsom’s desk. Some will then get signed and become law. Time is rapidly running out to have your voice impact that decision. Since my last weekly, we got a variety of people coming in to stand for or against the final version of SB 1047. There could still be more, but probably all the major players have spoken at this point. So here, today, I’m going to round up all that rhetoric, all those positions, in one place. After this, I plan to be much more stingy about talking about the whole thing, and only cover important new arguments or major news. I’m not going to get into the weeds arguing about the merits of SB 1047 - I stand by my analysis in the I do however look at the revised AB 3211. I was planning on letting that one go, but it turns out it has a key backer, and thus seems far more worthy of our attention. The MediaI saw two major media positions taken, one pro and one anti. Neither worried itself about the details of the bill contents.
OpenAI Opposes SB 1047The first half of the story is that OpenAI came out publicly against SB 1047. They took four pages to state its only criticism in what could have and should have been a Tweet: Except the letter is four pages long, so they can echo various industry talking points, and echo their echoes. In it, they say: Look at all the things we are doing to promote safety, and the bills before Congress, OpenAI says, as if to imply the situation is being handled. Once again, we see the argument ‘this might prevent CBRN risks, but it is a state bill, so doing so would not only not be first bet, it would be bad, actually.’ They say the bill would ‘threaten competitiveness’ but provide no evidence or argument for this. They echo, once again without offering any mechanism, reason or evidence, Rep. Lofgren’s unsubstantiated claims that this risks companies leaving California. The same with ‘stifle innovation.’ In four pages, there is no mention of any specific provision that OpenAI thinks would have negative consequences. There is no suggestion of what the bill should have done differently, other than to leave the matter to the Feds. A duck, running after a person, asking for a mechanism. My challenge to OpenAI would be to ask: If SB 1047 was a Federal law, that left all responsibilities in the bill to the USA AISI and NIST and the Department of Justice, funding a national rather than state Compute fund, and was otherwise identical, would OpenAI then support? Would they say their position is Support if Federal? Or, would they admit that the only concrete objection is not their True Objection? I would also confront them with AB 3211, but hold that thought. My challenge to certain others: Now that OpenAI has come out in opposition to the bill, would you like to take back your claims that SB 1047 would enshrine OpenAI and others in Big Tech with a permanent monopoly, or other such Obvious Nonsense?
I think this is generous. OpenAI did not explain how not to regulate AI, other than that it should not be by California. I couldn’t find a single thing in the bill OpenAI would not want the Federal Government to do they were willing to name?
OpenAI Backs AB 3211For SB 1047, OpenAI took four pages to say essentially this one sentence:
So presumably that would mean they oppose all state-level regulations. They then go on to note they support three federal bills. I see those bills as a mixed bag, not unreasonable things to be supporting, but nothing in them substitutes for SB 1047. Again, I agree that would be the first best solution to do this Federally. Sure.
You’re supposed to be able to request such things. I have been trying for several days to get a copy of the support letter, getting bounced around by several officials. So far, I got them to say they got my request, but no luck on the actual letter, so we don’t get to see their reasoning, as the article does not say. Nor does it clarify if they offered this support before or after recent changes. What I do know is that if OpenAI is supporting AB 3211, which it is, then their letter in opposition to SB 1047 is very Obvious Nonsense and rank hypocrisy. The bill has changed dramatically from when I looked at it. I am still opposed to it, but much less worried about what might happen if it passed, and supporting it on the merits is no longer utterly insane if you have a different world model. But that world model would have to include the idea that California should be regulating frontier generative AI, at least for audio, video and images. There are three obvious reasons why OpenAI might support this bill. The first is that it might be trying to head off other bills. If Newsom is under pressure to sign something, and different bills are playing off against each other, perhaps they think AB 3211 passing could stop SB 1047 or one of many other bills - I’ve only covered the two, RTFB is unpleasant and slow, but there are lots more. Probably most of them are not good. The second reason is if they believe that AB 3211 would assist them in regulatory capture, or at least be easier for them to comply with than for others and thus give them an advantage. Which the old version certainly would have done. The central thing the bill intends to do is to require effective watermarking for all AIs capable of fooling humans into thinking they are producing ‘real’ content, and labeling of all content everywhere. OpenAI is known to have been sitting on a 99.9% effective (by their own measure) watermarking system for a year. They chose not to deploy it, because it would hurt their business - people want to turn in essays and write emails, and would rather the other person not know that ChatGPT wrote them. As far as we know, no other company has similar technology. It makes sense that they would want to mandate watermarking everywhere. The third reason is they might actually think this is a good idea, in which case they think it is good for California to be regulating in this way, and they are willing to accept the blast radius, rather than actively welcoming that blast radius or trying to head off other bills. I am… skeptical that this dominates, but it is possible. What we do now know, even if we are maximally generous, is that OpenAI has no particular issue with regulating AI at the state level. Anthropic Says SB 1047’s Benefits Likely Exceed Costs
Jack Clack’s description seems accurate. While the letter says that benefits likely exceed costs, it expresses uncertainty on that. It is net positive on the bill, in a way that would normally imply it was a support letter, but makes clear Anthropic and Dario Amodei technically do not support or endorse SB 1047. So first off, thank you to Dario Amodei and Anthropic for this letter. It is a helpful thing to do, and if this is Dario’s actual point of view then I support him saying so. More people should do that. And the letter’s details are far more lopsided than their introduction suggests, they would be fully compatible with a full endorsement.
Details of Anthropic’s LetterThe letter is a bit too long to quote in full but consider reading the whole thing. Here’s the topline and the section headings, basically.
They say the main advantages are: Developing SSPs and being honest with the public about them. Deterrence of downstream harms through clarifying the standard of care. Pushing forward the science of AI risk reduction.
And these are their remaining concerns: Some concerning aspects of pre-harm enforcement are preserved in auditing and GovOps. The bill’s treatment of injunctive relief. Miscellaneous other issues, basically the KYC provisions, which they oppose.
They also offer principles on regulating frontier systems: The key dilemma of AI regulation is driven by speed of progress. One resolution to this dilemma is very adaptable regulation. Catastrophic risks are important to address.
They see three elements as essential: Transparent safety and security practices. Incentives to make safety and security plans effective in preventing catastrophes. Minimize collateral damage.
As you might expect, I have thoughts. I would challenge Dario’s assessment that this is only ‘halfway.’ I I would also note that they themselves call for ‘very adaptable’ regulation, and that this request is not inherently compatible with this level of paranoia about how things will adapt. SB 1047 is about as flexible as I can imagine a law being here, while simultaneously being this hard to implement in damaging fashion. I’ve discussed those details previously, my earlier analysis stands. I continue to be baffled by the idea that in a world where AGI is near and existential risks are important, Anthropic is terrified of absolutely any form of pre-harm enforcement. They want to say that no matter how obviously irresponsible you are being, until something goes horribly wrong, we should count purely on deterrence. And indeed, they even got most of what they wanted. But they should understand why that is not a viable strategy on its own. And I would take issue with their statement that SB 1047 drew so much opposition because it was ‘insufficiently clean,’ as opposed to the bill being the target of a systematic well-funded disinformation campaign from a16z and others, most of whom would have opposed any bill, and who so profoundly misunderstood the bill they successfully killed a key previous provision that purely narrowed the bill, the Limited Duty Exception, without (I have to presume?) realizing what they were doing. To me, if you take Anthropic’s report at face value, they clear up that many talking points opposing the bill are false, and are clearly saying to Newsom that if you are going to sign an AI regulation bill with any teeth whatsoever, that SB 1047 is a good choice for that bill. Even if they’d, if given the choice, prefer it with even less teeth. Another way of putting this is that I think it is excellent that Anthropic sent this letter, that it accurately represents the bill (modulo the minor ‘halfway’ line) and I presume also how Anthropic leadership is thinking about it, and I thank them for it. I wish we had a version of Anthropic where this letter was instead disappointing. I am grateful we do have at least this version of Anthropic. Elon Musk Says California Should Probably Pass SB 1047You know who else is conflicted but ultimately decided SB 1047 should probably pass?
Notice Elon Musk noticing that this will cost him social capital, and piss people off, and doing it anyway, while also stating his nuanced opinion - a sharp contrast with his usual political statements. A good principle is that when someone says they are conflicted (which can happen in both directions, OK, I’ve got my popcorn ready, everyone it’s time to tell us who you are, let’s go. As in, who understands that Elon Musk has for a long time cared deeply about AI existential risk, and who assumes that any such concern must purely be a mask for some nefarious commercial plot? Who does that thing where they turn on anyone who dares disagree with them, and who sees an honest disagreement?
People can support bills for reasons under than their own narrow self-interest? Perhaps he might care about existential risk, as evidenced by him talking a ton over the years about existential risk? And that being the reason he helped found OpenAI? From the beginning I thought that move was a mistake, but that was indeed his reasoning. Similarly, his ideas of things like ‘a truth seeking AI would keep us around’ seem to me like Elon grasping at straws and thinking poorly, but he’s trying.
Here we have some fun not-entirely-unfair meta-chutzpah given Elon’s views on government and California otherwise, suddenly calling out Musk for doing xAI despite thinking AI is an existential risk (which is actually a pretty great point), and a rather bizarre theory of future debates about regulatory paths.
That is such a great encapsulation of the a16z mindset. Everything is a con, everyone has an angle, Musk must be out there trying to hurt his enemies. That must be it. Beff Jezos went with the same angle.
This is an excellent point. Whichever side you are on, you should be very happy the issue remains non-partisan. Let’s all work to keep it that way.
Another excellent point and a consistent pattern. Watch who has clearly RTFB (read the bill) especially in its final form, and who has not. Negative Reactions to Anthropic’s Letter, Attempts to Suppress DissentWe also have Meanwhile Garry Tan (among others, but he’s the one Chau quoted) is doing exactly what Chau warns about, saying things like ‘your API customers will notice how decelerationist you are’ and that is absolutely a threat and an attempt to silence dissent against the consensus. The message, over and over, loud and clear, is: We tolerate no talk that there might be any risk in the room whatsoever, or any move to take safety precautions or encourage them in others. If you dare not go with the vibe they will work to ensure you lose business. (And of course, everyone who doesn’t think you should go forward with reckless disregard, and ‘move fast and break things,’ is automatically a ‘decel,’ which should absolutely be read in-context the way you would a jingoistic slur.) It should not be underestimated the extent to which, in the VC-SV core, dissent is being suppressed, with people and companies voicing the wrong support or the wrong vibes risking being cut off from their social networks and funding sources. When there are prominent calls for even the lightest of all support for acting responsibly - such as a non-binding letter saying maybe we should pay attention to safety risks that was so harmless SoftBank signed it - there are calls to boycott everyone in question, on principle. The thinness of skin is remarkable. They fight hard for the vibes.
I like the refreshing clarity of Aaron’s first sentence. He says we should not ‘create the template to slow things down,’ on principle. As in, we should not only not slow things down in exchange for other benefits, we should intentionally not have the ability to, in the future, take actions that might do that. The second sentence then goes on to make a concrete counterfactual claim, also a good thing to do, although I strongly claim that the second sentence is false, such a bill would have done very little. If you’re wondering why so many in VC/YC/SV worlds think ‘everyone is against SB 1047,’ this kind of purity spiral and echo chamber is a lot of why. Well played, a16z? Positions In Brief
I appreciated this insightful take on VCs who oppose SB 1047.
Indeed I have. At least here they tell you they’re saying no. Now you want them to tell you why and how you can change their minds? Good luck with that.
Mike Knoop, previously having opposed SB 1047 because he does not think AGI progress is progressing and that anything slowing down AGI progress would be bad,
Notice how much the online debate has always been between libertarians and more extreme libertarians. Everyone involved hates regulation. The public, alas, does not.
Postscript: AB 3211 RTFBC (Read the Bill Changes)One thing California does well is show you how a bill has changed We’ll start with a brief review of the old version (abridged a bit for length). Note that some of this was worded badly in ways that might backfire quite a lot. Authentic content is created by humans. Inauthentic content is created by AIs and could be mistaken for authentic. The bill applies to every individual, no size thresholds at all. Providers of any size must ‘to the extent possible’ place ‘imperceptible and maximally indelible’ watermarks on all content, along with watermark decoders. Grandfathering in old systems requires a 99% accurate detector. We now know that OpenAI thinks it knows how to do that. No one else, to our knowledge, is close. Models would be banned.
Internet hosting platforms are responsible for ensuring indelible watermarks. All failures must be reported within 24 hours. All AI that could produce inauthentic content requires notification for each conversation, including audio notification for every audio interaction. New cameras have to provide watermarks. Large online platforms (1 million California users, not only social media but also e.g. texting systems) shall use labels on every piece of content to mark it as human or AI, or some specific mix of the two. For audio that means a notice at the beginning and another one at the end, every time, for all messages AI or human. Also you check a box on every upload. Fines are up to $1 million or 5% of global annual revenue, EU style. All existing open models are toast. New open models might or might not be toast. It doesn’t seem possible to comply with an open model, on the law’s face.
All right, let’s see what got changed and hopefully fixed, excluding stuff that seems to be for clarity or to improve grammar without changing the meaning. There is a huge obvious change up front: Synthetic content now only includes images, videos and audio. The bill no longer cares about LLMs or text at all. A bunch of definitions changed in ways that don’t alter my baseline understanding. Large online platform no longer includes internet website, web application or digital application. It now has to be either a social media platform, messaging platform, advertising network or standalone search engine that displays content to viewers who are not the creator or collaborator, and the threshold is up to 2 million monthly unique California users. Generative AI providers have to make available to the public a provenance detection tool or permit users to use one provided by a third party, based on industry standards, that detects generative AI content and how that content was created. There is no minimum size threshold for the provider before they must do this. Summaries of testing procedures must be made available upon requests to academics, except when that would compromise the method. A bunch of potentially crazy disclosure requirements got removed. The thing about audio disclosures happening twice is gone. Users of platforms need not label every piece of data now, the platform scans the data and reports any provenance data contained therein, or says it is unknown if none is found. There are new disclosure rules around the artist, track and copyright information on sound recordings and music videos, requiring the information be displayed in text. I think that’s the major changes, and they are indeed major. I am no longer worried AB 3211 is going to do anything too dramatic, since at worst it applies only to audio, video and images, and the annoyance levels involved are down a lot, and standards for compliance are lower, and compliance in these other formats seems easier than text. My new take on the new AB 3211 is that this is a vast improvement. If nothing else, the blast radius is vastly diminished. Is it now a good bill? I wouldn’t go that far. It’s still not a great implementation. I don’t think deepfakes are a big enough issue to motivate this level of annoyance, or the tail risk that this is effectively a much broader burden than it appears. But the core thing it is attempting to do is no longer a crazy thing to attempt, and the worst dangers are gone. I think the costs exceed the benefits, but you could make a case, if you felt deepfake audio and video were a big short term deal, that this bill has more benefits than costs. What you cannot reasonably do is support this bill, then turn around and say that California should not be regulating AI and should let the Federal government do it. That does not make any sense, and I have confidence the Federal government will if necessary deal with deepfakes, and that we could safely react after the problem gets worse and being modestly ‘too late’ to it would not be a big deal. You're currently a free subscriber to |