---
subject: "The art of intentional gatherings"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-05-21 03:33:50
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
I met some close friends over the last two weekends, and we did the usual—wore cute outfits, went to a cocktail bar, and ordered some drinks and food. This has been our typical way (and perhaps the only way) of catching up with each other.
In the beginning, we particularly liked the idea of ‘hanging out’—it was just about spending unstructured time together with no set agenda. But eventually, we realised that these meet-ups were becoming uninspiring, underwhelming moments that failed to move us in any way or connect us to one another more meaningfully.
In The Art of Gathering: How We Meet and Why It Matters, Priya Parker makes a compelling case for purposeful, intentional gatherings. She calls for radically updating how we all gather by asking WHY we meet. This is actually the opposite of a buzzkill question. She emphasises reflecting on what the purpose of the meeting is and letting that purpose guide the details—who you are seeing, where you are seeing them, what time of day works best, and what you will do together. For example, if this year, you’d like to spend more time exploring the history of your city, let ‘how you plan the next meet up’ embody that purpose. If you want some stillness and deep conversation, perhaps, don’t consider that dingy, crowded cafe or bar.
Focusing on “why”, this Friday, Alifya Khan did a sharp and engaging [feature](https://the-ken.com/story/why-maheshwer-peri-rages-against-indias-education-machine/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) on Maheshwer Peri. Publisher, influencer, entrepreneur, activist, and counsellor, Peri has worn many hats. His viral social-media posts have inspired many spirited debates: in December 2022, he wrote on the “placement myth” of IITs; in February, he questioned the 575% surge in the fees charged by the reputed IIM Ahmedabad—Rs 27 lakh ($32,700) in 2021 from Rs 4 lakh ($4,800) in 2007. Alifya writes in depth about why Peri is so worked up about Indian education.
On Thursday, Rahul [explored](https://the-ken.com/story/malaysia-vies-for-pole-position-in-asias-medical-tourism-race/?r_edition=2&utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) if Malaysia can become a top medical-tourism destination in Asia. India, Thailand, and Malaysia are the three largest destinations in the region for medical tourism. Malaysia built its medical-tourism sector on Indonesian demand. Now, it wants to attract patients from across the world, even as other nations up the ante.
After six months of delays—including three deadline extensions—the Competition Commission of India (CCI) finally filled the top position at India’s antitrust watchdog on 15 May. On Wednesday, I [wrote](https://the-ken.com/story/india-finally-gets-a-new-antitrust-chief-but-her-path-is-a-minefield/?r_edition=2&utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) about why the country’s antitrust regulator hasn’t had a chief for the past six months, the logjam that ensued subsequently, and how the larger problem of understaffing still remains unsolved at the CCI.
Rounak, on Tuesday, reported on the journey of a young non-bank, which recently registered its best-ever quarter. Poonawalla Fincorp has taken Magma apart brick by brick to rebuild it with a retail and digital product suite and a new set of urban, more credit-worthy customers. While it’s natural for employees to exit the company that gets acquired, Rounak [explains](https://the-ken.com/story/poonawalla-fincorp-is-not-interested-in-magma-customers-magma-employees-are-not-interested-in-poonawalla-fincorp/?r_edition=2&utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) why Magma employees’ exit is also taking down Poonawalla Fincorp’s own employees.
On Monday, Pratap, in his sharp [story](https://the-ken.com/story/jio-airtel-brace-for-another-epic-price-war-and-its-not-for-mobile-users/?r_edition=2&utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter), wrote about the Jio-Airtel price war that is moving from our smartphones to our homes. He explains the challenges India’s top two telcos face and finds who’s in a better position to win this time.
Circling back to intentional gatherings, I am still learning more about how to create purposeful meet-ups. Do let me know if you have experimented with how you hang out with your loved ones and if you have re-engineered hanging-out ways to develop a more meaningful relationship.
Regards,
Vanita
[vanita@the-ken.com](mailto:vanita@the-ken.com)
What you just read is the personalised daily introduction to The Kens story. Written by a different person each day. Often insightful, sometimes witty, and very rarely boring. Someone sent this to you? [Sign up for free](https://the-ken.com/?modal=register&utm_source=footer&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=morning_email_ind_recap). [Dont like these? You can unsubscribe](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/unsubscribe/?user_id=2349339&data=lmEHdriwt5pe-c5OvjNqGdqvr4qwxWEFCklnpmQoj0FoMDAwdTAwMGJMOLd0Uc4gaQH6TgKsMQUM08DZyrwTYoZrRLCwL7V_1o0d3f4oBFglzom-P0OUO-vdrH6DELjxDko-SdyEcbiSjAJc8JTGC38yHlONl_F4zI7a9Kg04rdFuoq9mDvIUwIbD62UXKaaSUBlw0NiATcTIUHNbdaGxzWJGPNl4gIcJb19otz-Ej6lYXcFlQKt96raPkOIvEsRwB07M5AykHELj8tX47uwivxbe9qloQ7elLfNadOpXlOKD0p-eE0D12p-MzOx8l8qWAn9HGV0u0HhuH99KV8OtSCEEsELOO8yBIkb04WsiN4j01sDcxl8CH1F2q58w9QDztwRKGvS6FhnHFipT5ckTNUAto5gyHtm0dRsKK_PYmqw95U-KbPTW4HRBnivwTsscvO7jCPRTcaTlPw2BcISzlL5DqOIeynOf6p9QvCzBbGuzXTsIlb1ZNcRXkzO20ChJ40EhcfMXNE8KbMD6xCJA19GWTct_ltxET9v5GdO8L2M5OieKRxZ97OTZ25yIrgEqSwANNdhWgc=) Dont want to hear from us again? [ Unsubscribe from our emails here](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/?user_id=2349339&data=v0fAkI5T9FW28O6EZ18od6jwpc7g_3voglEC4wSQgANoMDAwdTAwMJk9lSFQPPvmrRSOWP9j33yjD0IvjZ6EXH8jf7I1z2ZlPRgbLBqJpZDfTdk3fE6BaYAIB9PLnOEAoCMtiygNYKDpi8dG4Cn78JGXh05J34p_uwkWMH60SV1n6jacenar7nc_msAID2BwHD_CHLSYgyj0aN1zQDYXZ5DBbTsnp6RgieryCFcGvVSxi8Vgh0V8IC5ljRn6r3hCwJHjarxjy9ApRrdLARSa0UVlYf6NJItaLNgJMdcwZPCVIoHIAjzIJ0n8clUnDd5gt5D2rUS3Ip8h6vxf4nqme0qcS9FCRD0IS3I6FRQyWepSx67air1wB358cD4zAemJWMfi0yNBBCZV3IOMXCe4ngh4VbQ4XVPhf9fsNWBEWyAwrxlEhQaSky4GfIZflzukDlFUI4VpkBR4fd9kZqf6b3vO8otyzPTbJDhe4zvd9Md7f53JtHpohSnWHJrVu-V1Ix6wcOE5t8ObqgTiCc8oJrSOzDxhfZABPr3MaJL88Es1U3Vek6UJAQ==).
Something wrong? Tell us at [support@the-ken.com](mailto:support@the-ken.com)