---
subject: "Sudan, 1898"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-01-12 14:02:23
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Thanks for reading! To support my work, please click the button below: If you want to help keep this project going, you can purchase a paid subscription. Paid subscribers — it’s only about 75 cents a week! — get access to the archives and my undying gratitude. This is a long post, so your email provider may cut it off. Make sure to click “View Entire Message” to see the whole thing. I’ll let this guy start the story: Yes, that’s little Winston Churchill, aged about 24. In the picture above, he’s posing in front of a painted backdrop in a Cairo photography studio. He has just begged out of his service in India to join the imperial army in Sudan because he wants to be a part of the action there. In his book
The situation was this: the British were scrambling to subjugate as much of the African continent as they could. Sudan had long been ruled by Egypt, but Egypt had come to be dominated by Britain. A man named Muhammad Ahmad — who claimed to be the Mahdi, a descendant of Muhammad who Muslims expected to return at the end of the world to dispense justice — had built a movement in the 1880s to challenge Egyptian (and British) dominance of the Sudan. Though he died in 1885, he was ably succeeded by Abdallahi ibn Muhammad, also known as “the Khalifa.” The Mahdi and Khalifa raised massive armies that ran several Anglo-British armies out of Sudan, making Sudan one of the few places in Africa that was able to hold out against European imperialism. The Sudanese people’s capable and determined efforts to keep their freedom did not, unfortunately, deter Europeans from trying to conquer them. In the late 1890s, the British decided to send a larger, better-equipped force into the Sudan to crush the Mahdist army and prevent Sudan from falling into the hands of approaching French forces. This force, under Herbert Kitchener, had Maxim guns—an early form of the machine gun—and was supported by gunboats on the Nile. The Maxim gun would change the nature of warfare. It was the first truly automatic machine gun, capable of firing 600 rounds per minute. In his
The final showdown between the Mahdi’s army and Kitchener’s — the battle Churchill begins to narrate above — happened at Omdurman, right across the river from Khartoum. The battlefield, captured in these photos from the 1930s, was mostly a flat expanse: There, about 8,000 British soldiers, accompanied by 17,000 Egyptians, encountered a Mahdist force that exceeded 50,000 men. The Khalifa’s strategy was to allow the British to approach Omdurman and then overwhelm them with superior numbers. The Mahdist soldiers carried banners with religious messages on them: The battle began early in the morning with a huge assault by the Mahdist army: Churchill, though a British triumphalist, did not shy away from the ugly realities of the battle:
During breaks in the fighting, Egyptian soldiers looted the bodies of their dead enemies: The Khalifa’s troops attacked the British position again and again. Each time, their superior numbers were driven back by the pitiless fire of the Maxim guns and the gunboat artillery. Eventually, the British 21st Lancers, a cavalry unit, charged. Churchill seems to be trying to channel
The Lancers’ charge was not just the centerpiece of Churchill’s account, it captured the imagination of the British public. The event was depicted by a number of artists in the ensuing years as a glorious moment in imperialism. Here’s Edward Hale’s painting: And R.C. Woodville’s: And William Barnes Wollen’s: The Lancers’ charge even inspired cigarette cards: This one was part of the “ Private Byrne was a big hero for the British, having singlehandedly fought off a number of enemy soldiers: In a separate
By the end of the day, the Mahdist army was broken. Young Winston ends his narrative of the battle with an arrogant colonialist flourish:
By afternoon, the Anglo-Egyptian army was in possession of Omdurman and the Mahdist state was no more. Omdurman came to mean different things to different people. For the British public it was a “ Not everyone was charmed by the stories coming out of Sudan. The fiercely anti-imperialist poet W.S. Blunt wrote to the Times of London,
Historians often cite Omdurman as one of the turning points in the history of warfare. It showed that modern weaponry could overcome much larger forces and paved the way toward the horrors of twentieth-century industrialized warfare. As for our young narrator, Winston Churchill had complicated feelings about the battle. In some places, he depicts it jingoistically, as a great victory for civilization. In others, he seems shaken by the horrors of battle. In a later memoir, he The British troops destroyed the Mahdi’s tomb, taking many of its decorative elements back to England with them. They dug out his long-dead body, decapitated it, and tossed it into the Nile. Kitchener Here’s what was left of the Mahdi’s tomb in 1906: The Mausoleum has since been rebuilt: You have no doubt noticed that I’ve presented this entire account from the British perspective, often using the words of Winston Churchill, a famously That’s not for lack of trying to find Sudanese perspectives or artifacts, but they haven’t been preserved or studied in the same way that the British viewpoint has, at least in places I know to look (if you know of something I’ve missed, let me know in the comments). But I did come across some really interesting photographs of Omdurman after the war, giving a limited glimpse of life after the battle, under British rule. The British built a monument to the dozens of soldiers who died on their side in 1898 and erected it on the battlefield at Omdurman (it will not surprise you that the deaths of far more Sudanese soldiers were not commemorated): A market street in Omdurman in 1936, the year the rest of the photos were taken: And the adjacent covered market: The main mosque of the city: The caretaker of the Khalifa’s house, dressed in clothes typical of the Mahdists: And my favorite photo of the bunch, just a group of kids being kids around a stranger’s camera: None of the people in these photos had their names recorded. Even the children in this last photo are almost certainly dead now. We can guess at what they thought about the Battle of Omdurman and its aftermath, but it’s hard to know for sure. Events like Omdurman leave a problem for the historian: how can we interpret them fairly when the evidence we have — both visual and written — is so one-sided? This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: Or you can share the newsletter with others: Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week! You're currently a free subscriber to |