---
subject: "The Bluey Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-02-01 16:20:32
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Kevin Maguire (KM) As long as we've been watching TV, it has been filled with a steady stream of below-par dads. They’re there to laugh at, but never aspire to: dads like Al Bundy, George Bluth Sr., or Homer Simpson (who only agreed to Kids' TV today doesn't fare much better—the most recognizable father figure to this generation of children would be Daddy Pig: an incompetent fool whose hobbies include watching TV, eating chocolate cake, and generally avoiding any physical activity. He’s father to a daughter who You can’t be what you can’t see. And that’s why I'm so thankful for Bandit Heeler, father-in-chief on the kid’s TV show Bluey. For the uninitiated, Bluey is a show about a family of dogs who live in Brisbane, Australia. Bandit works as an archaeologist, and his wife Heeler in airport security (he digs bones, and she sniffs suitcases, I assume?) But it’s really what happens at home that brings the show to life, and the heart-warming and ambitious portrayal of the modern dad. Why is this interesting? A few years ago Bandit gleefully breaks away from this tired stereotype. For one, he’s the primary caregiver, which is an oddity on TV, even today. But it’s not just what he does, it’s how he does it: playing joyously with his kids, changing our perception of what dads can be, and inspiring us to be better. It’s no hyperbole to say he raises the bar for fatherhood—he’s the dad you could be if you left your phone in the other room, closed your laptop, and joined the fun. You too could be more present. More playful. More patient. And maybe Bandit is not a perfect parent. None of us are. There are episodes that remind you of your own parenting mistakes, like when he In the season one episode “Takeaway” Bandit attempts to read a newspaper while he waits for a food order to be ready. In an interview, showrunner and writer Joe Brumm summed up the appeal of the show for parents:
Most kids’ TV shows aim their moral compass at the children—teaching them Some parents argue that Bandit and Heeler set unattainable goals, and Last month, I was talking to a friend about how much we love the show. "I often find myself thinking of Bandit when I’m busy and my daughter wants my attention," he told me. Even though Bandit once decreed that you My current parenting mantra? Simple "What Would Bandit Do?" — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) — Why is this interesting? is a daily email from Noah Brier & Colin Nagy (and friends!) about interesting things. If you’ve enjoyed this edition, please consider forwarding it to a friend. If you’re reading it for the first time, consider subscribing. You're currently a free subscriber to |