---
subject: "Congress Asks Better Questions"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-07-02 22:01:34
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
The majority of talk was this orchestrated rhetoric that assumes the conclusion that what matters is ‘democracy versus authoritarianism’ and whether we ‘win,’ often (but not always) translating that as market share without any actual mechanistic model of any of it. However, there were also some very good signs, some excellent questions, signs that there is an awareness setting in. As far as Congressional discussions of real AGI issues go, this was in part one of them. That’s unusual. (And as always there were a few on random other high horses, that’s how this works.) Partly because I was working from YouTube rather than a transcript, instead of doing a dramatization I will be first be highlighting some other coverage of the events to skip to some of the best quotes, then doing a more general summary and commentary. Most of you should likely read the first section or two, and then stop. I did find it enlightening to go through the whole thing, but most people don’t need to do that. Some Of The Best Stuff
Also from the hearing,
That was a good illustration of both sides of what we saw. This was also a central case of why Anthropic and Jack Clark are so frustrating. Anthropic should indeed be emphasizing the need for testing, and Clark does this, but we shouldn’t be ‘attempting to reassure’ anyone based on that. Anthropic knows it is worse than you know, and hides this information thinking this is a good strategic move. Throughout the hearing, Jack Clark said many very helpful things, and often said them quite well. He also constantly pulled back from the brink and declined various opportunities to inform people of important things, and emphasized lesser concerns and otherwise played it quiet.
I can accept that framing. The full talk about humans being unemployable comes at the very end. Until then, there is talk several times about jobs and societal disruption, but it tries to live in the Sam Altman style fantasy where not much changes. Finally, at the end, Mark Beall gets an opportunity to actually Say The Thing. He doesn’t miss. Welcome to the HouseIt is a good thing I knew there was better ahead, because oh boy did things start out filled with despair. As our first speaker, after urging us to ban AI therapist bots because one sort of encouraged a kid to murder his parents ‘so they could be together,’ Representative Krishnamoorthi goes on show a clip of Chinese robot dogs, then to say we must ban Chinese and Russian AI models so we don’t sent them our data (no one tell him about self-hosting) and then plays ‘a clip from The Matrix’ that is not even from The Matrix, claiming that the army or Mr. Smiths is ‘a rogue AI army that is broken loose from human control.’ I could not even. Congress often lives in the ultimate cringe random half-right associative Gell-Mann Amnesia world. But that still can get you to realize some rather obvious true things, and luckily that was indeed the worst of it even from Krishnamoorthi, this kind of thinking can indeed point towards important things.
I mean yes that is common sense. Yes, rhetoric from minutes prior (and after) aside, we should be building ‘safer AGI’ and if we can’t do that we shouldn’t be building AGI at all. It’s a real shame that no one has any idea how to ensure that AGI is aligned with human values, or how to get it to comply with laws that apply to humans. Maybe we should get to work on that. And then we get another excellent point.
Yes, at a bare minimum not deporting our existing AI researchers and cutting off existing related research programs does seem like the least you could do? I’d also like to welcome a lot more talent, but somehow this is where we are. Opening StatementsWe then get Dr. Mahnken’s opening statement, which emphasizes that we are in a battle for technical dominance, America is good and free and our AI will be empowering and innovative whereas China is bad and low trust and a fast follower. He also emphasizes the need for diffusion in key areas. Of course, if you are facing a fast follower, you should think about what does and doesn’t help them follow, and also you can’t panic every time they fast follow you and respond with ‘go faster or they’ll take the lead!’ as they then fast follow your new faster pace. Nor would you want to hand out your top technology for free. Next up is Mr. Beall. He frames the situation as two races. I like this a lot. First, we have the traditional battle for economic, military and geopolitical advantage in mundane terms played with new pieces. Many only see this game, or pretend only this game exists. This is a classic, well-understood type of game. You absolutely want to fight for profits and military strength and economic growth and so on in mundane terms. We all agree on things like the need to greatly expand American energy production (although the BBB does not seem to share this opinion) and speed adaptation in government. I still think that even under this framework the obsession with ‘market share’ especially of chip sales (instead of chip ownership and utilization) makes absolutely no sense and would make no sense even if that question was in play, as does the obsession with the number of tokens models serve as opposed to looking at productivity, revenue and profits. There’s so much rhetoric behind metrics that don’t matter. The second race is the race to artificial superintelligence (ASI) or to AGI. This is the race that counts, and even if we get there first (and even more likely if China gets there first) the default result is that everyone loses. He asks for the ‘three Ps,’ protect our capabilities, promote American technology abroad and prepare by getting it into the hands of those that need it and gathering the necessary information. He buys into this new centrality of the ‘American AI tech stack’ line that’s going around, despite the emphasis on superintelligence, but he does warn that AGI may come soon and we need to urgently gather information about that so we can make informed choices, and even suggests narrow dialogue with China on potential mitigations of certain risks and verification measures, while continuing to compete with China otherwise. Third up we have Jack Clark of Anthropic, he opens like this.
He then goes on to talk about how American AI will be democratic and Chinese AI will be authoritarian and America must prevail, as we are now required to say by law, Shibboleth. He talks about misuse risk and CBRN risks and notes DeepSeek poses these as well, and then mentions the blackmail findings, and calls for tighter export controls and stronger federal ability to test AI models, and broader deployment within government. I get what Clark is trying to do here, and the dilemma he is facing. I appreciate talking about safety up front, and warning about the future pace of progress, but I still feel like he is holding back key information that needs to be shared if you want people to understand the real situation. Instead, we still have 100 minutes that touch on this in places but mostly are about mundane economic or national security questions, plus some model misbehavior. Krishnamoorthi Keeps GoingNow we return to Representative Krishnamoorthi, true master of screen time, who shows Claude refusing to write a blog post promoting eating disorders, then DeepSeek being happy to help straight up and gets Clark to agree that DeepSeek does not do safety interventions beyond CCP protocols and that this is unacceptable, then reiterates his bill to not let the government use DeepSeek, citing that they store data on Chinese servers. I mean yes obviously don’t use their hosted version for government purposes, but does he not know how open source works, I wonder? He pivots to chip smuggling and the risk of DeepSeek using our chips. Clark is happy to once again violently agree. I wonder if this is a waste or good use of time, since none of it is new, but yes obviously what matters is who is using the chip, not who made it, and selling our chips to China (at least at current market prices) is foolish, Krishnamoorthi points out Nvidia’s sales are growing like gangbusters despite export controls and Clark points out that every AI company keeps using more compute than expected. Then there’s a cool question, essentially asking about truesight and ability to infer missing information when given context, before finishing by asking about recent misalignment results:
The Crowd Goes WildMoolenaarRepresentative Moolenaar then starts with a focus on chip smuggling and diffusion, getting Beall to affirm smuggling is a big deal then asking Clark about how this is potentially preventing American technological infrastructure diffusion elsewhere. There is an obvious direct conflict, you need to ensure the compute is not diverted or misused at scale. Comparisons are made to nuclear materials. Then he asks Clark, as an immigrant, about how to welcome immigrants especially from authoritarian states to help our AI work, and what safeguards we would need. Great question. Clark suggests starting with university-level STEM immigration, the earlier the better. I agree, but it would be good to have a more complete answer here about containing information risks. It is a real issue. CarsonRepresentative Carson is up next and asks about information warfare. Clark affirms AI can do this and says we need tools to fight against it. LahoodRepresentative Lahood asks about the moratorium that was recently removed from the BBB, warning about the ‘patchwork of states.’ Clark says we need a federal framework, but that without one powerful AI is coming soon and you’d just be creating a vacuum, which would be flooded if something went wrong. Later Clark, in response to another question, emphasizes that the timeline is short and we need to be open to options. DunnRepresentative Dunn asks about the blackmail findings and asks if he should be worried about AIs using his bank information against him. Clark says no, because we publish the research and we should encourage more of this and also closely study Chinese models, and I agree with that call but it doesn’t actually explain why you shouldn’t worry (for now, anyway). Dunn then asks about the finding that you can put a sleeper agent into an AI, Clark says testing for such things likely would take them a month. Dunn then asks Manhken what would be the major strategic missteps Congress might make in an AGI world. He splits his answer into insufficient export controls and overregulation, it seems he thinks there are not other things to worry about when it comes to AGI. Here’s one that isn’t being noticed enough:
He then asks Beall what should be included in that. Beall starts off with strategic missile-related systems and directive 3000.09 on lethal autonomous systems. Then he moves to superintelligence, but time runs out before he can explain what he wants. JohnsonRepresentative Johnson notes the members are scared and that ‘losing this race’ could ‘trigger a global crisis,’ and asks about dangers of data centers outside America, which Beall notes of course are that we won’t ultimately own the chips or AI, so we should redouble our efforts to build domestically even if we have to accept some overseas buildout for energy reasons. Johnson asks about the tradeoff between safety and speed, seeing them in conflict. Jack points out that, at current margins, they’re not.
Those who set up the ‘slow down’ and safety versus speed framework must of course take the L on how that (in hindsight inevitably) went down. Certainly there are still sometimes tradeoffs here on some margins, on some questions, especially when you are the ‘fun police’ towards your users, or you delay releases for verification. Later down the road, there will be far more real tradeoffs that occur at various points. But also, yes, for now the tradeoffs are a lot like those in cars, in that improving the safety and security of the models helps them be a lot more useful, something you can trust and that businesses especially will want to use. At this point, Anthropic’s security focus is a strategic advantage. Johnson wants to believe Clark, but is skeptical and asks Manhken, who says too much emphasis on safety could indeed slow us down (which, as phrased, is obviously true), that he’s worried we won’t go fast enough and there’s no parallel conversation at the PRC. TorresRepresentative Torres asks Clark how close China is to matching ASML and TSMC. Clark says they are multiple years behind. Torres then goes full poisoned banana race:
Clark says yes in terms of doing it here but no because it’s from private actors and they agree we desperately need more energy. Hissen says Chinese labs aren’t doing healthy competition, they’re stealing our tech, then praises the relaxation of the Biden diffusion rules that prevent China from stealing our tech, and asks about what requirements we should attach to diffusion deals and everyone talks arms race and market share. Sigh. In case you were wonder where that was coming from, well, here we go:
You see, if you’re trying to not die that’s a conflict of interest and your role must have been super important, never mind all that lobbying by major tech corporations. Whereas if you want American policy to focus on your own market share, that’s good old fashioned patriotism, that must be it.
No, ma’am, we too are only trying to win the race and maximize corporate profits and keep our fellow patriots informed, it is fine. Anthropic doesn’t care about everyone not dying or anything, that would be terrible. Again, I get the strategic bind here, but I continue to find this deeply disappointing, and I don’t think it is a good play. She then asks Beall about DeepSeek’s ability to quickly copy our tech and potential future espionage threats and Beall reminds her that export controls work with a lag and notes DeepSeek was a wakeup call ( BrownRepresentative Brown pulls out They Took Our Jobs and ensuring people (like those in her district, Ohio’s 11th) don’t get left behind by automation and benefit instead, calling for investing in the American workforce, so Clark goes into those speeches and encouraging diffusion and adjusting regulation and acts as if Dario hadn’t predicted the automation of half of white-collar entry level jobs within five years. NunRepresentative Nun notes (along with various other race-related things) the commissioning of four top AI teams as lieutenant kernels, which I and Patrick McKenzie both noticed but has gotten little attention. He then brings up a Chinese startup called Zhipu (currently valued around $20 billion) as some sort of global threat.
That is indeed how a number of Congress people talk these days, including this sudden paranoia with some mysterious ‘lock in’ mechanism for API calls or self-hosted open models that no one has ever been able to explain to me. He does then ask an actual good question:
Mahnken does some China bad, US good and worries the Chinese will be deluded into thinking AI will let them do things they can’t do and they might start a war? Which is such a bizarre thing to worry about and also not an answer? Are we prepared? I assume mostly no. Nun then pushes his HR 2152 for government AI diffusion. He asks Clark how government and business can cooperate. Clark points to the deployment side and the development of safety standards as a way to establish trust and sell globally. TokudaRepresentative Tokuda starts out complaining about us gutting our institutions, Clark of course endorses investing more in NIST and other such institutions. Tokuda asks about industry responsibility, including for investment in related infrastructure, Clark basically says he works on that and for broader impact questions get back to him in 3-4 years to talk more. Then she gives us the remarkable quote above about superintelligence (at 1:30:20), the full quote is even stronger, but she doesn’t leave enough time for an answer. I am very grateful for the statement, even with no time left to respond. There is something so weird about asking two other questions first, then getting to ASI. MoranRepresentative Moran asks Clark, what’s the most important thing to win this race? Clark chooses power followed by compute and then government infrastructure, and suggests working backwards from the goal of 50 GW in 2027. Mahnkin is asked next and suggests trying to slow down the Chinese. Moran notices that AI is not like older programming, that it effectively will write its own rules and programming and will soon do its own research and asks what’s up with that. Clark says more research is urgently needed, and points out you wouldn’t want an AI that can blackmail you designing its successor. I’m torn on whether that cuts to the heart of the question in a useful way or not here. Moran then asks, what is the ‘red line’ on AI the Chinese cannot be allowed cross? Beall confirms AI systems are grown, not built, that it is alchemy, and that the automated R&D is the red line and a really big deal, we need to be up to speed on that. ConnorRepresentative Conner notes NIST’s safety testing is voluntary and asks if there should be some minimum third party verification required, if only to verify the company’s own standards. All right, Clark, he served it up for you, here’s the ball, what have you got?
I’m sorry, I think the word you were looking for was ‘yes’? What the hell? This is super frustrating. I mean as worded how is this even a question? You don’t need to know the final exact testing requirements before you start to move towards such a regime. There are so many different ways this answer is a missed opportunity. Humans UnemployableThe last question goes back to They Took Our Jobs, and Clark basically can only say we can gather data, and there are areas that won’t be impacted soon by AI, again pretending his CEO Dario Amodei hadn’t warned of a jobs ‘bloodbath.’ Beall steps up and says the actual damn thing (within the jobs context), which is that we face a potential future where humans are not only unemployed but unemployable, and we have to have those conversations in advance. And we end on this not so reassuring note:
That is quite the bold warning, and an excellent place to end the hearing. It is not the way I would have put it, but yes the idea of most or all of humanity being entirely disempowered and unproductive except for our little status games, existing off of gifted resources, property rights and rule of law and some form of goodwill and hoping all of this holds up does not seem like a plan that is likely to end well. At least, not for those humans. No, having ‘solved the alignment problem’ does not on its own get you out of this in any way, solving the alignment problem is the price to try at all. And that is indeed one kind of thing we need to think about now. Is this where I wanted the conversation to be in 2025? Oh, hell no. It’s a start. You're currently a free subscriber to |