---
subject: "How China Is Like the 19th Century U.S."
from: "Construction Physics <constructionphysics@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-11-01 12:03:35
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Construction Physics", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8588207018748827248", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
I spend a lot of time reading about manufacturing and its evolution, which means I end up repeatedly reading about the times and places where radical changes in manufacturing were taking place: Britain in the late 18th century, the US in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Japan in the second half of the 20th century, and (to a lesser extent) China today. I’ve been struck by how many parallels there are between modern China (roughly the period from the late 1970s till today) and the Gilded Age/Progressive era U.S. (roughly the period from the late 1860s to the 1920s). During these periods, unprecedented levels of economic growth combined with large populations were making both the U.S. and China wealthy and powerful. Both countries were urbanizing, building enormous amounts of infrastructure, and becoming by far the largest manufacturers in the world, with industrial operations of unprecedented size. Both were undergoing wrenching social and cultural change as old institutions were replaced by new ones, and the countries began to become “modern.” Both were nations of ambitious strivers, where it seemed like anyone with talent could make themselves into a success by catching the tide of rising opportunity. Despite the many differences between the two countries, the forces of development pulled them along very similar paths. The rise of the U.S., the rise of ChinaIn the decades following the Civil War and the Cultural Revolution, respectively, the U.S. and China both saw record-setting economic growth. In 1820 the US had a GDP roughly 1/3rd the size of the United Kingdom’s or France’s, and roughly half of Germany’s or Italy’s. By 1870, its GDP was nearly as large as the UK’s, and was about 40% larger than France or Germany’s. By 1913, its GDP was more than twice as large as either the UK’s or Germany’s. In the 1870s, the US grew somewhere between 4.5 and 6.7 percent annually in real terms, one of the fastest growth rates ever recorded. From 1870 to 1913, the US maintained a growth rate of nearly 4%; no European country had a growth rate more than 3% over the same period. In his China, of course, has redefined what it means to be “rapidly growing.” It went from having the 6th-largest GDP in Both the U.S. and China were able to become such large economies in part because of their comparatively large populations. China was already by far the largest country by population in Populations of Major Countries Population of the U.S., Germany, UK, France, and Italy in 19th and early 20th century. The U.S.’s population surge was in part the result of immigration. Between 1880 and 1920, the number of foreign-born residents in the US China hasn’t had the same influx of immigrants (its foreign-born population remains small, less than In both countries, this mass movement of people was paralleled by a rapid growth of cities and an increase in urbanization. In 1860, the US was still mostly a rural country, with an urbanization rate of around 20%. By 1920, urbanization had China’s rapid urbanization is reflected in a constant stream of impressive feats of infrastructure construction. China has built the world’s largest In the late 19th and early 20th century, however, it was the U.S. achieving these amazing feats of building. Between 1860 and 1916 the US built more than As they were urbanizing, both the U.S. and China were transforming from a nation of farmers to manufacturing powerhouses. In 1860, agriculture still Around the turn of the 20th century, Europeans began to publicly worry about the tidal wave of cheap exports and novel products arriving from the U.S.. Charles Morris notes that “Attentive European elites were shocked as they came to understand the scale and speed of America’s ascendancy. Hardly three decades before, America was still torn and bleeding from a savage civil war, making its living exporting raw cotton, grain, and timber in exchange for Europe’s surplus manufactures.” While today you can’t throw a rock without hitting a book about the rise of China, in the late 19th and early 20th centuries there were hundreds of books written discussing America’s economic success. A 1902 British book, The American Invaders, chronicled how American manufactured goods were transforming lives “from Madrid to St. Petersburg”:
The manufactured goods that America did produce were often considered low quality: Morris notes that up to the Civil War, most American tools and guns were made of British steel parts, and that for railroads, “any carrier looking for quality rails and rolling stock did its shopping in England.” But by the early 20th century, American goods seemed to be conquering the world, even complex, high-end goods like locomotives and China seems to have matched this trajectory beat for beat. Agriculture employment was In both the U.S. and China, the transition to manufacturing powerhouse came through operating at previously unimaginable levels of scale. In the late 19th and early 20th century, the development of transportation and communication infrastructure like railroads, steamships, and telegraphs made it possible to cost effectively transport goods long distances, creating large markets and enabling the creation of enormous industrial facilities far larger than anything that had been seen before. The U.S. developed a host of mass-production and continuous-process manufacturing methods that could produce a constant stream of output in enormous quantities, a transformation sometimes known as the Modern China has also pushed the scale envelope in its manufacturing operations. The peak of scale in American manufacturing operations is arguably Ford’s Notably, both the US and China lagged scientifically even as they were becoming powerful economically. In “ China, similarly, has not necessarily been a leader in scientific progress, even as it has become an economic juggernaut. China has won Growth and cultureUnsurprisingly, daily life in both countries changed dramatically as their economies transformed. Partly these changes were simply the result of adopting what we now consider modern conveniences. In
A similar transformation took place in China. Access to basic sanitation in China rose from 24% in This transformation spawned highly consumerist cultures in both countries as a large middle class emerged. Charles Morris describes the late 19th century U.S. as the first “mass consumer” society, with Americans purchasing a wide variety of new products, sold at new chain stores like A&P and Woolworths, or through catalogs like Sears and Montgomery Ward. Morris notes:
One
China seems to have gone through a similar evolution; the rise of a Chinese middle class created what has been called “tidal wave consumption” as shoppers began to quickly purchase the products they saw their neighbors buy. A man born to a professional family in China in the 1970s
At the high-end of the income distribution, both the U.S. and China saw the emergence of a new, ultra wealthy class. Osnos notes that “In 1850, America had fewer than twenty millionaires; by 1900 it had forty thousand”; China likewise has seen a rapid increase in the number of The sense I get from each time and place is of a roiling, bubbling ferment, as the old structures and ways of life are ripped apart and replaced by modern ones. In China, an economy driven entirely by state-owned companies and top-down planning was transforming into a market-driven one, requiring people to learn new rules, new strategies, and an entirely new way of life. In her book about Chinese female migrants,
Osnos notes that in Beijing, “The endless churn was the only constant," and that he “never passed up an invitation, because places, and people, vanished before you had the chance to see them again.” Other places seemed static and unchanging by comparison: a Chinese friend of Osnos rejected a suggestion to visit New York on a trip to America because “everytime I go, it looks the same.” Likewise, in the U.S. old institutions were ripped apart and replaced by new ones. While historically America had been a rural nation of small farmers and small businesses, by the late 19th century it was “careening towards modernity," being taken over by huge corporations and impersonal institutions. Morris describes how the “old ways of life, long settled expectations, all the fixed stars for measuring stature and progress, were violently wrenched out of place.”
In both countries, this upheaval created huge amounts of opportunity. With the old structures of life falling away, and new ones taking shape, there was much to gain by those willing to take risks, regardless of whether you had the right background or traditional status markets. In both countries new businesses would constantly spring up, fail, and then get replaced by different businesses, and people would quickly move from one opportunity to another. Both nations seemed full of strivers, people who would scramble and scrape to get ahead, and were rewarded for doing so. In the U.S., many tycoons and industrialists worked their way up from modest beginnings.
Most surprising of all to me was how much of what seems like a quintessentially American culture seems to have been recapitulated in modern China. In Factory Girls, migrants constantly move from one factory to another for new job opportunities, and many work their way up from assembly line workers to managers of entire factories (people changed jobs so often that mobile numbers were the only reliable way to reach them — office or dorm numbers were quickly out of date). Chang notes that migrants’ “tolerance for risk was astonishing. If they didn’t like a boss or a coworker, they jumped somewhere else and never looked back.” Evan Osnos likewise notes in his aptly titled Age of Ambition that “I had come to expect that Chinese friends would make financial decisions that I found uncomfortably risky: launching businesses with their savings, moving across the country without the assurance of a job.” Ambition, which had traditionally been cautioned against, became something to be celebrated:
(As I understand it, this ferment in China has died down somewhat since the early 2010s, and the Chinese economy no longer has such a “frontier” aspect to it. In Paired with this celebration of ambition is a culture of individualism and self-reliance. Osnos reports that “The state media, which had once encouraged everyone to be a ‘rustless screw’ in the machine, now acknowledged the new reality of competition: ‘you must rely on yourself,’ the Hebei Economic Daily wrote. ‘Blaze your own path and fight.’” Osnos writes:
An obsession with self-reliance also peppers Leslie Chang’s Factory Girls: a constant refrain, repeated by migrant girls themselves and in the magazines and media that cater to them, is that “you can only rely on yourself” (not surprising since workers are far from home, with few social ties, and constantly changing factories.) Migrants are constantly taking classes to try to improve themselves and their career prospects: often in English and computers, but also things like injection molding machine operation and how to work in an office. With institutions constantly in flux and being reshaped, and with culture and social mores untethered, these worlds of immense opportunity also contain an immense number of scams, schemes, and grift. Morris describes the late 1860s U.S. as a “pandemic of corruption” triggered by the huge injection of federal spending, and Immature financial markets and securities laws (the Securities and Exchange Commission wasn’t created until
China seems to have (or had) both a similar Wild West aspect and an obsession with economic growth. Chang’s factory girls are constantly at risk from being scammed or grifted by opportunists: bus drivers who take their ticket then kick them off, con-men who trick them out of their money, peddlers selling get-rich-quick schemes or dubious training courses, sales organizations which are really pyramid schemes, factory owners who force them to work for less than minimum wage or for more than the legal number of hours. At the same time, they’re constantly skirting the law themselves: using fake IDs to freely move around, lying about their skills and abilities to get hired, and buying counterfeit diplomas. Chang recounts one interaction with the teacher of a training course for migrants:
This Wild West culture has costs beyond the financial: an Both countries ultimately made efforts to rein in harms from corruption and unchecked development. In the U.S., the Gilded Age was followed by the Progressive Era, where reformers advocated for While China still has large amounts of corruption in the form of bribes and access money paid to government officials, Yuen Yuen Ang argues in China’s Gilded Age that China has been able to channel its corruption into a pro-development force. Local bureaucrats are often paid by kickbacks, free meals, and so on, but these are linked to their region’s economic development: the more private investment, and the greater the success of local businesses, the greater these types of benefits they can extract. Interestingly, you see the same sort of idea in late 19th and early 20th century US, with the idea of “ ConclusionI’m far from the first person to point out these resemblances between the U.S. and China. In Age of Ambition, Osnos notes that:
Yuen Yuen Ang likewise notes the similarities between modern China and the Gilded Age U.S., stating that “both countries underwent a wrenching structural conversion from rural to urban and closed to global markets, producing once-in-a-generation opportunities for the politically connected and enterprising…to acquire fabulous wealth.” The most interesting thing about these parallels, to me, is that the U.S. and China in many ways were starting from very different places. Prior to its opening up, China’s economy was entirely state-owned and state-planned, and its economic expansion was coupled with unwinding much of the state enterprise machinery, letting small businesses form and markets bloom. The U.S., on the other hand, was on the other end of the spectrum. Prior to its economic expansion it had an incredibly weak state, and economy driven by very small enterprises. Its development was accompanied by the creation of large, powerful companies and institutions, and moving away from the “invisible hand” of the market and towards the “visible hand” of exchanges of goods and services mediated within very large organizations. China’s success came from finding ways to mobilize its huge number of people and hasn’t necessarily been focused on operating at the frontier of efficiency. The U.S., on the other hand, despite its comparatively large population, had a chronic shortage of labor, and much of its development was focused on developing less labor-intensive manufacturing technologies like the Thanks to Dan Wang for reading a draft of this. All errors are my own. 1 This is a list of “buildings,” not tallest structures, which would include things like the much taller Eiffel Tower. 2 Many of these prizes will be lagging indicators, awarded far after the work done for them, so the lack of awards is probably a better indicator of China’s historical scientific efforts rather than in the last 10-20 years. But it nevertheless shows that China has not been leading scientifically even as it has grown rich. Studies of China’s scientific progress often use metrics like number of papers published or number of Construction Physics articles will always remain free, but if you find this work valuable, I encourage you to Construction Physics is produced in partnership with the Institute for Progress, a Washington, DC-based think tank. You can learn more about their work by visiting their You can also contact me on |