---
subject: "The Nutgraf: “There’s an app for that”—Swiggy, Zepto, and Blinkit"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-01-11 04:52:54
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
If you are applying for a role in marketing or product at a consumer startup, one question you can expect in your interview is, “If you are the Product head at a quick-commerce company like Zomato, Swiggy, or Zepto, how do you decide which verticals need a separate app and which ones remain on your main app?”
There are two answers to this question.
One way to arrive at the solution is by using all the principles of product management. You segment the users and cluster the ones who behave the same way. Then you examine the retention cohorts of these segments, and their corresponding metrics like average order value, lifetime value, and stuff like that. Then you look at cross-purchase user segments, and examine their retention curve. Then eventually, you make a cost-benefit analysis that balances the cost of acquiring new users with the higher retention that your new app will create. That’s more or less your answer on whether or not to build a separate app. This is what your interviewer expects to hear from you.
Here’s the non-jargon version of how this usually pans out. Let’s say you work at Zepto. If you want to decide whether to create a separate app to deliver, say, coffee and fresh snacks in 10 minutes, you start by analysing the behaviour of users who use Zepto almost exclusively to buy snacks and coffee. Once you figure out a considerable number of these users are more loyal to Zepto (and more lucrative), then you have some evidence to justify a separate app for them. You strengthen your argument by doing some cost-benefit analysis for building a separate app. You do a minimum product with an engineering team by reusing as many existing APIs as possible to launch quickly. You convince designers that it’s not a “rebranding”, but just a “refresh”. Marketing has the easiest job—it just has to come up with a nice logo and a new name for the app. They huddle together in a conference room, open a thesaurus, and start debating whether to call it Cafe, Bistro, or Snack. You launch in a couple of weeks. The CEO makes a big announcement on Linkedin. You get a nice award at the monthly all-hands. Annual appraisal bullet point done. Promotion recommendation sorted.
That’s one possible answer.
In fact, last month, when companies like Blinkit and Zepto announced new apps, I made similar arguments. I examined it logically.
If you understand this, then you understand why Blinkit and Zepto are spinning out Bistro and Cafe as separate apps. In fact, the original rationale behind launching Zepto Cafe was to boost the average order value of grocery purchases on Zepto. Earlier this year, a Harvard Business School case study on Zepto also suggested that it could use Zepto Cafe to increase order value. The assumption was that customers would add items from Zepto Cafe while making grocery purchases.
I don’t know this with certainty, but now that Zepto is spinning out its Cafe into a separate app, I suspect Zepto has discovered that customers don’t behave like they’d originally expected. People don’t order egg puffs and groceries at the same time. These are distinct purchasing behaviours, done at different times, with separate retention patterns. Zepto and Blinkit would rather take a chance at creating new associations for specific, narrow behaviours by rolling out separate apps, rather than figure out how to make customers perform both behaviours in one purchase flow contained in a single app. It’s somewhat counterintuitive, but it’s bold.
10-minute delivery is eating 40-minute food delivery, [The Nutgraf](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/10-minute-delivery-is-eating-40-minute-food-delivery/)
Call it 2025 clarity, but today, I’m more convinced that the real answer is that these decisions are much more messy, complicated, and random.
Just last week, Albinder Dhindsa, CEO of Blinkit, gave us another plausible reason why Blinkit spun out Bistro as a separate app.
And it had nothing to do with user cohorts.
Ah!
After Blinkit rolled out Bistro, Swiggy did something similar (and launched an app called Snacc). And this prompted a complaint from the restaurant body NRAI. The NRAI’s argument is that Zomato and Swiggy are marketplaces, and now that they’re launching apps of their own to deliver their own food, it’s a violation of neutrality and creates an uneven playing field. This is essentially similar to what sellers once said Amazon was doing—it started off as a marketplace, then learnt from what sellers sold, and started offering private-label versions of the same products.
Seen through this context, it makes sense that Blinkit launched Bistro as a separate app. It at least gives them the appearance of an arms-length distance between them and their restaurant partners, and if things really escalate, it can easily be spun out, or spun down.
I can see the logic here.
Swiggy, on the other hand, is the one I really want to talk about.
Look, I know I’ve been hard on Swiggy, but the one thing I’ve admired them for is their conviction in a future where everything is housed in a single app. They’ve always been resolute about this, all the way up to their IPO. In fact, just last month, I [wrote](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/10-minute-delivery-is-eating-40-minute-food-delivery/), “There’s a future where a customer lands on one app when they think of any of these cases. One company that believes in that future is Swiggy. Swiggy has resolutely doubled down on the idea that it can house all of its offerings in a single app, which it says gives it some advantages, even though it isn’t clear what these synergies are. It even had a slide that expressly called this out in its pre-IPO press conference. Perhaps Swiggy is right, but there’s another version of the future. And that’s what Zepto and Blinkit believe in—the future where there’s ‘one app for a customer need’.”
As Swiggy keeps telling us, there are synergies to doing everything on just one app.
Swiggy’s beliefs in a one-app future runs deep.
It’s—
On-demand food and grocery delivery player Swiggy rolled out three new standalone smartphone apps this week. The company is starting the year by testing an interesting strategy of introducing separate apps while maintaining a single unified app for all services.
The firm will soon launch a separate app for its grocery delivery service Instamart, it said in a statement on Thursday. Earlier this week, it rolled out Pyng–a professional services marketplace—and a 15-minute food delivery app called Snacc in select pin codes of Bengaluru.
Swiggy eyes multi-app strategy with rollout of 3 standalone apps, [Mint](https://www.livemint.com/companies/news/swiggy-eyes-multi-app-strategy-with-rollout-of-3-standalone-apps-consumers-11736434217189.html)
Oh come on!
THREE APPS?!?
In one week!
Companies are allowed to change their minds, but I’m amazed at how rapidly Swiggy did a U-turn on something it had believed so stoutly for so long.
So what happened? Maybe some new insight? Perhaps a new bold vision? A fresh start? What changed?
Well, if you ask Swiggy’s CEO, Sriharsha Majety, his answer is essentially “we were always like this”.
Launching new apps has always been a part of Swiggy’s strategy, and moves to launch separate apps for Instamart and Snacc, shouldn’t be seen as a departure from its core offering, the company’s group chief executive officer and co-founder Sriharsha Majety told Moneycontrol in an interview.
In the past, a host of offerings, such as Swiggy Daily, Supr Daily, Dineout and Insanely Good, have all existed as separate apps even as they continued to be housed under the main app, enabling multiple entry points.
“The separate apps that we launched before did not work for very different reasons, where we didn’t find product-market fit (PMF) in those,” Majety said.
Swiggy has in fact seen that separate apps drive more users.
Swiggy launching a new app is not a new strategy, says chief Sriharsha Majety on Instamart, Snacc launch, [Moneycontrol](https://www.moneycontrol.com/news/business/startup/swiggy-launching-a-new-app-is-not-a-new-strategy-says-chief-sriharsha-majety-on-instamart-snacc-launch-12906803.html)
Later in the story, Majety says, “During the initial years, we did not imagine a world beyond 150 million users. Now, we’re looking at even 300 and 500 million users, thanks to quick commerce.” In another article, he says, “We have never called ourselves a superapp. We had Supr Daily, Insanely Good, Dineout as separate apps in the past and are building on that strategy.”
These are all contortions that don’t really tell us anything. First, Swiggy’s essentially pretending like they’ve always believed in multiple app strategy, and that we are the crazy ones who put words in their mouth about Swiggy believing in a super-app future. Also, bringing up Supr Daily, Insanely Good, and Dineout are hardly making the point because: a) Supr Daily and Dineout were acquisitions, b) Supr Daily rebranded to Insanely Good, so it’s basically not two different apps, but the same app, and finally c) Insanely Good was subsumed into the main Swiggy app.
Also, Swiggy is pretending like something has radically changed in the market. It hasn’t. In fact, they’ve known for a while that their quick-commerce business is going to be bigger than their food-delivery business, so I have a hard time believing these 300–500 million users magically appeared last week.
However, one consequence of this announcement is that Swiggy’s stock price went up by 6% and [snapped](https://inc42.com/buzz/swiggy-shares-surge-6-1-after-new-apps-launch/) a four-day losing streak.
Maybe the reasons why companies are launching apps left, right, and centre isn’t from a place of logic, but from a place of fear, uncertainty, and FOMO. There are other intrinsic factors too. In startups, this is called the “SVP value-add phenomenon”. At a certain stage of their growth, companies get a new rung of senior management. They come in, all anxious to show their worth, and decide that whatever the previous set of leaders were doing was completely wrong, and so they do a 180. This usually results in some big bang launches of products that look radically different from what the company was doing earlier. Blinkit, Zepto, and Swiggy are all probably going through a version of this, where new SVPs have come in and are all seeking to make their mark.
Like I wrote earlier, these decisions are much more messy, complicated, and random.
And that’s true not just for companies, but also for users. There will always be users who’ll laud, say, Swiggy for launching a separate app for Instamart because it makes it easier for them to search for it on their phone and use it. Most of them may never bother installing the app. There will also be users who’ll bemoan the spread of apps. They’ll install all the apps out there. If companies can delude themselves about why they change their mind, so can users.
Most of these decisions to launch new apps by these companies should be seen through this lens, instead of a part of some grand new reality or strategy that’s underpinned by sharp consumer insight.
Sometimes, product evolution is nothing more than randomness. We’ll never know which companies have convictions and which ones are following the herd.
It’s okay to say we don’t know.
Things don’t have to make sense all the time.
Regards,
Praveen Gopal Krishnan