---
subject: "The Next Decacorn?"
from: "The Generalist <thegeneralist@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-08-21 13:02:29
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Generalist", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8815311452832858585", "UNREAD"]
---
“Some of the best content in the world on VC, in-depth research and analysis. Grazie!" — Michelle, a paying member Friends, Sometimes, I like to torture myself with a thought experiment. What if on my first day in venture capital, back in 2016, someone handed me a list of the startups that would grow to +$10 billion valuations? With perfect information, perfect foresight, and capital to deploy, what kind of a portfolio might I have been able to assemble? Would I have had the chance to back Revolut at $40 million (now $75B)? Or taken a bet on a quirky collaboration tool called Notion ($10B) that had just released its first product? Would I have emailed a 24-year-old Dylan Field and expressed an admiration for Figma ($36B)? Or asked the heads of a strange little research lab, OpenAI ($500B), to stay in touch? Of course, investors never have perfect information. The reason venture is such an endlessly engaging craft is because of its inherent uncertainty – the mixture of creativity, rigor, and risk it requires. But, in matters of investing, knowledge is always valuable, and insight is essential. We could all use something like an early detection system that helps us see around corners and introduces us to the companies that might just become the next big thing.
We cannot promise it is a magical list—there are no guarantees in this game—but it is the closest thing we’ve been able to create. It is a kind of distilled foresight—the product of five months of research, nominations from the world’s leading VCs, and confidential information. Time will reveal which companies rise to the top. But in the meantime, The Future 50 can show you some new places to look and some new startups to keep an eye on. The entirety of the Future 50 is available to premium subscribers for just $22/month. For the price of a business lunch, you’ll unlock detailed descriptions of startups we believe may become the next unicorns, decacorns, and perhaps even centacorns. For each company, you’ll learn what they do, what makes them special, and why we selected them. You’re accessing months of research, all at once. Join today to get exclusive access. Brought to you by BrexBrex is proud to sponsor The Generalist’s Future 50—a list of bold companies building what’s next. At Brex, we believe founders should be focused on creating the future, not drowning in spreadsheets and clunky finance tools. That’s why we built a finance platform that’s simple, scalable, and fast. With Brex, founders get everything they need to maximize runway and grow their businesses—corporate cards, startup-friendly rewards, banking, and high-yield treasury with same-hour liquidity—all in one place. Over 30,000 companies, including 1 in 3 U.S. venture-backed startups, trust Brex to help them spend smarter and move faster. The Future 50Meet 50 of the world’s highest-potential startups. Nominated by investors, selected by The Generalist. To unlock the full list, you can |