---
subject: "Ed Set Go: Indian students are using edtech. Just not the way you think"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-09-30 01:31:59
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
Ed Set Go
Mon, 30 Sep 24
Your weekly newsletter on the most critical pivots in edtech and education in India.
Good Morning Ishan,
There are approximately 4 million young people who study arduously for and take India’s engineering and medical school entrance exams every year. Another few million apply for a variety of other entrance tests—[IBPS PO](https://www.bankbazaar.com/banking-sector/ibps-po-syllabus.html#:~:text=The%20Institute%20of%20Banking%20Personnel,exam%2C%20and%20the%20interview%20round.), [SSC](https://ssc.nic.in/), [ICAR](https://www.nta.ac.in/Icarexam), [UGCNET](https://ugcnet.nta.ac.in/), to name a few.
There’s an entire word salad of tests out there.
And almost every family in the country will have at least one member who made an attempt to “crack” one of these exams. If they made it through, the institute or cram school they attended would have become the stuff of lore, with students of the next generation flocking to these prep schools.
Technology disrupted this close nexus. It let existing and new companies take the same model and put it online and into apps. Marketing moved from word of mouth promotion to cutthroat spending on advertising dollars. Edtechs created their own platforms, but relied massively on Youtube to broadcast their products.
Yet, there’s one distinct feature of the internet age that companies haven’t quite figured out how to tap yet—the heady mix of camaraderie and anonymity of messaging apps. Edtechs often still see these apps as just the trailer and try to direct traffic to the main event, i.e., their own web platform/offline coaching center.
The popularity of Whatsapp, Telegram, and Signal grew during the pandemic, when a lot of other channels weren’t accessible. Not everyone had access to a laptop to get onto a Zoom call. Schools and non-profits, in fact, made [clever use](https://the-ken.com/story/schools-makeshift-covid-19-classes/) of Whatsapp to get lessons and assignments to kids—like by texting their parents’ Whatsapp numbers, for instance.
The end of the pandemic may have pricked edtech’s bubble, but it didn’t dampen the enthusiasm to study online. Which is why, when Telegram’s CEO Pavel Durov was arrested by the French police in August over alleged illicit activities on the app, Indian students were one of the [fiercest critics](https://www.edexlive.com/news/2024/Aug/28/dont-ban-telegram-urge-indian-students-over-rumours-of-app-ban-heres-why) of a potential Telegram ban in India. Durov would’ve never guessed.
| Source: Edexlive/X |
It doesn’t take long to figure out why Telegram is so popular, especially amongst medical exam aspirants. The messaging app is perceived to be safer than others to share information; it can allow the creation of large groups of up to 200,000 people; and users can swap multiple large files back and forth, which is great for sharing test papers and other coursework that they usually have to pay for. Think about it as the digital version of swapping notes after class.
Telegram is also free to use, of course. But it’s not just that. A series of academic [papers](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9521357/) have also tried to capture the effects of studying, or the shared experience of studying together, on Telegram, to see whether it aids in learning languages.
The findings demonstrated that using the Telegram application increased the motivation of the experimental group and decreased their level of foreign language anxiety. Also, the results of one sample t-test showed that the participants of the experimental group held positive attitudes toward using the Telegram application in English language learning. The implications of this research can encourage both teachers and learners to use social media-based instruments in English teaching and learning.
There’s a ubiquity to messaging apps that even Youtube doesn’t have. They can help students connect directly, meet urgent needs like getting their doubts solved, and share study material that are, most times, paywalled. And it’s not just official study material but students’ [own notes](https://www.quora.com/What-are-the-best-Telegram-channels-for-NEET-and-AIMMS-entrance-exam-preparation) too, which can be easier to navigate and more relevant.
This kind of information sharing is raw and organic, and difficult to trap in a business model. We’d written about the evolution of #studygram in February 2022—basically an attempt to get mini-content creators who specialised in one area of study (like medical exam prep) to create Telegram-like channels on a messaging app.
Instead of retro-fitting a chat app into a web platform, like with the big edtechs, Habitat, a fledgling startup, was trying to [build](https://the-ken.com/edsetgo/the-evolution-of-studygram/) an edtech around the chat and share culture.
The Habitat app has about 250 creators right now, says founder Rohit Pande, about 70% of whom are women. He claims the app also has a largely tier-2, tier-3 city audience that relies more on social networks for learning, career advice, exams. Wrapped up in a tight social media bow, Habitat’s 30-day user retention levels are 35%, claims Pande.
“This is a student’s game. Teachers are better off recording videos and broadcasting them. But students want engagement,” he says.
The evolution of #studygram, Ed Set Go
Pande’s bet was that Habitat could leverage the “living every moment” online culture and mix that in with free and constant access to study material. The business would support the rise of these mini creators—who would use Telegram and Whatsapp to drive traffic to their own messaging app—and take 2–5% of what users paid these creators.
The challenge with this kind of a model, of course, is scale. How do you get enough users to pay? Another problem is quality control. There’s no point in coming to a specific site if you don’t get what you need immediately, and if it’s not high-quality. You might as well take your chances on social media.
Habitat has tried to circumvent this problem by hand picking its creators… which kind of drags it back into the territory of traditional edtechs.
There is, however, something to be said about the nature of group learning when compared with broadcast channels like Youtube or many other online learning platforms. There’s a sense of community ownership that takes over when the medium is disaggregated. In an [interview](https://www.financialexpress.com/business/sme-habitat-creators-get-a-channel-to-spawn-communities-2604639/) with the Financial Express in July 2022, Pande still seemed keen on the idea of edtech-as-group-learning:
According to Pande, the operational model has led to the creation of communities that manage and moderate on their own. “There are groups where the content creators have picked members to interact with and manage the community, either for cash rewards or for special privileges. In some cases, members have come forward to take care of the group when the creator is away out of pure interest in the person,” he says.
Admittedly, it appears Pande’s hypothesis hasn’t fully worked out. In a Linkedin post from about a year ago, he alludes to moving on from the idea of Habitat, but does point directly to what may be the future: an independent, tight-knit Telegram channel run by someone who topped a competitive exam, with over 100,000 members. The topper in this case, [Ghanshyam Gautam](https://x.com/kaptaanupsc?lang=en), is a mini celebrity in his own right, and is often featured on numerous podcasts, webcasts, and motivational videos on how to crack India’s tough civil services exam. He even has his own moniker, “Kaptaan Jack Sparrow”. I promise to report back on why he’s called that!
There’s still hope that as edtech clashes more and more with the attention economy—apps, texting, sharing—it can birth new business models for the future. These won’t look like old edtech. They may not be VC-ready businesses. But they will address a real need around education. The question is: what are the fundamentals of a vibes-and-viral movement, and how does one cash in?
That’s all for this week folks! Hope you liked this detour from big edtech to the smaller side lanes of internet education. Write to [edsetgo@the-ken.com](mailto:edsetgo@the-ken.com) with any questions or suggestions.
Cheers!
Olina
Why do women freeze their eggs?Hello! We are Snigdha and Rahel, and we host |