---
subject: "OpenAI Claims Nonprofit Will Retain Nominal Control"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-05-07 19:39:02
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Your voice has been heard. OpenAI has ‘heard from the Attorney Generals’ of Delaware and California, and as a result Technically they are not admitting that their original plan was illegal and one of the biggest thefts in human history, but that is how you should in practice interpret the line ‘we made the decision for the nonprofit to retain control of OpenAI after hearing from civic leaders and engaging in constructive dialogue with the offices of the Attorney General of Delaware and the Attorney General of California.’ Another possibility is that the nonprofit board finally woke up and looked at what was being proposed and how people were reacting, and realized what was going on. The letter ‘ The question is, what exactly is the new plan? The fight is far from over. The Mask Stays On?As previously intended, OpenAI will transition their for-profit arm, currently an LLC, into a PBC. They will also be getting rid of the capped profit structure. However they will be retaining the nonprofit’s control over the new PBC, and the nonprofit will (supposedly) get fair compensation for its previous financial interests in the form of a major (but suspiciously unspecified, other than ‘a large shareholder’) stake in the new PBC.
The rest of the post is a letter from Sam Altman, and sounds like it, you are encouraged to
Your Offer is (In Principle) AcceptableI find the structure of this solution not ideal but ultimately acceptable. The current OpenAI structure is bizarre and complex. It does important good things some of which this new arrangement will break. But the current structure also made OpenAI far less investable, which means giving away more of the company to profit maximizers, and causes a lot of real problems. Thus, I see the structural changes, in particular the move to a normal profit distribution, as a potentially a fair compromise to enable better access to capital - provided it is implemented fairly, and isn’t a backdoor to further shifts. The devil is in the details. How is all this going to work? What form will the nonprofit’s control take? Is it only that they will be a large shareholder? Will they have a special class of supervoting shares? Something else? This deal is only acceptable if and only he nonprofit: Has truly robust control going forward, that is ironclad and that allows it to guide AI development in practice not only in theory. Is this going to only be via voting shares? That would be a massive downgrade from the current power of the board, which already wasn’t so great. In practice, the ability to win a shareholder vote will mean little during potentially crucial fights like a decision whether to release a potentially dangerous model. What this definitely still does is give cover to management to do the right thing, if they actively want to do that, I’ll discuss more later.
Gets a fair share of the profits, that matches the value of its previous profit interests. I am very worried they will still get massively stolen from on this. As a reminder, right now most of the net present value of OpenAI’s future profits belongs to the nonprofit. Uses those profits to advance its original mission rather than turning into a de facto marketing arm or doing generic philanthropy that doesn’t matter, or both. There are still clear signs that OpenAI is largely planning to have the nonprofit buy AI services on behalf of other charities, or otherwise do things that are irrelevant to the mission. That would make it an ‘ordinary foundation’ combined with a marketing arm, effectively making its funds useless, although it could still act meaningfully via its control mechanisms.
Remember that in these situations, the ratchet only goes one way. The commercial interests will constantly try to wrestle greater control and ownership of the profits away from us. They will constantly cite necessity and expedience to justify this. You’re playing defense, forever. Every compromise improves their position, and this one definitely will compared to doing nothing. Or:
There’s also the issue of the extent to which Altman controls the nonprofit board. The reason the nonprofit needs control is to impact key decisions in real time. It needs control of a form that lets it do that. Because that kind of lever is not ‘standard,’ there will constantly be pressure to get rid of that ability, with threats of mild social awkwardness if these pressures are resisted. So with love, now that we have established what you are, The Skeptical TakeHe had an excellent thread explaining the attempted conversion, and he has another good explainer on what this new announcement means, as well as an emergency 80,000 Hours podcast on the topic that should come out tomorrow.
The central things to know about the new plan are indeed: The transition to a PBC and removal of the profit cap will still shift priorities, legal obligations and incentives towards profit maximization. The nonprofit’s ‘control’ is at best weakened, and potentially fake. The nonprofit’s mission might effectively be fake. The nonprofit’s current financial interests could largely still be stolen.
It’s an improvement, but it might not effectively be all that much of one? We need to stay vigilant. The fight is far from over.
Tragedy in the BayRoon says the quiet part out loud. We used to think it was possible to do the right thing and care about whether AI killed everyone. Now, those with power say, we can’t even imagine how we could have been so naive, let’s walk that back as quickly as we can so we can finally do some maximizing of the profits.
I do not think that the capped profit requires strong assumptions about a singleton to make sense. It only requires that there be an oligopoly where the players are individually meaningful. If you have close to perfect competition and the players have no market power and their products are fully fungible, then yes, of course being a capped profit makes no sense. Although it also does no real harm, your profits were already rather capped in that scenario. More than that, we have largely lost our ability to actually ask what problems humanity will face, and then ask what would actually solve those problems, and then try to do that thing. We are no longer trying to backward chain from a win. Which means we are no longer playing to win. At best, we are creating institutions that might allow the people involved to choose to do the right thing, when the time comes, if they make that decision. The Spirit of the RulesFor several reasons, recent developments do still give me hope, even if we get a not-so-great version of the implementation details here. The first is that this shows that the right forms of public pressure can still work, at least sometimes, for some combination of getting public officials to enforce the law and causing a company like OpenAI to compromise. The fight is far from over, but we have won a victory that was at best highly uncertain. The second is that this will give the nonprofit at least a much better position going forward, and the ‘you have to change things or we can’t raise money’ argument is at least greatly weakened. Even though the nine members are very friendly to Altman, they are also sufficiently professional class people, Responsible Authority Figures of a type, that one would expect the board to have real limits, and we can push for them to be kept more in-the-loop and be given more voice. De facto I do not think that the nonprofit was going to get much if any additional financial compensation in exchange for giving up its stake. The third is that, while OpenAI likely still has the ability to ‘weasel out’ of most of its effective constraints and obligations here, this preserves its ability to decide not to. As in, OpenAI and Altman could This is very different from saying that the board will act as a meaningful check on Altman, if Altman decides to act recklessly or greedily. It is easy to forget that in the world of VCs and corporate America, in many ways it is not only that you have no obligation to do the right thing. It is that you have an obligation, and will face tremendous pressure, to do the wrong thing, Thus, the ability to fight back against that is itself powerful. Altman, and others in OpenAI leadership, are keenly aware of the dangers they are leading us into, even if we do not see eye to eye on what it will take to navigate them or how deadly are the threats we face. Altman knows, even if he claims in public to actively not know. Many members of technical stuff know. I still believe most of those who know do not wish for the dying of the light, and want humanity and value to endure in this universe, that they are normative and value good over bad and life over death and so on. So when the time comes, we want them to feel as much permission, and have as much power, to stand up for that as we can preserve for them. It is the same as the Preparedness Framework, except that in this case we have only ‘concepts of a plan’ rather than an actually detailed plan. If everyone involved with power abides by the spirit of the Preparedness Framework, it is a deeply flawed but valuable document. If those involved with power discard the spirit of the framework, it isn’t worth the tokens that compose it. The same will go for a broad range of governance mechanisms. Have Altman and OpenAI been endlessly disappointing? Well, yes. Are many of their competitors doing vastly worse? Also yes. Is OpenAI getting passing grades so far, given that reality does not grade on a curve? Oh, hell no. And it can absolutely be, and at some point will be, too late to try and do the right thing. The good news is, I believe that today is not that today. And tomorrow looks good, too.
You're currently a free subscriber to |