---
subject: "The Monday Media Diet with Clayton Chambers"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-03-06 11:21:58
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
We’ve long enjoyed Clayton’s writing and POV on menswear. We’re happy to have him with us this week. -Colin (CJN) Tell us about yourself. My name is Clayton Chambers (CC). I’m a writer and brand strategist based in the United States. I run a newsletter called Outside of work, I enjoy spending time in nature, keeping up with European football (Arsenal supporter over here), and traveling as often as I can with my partner and our 1-year-old son. You can find me Describe your media diet. For podcasts, I like listening to I’m into a lot of magazines, most notably a Japanese one called Go Out and a French one called L’etiquette. Some coffee table books I’m enjoying right now are Warhol on Basquiat, Football: Designing the Beautiful Game, and Rockers, a book uncovering the style behind reggae music in the 70s. Ultimately, I’m focused on filling my brain with (what I consider) the right stuff, not more stuff. But you can probably see that most of what I consume is at the intersection of fashion, art, music, food, and culture in general. Want to run a WITI classified? Want to reach 20,000 brilliant readers? WITI classifieds start at $250, and The Mandate is a newsletter about the weird world of masculinity | Written by Olympic Medalist & NYT/Men's Health contributor Jason Rogers. What’s the last great book you read?
What are you reading now? Currently reading about the history of football as a sport (see above RE: the book title) and a book on dysfunctional family dynamics that appear in therapy, written by a therapist (sexy, I know!). What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication? I’m probably a bad example, but I read till I get bored. My strategy is to have multiple books in rotation simultaneously because I like the context switching. It allows me to revisit each one with a fresh perspective. Who should everyone be reading that they’re not? Anything from W. David Marx. His two books, What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone? I’m not big on having too many apps on my phone, but I love using Plane or train? Plane if I want to be productive. Train for everything else. Trains are just classier and more relaxing than flying on a plane (I’ll asterisk that with *in Europe*). With trains, I find it’s easier to slow down and think about life, especially with the right terrain beyond the windows. What is one place everyone should visit? Oh, too many places, but one that I feel is somewhat underrated is Istanbul. I found it to be a wonderful city, rich with history, with a deep connection to the spiritual, and a strong food scene (Turkish food has so many layers to it). Something to note about Istanbul is that the city is part Europe, part Asia, split up by the ancient Bosphorus river, a magical body of water that’s as busy as can be in the day time, and perfectly still and quiet at night. Architecturally, the city has a unique layout and design, too, built along the hills. Plus, you’re on the Mediterranean, so that coastal breeze and crystal blue water are a phenomenal excuse to get more time on the beach. Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into. Many of the rabbit holes I find myself in these days revolve around the evolution of fashion/style and its connection to the culture. I grew up somewhat sheltered (and I’m from a small town), so over the years, I’ve spent a lot of time playing catch up. One rabbit hole that’s endless for me is the rise of early hip-hop music and its connection to a lot of the fashion and style that drives what we wear today, i.e. sneakers, North Face puffer jackets, Carhartt WIP, and so on. Another (non-style related) rabbit hole I’m into right now is the rise of car usage, highways, and suburban living in the United States (vs. the way transit and living operate in Europe) in correlation with the rapid increase of depression and loneliness. (CC) — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Clayton (CC) —
|