---
subject: "Michael Clemens on H1-B visas"
from: "Marginal REVOLUTION <donotreply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-09-24 04:47:18
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tyler Cowen", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2466199532210586699", "UNREAD"]
---
From 1990 to 2010, rising numbers of H-1B holders
[caused 30–50 percent of all productivity growth]in the US economy. This means that the jobs and wages of most Americans depend in some measure on these workers.The specialized workers who enter on this visa fuel high-tech, high-growth sectors of the 21st century economy with skills like computer programming, engineering, medicine, basic science, and financial analysis. Growth in those sectors sparks demand for construction, food services, child care, and a constellation of other goods and services. That creates employment opportunities for native workers in all sectors and at all levels of education.
This is not from a textbook narrative or a computer model. It is what happened in the real world following past, large changes in H-1B visa restrictions. For example, Congress
[tripled]the annual limit on H-1B visas after 1998, then slashed it by 56 percent after 2004. That produced large, sudden shocks to the number of these workers in some US cities relative to others. Economists traced what happened to various economic indicators in the most-affected cities versus the least-affected but otherwise similar cities. The best research exhaustively ruled out other, confounding forces.That’s how we know that workers on H-1B visas cause dynamism and opportunity for natives. They
[cause more patenting of new inventions], ideas that create new products and even new industries. They cause entrepreneurs to found more (and more successful)[high-growth startup firms]. The resulting productivity growth[causes more higher-paying jobs for native workers], both with and without a college education, across all sectors. American firms able to hire more H-1B workers[grow more], generating far more jobs inside and outside the firm than the foreign workers take.An important, rigorous new study found the firms that win a government lottery allowing them to hire H-1B workers
[produce 27 percent more than otherwise-identical firms]that don’t win, employing more immigrants but no fewer US natives—thus expanding the economy outside their own walls. So, when an influx of H-1B workers raised a US city’s share of foreign tech workers by 1 percentage point during 1990–2010,[that caused]7 percent to 8 percent higher wages for college-educated workers and 3 percent to 4 percent higher wages for workers without any college education.
Here is [the full piece](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=3c467ad3a7c8481bac04c4e70addf18b46a46091ee432e2659d4a4d8734fb6c3&blog_id=42693868&post_id=91537&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=a09c560d684bc6d37e661ac398138da7&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cucGlpZS5jb20vYmxvZ3MvcmVhbHRpbWUtZWNvbm9taWNzLzIwMjUvbmV3LXVzLWN1cmItaGlnaC1za2lsbC1pbW1pZ3JhbnQtd29ya2Vycy1pZ25vcmVzLWV2aWRlbmNlLWl0cy1saWtlbHk&email_id=5ee746ab1467a72ebf3e83b9f19b7b75).