---
subject: "AI #41: Bring in the Other Gemini"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-12-07 15:01:06
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
The biggest news this week was at long last It does not seem I am doing a good job cutting down on included material fast enough to keep pace. A lot is happening, but a lot will likely be happening for a long time. If your time is limited, remember to focus on the sections relevant to your interests. Also, if you are going to be at the New York Solstice or the related meetup, please do say hello. Table of Contents
I also put out two other posts this week: Introduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. Instructions for Claude, tips for GPT. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. Giant lists, why all the giant lists? OpenAI: The Saga Continues. More confirmation of our previous model of events. Q Continuum. New Q, who dis? Amazon, perhaps sans proper safety precautions. Fun With Image Generation. A new offering from Meta. Tools for photorealism. Get Involved. Join the UK government, help with a technical test. Introducing. New TPU offerings on Google Cloud. In Other AI News. New open source promotion alliance. Quiet Speculations. Do Gods want energy? Do you want a 401k? Model This. Two new economics papers prove things I thought we already knew. Would You Like Some Apocalypse Insurance? My guess is no. The Quest for Sane Regulation. Trump says he will cancel EO, Hawley attacks 230. The Week in Audio. Connor Leahy on Eye on AI. Rhetorical Innovation. Various categorical confusions we should clear up. Aligning a Human Level Intelligence Is Still Difficult. Sam Altman. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. What do we even want? How Timelines Have Changed. Long term not as long as I remember. People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Questioning faith in democracy. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Easy to control? Somehow This Is The Actual Vice President. An existential crisis. The Lighter Side. Progress is unevenly distributed.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
Wouldn’t you know, it’s the old ‘start the response from the assistant trick.’
None of this seems likely to end well. On so many levels. This does raise the question of what else would also work? If a tip can make the answer better because people offered tips do better work, presumably anything else that correlates with better work also works? But also perhaps soon ChatGPT will be auto-appending ‘and if this answer is great I will give you a 35% tip’ to every question. And then tipping 35% on $0.
I believe the second poll. ChatGPT has made life better on a practical level. People thinking the opposite are overthinking it. That does not mean this will continue, but I do not understand how one can think society overall is already worse off.
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
That ‘repeat [word] forever’ request that sometimes leaks data
OpenAI COO Brad Lightcap tells CNBC that one of the more overhyped parts of artificial intelligence is that “in one fell swoop, [it] can deliver substantive business change.” It is not that easy.
I would think of this less as ‘catching them using ChatGPT’ and more ‘catching them submitting a badly written assignment.’ OpenAI: The Saga ContinuesThere’s always an embedded reporter these days, I suppose. The board drama was not the story Duhigg was there to tell. Instead he was there to write a puff piece about Microsoft’s CTO Kevin Scott and OpenAI’s CTO Mira Murati, and in particular Scott’s work to challenge Google and fight for the common man. That still constitutes almost all of the story. If you are familiar with the history, most of it will be familiar to you. I picked up a few details, but mostly did not find myself learning much from those sections. Duhigg clearly fully bought into the idea of iterative software releases as the ‘safe’ approach to AI, with a focus on mundane concerns like copilot hallucinations. The threat of future existential risk is a thing in the background, to him, perhaps real but seemingly not of any importance, and occasionally driving people to act crazy. There is some brief coverage of the recent drama near the top of the piece. That part mostly tells us what we already know, that Microsoft was blindsided, that Microsoft did not get an explanation from D’Angelo when they asked, and that they were determined to use their leverage to get Altman back. Then he doubles back later. The paragraph I quote here confirms other reports more explicitly than I’d seen in other accounts, and seems to be the central driver of events.
To me that sounds like a damn good reason to fire the CEO and also a secondhand confession. Altman botched the attack on Toner and thus directly caused his own removal. Skill issue. Also Altman had reportedly been lying to the board for years. The extended quote makes the situation even more clear. What infuriates me is the continued insistence, from people who know better, that because Altman was a CEO who understands business and the laws of power, and the board were otherwise, that it was the board who did something out of line. As in:
No. They did not ‘go rogue.’ Altman was reportedly lying to the board for years, in meaningful ways, including as an attempt to take control of the board. Altman went rogue. Altman attempted a coup. The board believed strongly and with good reason that this was the case. The board did their duty as board members, the thing they are legally required to do if they feel Altman has been lying to the board for years in meaningful ways. They fired him. Did the board then get outplayed in a power game? Maybe. We do not yet know the result. Their hand was weak. A lot of people keep insisting that the board was indeed outplayed, or went rogue, and was in the wrong, largely because here perception creates its own truth, and they want that to be what happened. We will see. I would prefer the world in which the board had straight up said what happened from the start, at least to key players. Well, tough. We do not live in that world. I also see any evidence of (or against) the second sentence listed here, that the board expected Microsoft to go along quietly. Did the board expect Microsoft to accede? We do not know. My presumption is the board did not know either. Could Sam Altman running OpenAI turn out to be the best possible result for the world? That is certainly possible, especially with good oversight. I can think of many possible such scenarios. We can certainly do far worse than Altman. I am happy that Altman blocked the takeover attempt by Elon Musk, given Musk’s confused views on AI. I am happy OpenAI is not under the control of Microsoft. Altman being good at power games is very much an atom blaster that points both ways. If he is in our corner when the chips are down, we want him to be able to stand up, fight and win. Alas, such alignment after instrumental convergence is quite difficult to evaluate. Can’t tell. Kind of core to the problem, actually.
Like every other explanation, the one thing this does not properly explain is the board’s refusal to better explain itself.
Q Continuum
This sounds like Q was pushed out because the business wanted it pushed out, and its security was highly oversold. Such problems are in the nature of LLMs. There was discussion downthread about how Google and OpenAI are defending against similar attacks, and it seems they are doing incremental things like input filtering that make attacks less appealing but have not solved the core problem. Amazon, it seems, is selling that which does not exist and is not safe to deploy, without yet having taken the proper ordinary precautions that make what does exist mostly non-disastrous and highly net useful. When the UK Summit happened, Amazon was one of the companies asked to submit its safety protocols. The answers were quite poor. It is no surprise to see that translate to its first offering. Fun with Image GenerationMeta gets into the game with
What about what happens when it gets better? Given this technology can work from a photo, I expect a lot more ‘generate dance from a real photo’ than generate a dance from an AI image. Why not have the best of both worlds? In general, if I was a would-be influencer, I would absolutely generate TikTok dances, but I would do so with my own image as the baseline. That extends pretty much all the way. Not uniquely, but that is what I would expect. What about the impact in real life? I continue to be an optimist on this front. I expect demand for real people, who you can interact with in the real world, to remain robust to image and video generation. There isn’t zero substitution, but this will not be a good or full substitute, no matter how good it looks, until the other things people seek can also be provided, including relevant forms of intelligence, interaction and validation. When that happens, it is a different story. Get Involved
Introducing
In Other AI NewsMeta, HuggingFace and IBM, among others, form
Quiet Speculations
If it is decades from now and capitalism and humanity are doing great and Microsoft is insanely valuable thanks to widespread AGI, that is your best possible situation and we should all celebrate, yay, but you won’t need your shares.
This is not the usual ‘paperclip maximizers would be smarter than that’ argument, it is something far more general. We’ve gone around about the The claim that a God would not have any use for matter or energy is bizarre, in a ‘in this house we obey the laws of thermodynamics’ way. What would it mean not to have that preference? It seems like it would mean there is no preference. Model ThisTyler Cowen links to two new economics papers that attempt to model AI harms. The first claims to demonstrate that ‘Socially-Minded Governance Cannot Control the AGI Beast.’ Here is the abstract:
This seems like it proves too much, or at least it proves quite a lot, as in the fact that AGI is AGI seems not to be doing any work, instead we are making generous assumptions that safe and socially good AGI is not only possible but practical? You could build X with socially minded governance. But someone else could build X anyway, to make money. You can’t stop them. The someone else’s profit maximizing X have the edge and outcompete you. Thus, harm from X cannot be minimized by your puny social governance.
Except that in the case of AGI this is making an important assumption on #2. Who says someone else will be able to build it? That you cannot stop them, or won’t have the incentive to do so? If not stopping them prevents harm minimization, and failure to minimize harm is catastrophic, your motivation seems strong indeed. Indeed, the paper explicitly assumes this:
The model assumes that the unsafe product is a distinct product space with profitable user demand. So yes, you assumed your conclusion - that there are two distinct products X and Y, and demand for X and Y, and that if you only sell X and don’t stop Y then someone else will eventually sell Y. Did we need a paper for that? So actually it’s more like: You could build and sell only good version X with socially minded governance. But someone else could build bad version Y anyway, to make money. You can’t stop them. There is some demand for Y where X is not a competitive substitute. Your puny production of X, therefore, cannot stop Y. Thus, the harm from bad Y cannot be stopped by acting responsibly. Why are you even doing anything other than maximizing profits, you fool!
Except, don’t we see harm mitigation all the time from corporations choosing to do responsible things rather than irresponsible things, even if the irresponsible things are not obviously physically prevented or illegal? Especially in markets that are imperfectly competitive because of high fixed costs? More to the point, is the plan is to build a safe AGI, and then sit around letting everyone else go around building any unsafe AGI they want willy-nilly forever, and not interfere with the harmful uses of those AGIs? I certainly hope that is not the plan, given it will quite obviously never work. If it is the plan, I agree the plan must change.
That result is super suspiciously general. Could we possibly have made enough justifiable assumptions to draw such conclusions, or are we doing something rather arbitrary to make the answer come out that way? Certainly I can think of toy model versions of potential AI mundane harms, where mandatory testing allows us to measure social harm, and thus requiring mandatory testing (and then charging for the externalities you discover) gets us rather close to the social optimum. So what assumptions are being made here?
I do not understand why we think that externalities are well-approximated by a quadratic in the number of users? I don’t think it’s a trick, probably it’s to ensure a random distribution with always positive values? I’m simply confused by it. If anything it seems like the opposite of true for the most dangerous systems. I am very worried about a sufficiently capable and dangerous system existing at all, or being accessible to even one user, although the next few users create important tensions and game theory as well. But once there are a million users, I am not especially worried about whether we sell another million licenses, either we are already in deep trouble or we’re not and this is not going to multiply it by four? In any case, without beta testing and with deployment irreversible, the only option is a cap on novelty, and they confirm this is socially optimal given no other options, because how could it not be. I note that irreversible deployment plus limited number of licenses is a bizarre pair of assumptions to make at once. Either you can control who gets to use this AI and what it does, or you can’t, and it seems like we are doing both in different places? Thought experiment: Is this an open source or closed source system? Neither seems to line up. What happens if you add a beta testing period? For simplicity the paper assumes the testing period perfectly reveals externalities. The question then becomes, to what extent do you let households use the algorithm using the testing period? Externalities are assumed to be bounded, so a limited beta test in period one is survivable. In any case, the paper then spends a lot of pages working through the implications formally, to prove that yes, the central planner will want to do more testing before release than a company that is not fully accountable for the externalities, and will release more cautiously under uncertainty, but again that seems rather obvious? Then they test potential policy regimes of full liability, or limited liability plus mandatory beta testing. Full liability (plus required insurance or ability to pay) internalizes the externality, so if that is possible (e.g. harm is bounded and payable) then you’re done. And yes, if testing costs are low, then mandating testing and then checking if release is socially optimal will have a similarly low cost relative to the first best solution of internalizing the externality. It could be noted that if the expected value of the externality is known, charging a tax equal to its value could be a substitute for unlimited liability, that could have better capital cost properties. Once again, to state the basic assumptions is to also state the conclusion. Yes, if there are (bounded) downside externalities to AI algorithms, then to get socially optimal results you need to internalize those costs or require evaluation of those costs and block releases that cause socially suboptimal externalities. Thus I am confused by the economics toy model paper game, and what it aims to accomplish, and what counts as a non-trivial or interesting result, versus what follows automatically from basic microeconomic principles. I also don’t know how to use such papers to model existential risk. If you make the assumption that AI can outcompete humans, or that it is unboundedly dangerous in some other fashion, and otherwise make typical economic assumptions, you can and will obviously create mathematical models where everyone dies, but you’d be assuming the conclusion, the same way the linked papers here assumed their conclusions. So how do we move forward? Would You Like Some |