---
subject: "staking, policy, what’s going on; an ode to open source; consensus is king"
from: "web3 weekly from a16z crypto <a16zcrypto@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-02-13 16:00:12
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "a16zcrypto"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2535365729249697677"]
---
1. Top of mind: On staking; plus, a pulse check on crypto policy & regulationOn stakingThis past week, the SEC announced Why does staking matter? In modern blockchains, "staking" serves a similar function to "mining" in other blockchains — that is, both are mechanisms that allow a participant to earn the right to provide computational capacity. But staking is far more energy efficient. How it works: On a proof-of-stake blockchain, anyone can “stake” or lock up their tokens to earn the right to contribute computational resources and security to the network (in exchange for rewards in the form of more tokens). The blockchain's consensus mechanism randomly selects stakers in proportion to how many tokens they have staked. Since staked tokens act as an incentive for stakers to act in good faith and follow protocol rules, staking also helps with decentralization because participants are essentially pledging their tokens as an assurance of good behavior — without relying on a centralizing or less secure off-chain system. And while staking means that anyone can participate in a protocol (as long as they have a powerful enough computer, tokens to stake, and a connection to the internet), staking-as-a-service programs can make it even easier for more people to participate. For more on proof-of-stake blockchain designs, security, technical considerations, community, process: ▶️ watch: [A survey of proof-of-stake (PoS) blockchain designs](https://substack.com/redirect/3e57e44d-6769-4544-83d1-c3c2bbe4cce2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)by Valeria Nikolaenko🎧 listen: [PoS blockchains - designs, consensus, attacks](https://substack.com/redirect/8446afe6-6213-4207-a8ec-8c04209128e2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)with Valeria Nikolaenko, Tim Roughgarden, and Sonal Chokshi🎧 listen: [Ethereum, Merge and beyond](https://substack.com/redirect/d3efa230-284d-45e2-af50-f60d8950d761?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)with Tim Beiko, Ali Yahya, Tim Roughgarden, and Sonal Chokshi📄 read: [What ‘The Merge’ means](https://substack.com/redirect/eba1d39c-0705-4e50-9146-a53eaf43f895?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)by Ali Yahya
For a16z crypto legal, policy, and regulatory teams’ position on recent events, see 🧵: Crypto policy & regulation: What’s going on?Collin McCune, Miles Jennings, Brian Quintenz, and Sonal Chokshi In the latest episode of the Throughout, we dig into the mindsets, myths, debates, and nuances involved in regulating crypto… And finally, we quickly touch on what to expect for regulation in a few specific domains. related: Be sure to also check out our 2. Resources: Open source tools you can build on and useDaejun Park, Noah Citron, Sam Ragsdale Open source is critical to the crypto ecosystem, enabling [An on-ramp to formal verification and more, Halmos](https://substack.com/redirect/0bd82b69-d39e-486b-a57f-a140b8c48437?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)allows developers to reuse the same properties written for unit tests for formal specifications through symbolic testing; developers can avoid duplicative work and improve tests a few specifications at a time, without starting from scratch. [*latest release*][Light client tool Helios provides fully trustless access to Ethereum](https://substack.com/redirect/498f7800-bb94-4916-8f9e-4492115e715c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). For the sake of convenience, many use centralized RPC (remote procedure call) servers; but users need to trust the providers, and there’s no way to verify the correctness of queries. So Helios converts data from an untrusted centralized RPC provider into a verifiably safe, local RPC without running a full node. [see also: ‘blockchain’s mobile moment’,[here](https://substack.com/redirect/954dbacc-f150-4fcb-a4c1-f66cbc65244a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)][zkDrops enables privacy-protecting crypto airdrops](https://substack.com/redirect/6255d69e-7eb5-4e67-a06a-cb88a7a4e9b5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Crypto airdrops commonly expose lots of unnecessary information about token recipients. But zero knowledge proofs can enable people to selectively reveal only specific pieces of information. [*recently updated*: faster proving time]
…be sure to also check out our ongoing 3. Consensus, consensus, consensusAndrew Lewis-Pye et al The latest in our Consensus protocols are central in the world of blockchains. But the literature can sometimes be hard to get a handle on, so this canon helps anyone get up to date on the foundations, as well as the latest research links… categorized by the type of protocol discussed, along with an overview of general resources: see also: This --Sonal Chokshi with Ali Yahya, Eddy Lazzarin, and a16z crypto teams subscribe to our podcast ' |