---
subject: "Data is actually not a great VC-backed business"
from: "Auren Hoffman of Five Links <auren@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-07-27 15:11:52
labels: ["Auren Hoffman", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_4260038268466989707", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
trigger warning: there is a lot of pouring cold water on data businesses Five years ago, I made a full-throated argument that But I was wrong. This was a mistake. My main argument was that that number of data buyers was sure to grow exponentially. Companies were getting much more data-forward (investing in data lakes, snowflake, databricks, etc.) and employing armies of data scientists. Surely they will need to buy more data. And this was even before the AI wave. I wrote:
But today, there are actually fewer than 100 hedge funds that spend millions on alternative data. the number of hedge funds buying a lot of data is going down, not up. there are fewer funds that spend a lot on data than there were 5 years ago. Even one of the largest hedge funds, Bridgewater, barely buys any data. And this is true across the board. Ten years ago there were zero real estate companies buying significant data … today there are still less than 5. There are still very few retailers that buy data. There are lots of financial services firms (think banks) that buy data but most of that is from data companies started over 40 years ago and have used regulatory capture to cement a duopoly. But AI to the rescue? Well, not really. There are some new AI company buyers that have entered the market. But there are very few AI companies that buy data. And they do not always have a recurring need for that data (will be interesting to see where the Google/Reddit deal re-trades at once it expires next year). so the market for data did grow over the last ten years. it is certainly bigger today than it was. but it not grow nearly as fast as any of us predicted. and that’s because getting value from data is still SUPER hard. does AI make it easier? yes. but so did all the other innovations in the last ten years and those innovations did not meaningfully grow the market for data. Data businesses (companies that sell data – think rows and columns) are good businesses. They make good profits. They grow (albeit slowly) well. But they are not great businesses – and most should not take venture capital funding. “Rows, Columns, and Regret” – The Costly Illusion That Data Can Scale Like Software In the last 20 years, there have been about 1000 SaaS unicorns. There has been roughly one DaaS unicorn: ZoomInfo (NASDAQ: ZI). And ZoomInfo never took venture capital (they did do secondaries along the way but they were always profitable … from even day one). Venture capital is great for companies that need to lose a lot of money for a while and fuels fast growth and deep R&D. the best data companies are profitable and grow profitably. We’ll see more DaaS unicorns in the future, but they will not take venture capital. Yes, they might need a bit of seed capital … they’ll take debt to buy other companies … but they do not need to raise tens of millions in equity financing. There are only It is kinda weird that most of the super large DaaS companies Data is PE, not VC. getting back to venture capital … most of the VC investors in DaaS companies (including me) will not make even a double-digit IRR collectively. It is not a good category for venture. DaaS is a good business (that trades on multiples of profit) but should not raise outside capital. “Starting a data business? Congrats, you’ve just invented private equity’s favorite acquisition target. VC returns not included.” “Venture capital loves explosive growth. Data businesses grow like a bonsai tree: slow, steady, and only after years of careful pruning.” “ZoomInfo is the only DaaS unicorn. That’s not a market trend. That’s a statistical anomaly.” VCs: ‘We love recurring revenue!’ “Data companies are like tofu: bland, stable, and PE firms love seasoning them” note: X of the week: if you like this article, please do three things: share it with someone you admire follow me ( [@auren](https://substack.com/redirect/a50756a7-f5c2-48d1-977e-2feb93ee72a4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)) on Xsubscribe to the “ [World of DaaS](https://substack.com/redirect/c0bcbba4-7a73-441e-ad02-3965723059c8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)” podcast
(if you hate this, please share with all your enemies) Hope you enjoy |