---
subject: "The Synthetic Research Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-02-22 12:51:17
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Hi all, I ran this over at my Noah here. A few weeks ago, I heard the term “silicon sampling” for the first time. As Want to run a WITI classified? Want to reach 20,000 brilliant readers? WITI classifieds start at $250, and The paper’s authors refer to this capability as “algorithmic fidelity”—easier understood as the ability to induce the model to produce answers that correlate with the opinions of specific groups:
They went on to test this fidelity across several criteria, including how well it could recreate survey results. While this paper focuses mainly on political polling, there are fascinating implications for marketing and brand research ( Why is this interesting? To learn more about the approach and its application, I reached out to It’s in its early days, but the plan is to continue to simplify the product, requiring less direct knowledge of the solution. “In the future,” Alves explained, “we want this to be even richer, so you just define your audience like, ‘people in long-distance relationships,’ and you click a button, and it gives you a set of possible problems they have, and you can select from them instead of you having to go and put it in yourself.” I asked Hugo if he had plans to expand the target audience to marketers, and he said they’re still in the early stages of the product lifecycle but are leaving all avenues open. One question all this raises for me is, “why?” If it is so easy to reproduce research from human panels, on the one hand, it makes tons of sense to do it cheaper and quicker using machine learning models. Still, on the other, it makes you wonder if that kind of research is actually worth anything in the first place. Anyone who has worked with large brands on research has seen all sorts of output—a ton of marketing research exists to ensure a marketing VP or agency has something to point to if everything goes wrong. Synthetic research seems like a perfect solution for this kind of study, where the goal is clearly not to gain deep insight into a target audience. When I posed this to Alves, who has a master’s in clinical psychology, he said, “One of the things I say to people who ask, ‘but does a language model have all the nuances and subtleties?’ And I’m like, ‘have you seen real research? Have you seen real user researchers doing it? And the feedback that sometimes you get it?’ Even with just our beta product, it’s comparable.” That makes sense to me, at least in theory. I’m supposed to get access to the Synthetic Users product this week, and I am excited to have a play and share the results. (NRB) — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) —
|