---
subject: "The Vuelta a España Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-09-19 09:55:18
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Mark Slavonia (MJS) is an investor, a pilot, and an Mark here. For Jumbo-Visma, this was a huge opportunity. By riding as a team to support Kuss, they could reap tremendous goodwill and highlight the esprit de corps of their team, while giving a popular supporting rider a chance to shine. They became the first team to finish 1-2-3 in a Grand Tour in over fifty years. (They also won all three Grand Tours of 2023.) Why is this interesting? Jumbo Visma very nearly blew it. The team’s two big stars, Denmark’s One of cycling’s unwritten rules is that riders don’t attack their own teammates. Not attacking a teammate creates strategic advantages that teams can exploit to force other teams to expend more effort. Teams go to great lengths to amplify the mythology of the taboo against attacking a teammate, talking endlessly about how “it doesn’t matter which of us wins, we’re a team.” This builds trust within the team and makes the strategic threat credible to other teams. Like many unwritten rules about trust, this norm has advantages for everyone when followed, and a corrosive effect when violated. Riders that break this rule risk falling afoul of their team managers, becoming unpopular with fans, and developing a reputation for being untrustworthy. Thankfully, Jumbo came to their senses, and after a few days of backlash, Roglic and Vingagaard helped lead Kuss up a mountain stage just as he had done so many times for them throughout the years. In the end, Kuss managed to hang on by a slim margin (just 17 seconds after nearly 77 hours of racing), and Jumbo team management could pretend that all was well and that things had gone exactly according to plan. (MJS) — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Mark (MJS) —
Invite your friends and earn rewardsIf you enjoy Why is this interesting?, share it with your friends and earn rewards when they subscribe. |