---
subject: "From Walden Pond to the Ganges"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-04-27 13:02:18
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Thanks for reading! This post took a lot of work. If you’re enjoying it, you can subscribe to the newsletter. If you want to help keep this project going, please consider purchasing a paid subscription. Paid subscribers — it’s only about 75 cents a week! — get access to the archives, the satisfaction of supporting work they enjoy, and my undying gratitude. To support my work, please click the button below:
These men obviously weren’t planting or reaping crops in the snow-covered ground; instead, they were harvesting the frozen surface of the pond:
The scene Thoreau witnessed might have looked something like this, a photo of ice harvesting on Fuller Pond in Massachusetts later in the century: Although Thoreau found their “methods too well known to require description,” it’s worth elaborating on this lost art for the modern reader. Workers would first have to clear the ice of snow: Cut grooves in the ice, as on this Pennsylvania lake: “Mark the cakes:” Separate them: Load the ice for transportation, as we see in the Massachusetts operation: And haul it away, as they did in this Canadian scene: The last thing the shivering inhabitants of Massachusetts wanted was ice, but the stuff was in great demand in other parts of the world. Thoreau, an admirer of Indian culture, seems a little jealous of the trip this ice was about to take:
Thoreau laid it on a little thick, but I share his wonderment at what he saw happening on the pond. The global ice trade of the nineteenth century was an improbable thing — how could chunks of frozen American lakes travel halfway around the world and keep people cool in Charleston, Calcutta, or Kingston? It does seem somehow wrong to my modern eye to see blocks of ice being unloaded on a Charleston pier, as in this photo from the 1930s: It wasn’t completely unheard of, even in ancient times, for people in warm climates to have access to ice. The Roman emperor Nero used to Frederic Tudor reminds me a little bit of the startup bros of the twenty-first century. When he pioneered the idea of transporting ice all over the world, he was a familiar type: a young, ambitious, stubborn guy from a wealthy background who had skipped college at Harvard to jump into the business world and make money. After a few years of mercantile schemes involving trade with Caribbean islands, Frederic and his brother William were hanging out at a picnic back home in Massachusetts, drinking beverages chilled with ice from the family ice house. William said it was sad that people in the Caribbean would never be able to enjoy a cool, refreshing drink. Frederic immediately realized a business opportunity. Ice was cheap to acquire (you just had to pay laborers to extract and ship it), and many boats arrived in Boston full of raw materials from the Caribbean but returned relatively empty. The Tudors could harvest ice, pack it in the ships with sawdust insulation (a cheap waste product from Massachusetts sawmills), and make a fortune! The only problem was that everyone thought Frederic’s idea was stupid. Boston newspapers
The venture was a disaster. The ice melted, the brothers lost $4500, and William quit. But Frederic was not the sort who gave up easily. He
After the disaster of his first voyage in 1805, Tudor doubled down. Like a nineteenth-century This illustration from the 1830s shows the arrival of an ice shipment in Cuba; the cargo is unloaded by enslaved people: Tudor was relentless in scaling up his business. He used the profits from Cuba to build ice houses in other warm places in the Western Hemisphere. Then, as Thoreau marveled, he gambled that well-packed ice would survive the almost 8,000-mile journey to India. Here’s a shipment being unloaded in Bombay in the 1880s: It was then stored in ice houses like this one in Calcutta: Some people in warm climates were enthusiastic about the arrival of ice. One British colonialist
While others were distrustful of cold drinks, preferring hot beverages because they were less likely to bear disease or shock the system. One song went:
Despite the skepticism, Tudor’s shipments were a hit. The ice business became big business, and Tudor earned the nickname “Ice King” as he ruthlessly undercut potential competitors. Ice not only chilled the drinks of aristocrats, but it also enabled the shipment of perishable food all over the world. Railroad cars full of meat could now cross the country, making the stockyards of places like Chicago and Cincinnati possible. Frozen lakes all over the north were sliced up to serve humanity’s growing demand for ice. Some ice-harvesting operations seem to have been relatively idyllic, like this one in Massachusetts in the 1930s: But other operations, like this one at Rockland Lake, New York, were fairly industrial: This scene, from Wolf Lake in Indiana in 1889, is even more frenetic: On the other end of the trade was a network of ice houses, like this one in London: And ice-sellers, like these girls doing what would normally have been considered a man’s job during World War I: Tudor died a very rich man in 1864, and his industry continued to prosper for a few decades afterward. But inventors eventually devised machines that could make ice from water: At first, these machines made relatively dirty and expensive ice. But as these techniques became more efficient, they became cheaper. By the 1920s, “plant ice” was supplanting “natural ice.” Over time, the ice trade dwindled. It was no longer good business to ship ice from Boston to Calcutta when people in Calcutta could make their own. The crews stopped carving up the frozen ponds of the North so that people in the South could enjoy a cold drink or a fresh steak. Walden Pond became quiet in the winters once more, and its waters no longer mingled with the sacred waters of the Ganges. This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are three ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: You can share the newsletter with others: You can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week! You're currently a free subscriber to |