---
subject: "How a Government Think Tank Trained The First Generation of US Software Developers"
from: "Construction Physics <constructionphysics@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-11-26 13:02:39
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Construction Physics", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8588207018748827248", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
The US government had a hand in creating much of the early computer industry. Many early computers, such as Software and SAGEFollowing the end of WWII, the Soviet Union quickly emerged as a major potential threat to the US and western Europe. In 1946 Winston Churchill delivered a speech where he declared an “ That same year, the Soviet Union In 1950, MIT was contracted to create a prototype for the computer-based air defense system, using MIT’s in-development IBM was awarded the contract to build the computers for 24 SAGE sites around the country. Based on the Whirlwind, the enormous IBM built the computers, but making SAGE work also required creating the software to run the system. IBM declined the offer to program the SAGE software, on the grounds that it “couldn’t imagine” how it could absorb the estimated 2000 programmers the job might require once the job was done. MIT and Bell Labs similarly declined. The Air Force thus turned to the RAND corporation, a non-profit think tank created in 1948 to try and maintain the “
RAND’s radar operator performance studies made it an obvious candidate for programming the SAGE system. Not only was RAND already working on the problem of processing radar station data, but to do so it had already hired a substantial fraction of the programming talent in the US. In 1955 RAND employed 25 programmers, at a time when there were only an estimated 1200 programmers in the entire country, only 200 of which were creating programs of substantial complexity. In 1955 RAND agreed to take on the task of programming for the SAGE system, and by the end of the year 75 people at RAND’s System Development Division were working on SAGE. Programming SAGE was vastly more complicated than any software task that had preceded it. One SAGE programmer noted that when he was hired, “large programs were about 25 steps”, and that he was taken aback when one older programmer claimed to have written a 300-instruction program. But a single SAGE program might have as many as 800 instructions, and the entire SAGE system ended up having more than 1 million instructions. Initially RAND had estimated that programming SAGE might require 100 programmers, but it soon became obvious this was a gross underestimate. By 1956 RAND had hired so many programmers and other staff to work on SAGE that the staff of the System Development Division was greater than the rest of RAND combined, and the division was spun out as a separate entity, the System Development Corporation, or SDC. By 1959 SDC had 800 programmers working on SAGE, and it’s estimated that SDC employed half of the programming manpower in the US. Because of how nascent computers, and computer programming, was, hiring the number of programmers SAGE required wasn’t straightforward. Part of the interview process was asking whether candidates knew what computer programming was, and one hired programmer noted that “most of us didn’t know what a programmer was until we came to work at SDC”. In the absence of experienced programmers, SDC recruiters looked for “good logical minds and a math or science background”, but it proved hard to predict who would end up being an adept programmer. Hired candidates were given four months of training (two on the IBM computers, and then another two on the SAGE system). Nearly 90% of those hired were between the ages of 22 and 29. Over the next several years, SDC hired thousands of programmers and other staff to develop and then roll-out the SAGE software, making the company by far the largest software developer in the US. The first SAGE site came online in 1956, and by 1961 all SAGE sites were operational. Experience on SAGE subsequently made its way into large civilian software projects. The design of Part of SDC’s high attrition rate was because of government pay limitations: as demand for programming talent grew, SDC staff found they could go to defense or electronics companies like Northrop or Litton and double their salaries.¹ And part of it was because, as work on the SAGE system progressed, the programming work shifted from creating the system to deploying and maintaining it. This was less glamorous work which had little opportunity for advancement, and as a result many of the most ambitious employees went elsewhere. However, SDC considered part of its mission to be a “university” for programmers, and thus didn’t oppose its trainees leaving for more desirable jobs. As a result of this attrition, ex-SDC employees became the “ground floor” of the burgeoning field of what was then called electronic data processing. One SAGE veteran noted that by the 1970s “chances were reasonably high that on a large data-processing job…you would find at least one person who had worked with the SAGE system”. There are many cases where government efforts are crucial in bringing some new technology into existence. The jet engine, the nuclear reactor, the Construction Physics articles will always remain free, but if you find this work valuable, I encourage you to Construction Physics is produced in partnership with the Institute for Progress, a Washington, DC-based think tank. You can learn more about their work by visiting their You can also contact me on |