---
subject: "Summer Friday Link Dump Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-08-25 09:45:06
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Noah here. We are taking another Summer Friday and sending off the week with a collection of links. Leave your own favorites in the comments. Hope you enjoy and have a great weekend. Almost definitely a WITI in this one: [The Beekeepers Who Don’t Want You to Buy More Bees](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/6e112011-6304-4151-b82d-5e0ee86b558d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). This bit about “hivewashing” might have been my favorite: “Hives are now getting installed at what beekeeping association leaders say is a record pace. As with the B&B Hotel, they are typically motivated by an impulse to do something positive for the environment that is also highly visible - an apiary form of greenwashing. (Hivewashing?)” (NRB)For all the hype about the New Yorker Elon profile, I found this recent piece a whole lot more interesting: [What Happens to All the Stuff We Return?](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/99bf2b05-0e3a-4e47-a850-47c0aa78de6e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)(NRB)
WITI Classifieds: We are experimenting with running some weekly classifieds in WITI. If you’re interested in running an ad, Interpreting the internet for the tasteful reader. Join 23,000+ subscribers who rely on Dirt for their cultural alpha. I’m in Italy this week and these “smokeless” cigarettes are everywhere: [Smokeless cigarettes not as harmless as claimed, study says](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/cb3bc610-6136-4736-bec2-227882a35c56?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)(NRB)WITI reader Tom Vanderbilt shared this recent piece he wrote after my [Ebike Edition](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/b888f09c-7625-48e4-a668-244fdf20a434?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)last week:[Cultivating a Community Through Soccer](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/1bbdce4d-3e55-4d5c-a817-7510a7d9f972?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)(NRB)File under: it’s cheap for companies to talk about wellness. [Employers Cut Off Access to Weight-Loss Drugs for Workers](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/014628b7-0f06-439b-8afb-1ea467afa833?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)(NRB)[“Relentless F*cking Noise”: Lou Reed on Making an Unlistenable Album](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/da773299-52fb-4cdb-8f70-300b6eef1e24?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)(NRB)
— Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) — Why is this interesting? is a daily email from Noah Brier & Colin Nagy (and friends!) about interesting things. If you’ve enjoyed this edition, please consider forwarding it to a friend. If you’re reading it for the first time, consider subscribing. You're currently a free subscriber to |