---
subject: "Chantilly destination achieved, the Limbourg brothers are amazing"
from: "Marginal REVOLUTION <donotreply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-06-23 04:06:16
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tyler Cowen", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2466199532210586699", "UNREAD"]
---
Commissioned by the Duc de Berry, the enormously wealthy brother of King Charles V of France, this exquisite Book of Hours was begun by the Limbourg brothers, a trio of Netherlandish miniature painters, in around 1411. The Duc and the Limbourgs died in 1416. The manuscript was completed by other wealthy patrons and talented artists 70 years later and contains 131 full-page illuminations. Now, in a vanishingly rare opportunity, the general public has been invited to step into this world.
Until October, visitors to a special exhibition at the Condé Museum in the Château de Chantilly, 55km north of Paris, will be able to view as independent works the 12 monthly calendar pages of the Très Riches Heures, on which much of the fame of this 15th-century prayer book rests. Its importance and influence are contextualised by an exceptional display of some 100 medieval manuscripts, sculptures and paintings loaned from museums and libraries around the world.
...as the renowned scholar Christopher de Hamel, author of the 2016 book, Meetings with Remarkable Manuscripts, explains, the Très Riches Heures are so much more than a luxury object. “The staggering originality of the design and composition is overwhelming,” he says. “The full-page calendar miniatures were the first ever made. It marks the very first moment when the Renaissance touched northern Europe.
Here is [the full story](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=9447f4428ce8d0417ff6305356ab9d6c8c4493a754ba8394b54107bd23210685&blog_id=42693868&post_id=90941&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=26885436c28d3ddd859ccc5823570956&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cudGhlYXJ0bmV3c3BhcGVyLmNvbS8yMDI1LzA2LzA5L21lZGlldmFsLW1hbnVzY3JpcHRzLXRyZXMtcmljaGVzLWhldXJlc29uY2UtaW4tYS1saWZldGltZS1vcHBvcnR1bml0eQ=&email_id=2918544aafd469549d300aa7b202ed82). This is very likely the best and most important artistic exhibit in the world right now. It is only the third time (ever) the pages of the book have been on display for the public. In the exhibit more broadly, it is remarkable how many of the best works were created in the first decade of the fifteenth century.
All three of the brothers [died before the age of thirty](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=04936ee825e54f5763f0e9468653b32e6fce3fbe88fb04bbc0f1bf63d71921c0&blog_id=42693868&post_id=90941&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=4faf8a43bf43170ec9b04cb35c5e3010&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly9lbi53aWtpcGVkaWEub3JnL3dpa2kvTGltYm91cmdfYnJvdGhlcnM&email_id=2918544aafd469549d300aa7b202ed82), possibly because of the plague.
Chantilly is about an hour north of Paris, and it is a pleasant but fairly extreme town. Think of it as a French version of Middleburg, VA? Or perhaps parts of Sonoma? It is their version of horse country, with non-spicy food to boot. The accompanying castle, by the way, also is interesting and has some wonderful art works, including by Poussin, Watteau, and Greuze. The decor and trappings give you a sense of what eighteenth century French Enlightenment nobles might have considered to be beautiful.
A major goal of this trip has been to get a better handle on the Western European medieval world, and visiting this exhibit has been a big and very successful part of that.