---
subject: "The TV Call Letters Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-05-02 12:48:44
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Lindsay Tuchman (LT) is a journalist and host of Morning Rush for "In Ocean City, Lindsay Tuchman, WBOC." That is something I've said countless times. It's what's known as a "sig out" in TV news talk. When you’re watching your local stations, or listening to the radio, you'll usually hear the station's call letters at the end of the reporter's story. Why is this interesting? Let’s start with the W (or K). According to the FCC, it all began with telegrams and radio. It's 1912, and an international conference is gathering to set some rules for radio transmissions. Notably, the RMS Titanic set sail and met her infamous fate just a few months before, highlighting the urgency for a streamlined communications system. The Department of Commerce then These days, picking call letters is more about keeping with tradition than avoiding a penalty. Some stations that you know and love, like WCBS in New York and KCBS in LA, are obvious—CBS is the owner of those stations, and therefore it goes in the name. Some are based on their market location—WRAL (Raleigh), WEAU (Eau Claire, WI), KDFW (Dallas)—while others opted for the channel number in Roman numerals like KRXI (Reno Channel 11). But some, and this is the fun part, got a little bit more creative. Chicago's Also in Chicago, Atlanta's Fort Myers' So now back to "We're Between the Ocean and the Chesapeake." Cute, right? (LT) — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Lindsay (LT) — Why is this interesting? is a daily email from Noah Brier & Colin Nagy (and friends!) about interesting things. If you’ve enjoyed this edition, please consider forwarding it to a friend. If you’re reading it for the first time, consider subscribing (it’s free!). |