---
subject: "Competing Elite-Selection Mechanisms"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <the-diff@ghost.io>"
to: ""
date: 2025-05-19 14:50:04
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
In this issue: - Competing Elite-Selection Mechanisms—It's convenient to identify rising stars early in order to make sure they get some of the world's limited opportunities to show their stuff. But this can very easily lead to broken selection systems. It works best when there's a mix of formal and informal selection mechanisms, and when elite status is not on autopilot, but partly consists of having good judgment about which status ladder to climb.
- Left-Tail Outcomes—An update to the Diff theory that the future of terrorism and political assassinations is much weirder.
- Downgrades and Giffen Goods—A world where the US is less creditworthy is a world where everywhere else is a bit more risky.
- Bearer Instruments—A permissionless, decentralized asset is much easier to steal.
- Currency—US borrowers are increasingly turning to Europe.
- Shipping—Lower global shipping volumes can be great for shippers if they take the form of a start-stop market where there's rapid cycling between shortage and glut.
Competing Elite-Selection MechanismsA few weeks ago, The Diff Google and Meta have Associate Product Manager and Rotational Product Manager programs, both of which are designed to be a fast learning experience on both sides: unusually early responsibility for the candidates, and, for the employer, an early look at who's able to execute. This is distinct from another more ad hoc approach at pressure-cooker professional services companies like investment banks and consulting firms, where someone can get the equivalent of a temporary promotion by being put in charge of some time-sensitive and important part of a project (e.g. building and owning the financial model for a multi-billion dollar sell-side M&A transaction). That's a status that can be revoked at any time, and can easily be a way to shift blame when things aren't going well. Those businesses are structured around high attrition in the first few years, so it doesn't make sense for them to invest a lot in human capital that they won't actually collect a return on (and it also makes them more willing to risk employee burnout during crunch times, because they'll be hiring new analysts soon anyway). People running big organizations always face the problem that most of the people who will be in charge after they're gone will be hired at some point during their tenure, i.e. it's every CEO's job to at least consider whether their company's new hires are CEO material, and whether potential company lifers are actually getting identified early. If the business is designed around outcomes that can be measured in a short period of time—did we get the deal? Did we deliver the project?—they don't need as much formal structure. But at other companies, there are a few truly front-office people who directly contribute to revenue, and a huge number of people who indirectly contribute to them, and who are often pretty indispensable. When CEOs are doing this, they're often looking at external markers of status and upward mobility, and there's a rich ecosystem for this. Y Combinator is the standout example, having nabbed some of the Ivies' franchise of finding the most promising young people and verifying that important people ought to trust them with responsibility or at least capital. There are companies whose imprimatur is valuable, though people leaving those companies also have to deal with the fraught question of why, exactly, they're leaving such a favorable environment. Bringing in outside talent implicitly means treating the world outside the company as a better judge and incubator of talent than the company itself. Which could very well be true: the assessment and cultivation of talent can't be something that everyone's equally good at, and any time there's variance in skills, there's room for a market. So the buyside outsources the first cut of talent assessment to investment banks who hire analysts and teach them critical skills like Excel, PowerPoint, basic business knowledge, and strategies for dealing with chronic sleep deprivation. And those banks also outsource their talent triage to colleges, who in turn outsource some of it to the College Board, high schools, etc. This actually turns out to be a pretty robust system, in part because it's an organic one: when a bank stops training good analysts, it stops being able to recruit them, and after a while the lack of a buyside alumni network means it's not really involved in major deals. Schools also rise and fall in prominence—CCNY produced nine Nobel Prize winners when it had strictly test-based admissions and the Ivies had discriminatory policies, but in 1970 the Harvard of the Proletariat switched to open admissions for high school graduates in New York City, which basically turned it into a brand-new organization that kept the building, brand name (but not brand equity), and staff (for a while) of its predecessor. The part of this that's durable is the meta aspect: there's a constant shift in who's able to give a meaningful imprimatur to whom, and even a shift in how credentialed different career paths are, and it doesn't run in just one direction. It's a lot harder to become a doctor or lawyer than it was in the past—med school became a US requirement in the 1920s, and law school became a de facto requirement for lawyers over about half a century wrapping up in the 70s. It's inevitable that we need some kind of rubric for deciding who's talented enough to be worth paying attention to and who isn't. But it's also inevitable that this kind of ranking will be gamed, since everyone who is up for inclusion wants to get it, and everyone who's been vetted already wants the set of new entrants to be as small as possible—doctors have a strong financial incentive for there not to be many more doctors, and even extending the amount of education required means that a given new doctor has fewer active doctor-years in which to dilute other doctors' economics. And, of course, public-spirited reasons to say that not everyone should be wielding scalpels and prescribing fun and/or dangerous substances to whoever they want. Disclosure: Long GOOGL, META. You might question the "potential" part of this, given that so many schools have holistic admissions policies based on extracurriculars rather than pure grades and test scores. But you can divide the impressive accomplishments of eighteen-year-olds into two buckets that have almost zero overlap: 1) much more impressive than getting into Harvard/Yale/Princeton, or 2) designed to be impressive to admissions officers. Do admissions officers ever wonder how any problems in the world could possibly continue to exist given how many nonprofits are being started by ambitious youngsters? [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/0fb87d01?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)Google's APM program is a big enough deal that there's at least one case of someone quitting because they didn't get in—though [co-founding Instagram](https://www.thediff.co/r/51608cb3?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)is a nice consolation prize.[↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/0a7ce3c6?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)This is basically part of the compensation package at a sufficiently hot startup: if you do decide to quit, other employers will probably overestimate how much they'd have to pay to get you to quit for them. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/396741ca?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)Some states still allow you to become a lawyer without a JD as long as you've been apprenticed to one for a long time. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/b899625e?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)But the economic motive is there, if only in the sense that doctors feel more affinity for other people with the same job they have than for people who might hypothetically get that job, but might also hypothetically work in some different field altogether. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/19b68a2b?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. See a sampling of current open roles below: - Ex-Citadel, D.E. Shaw team that’s building the intelligence layer for casualty risk transfer that turns claims and underwriting data into liquidity for the trillion-dollar insurance liability market is looking for a principal full-stack software engineer with 10+ years of end-to-end product development experience in a fast-moving environment. (Boston, NYC)
- YC-backed startup using AI to transform how companies quantify and optimize engineering productivity is hiring formidable full-stack and AI engineers. Experience with React + Typescript, Go, or Python on the ML side a plus. (SF)
- Well-funded, fast-moving team is looking for a full-stack engineer to help build the best AI powered video editor for marketers. Tackle advanced media pipelines, LLM applications, and more. TypeScript/React expertise required. (Austin, Remote)
- A Google Ventures-backed startup founded by SpaceX engineers that’s building data infrastructure and tooling for hardware companies is looking for a product manager with 3+ years experience building product at high-growth enterprise SaaS businesses. Technical background preferred. (LA, Hybrid)
- An OpenAI backed startup that’s applying advanced reasoning techniques to reinvent investment analysis from first principles and build the IDE for financial research is looking for software engineers and a fundamental analyst. Experience at a Tiger Cub a plus. (NYC)Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up.
If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. ElsewhereLeft-Tail OutcomesThe Diff recently had a So, This belief system is at least nominally descended from antinatalism, which is a bit less niche-y: The New Yorker Downgrades and Giffen GoodsThe US has A broader question is: how high should the US's credit rating be? The number of AAA-rated companies has declined over time—Microsoft and Johnson & Johnson are the two survivors today, compared to Bearer InstrumentsThere was a brief period where a pretty easy way to tell a gripping fictional crime story was: - Find anything good from back when bearer bonds were a meaningful financial instrument.
- Update the story to replace the bonds with a USB stick that has a crypto private key.
In this case, reality is a bit ahead of fiction, as CurrencyMore American companies are - They're locking in funding that matches some of their other costs and revenues, which is a good way to mitigate currency risk. And they're doing it at a time when rates are lower in Europe than they are in the US. Or
- It's an early shift in the global currency system's center of gravity, with more investors choosing to think in terms of currencies other than the dollar.
It's probably mostly the first point, but worth watching whether a higher supply of American-issued, euro-denominated debt doesn't push rates closer to parity, and whether this kind of issuance continues at a similar pace if the rate gap shrinks. ShippingYou would think that the sector most exposed to tariff-driven downside would be the one that ships goods from place to place, but |
||||||||||
|
|
|
||||||||||
|