---
subject: "The Nutgraf: Elon’s Monsoon Hungama moment"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-11-09 04:52:48
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
On Tuesday, millions of Americans went to the polling booths to decide who would be the most powerful person in the world.
By the following morning, we found out who that was—Elon Musk.
Just a couple of days later, on Friday, the after-shocks of Elon’s victory were being felt in New Delhi.
Reliance Jio and Bharti Airtel clashed with satellite players that are eyeing India’s lucrative satcom market at TRAI’s open house discussion on Friday, as telecom operators made a spirited pitch for level-playing-field among the “competing” “substitutable services” and satcom companies argued that justification for administrative assignment of radiowaves is “techno-economic”.
The high-voltage discussions went on for over six hours under the watchful eye of the regulator and saw active participation of all key stakeholders – from Jio, Airtel and Vodafone Idea to satellite biggies like Starlink and Amazon (Project Kuiper is Amazon’s low Earth orbit satellite broadband network).
The open house discussion was punctuated with frequent interjections and counterarguments, and, at times, emotional outbursts, as opposing fractions made their submissions on issues such as pricing, period of assignment of satcom spectrum, frequency bands, roll out obligations, and other nuances.
Clash of titans: TRAI open house sees Jio, Airtel spar with Starlink, Amazon over satcom spectrum norms, [Deccan Herald](https://www.deccanherald.com/business/companies/clash-of-titans-trai-open-house-sees-jio-airtel-spar-with-starlink-amazon-over-satcom-spectrum-norms-3268781)
If you had to distil it into one sentence, here’s what Reliance Jio wants as per their representative:
“We (TSPs) are working in a hyper-competitive market. We are not afraid of competition. It is the other way around actually. The entities which want to be in this space via satellite, in the telecommunication space via satellite, are afraid of competition, and that’s why they want all this kind of protection and get spectrum for free,” Ravi Gandhi of Reliance Jio said.
Gandhi batted for a level-playing field saying same terms and conditions, and same spectrum pricing is “extremely important”.
Reliance Jio wants a “level-playing field” against Starlink, which offers internet connectivity to consumers and corporations directly by letting them connect to their satellites. Starlink is owned by Spacex, which is owned by Elon Musk.
If you’re wondering what all this is about, I’ll explain.
But to do justice to it, I’ll need to tell you not one but two stories, separated by 25 years. The first story is set in the present, and is about Starlink and Elon Musk. The second story is a long-forgotten one, from way back in 2001. It’s about Reliance and how it captured India’s telecom market.
Starlink is Elon Musk’s most powerful company, and it’s somewhat under-examined. Everyone knows about Tesla, Spacex, and X, but if you had to pick one product that’s significantly responsible for the amount of power and influence that Musk wields today, it’s Starlink. Starlink is a telecommunications company with a difference—it provides broadband internet connectivity through a set of 7,000 satellites orbiting the earth at a low-orbit.
Starlink’s stated purpose is simple—it wants to provide internet connectivity to underserved areas across the world, and to offer a more competitively priced alternative in urban areas. It also (mostly) sells directly to consumers, who can just pay Starlink and get an internet connection. It’s a simple, elegant, business built on top of a unique capability that only Elon Musk has, i.e., the ability to launch satellites at will cheaply and easily through Spacex. It claims to have over four million subscribers globally, and is on track to [cross](https://www.satellitetoday.com/finance/2024/05/09/starlink-on-track-to-hit-6-6b-in-revenue-this-year-quilty-report-estimates/) six billion dollars in revenue this year.
However, Starlink hasn’t just been successful, it’s also been wildly disruptive. And that’s because it can offer broadband internet at will to just about anyone, anywhere. No spectrum. No physical ground installation of towers. Just hit some buttons on a dashboard somewhere in the United States and satellites realign, and boom, internet service capability turned on. Imagine how much power that gives Elon Musk. In fact, in his acceptance speech, Donald Trump narrated a long, somewhat winding story about [how Musk used Starlink](https://qz.com/donald-trump-elon-musk-starlink-hurricane-helene-nc-1851661683) to help restore internet connectivity when hurricanes disrupted rural North Carolina. Musk has used Starlink to influence the Russia-Ukraine war by offering internet access at the war front, to mediate between China and Taiwan, and as a bargaining tool in Brazil.
But there’s more. Starlink isn’t just a philanthropic product targeted at rural, underserved users.
Take Nigeria for instance.
Internet service disruptor Starlink came to Africa with a plan: deliver fast, reliable satellite internet to poorly served areas. But as the company now faces capacity issues in the continent’s urban centres, it’s becoming clear that Africa has other ideas.
From bustling metropolises like Nairobi and Lagos to Harare and Lusaka, city dwellers have driven Starlink’s surge in demand. This rush has even forced the company to halt new sign-ups in major urban areas, despite having reserved “significant capacity outside of city centres,” according to owner Elon Musk’s own statement on X, in which he added that Starlink is working to increase internet capacity in dense urban areas in Africa as fast as possible.
The company says too many users are trying to access the Starlink service in Africa’s urban regions which are currently at network capacity. Observers reckon the company may have underestimated demand in Africa’s urban areas and overestimated need in remote locations.
The result? Starlink’s kits are now unavailable for purchase in some of the continent’s biggest cities, leaving hopeful customers in limbo.
Starlink Entered Africa With A Plan—The Market Is Forcing A Rethink, [WeeTracker](https://weetracker.com/2024/11/06/starlink-makes-changes-in-africa/)
Starlink created a new technology and effectively became a global internet provider. It can offer internet anywhere in the world cheaply, with little local capital investment. All it needs is a go-ahead from regulators in that country to sell subscriptions, spare capacity, and it’s good to go. Overnight, Starlink can disrupt any major telecom player, anywhere in the world.
This is a good time to cut back to 2001, when Reliance was still mostly an oil and gas company.
At the time, the telecom industry was fairly small and nascent. Mobile connectivity rates in India were in the low single digits. Despite India’s best efforts, it was simply too expensive for telecom players to offer widespread mobile connectivity. A large part of this situation was self-inflicted. India had created a notoriously complicated and extractive system to sell spectrum to telecom companies. And companies not only had to pay huge amounts to lease spectrum, they also had to pay a share of revenues. There was little incentive to expand the market.
The details of how telecom was liberalised in India are much more complicated, and frankly, some of it has repercussions to this day. One of the things that the Indian telecommunication did to ease things was that it allowed players who had a “basic service licence” to offer limited mobility services. I don’t want to get too deep into this, but essentially, this allowed players who offered something called WLL (wireless local loop technology) to expand and offer mobile services to Indians.
The WLL technology was still early, but it was deployed in both dense urban and sparse rural deployment scenarios. Apart from India, it had seen some traction in countries like Fiji, Tunisia, and… Nigeria.
Of course, back then, not everyone was happy with this decision to let WLL players offer mobile services. Existing telecom players complained that this was tantamount to a “backdoor entry”, because it let WLL players become mobile telecom players without having to pay the higher fees that they were paying for spectrum, entry, or revenue share. This made existing Indian telecom companies—Bharti, Hutch, Idea, BPL, and a few others—quite upset.
And who were they upset at?
Which was the company that took advantage of this “backdoor entry”?
In January, 2001 when the government approved the use of CDMA (Code Division Multiple Access) based Wireless in Local Loop (will) platforms by basic telephony companies to provide ‘limited mobile’ services (within a single Short Distance Charging Area, approximately 250 square km), Reliance made its move. It bid for, and won 17 new licences, to go with the one for Gujarat that it had acquired in 1997.
And everything changed.
In The Line Of Fire, Business Today (2003)
This specific ruling was the basis on which Reliance stormed into telecom, and changed India forever. Mukesh Ambani, who had just taken over as the head of Reliance Infocomm, countered all claims by saying, “If anyone thinks this is a backdoor entry (into cellular telephony), well, it is a backdoor that was open to all”. In just a couple of years, Reliance launched the now famous ‘Monsoon Hungama’ offer, giving away handsets for free to consumers, offering rock-bottom prices, and driving up adoption of mobile services across the length and breadth of the country. Competitors were forced to respond in kind, and well, the rest is history.
And it all began with India’s telecom regulator letting the wireless loop players use their technology to disrupt existing telecom players.
Cut to 2022.
When Starlink wanted to offer services in India, it got over 5,000 pre-orders for its devices. Then, the India government stepped in and asked Starlink to refund customers until it came up with the right set of licences for it to operate legally.
Starlink complied. And waited.
And now, last week, this last set of obstacles seem to have been removed from its path. Much to the anger, disappointment, and frustration of existing telecom operators, mostly led by Reliance Jio, Starlink is on the verge of starting operations in India, which will disrupt and change the way we think about mobile internet connectivity for the next several decades.
For many countries, there are incentives to let Starlink in, because it solves problems that existing players are incapable of solving. It’s also a hedge. Trump’s victory ensures that Elon Musk becomes much more powerful and relevant. He’s a leader who has ownership and interests in multiple business lines, across diverse industries, and now, his influence is magnified because he has a direct, political connection with the existing government in power, i.e., Trump. This gives him the ability to create regulations that help him increase his influence.
Does it sound like we’ve heard this story before?
I’ll end with a final, unrelated note.
Back in 2001, when the department of telecommunications allowed WLL players like Reliance to enter the mobile telephony space, existing players got upset and escalated the decision all the way to the top. Everything got quite heated, and finally, it went to the Supreme Court of India. The highest court of the land examined the issue and sent it back to the Telecom Dispute Settlement Appellate Tribunal.
The Supreme Court had just one directive to TDSAT—create a “level playing field”.
Regards,
Praveen Gopal Krishnan