---
subject: "The Great War Against Free Speech"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-02-18 12:04:16
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
Eugene Debs had been to prison once before, but his second stint in jail, in 1918, was different.
The labor leader’s first incarceration came in 1894 after he defied a court order during the Pullman railroad strike. During his few months in prison, he read a bunch of radical political tracts and, when released, was instrumental in creating a national socialist movement. He became the movement’s standard-bearer, running for president several times and winning 6% of the national vote in 1912.
The “old man with the burning eyes,” as a fellow socialist [described](https://substack.com/redirect/b577fb02-89f3-4e7b-8b80-416db082aaa7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) him, was, more than anything, an oratorical powerhouse. He would lean out over the edge of a stage and, in a clear, loud voice, condemn the capitalist forces that he believed were ruining the country.
His fellow Indianan [Max Ehrmann](https://substack.com/redirect/82702b17-72c3-46f9-9936-48f82abc6d44?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) recalled his effect on audiences:
Whatever may be said of his philosophy, one thing is certain, that he has won a place in American history as one of its greatest orators; and in my opinion, there is not a man on the American platform to-day who is his equal. His is a new and different kind of oratory. He resorts to no tricks of rhetoric; no claptrap and stage effects, no empty pretense of deep emotion; but he stands frankly before his audiences and opens the door-ways of his mind and heart that seem ever to be overflowing with terrible invective or the sweet waters of human kindness.
Debs’s ability to speak was his most important weapon against the powerful, which is perhaps why they punished him for speaking out. When the United States entered the First World War, Debs was outraged. In his estimation, the war was not being fought for the high-minded purposes proclaimed by Woodrow Wilson. It was a project of the big corporations, who were happy to send American men to die as long as it made them higher profits.
Debs toured the country railing against the war effort. He appeared at a socialist gathering in Canton, Ohio, in June of 1918. He knew he was under great scrutiny: federal law enforcement officials were noticeably [circulating](https://substack.com/redirect/66000de1-8d07-4fbc-b9a9-2ec50339401f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) through the crowd. Debs [acknowledged](https://substack.com/redirect/7294127b-3c54-4137-871a-381f87645f76?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) that he was in legal jeopardy:
I must be exceedingly careful, prudent, as to what I say, and even more careful and prudent as to how I say it. I may not be able to say all I think; but I am not going to say anything that I do not think. I would rather a thousand times be a free soul in jail than to be a sycophant and coward in the streets.
He went on to condemn militarism in all its forms, in Germany and the United States, arguing that wars always victimize the working man:
And here let me emphasize the fact — and it cannot be repeated too often — that the working class who fight all the battles, the working class who make the supreme sacrifices, the working class who freely shed their blood and furnish the corpses, have never yet had a voice in either declaring war or making peace. It is the ruling class that invariably does both.
And he told his audience that they deserved better than to die in the trenches:
You need at this time especially to know that you are fit for something better than slavery and cannon fodder. You need to know that you were not created to work and produce and impoverish yourself to enrich an idle exploiter. You need to know that you have a mind to improve, a soul to develop, and a manhood to sustain.
Two weeks later, he was arrested for what he had said in Canton, put on trial, convicted, and sentenced to a decade in prison.
You might be wondering: what about the First Amendment? You know, the part of the Constitution that allows Americans to express themselves freely?
As Debs discovered, the First Amendment was pretty weak during World War I. During his trial, he stood on [principle](https://substack.com/redirect/757a709f-9ab5-4ef8-86e5-7c224974de56?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) (”I have been accused of obstructing the war. I admit it. Gentlemen, I abhor war. I would oppose the war if I stood alone.”) and [claimed](https://substack.com/redirect/66000de1-8d07-4fbc-b9a9-2ec50339401f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) that, if he were convicted for speaking his mind, “the Constitution of the United States is dead.” He wasn’t entirely wrong.
The assault on free speech during and after World War I was one of the most dangerous moments in American constitutional history. The federal government used the presence of a wartime emergency — one that the government chose to create — to restrict freedom of speech more than ever before or since. How were they able to do this, and could it happen again?
You’ll notice that Debs was careful in his Canton speech not to cross some clear lines: while he was clear that he deeply disapproved of the war, he did not directly incite illegal behavior, nor did he threaten officials. He simply said that the war and the conscription that fueled it were wrong and that working people should not be forced to fight.
While Debs was cautious, he also likely understood that his statements might land him in prison anyway; several of his friends were already incarcerated for speaking out against the war (he had visited a couple of them right before the Canton speech), and he had [told](https://substack.com/redirect/66000de1-8d07-4fbc-b9a9-2ec50339401f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) friends that he expected to be arrested at some point.
The reason for his pessimism was that the federal government had been aggressively restricting speech for a while by the summer of 1918. Just two months after America entered the war, Congress passed the Espionage Act, which broadly criminalized interference with the war effort. Spying was outlawed, but the law also made it illegal to incite insubordination or obstruct enlistment in the armed forces. This was the logic under which Debs was convicted — his statements about “cannon fodder” were interpreted as an encouragement of draft dodging. The government cast its net wide — it even [prosecuted](https://substack.com/redirect/17458018-c646-4a6c-b702-d99398a59c3f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) Wisconsin congressman [Victor Berger](https://substack.com/redirect/9b0fd190-f649-4281-8c66-b39b5cce44ca?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) under the Espionage Act, sentencing him to 20 years in prison (he later got out on appeal).
Less than a year later, Congress passed the [Sedition Act](https://substack.com/redirect/1c473a30-37b5-4779-afe0-0b738e53a69b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), which went even further: it made it illegal to
willfully utter, print, write, or publish any disloyal, profane, scurrilous, or abusive language about the form of government of the United States, or the Constitution of the United States, or the military or naval forces of the United States.
Now, it was illegal to criticize the government at all. The Wilson administration took full advantage of the new laws’ provisions. It [used](https://substack.com/redirect/44ec0189-707a-4383-94e5-0593425b23a7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) the Sedition Act to round up hundreds of political radicals, especially members of the Industrial Workers of the World union. Several left-leaning or German-language publications were [banned from the mail](https://substack.com/redirect/539c7832-f400-4b8a-bf32-c0ceeef2a991?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) because they expressed skepticism about the war effort. Many other Americans [ended up](https://substack.com/redirect/44ec0189-707a-4383-94e5-0593425b23a7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) in the government’s crosshairs. A movie producer who negatively portrayed the British (an American ally in World War I) in a film about the American Revolution was sent to prison, as were people who [predicted](https://substack.com/redirect/539c7832-f400-4b8a-bf32-c0ceeef2a991?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) a German victory in the war. A[t](https://substack.com/redirect/691832e9-4da1-4fa6-9cd7-ea6da60a1d3a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) least one man went to jail because he attended gatherings where the draft was criticized.
All in all, about 1,000 Americans were [convicted](https://substack.com/redirect/3f6266ae-82d1-499f-aa68-a9732f809022?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) under the Sedition Act; many more were indicted in an attempt to silence dissent.
Even after the war ended, the federal government’s assault on free speech continued. Rattled by the growth of anarchism in the United States and the success of the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia, Attorney General Mitchell Palmer used the Immigration Act of 1918, which allowed the government to deport suspected anarchists without due process. Thousands of people were rounded up, often without warrants, and many were deported.
After the raids had ended, Palmer [gloated](https://substack.com/redirect/6190ef2a-c59f-481f-998a-63989d93b80f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) that he had saved America from a kind of apocalypse:
Like a prairie-fire, the blaze of revolution was sweeping over every American institution of law and order a year ago. It was eating its way into the homes of the American workmen, its sharp tongues of revolutionary heat were licking the altars of the churches, leaping into the belfry of the school bell, crawling into the sacred corners of American homes, seeking to replace marriage vows with libertine laws, burning up the foundations of society.
Legal cases over these new speech restrictions worked their way through the courts. In 1919, the Supreme Court heard the case of Charles Schenck, a socialist who had criticized the draft. The Court unanimously held that the government was justified in jailing Schenck; in his decision, Oliver Wendell Holmes [held](https://substack.com/redirect/0b8426f1-5d9e-4fb6-93e4-91b0080fcae0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) that distributing leaflets encouraging men not to enlist was like shouting “fire” in a crowded theater, and presented a “clear and present danger” to the republic. A week later, the court [upheld](https://substack.com/redirect/e168b94a-5e7c-44f6-a3e6-e14b06cbd321?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) Debs’s conviction, arguing that even if Debs had not explicitly encouraged draft-dodging, his “underlying intent” was clear.
It was now apparently legal to throw Americans in jail not just for what they said but for what a judge or law enforcement officer thought their intentions might be.
Within a few years, the government’s crackdown on speech softened. The Palmer Raids sputtered to a close in 1920. Palmer ran for the Democratic nomination on an anti-immigrant and anti-labor platform, but his candidacy collapsed because his positions were wildly unpopular. Congress repealed the Sedition Act in 1920, and Woodrow Wilson offered clemency to many of the people who had been imprisoned.
But much of the Espionage Act remained on the books, and it wasn’t until 1969 that the Supreme Court definitively [rethought](https://substack.com/redirect/f1bc17e3-c83a-4c0b-8c2b-bf895c9ac6a2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) its position on the First Amendment. In Brandenburg v. Ohio, the court overruled the conviction of a Ku Klux Klan member who had been jailed for promoting his racist ideology. The court introduced a new standard for government punishment of speech. The government could not imprison someone for what they said or wrote unless it was “directed at inciting or producing imminent lawless action” and “likely to incite or produce such action.”
Since then, Americans have enjoyed far more robust freedom of speech. But the period around World War I serves as a warning. In times of [emergency](https://substack.com/redirect/891ddfd8-6ab6-44e3-843d-e6245736dd02?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), real or imagined, the U.S. government has found ways to characterize dissent as an existential threat. The next step, as during World War I, has been for the government to restrict its citizens’ fundamental freedoms, often in ways that later look plainly shameful.
The shocking and successful assault on free speech during World War I should remind us that, if we’re not vigilant about maintaining our rights, they may not be worth much more than the paper they’re written on.
This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work:
You can subscribe as a free or paying member:
Or you can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment:
Thanks for reading!
You're currently a free subscriber to [Looking Through the Past](https://substack.com/redirect/d351c527-54c2-4758-884d-b69734ff6517?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). For the full experience, [upgrade your subscription.](https://substack.com/redirect/2/eyJlIjoiaHR0cHM6Ly93b3JsZGhpc3Rvcnkuc3Vic3RhY2suY29tL3N1YnNjcmliZT91dG1fc291cmNlPXBvc3QmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPWVtYWlsLWNoZWNrb3V0Jm5leHQ9aHR0cHMlM0ElMkYlMkZ3b3JsZGhpc3Rvcnkuc3Vic3RhY2suY29tJTJGcCUyRnRoZS1ncmVhdC13YXItYWdhaW5zdC1mcmVlLXNwZWVjaCZyPThvNTRuJnRva2VuPWV5SjFjMlZ5WDJsa0lqb3hORFUyTXpNeE9Td2lhV0YwSWpveE56Y3hOREUyTlRZNUxDSmxlSEFpT2pFM056UXdNRGcxTmprc0ltbHpjeUk2SW5CMVlpMHlPVFUzTWpVaUxDSnpkV0lpT2lKamFHVmphMjkxZENKOS5INl9VbE5MdkszTENTRlhPQURoMVZDYkZqczdVdm5fcXdKX0VWT19fM3lFIiwicCI6MTg4MDU2ODkzLCJzIjoyOTU3MjUsImYiOnRydWUsInUiOjE0NTYzMzE5LCJpYXQiOjE3NzE0MTY1NjksImV4cCI6MjA4Njk5MjU2OSwiaXNzIjoicHViLTAiLCJzdWIiOiJsaW5rLXJlZGlyZWN0In0.M-3jXizigf65LCPrAbTl9UtYsWB_8xmphCXjOTeMyBA?&utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email&utm_content=postcta)