---
subject: "“I Am the First Man to Read That!”"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-06-11 13:13:13
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
George Smith was a working-class printer in nineteenth-century London, but, like many people with tedious jobs, his real interests were elsewhere. Despite leaving school for an apprenticeship at 14 and having little formal education, Smith became obsessed with ancient history — specifically the Assyrians, a city-state that grew into a mighty Middle Eastern empire between the 1300s and 600s BCE Smith, who was only in his twenties, spent all of his free time reading about the ancient Assyrians. He often walked over to the British Museum on his lunch break to look at the Assyrian collections there. He taught himself to read cuneiform, and the museum’s curators realized that he was quite good at translating ancient texts. So they turned Smith loose on their growing collection of ancient tablets. In the 1860s and 1870s, Smith spent most evenings cataloging and cleaning the broken bits of clay in the museum’s collection. Most of his work must have been sheer drudgery, but, every once in a while, he would make a discovery that made the work worthwhile. In 1866, he found proof of Biblical events — a record of a tribute payment made by Jehu, an Israelite king, to the Assyrian ruler. The next year, he was able to put a precise date on a four-thousand-year-old war. He went on to find a description of a total solar eclipse, pinpointing it to June 15, 763 BCE. Smith was eventually invited to add to the scholarly record, publishing books and articles. He became an important figure in the field. But all of this unexpected success paled in comparison to what came next. Among the piles of tablets in the Museum, Smith read the first few lines of one of them. It seemed promising, but he had to wait a few days for a restorer named Mr. Ready to clean the artifact. After what must have seemed like an eternity for the impatient translator, he was able to lay eyes on a passage that would change the world. His friend E.A. Wallis Budge
What had Smith read that caused him to start flinging his clothes around the room? A passage that he
It sure sounded a lot like the
Smith’s discovery became international news. The
The tablet and the story it contained were exciting, but they were dangerous, too. George Smith and his colleagues had uncovered the flood tablet during a precarious time for Christianity. About a decade before Smith’s discovery, Charles Darwin had published The Origin of Species, which had turned the Biblical account of creation on its head. Before him, Charles Lyell’s geographical insights had revealed that the Earth was much older than mainstream theology claimed. Into the fierce debate over the veracity of the Bible came the flood tablet. Some saw the tablet as a confirmation of the Biblical accounts of Noah’s flood. There must have been a great flood and an ark. One magazine writer
Smith saw the texts in conversation with the Bible — he published a book called But others dwelled upon the fact that this, older, version of the story did not necessarily show that the Bible was true. The Assyrian version of the story was polytheistic — the rain god unleashes the storms, the irrigation god tears down the levees, and the mother goddess Ishtar Was the flood tablet proof of the Bible’s historical roots, or was it proof that the flood story was a myth that had passed through many sets of hands over the centuries, with each culture adding its own gods and beliefs to the tale? And if the flood story was just a bit of folklore that the Jews had picked up from neighboring cultures, what else in the Bible might come into doubt? George Smith knew that many other fascinating texts lay in the ruins of Assyrian palaces, and parlayed his newfound prominence — the Prime Minister had attended his lectures! — into a role in the excavations at Nineveh. He had finally achieved his dream of unearthing fragments of history that had been concealed for millennia. Unfortunately for Smith, his obsession killed him. On his third expedition to the Middle East, he contracted dysentery and died in Aleppo, Syria. But he had started something that would transform our understanding of the past. As scholars continued to translate tablets, they realized that the fragments of the flood story were part of a much longer work of literature, a series of stories about a man that Smith first identified as Idzubar. But, as they gained a better understanding of cuneiform, translators decided that his name was more accurately pronounced Gilgamesh. Gilgamesh appeared in ancient Mesopotamian king-lists, suggesting he was likely a real ruler, but he also featured in clearly fictional tales involving magic and gods. By the end of the 1800s, scholars had combed through thousands of tablets and compiled the stories about Gilgamesh into a coherent whole. We now call the story they stitched together The Epic of Gilgamesh. It’s the oldest story we have. As with many ancient legends, several different versions seem to have floated around the ancient Middle East, along with some poems about Gilgamesh that don’t fit into the story proper. The main plot of the story takes all sorts of weird twists and turns, but at its heart are basic human themes: the meaning of civilization, the friendship between Gilgamesh and the “wild man” Enkidu, the nature of just kingship, the human desire to escape mortality, and the relationship between humans and the divine. These tablets show us that the human desire to tell stories that give meaning to our lives goes back to the dawn of civilization, and they demonstrate that some of our stories are probably older than we know. They tell us that the ancient Mesopotamians, whose lives are in so many ways unimaginable to us, dealt with many of the same issues that we do. The story of the tablets’ recovery reminds us of how much has been lost from our ancient past. If we had no idea about this ancient and influential story until George Smith happened upon that tablet, what else has gone missing in the mists of time? Though Smith and his successors have plugged away at translating the British Library’s collection of cuneiform tablets, there are I wonder whether one of those other artifacts, moldering in a storeroom somewhere, has the potential to upend our understanding of the past just as much as George Smith’s flood tablet did. This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are three ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: You can share the newsletter with others: You can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week! You're currently a free subscriber to |