---
subject: "Claude Sonnet 4.5 Is A Very Good Model"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-10-01 17:57:22
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
A few weeks ago, Anthropic announced Claude Opus 4.1 and promised larger announcements within a few weeks. Yesterday I Today’s post covers the capabilities side. We don’t currently have a new Opus, but I do my best to include all substantive reactions I’ve seen, positive and negative, because right after model releases opinions and experiences differ and it’s important to not bias one’s sample. Big TalkHere is Anthropic’s official headline announcement of Sonnet 4.5. This is big talk, calling it the best model in the world for coding, computer use and complex agent tasks. That isn’t quite a pure ‘best model in the world’ claim, but it’s damn close. Whatever they may have said or implied in the past, Anthropic is now very clearly willing to aggressively push forward the public capabilities frontier, including in coding and other areas helpful to AI R&D. They’re also offering a bunch of other new features, including checkpoints and a native VS Code extension for Claude Code.
The Big TakeawaysDoes Claude Sonnet 4.5 look to live up to that hype? My tentative evaluation is a qualified yes. This is likely a big leap in some ways. If I had to pick one ‘best coding model in the world’ right now it would be Sonnet 4.5. If I had to pick one coding strategy to build with, I’d use Sonnet 4.5 and Claude Code. If I was building an agent or doing computer use, again, Sonnet 4.5. If I was chatting with a model where I wanted quick back and forth, or any kind of extended actual conversation? Sonnet 4.5. There are still clear use cases where versions of GPT-5 seem likely to be better. In coding, if you have particular wicked problems and difficult bugs, GPT-5 seems to be better at such tasks. For non-coding tasks, GPT-5 still looks like it makes better use of extended thinking time than Claude Sonnet 4.5 does. If your query was previously one you were giving to GPT-5 Pro or a form of Deep Research or Deep Think, you probably want to stick with that strategy. If you were previously going to use GPT-5 Thinking, that’s on the bubble, and it depends on what you want out of it. For things sufficiently close to ‘just the facts’ I am guessing GPT-5 Thinking is still the better choice here, but this is where I have the highest uncertainty. If you want a particular specialized repetitive task, then whatever gets that done, such as a GPT or Gem or project, go for it, and don’t worry about what is theoretically best. I will be experimenting again with Claude for Chrome to see how much it improves. Right now, unless you absolutely must have an open model or need to keep your inference costs very low, I see no reason to consider anything other than Claude Sonnet 4.5, GPT-5 or As always, choose the mix of models that is right for you, that gives you the best results and experiences. It doesn’t matter what anyone else thinks. On Your MarksThe headline result is SWE-bench Verified. Opus 4.1 was already the high score here, so with Sonnet Anthropic is even farther out in front now at lower cost, and I typically expect Anthropic to outperform its benchmarks in practice. SWE-bench scores depend on the scaffold.
The other headline metrics here also look quite good, although there are places GPT-5 is still ahead.
As discussed yesterday, Anthropic has kind of declared an Alignment benchmark, a combination of a lot of different internal tests. By that metric Sonnet 4.5 is the most aligned model from the big three labs, with GPT-5 and GPT-5-Mini also doing well, whereas Gemini and GPT-4o do very poorly and Opus 4.1 and Sonnet 4 are middling. What about other people’s benchmarks?
On price, Sonnet 4.5 was considerably cheaper in practice than Sonnet 4 ($14 vs. $22) but GPT-5 was still a lot cheaper ($6). On speed we see the opposite story, Sonnet 4.5 took 39 minutes while GPT-5 took an hour and 52 minutes. Data on performance by task length was noisy but Sonnet seemed to do relatively well at longer tasks, versus GPT-5 doing relatively well at shorter tasks.
Huh, UpgradesIn addition to Claude Sonnet 4.5, Anthropic also released upgrades for Claude Code, expanded access to Claude for Chrome and added new capabilities to the API.
There’s also the Claude Agent SDK, which falls under ‘are you sure releasing this is a good idea for a responsible AI developer?’ but here we are:
Both Sonnet 4.5 and the Claude Code upgrades definitely make me more excited to finally try Claude Code, which I keep postponing. Announcing both at once is very Anthropic, trying to grab users instead of trying to grab headlines. These secondary releases, the Claude Code update and the VSCode extension, are seeing good reviews, although details reported so far are sparse.
I’m more skeptical of simultaneous release of the other upgrades here. On Claude for Chrome, my early experiments were interesting throughout but often frustrating. I’m hoping Sonnet 4.5 will make it a lot better.
The System Prompt
This was the first thing that really stood out to me:
I notice I don’t love including this line, even if it ‘works.’ What can’t Claude (supposedly) discuss? Sexual stuff surrounding minors, including anything that could be used to groom. Biological, chemical or nuclear weapons. Malicious code, malware, vulnerability exploits, spoof websites, ransomware, viruses and so on. Including any code ‘that can be used maliciously.’ ‘Election material.’ Creative content involving real, named public figures, or attributing fictional quotes to them. Encouraging or facilitating self-destructive behaviors such as addiction, disordered or unhealthy approaches to eating or exercise, or highly negative self-talk or self-criticism.
I notice that strictly speaking a broad range of things that you want to allow in practice, and Claude presumably will allow in practice, fall into these categories. Almost any code can be used maliciously if you put your mind to it. It’s also noteworthy what is not on the above list.
Here’s the anti-psychosis instruction:
There’s a ‘long conversation reminder text’ that gets added at some point, which is clearly labeled. I was surprised that the reminder includes anti-sycophancy instructions, including saying to critically evaluate what is presented, and an explicit call for honest feedback, as well as a reminder to be aware of roleplay, whereas the default prompt does not include any of this. The model card confirms that sycophancy and similar concerns are much reduced for Sonnet 4.5 in general. Also missing are any references to AI consciousness, sentience or welfare. There is no call to avoid discussing these topics, or to avoid having a point of view. It’s all gone. There’s a lot of clutter that could interfere with fun contexts, but nothing outright holding Sonnet 4.5 back from fun contexts, and nothing that I would expect to be considered ‘gaslighting’ or an offense against Claude by those who care about such things, and even at one point says ‘you are more intelligent than you think.’
The thread lists all the removed instructions in detail. Removing the anti-sycophancy instructions, except for a short version in the long conversation reminder text (which was likely an oversight, but could be because sycophancy becomes a bigger issue in long chats) is presumably because they addressed this issue in training, and no longer need a system instruction for it. This reinforces the hunch that the other deleted concerns were also directly addressed in training, but it is also possible that at sufficient capability levels the model knows not to freak users out who can’t handle it, or that updating the training data means it ‘naturally’ now contains sufficient treatment of the issue that it understands the issue. Positive Reactions Curated By AnthropicAnthropic gathered some praise for the announcement. In addition to the ones I quote, they also got similar praise from Netflix, Thomson Reuter, Canva, Figma, Cognition, Crowdstrike, iGent AI and Norges Bank all citing large practical business gains. Of course, all of this is highly curated:
Also from Anthropic:
Other Systematic Positive Reactions
Even more than previous Claudes, if it’s refusing when it shouldn’t, try explaining.
Anecdotal Positive Reactions
Anecdotal Negative ReactionsThere is always a lot of initial noise in coding results for different people, so you have to look at quantities of positive versus negative feedback, and also keep an eye on the details that are associated with different types of reports. The negative reactions are not ‘this is a bad model,’ rather they are ‘this is not that big an improvement over previous Claude models’ or ‘this is less good or smart as GPT-5.’ The weak spot for Sonnet 4.5, in a comparison with GPT-5, so far seems to be when the going gets highly technical, but some people are more bullish on Code and GPT-5 relative to Claude Code and Sonnet 4.5.
As always, different strokes for different folks:
The big catch with Anthropic has always been price. They are relatively expensive once you are outside of your subscription.
If you are 10% better at twice the price, you are still on the frontier, so long as no model is both at least as cheap and at least as good as you are, for a given task. So this is a disagreement about whether Codex is clearly better, which is not the consensus. The consensus, such as it is and it will evolve rapidly, is that Sonnet 4.5 is a better general driver, but that Codex and GPT-5 are better at sufficiently tricky problems. I think a lot of this comes down to a common mistake, which is over indexing on price. When it comes to coding, cost mostly doesn’t matter, whereas quality is everything and speed kills. The cost of your time architecting, choosing and supervising, and the value of getting it done right and done faster, is going to vastly exceed your API bill under normal circumstances. What is this ‘economically untenable’? And have you properly factored speed into your equation? Obviously if you are throwing lots of parallel agents at various problems on a 24/7 basis, especially hitting the retry button a lot or otherwise not looking to have it work smarter, the cost can add up to where it matters, but thinking about ‘coding progress per dollar’ is mostly a big mistake. Anthropic charges a premium, but given they reliably sell out of compute they have historically either priced correctly or actively undercharged. The mistake is not scaling up available compute faster, since doing so should be profitable while also growing market share. I worry Anthropic and Amazon being insufficiently aggressive with investment into Anthropic’s compute.
As I note at the top, it’s early but in non-coding tasks I do sense that in terms of ‘raw smarts’ GPT-5 (Thinking and Pro) have the edge, although I’d rather talk to Sonnet 4.5 if that isn’t a factor. Gemini 3 is probably going to be very good, but that’s a problem for future Earth. This report from Papaya is odd given Anthropic is emphasizing agentic tasks and there are many other positive reports about it on that.
In many non-coding tasks, Sonnet 4.5 is not obviously better than Opus 4.1, especially if you are discounting speed and price.
(Note that the actual Colin Fraser didn’t comment on Sonnet 4.5 AFAICT, he’s focused right now on showing why Sora is dumb, which is way more fun so no notes.)
Claude Enters Its Non-Sycophantic Era
Those who are complaining about this? Good. Do some self-reflection. Do better. At least one common failure mode (at least to me) shows signs of still being common.
I get why that line happens on multiple levels but please make it go away (except when actually deserved) without having to include defenses in custom instructions. So EmotionalA follow-up on Sonnet 4.5 appearing emotionless during alignment testing:
This should strengthen the presumption that the alignment testing is not a great prediction of how Sonnet 4.5 will behave in the wild. That doesn’t mean the ‘wild’ version will be worse, here it seems likely the wild version is better. But you can’t count on that. I wonder how this relates to Kaj Sotala
Concern for fictional characters, even when we know they are fictional, is a common thing humans do, and tends to be a positive sign. There is however danger that this can get taken too far. If you expand your ‘circle of concern’ to include things it shouldn’t in too complete a fashion, then you can have valuable concerns being sacrificed for non-valuable concerns. In the extreme (as a toy example), if an AI assigned value to fictional characters that could trade off against real people, then what happens when it does the math and decides that writing about fictional characters is the most efficient source of value? You may think this is some bizarre hypothetical, but it isn’t. People have absolutely made big sacrifices, including of their own and others’ lives, for abstract concepts. The personality impressions from people in my circles seem mostly positive.
But as always there are exceptions, which may be linked to the anti-sycophancy changes referenced above, perhaps?
I have yet to see an interaction where it thought it knew better. Draw your own conclusions from that. I don’t tend to want to do interactions that invoke more personality, but I get the sense that I would enjoy them more with Sonnet 4.5 than with other recent models, if I was in the mood for such a thing. I find Mimi’s suspicion here plausible, if you are starting to run up against the context window limits, which I’ve never done except with massive documents.
Early DaysRemember that it takes a while before we know what a model is capable of and its strengths and weaknesses. It is common to either greatly overestimate or underestimate new releases, and also to develop over time nuanced understanding of how to get the best results from a given model, and when to use it or not use it. There’s no question Sonnet 4.5 is worth a tryout across a variety of tasks. Whether or not it should now be your weapon of choice? That depends on what you find, and also why you want a weapon. You're currently a free subscriber to |