---
subject: "The Lip Gloss Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-03-01 11:01:43
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Stephanie Balzer (SB) is a writer, coach, and founder of Stephanie here. I love lip gloss. For starters, I love the words lip and gloss together. I love its shininess, stickiness, evenness—terms borrowed from In general, people have agreed that personal grooming, including applying makeup, should be done in private. But even the most blue-blooded arbiters of social etiquette make exceptions for lipstick—or its more viscous cousin, lip gloss.
Fanfare, that airhorn of a word. In 2011, Then there’s Rihanna, Why is this interesting? The lipstick and lip gloss markets are global, multi-billion dollar industries. That means there are hundreds of millions of people worldwide, mostly women, who are staking their take on the nuanced rules of application. I wonder how many of us have personal stories tied to lip products. For example, I can remember dates, events, and even whole seasons of my life this way. I still miss favorite discontinued colors. Jane Iredale’s Cotton Candy was the best pink with a summer tan. Bobbi Brown’s Bellini was an ideal pale winter tint. One time a stranger asked if I always “wore black lipstick.” It was MAC’s Desire, a sheer, deep purple. January 2012 is defined by the time I spent in the ICU with a friend after his double lung transplant. We couldn’t take many personal items into his room, so I would slip a gloss in my pocket before I donned my paper gown and scrubbed my arms with disinfectant and wrestled my wet hands into blue surgical gloves. One day, in the hospital hallway, I took a picture of all the glosses I found in my handbag while fishing for a specific one. To see that photo now—it’s the absurdity of carrying around four tubes of practically the same shade of pink juxtaposed against a backdrop of my desperateness that insisted something amusing still mattered. It mattered because I intended to share that photo as its own kind of fanfare. Here, this is what I held onto and documented, the colors and habits that made up our lives. (SB) Want to run a WITI classified? Want to reach 20,000 brilliant readers? WITI classifieds start at $250, and The Mandate is a newsletter on topics men don't like to talk about. Written by Olympic Medalist & NYT/Men's Health contributor, Jason Rogers. — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Stephanie (SB) —
|