---
subject: "Retro Recomendo: Nature"
from: "Recomendo <recomendo@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-04-13 09:00:59
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Recomendo", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8455078693589186571", "UNREAD"]
---
Our subscriber base has grown so much since we first started eight years ago, that most of you have missed all our earliest recommendations. The best of these are still valid and useful, so we’re trying out something new — Retro Recomendo. Once every 6 weeks, we’ll send out a throwback issue of evergreen recommendations focused on one theme from the past 9 years. Learn from Nature
Amphibian love songsA few years ago I took an unforgettable night time tour in a Costa Rican jungle to listen to frog calls, and discovered that humans aren’t the only musicians on Earth. This playlist titled Star gazing navigationStargazing apps on your phone are magic. They work like AR-augmented reality — overlaying the night sky with outlines of constellations, star and planet names, paths of the moon, and even satellite, comet and asteroid sightings. The apps are uncannily accurate, and easy to understand. There are free apps and expensive subscriptions, but I use Namibia live streamThis Nature live camsFor a dose of awe and wonder head over to Identify nature appThere is utility and pleasure in being able to identify wild creatures and plants. But it’s a steep learning curve. The fastest way I found to learn is via the Recomendo is an authentic, hand-crafted, human-written weekly newsletter that is free, but not cheap. Consider supporting our work with a paid option, now at the low price of $45 per year. Paid subs enable us to keep making it free for others. Recomendo is published by Cool Tools Lab, a small company of three people. We also run the Recomendo Unclassified Ads work! UNCLASSIFIEDS 10 Amazon Prime Perks You Need to Be Using. Free music/podcasts, access to lightning deals, and Whole Foods discounts among many others! Make sure you're not missing out, and get the most out of your Prime membership Pets can't tell you what's wrong—but we can. At Sage Veterinary Imaging, pets get human-quality MRI & CT scans for precise answers. People travel from all over to our Round Rock, TX center for expert diagnostics. Learn more at Get Up to 90% Back on Vet Bills! Don't stress over costly vet bills. Choose Embrace for top-rated pet insurance and Stop paying full price for streaming. Learn how to get services like Peacock, Paramount+, and Apple TV+ for cheap (or free) with Cord Cutter Weekly's Publishers Weekly states this about You deserve fewer people-pleasing regrets. Say no with confidence. Say yes without guilt. Get your weekly dose of bold boundaries every Sunday in Humor, delivered daily. Discover your new favorite read. Chortle sends funny, original writing directly to your inbox every weekday. Perfect for fans of McSweeney’s or MAD Magazine. Check out one of our most popular posts: Recomendo is copyrighted by Cool Tools Lab, LLC. Commissions may be earned from the links above. |