---
subject: "The Influence of Bell Labs"
from: "Construction Physics <constructionphysics@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-11-15 13:01:58
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Construction Physics", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8588207018748827248", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
We’ve Bell Labs was notable for combining the best aspects of academic and industrial research. As in a conventional academic lab, scientists had the freedom to pursue research avenues they found promising without being bound by concerns of immediate profitability or return on investment. It was understood that efforts might take years to pay off, and only a handful would. Researchers could also publish papers and engage with the broader intellectual community in their field, while using cutting-edge equipment that only an industrial lab could provide. And they could pursue their research without having to worry about teaching classes or applying for grants. Discussion of Bell Labs tends to center around the impact and successes of the Labs itself. But a perhaps underappreciated impact of Bell Labs is the influence it had on other large corporations. Bell Labs was highly prestigious, and its invention of the transistor demonstrated that world-changing products could come by funding “basic” scientific research. Inspired by Bell Labs, in the second half of the 20th century, a variety of corporations started their own research operations based on the Bell Labs model. Bell Labs and Industrial ResearchIndustrial research labs started to become popular in the US around the turn of the 20th century. Along with Bell Labs, companies like DuPont, General Electric, and Kodak all employed scientists in research labs, and by 1940 there were over 1,000 industrial research labs in the U.S. Most of these labs were small (on average they employed fewer than 100 people), and as late as 1940 there were fewer than 30,000 people employed in a “scientific” capacity in all US manufacturing. But following WWII, research spending by both the government and the private sector increased enormously. In 1946, private R&D spending in the U.S. was about $500 million annually, roughly what it had been before the war. By 1951 it had increased four-fold to $2 billion annually, and between 1953 and 1977, in real terms, it quadrupled again. Unpacking the reasons for this increase goes beyond the extent of this essay, and it certainly wasn’t just because of AT&T and Bell Labs. But Bell Labs’ achievements, particularly the invention of the transistor in 1947, seem to have prompted the decisions of many companies to start their own R&D labs, and influenced how those labs were structured. There seem to have been several modes of influence. For one, the transistor itself ushered in a new world of semiconductor devices. Semiconductors were a product of deep, scientific understanding of the physical nature of matter. Anyone who wanted to compete in the new market by developing their own semiconductor-based products would need to acquire the relevant scientific expertise. The transistor also demonstrated that “basic” research could result in enormously successful, world-changing products. The world had just seen the amazing power of scientific research in wartime achievements like radar and the atomic bomb, and the transistor showed that the fruits of such research weren’t limited to enormous government projects. The success of nylon, another successful product that was the result of basic research by DuPont, also reinforced this perception. Finally, Bell Labs was incredibly prestigious, and companies wanted to burnish their reputations by having their own scientific research establishments. Not only was this prestige desirable in its own right, but it could allow companies to acquire the sort of talent that they otherwise might not be able to. The transistor cemented Bell Labs’ reputation as one of the best research labs in the world, which allowed it to acquire some of the world’s best scientific talent, which resulted in
Bell Labs thus created a new world that required some degree of scientific capability, showed what could result from creating such capabilities, and provided a playbook for how to do it. In the 1950s and beyond, many companies started their own research operations on the Bell Labs model: creating an academic-esque environment and giving researchers freedom to follow their interests, without necessarily needing to worry about marketable products or immediate profitability. Several of these research labs, unsurprisingly, were founded by companies in the computers and electronics industry. IBM, for instance, had a research division prior to the 1950s, but it was mostly a small group of electrical engineers who were focused on figuring out how to build new products. Thomas Watson Jr., son of the founder of IBM and its former CEO,
At the time, IBM primarily produced mechanical punchcard-based calculators, but Watson Jr, recognizing that the future was in electronics, scaled up their research operations and hired thousands of scientists and engineers who understood semiconductors and solid-state physics. To organize a program of “pure research," IBM hired Emanuel Piore, the former head of the Office of Naval Research:
IBM Research went on to spawn a variety of major scientific and technological discoveries.
When setting up its research efforts, IBM consciously took notes from Bell Labs. An Another electronics manufacturer that patterned its research efforts after Bell Labs was Texas Instruments.
While these efforts are described as “basic research," they don’t appear to be quite as sequestered from product development as in some other Bell Labs-inspired research labs. In the oral history, Teal notes that the labs’ efforts weren’t quite pure science, and research directions tended to be product-focused. They nevertheless appear to be highly influenced by Teals’ Bell Labs experience. Research at Texas Instruments would ultimately result in the first production silicon transistor, and the co-invention of the integrated circuit. Perhaps the most famous research lab inspired by Bell Labs was Xerox’s Palo Alto Research Center (PARC). Concerned that their copier business would potentially be undermined by advancing computer technology, Xerox acquired computer manufacturer SDS in 1969 to help it stay at the forefront of modern technology. Following the purchase, chief scientist Jack Goldman convinced company leadership to build a new research operation. From Dealers of Lightning, a history of Xerox PARC:
PARC would be founded “by men whose experience had taught them that the only way to get the best research was to hire the best researchers they could find and leave them unburdened by directives, instructions, or deadlines.”
PARC would become famous as the birthplace of much of the technology behind the PC revolution: out of PARC came the
Among the achievements of Ford’s research labs are the Another Bell Labs-inspired research lab outside the electronics industry was Exxon’s. In the early 1970s Exxon was worried that petroleum would begin to be exhausted in the coming decades, and was willing to fund long-term research in the hunt for alternative energy technologies. These efforts were wide-ranging, including “fuel cells, solar cells, computer chips, superconductors, and batteries, as well some non-energy projects, such as fax machines and word processors.” Exxon researchers had a great deal of freedom, access to the best equipment, and weren’t burdened with questions of profitability or return on investment. From
Exxon felt that it was in direct competition with Bell Labs, and acted accordingly:
Exxon research would later become infamous for ConclusionBell Labs ultimately wasn’t able to maintain its long-horizon research environment following the dissolution of the AT&T monopoly, and it seems like the same is true for the Bell Labs-inspired research organizations. IBM still funds a great deal of research, but is much more tightly integrated with product development, and its This probably shouldn’t be surprising. I argued in my
Part of corporations increasing unwillingness to fund unrestricted, speculative research likely comes down to the fact that labs with unrestricted research operations don’t appear to have been particularly successful. In
Looking at the history of the Bell Labs-inspired organizations seems to at least somewhat confirm this thesis. I haven’t studied their output exhaustively, but their most successful achievements — things like the Texas Instruments’ integrated circuit, IBM’s DRAM, and Xerox’s laser printer — mostly seem fairly closely tied to immediate product needs, and aren’t obviously the sort of thing you’d need to fund “basic” research to get. Indeed, research on the laser printer started years before Xerox formed PARC, and the other co-inventor of the integrated circuit was Fairchild Semiconductor, which as far as I can tell didn’t operate anything like a basic research lab. Their longer-timeline, “breakthrough” achievements seem to perhaps yield interesting scientific discoveries (the scanning tunneling microscope, Mandelbrot’s There’s a well-known phenomenon that technological progress is often driven by
It’s possible something similar happened with Bell Labs following the invention of the transistor. Not necessarily a bubble in electronics investment (though that could well be the case), but in the meta-idea of economically unjustifiable investments in pursuing basic research decoupled from immediate product needs. People often bemoan that American companies aren’t willing to fund research the way that they once did, but perhaps that age of industrial research was simply a bubble that was invariably going to pop. 1 Though it’s possible Exxon would have made these developments itself, had it continued to fund battery research. Construction Physics articles will always remain free, but if you find this work valuable, I encourage you to Construction Physics is produced in partnership with the Institute for Progress, a Washington, DC-based think tank. You can learn more about their work by visiting their You can also contact me on |