---
subject: "Tesla app store 🚗, obesity drugs beyond Ozempic 💊, dawn of spatial computing 😎"
from: "TLDR <dan@tldrnewsletter.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-06-29 10:17:18
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "TLDR", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_795315172960844453", "UNREAD"]
---
[Tesla To Add Official Support for Third-Party Services and Apps (3 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.notateslaapp.com%2Fsoftware-updates%2Fupcoming-features%2Fid%2F1497%2Ftesla-to-add-official-support-for-third-party-services-and-apps%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018906a84435-dd8ef334-318b-47b5-99bc-fe30ba62c9e8-000000/vdYKa3F8s3vwcVPbGYEZ5c73gbGVAJaUg4gqjLVE34Q=307)
A new option in Tesla account settings suggests that Tesla could be close to releasing official support for third-party apps. Support for third-party apps could give users a more customized and privacy-focused experience. Current third-party apps require complete access to the vehicle. Official support could introduce more controlled access, increasing security. Tesla has not revealed much about the feature so it is unknown who will be able to make apps for Teslas and whether developers will have to pay to distribute through the store. |
[The Dawn of Spatial Computing (22 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fevery.to%2Fp%2Fthe-dawn-of-spatial-computing%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018906a84435-dd8ef334-318b-47b5-99bc-fe30ba62c9e8-000000/RDEslzyVKyOhia5gU3_SR1dwIEROyDDc8GADOR9UU6Y=307)
The graphical user interface and mouse have remained the predominant way to interact with computers over the years. Headsets like Apple's Vision Pro ultimately aim to replace the current computer interface entirely.
The idea that head-mounted displays or augmented-reality glasses will replace the screen sounds implausible, but the technology is almost there. This new form of computing promises a completely new way of perceiving and interacting with the world. |
Science & Futuristic Technology
|
[Joby Aviation receives permit to fly first eVTOL built on production line (4 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftechcrunch.com%2F2023%2F06%2F28%2Fjoby-aviation-receives-permit-to-fly-first-evtol-built-on-production-line%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018906a84435-dd8ef334-318b-47b5-99bc-fe30ba62c9e8-000000/Y3i46PJmqxTRZgxdwWEq0jZ8WVTwGVTTBVFIZqb44O8=307)
Joby Aviation is on track to deliver its first electric aircraft by 2024 and commercialize an air taxi service by 2025. Its Californian pilot production plant has rolled out its first electric vertical takeoff and landing vehicle (eVTOL). The eVTOL received a special airworthiness certificate from the FAA to begin flight testing. Joby has multiple aircraft currently in its production line that it plans to use for customer applications. |
[4 volunteers just entered a virtual "Mars" made by NASA. They won't come back for one year (2 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.cbsnews.com%2Fnews%2Fnasa-virtual-mars-habitat-four-volunteers-start-mission-one-year%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018906a84435-dd8ef334-318b-47b5-99bc-fe30ba62c9e8-000000/vMZHloc5wVFLEaxe8E6TAw8Bb98b8JX_-emBCsTDQzs=307)
Four volunteers have entered a 1,700-square-foot habitat, NASA's Crew Health and Performance Exploration Analog, as part of an experiment designed to anticipate the challenges that a real-life human mission to Mars might face. The participants, none of whom are trained astronauts, will remain in the habitat for 378 days. They will carry out an array of mission activities, including simulated spacewalks, robotic operations, growing crops, and habitat maintenance. There will be obstacles such as resource limitations, equipment failure, communication delays, and environmental stressors. This will be the first of three planned Mars surface simulations. |
Programming, Design & Data Science
|
[BlockSuite (GitHub Repo)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Ftoeverything%2Fblocksuite%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018906a84435-dd8ef334-318b-47b5-99bc-fe30ba62c9e8-000000/m0KOA0BtDhK9JWx0Hm5cQqffnFq1oWkXa2B3n55ExTE=307)
BlockSuite is a collaborative editor. It features block-based editing, incremental state sync, compact rich text, and a hybrid infinite canvas. BlockSuite is intrinsically collaborative and framework agnostic. |
[Composer (GitHub Repo)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fmosaicml%2Fcomposer%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018906a84435-dd8ef334-318b-47b5-99bc-fe30ba62c9e8-000000/cpMb6rzK6jkuqZrPeJfdAJBmtQBlQFjTeiMVCnf45lA=307)
Composer is a PyTorch library that enables faster, cheaper, and more accurate neural network training. It features more than 20 methods for speeding up training networks, an easy-to-use container that integrates best practices for multi-GPU training, and strong and reproducible baselines. Composer can be used both as a functional API and as a standalone trainer. |
[Obesity Drugs Are Moving Way Past Ozempic (7 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Farchive.ph%2FoS7Su%23selection-711.270-711.503%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018906a84435-dd8ef334-318b-47b5-99bc-fe30ba62c9e8-000000/_RELFU6o4IikGV1QPzRLGsaE9_KhgsPgRwMI1HTuSA4=307)
Several drugs presented at the American Diabetes Association meeting in San Diego over the past few days are likely better treatments for obesity than Ozempic, a popular diabetes drug. Many obesity medications are advancing through development and will be available in the coming years. There will be a range in pricing, effectiveness, side effects, and benefits across the different drugs. While Ozempic may be becoming obsolete, its name seems destined to live on as a generic term, like Band-Aid, escalator, and thermos. |
[Fast machines, slow machines (16 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fjmmv.dev%2F2023%2F06%2Ffast-machines-slow-machines.html%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018906a84435-dd8ef334-318b-47b5-99bc-fe30ba62c9e8-000000/o2NZP4jaXYfG7E5RcKKIvHZv0OUcufVzimYTIeA9Y48=307)
A recent Twitter post comparing an older computer running Windows NT 3.51 and a newer one running Windows 11 showed the older computer loading apps instantly while the newer computer showed significant lag. This opened up a discussion on how, while computers have gotten better, performance on trivial tasks has regressed. Latency on modern computer interfaces is getting worse. Frameworks, layers of abstraction, and the mass adoption of managed and interpreted languages are causing a lot of this latency. |
[Building god (44 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.strangeloopcanon.com%2Fp%2Fbuilding-god%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018906a84435-dd8ef334-318b-47b5-99bc-fe30ba62c9e8-000000/CoCCQHfE5j25vB7nCt38ZcNv5nmXPQFB8wGqifrlQjc=307)
An excerpt from a small book about AI development that talks about building a self-improving and reflective AI agent that is good enough to run scientific experiments. |
[TLDR Talent](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fdanni763618.typeform.com%2Fto%2FrSL4lOH3/2/0100018906a84435-dd8ef334-318b-47b5-99bc-fe30ba62c9e8-000000/jNhzEcKnShj0Q4NdgKB9ny5rXKjv-BhWvWCBLp1HHlY=307) is our exclusive community where we help world-class tech talent and get intros to companies of their choice, along with a number of exciting startups and tech companies curated by TLDR.
We give you full control of the process, you can specify if you’re actively searching or passively interested only if something amazing comes along. Set your preferred compensation, seniority/title/role, specific companies (or types of companies) you’d like to work for and more. [Click here to apply](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fdanni763618.typeform.com%2Fto%2FrSL4lOH3/3/0100018906a84435-dd8ef334-318b-47b5-99bc-fe30ba62c9e8-000000/9K59HQgnTJfekQVG6_bukd73qqyTU1P6gqnMe4yju8s=307).
|
If your company is interested in reaching an audience of tech executives, decision-makers and engineers, you may want to [advertise with us](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fshare.hsforms.com%2F1OxvmrkcFS4qsxKpNXCi76wee466%3Futm_source=tldr%26utm_medium=newsletter/2/0100018906a84435-dd8ef334-318b-47b5-99bc-fe30ba62c9e8-000000/vPZv5av3H14AAtGzop3aYG7M2g0X0BvS4crOVVgSoCY=307).
If you have any comments or feedback, just respond to this email!
Thanks for reading,
[Dan Ni](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2Ftldrdan/1/0100018906a84435-dd8ef334-318b-47b5-99bc-fe30ba62c9e8-000000/cyJ4CRQJ2dFQkH0yQOsywzvA1eZOe9QiYT9Eh56WcSo=307) and [Stephen Flanders](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2FSteveFlanders22/1/0100018906a84435-dd8ef334-318b-47b5-99bc-fe30ba62c9e8-000000/9dWdijpl_XGs2AlbIsBc-SoGT5YGZ2j7tjD3c19sa_0=307)
|
|
|
|