---
subject: "What Learning by Doing Looks Like"
from: "Construction Physics <constructionphysics@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-12-12 13:48:11
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Construction Physics", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8588207018748827248", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
On Construction Physics, we’ve talked frequently about the importance of Learning curves are often conflated with the similar, but distinct, concept of “learning by doing," the idea that the more you do something, the better you get at it. Learning curve gains are often assumed to be the result of learning by doing. The Our World in Data As originally formulated, the learning curve did indeed probably mostly consist of learning by doing. Theodore Wright But the more generic relationship between rising production volume and falling cost includes many factors other than learning by doing. With But even though learning by doing isn’t the only part of the learning curve, it’s nevertheless an important facet of it, and of technological improvement more generally. One way to understand the learning curve is to look specifically at technologies where progress does seem to have been heavily driven by accumulating experience. One such technology is polycrystalline diamond compact (PDC) drill bits. Over the last 50 years, PDC bits have gradually become the standard drill bit for drilling oil and gas wells, replacing the previous The nature of drill bits means that progress in them is heavily driven by learning by doing. A drill bit’s job is essentially to drill through rock as quickly as possible, for as long as possible, without breaking or wearing out. Because many costs of drilling are Figuring out how to make a bit drill faster and last longer in large part comes from experience: every failed or damaged drill bit is an opportunity to understand the causes behind that failure, and to modify the drill bit and drilling process to try and avoid it. 50 years of constant modifications based on both real-world and laboratory drill bit failures have steadily pushed PDC drilling performance higher and higher. PDC bits are also a good case study learning by doing because their evolution is unusually well-documented. In general, the sort of factory-floor level improvements that make up learning by doing don’t get written down in a way that’s accessible to the wider world; either out of a desire for secrecy (companies trying to protect their competitive advantages) or out of apathy (no one bothers). But drilling companies seem to be exceptionally open about their drilling experiments and progress, and there’s a great deal of published research from major oil companies documenting their drilling improvement efforts. Origins of the PDC bitFor most of the 20th century, oil and gas drilling was done primarily using roller-cone bits. The roller-cone bit, invented by Howard Hughes Sr. in 1907³, consisted of two (later three) interlocking, rotating wheels. When the bit was pressed down against the rock and rotated, the wheels rolled along the bottom, and the vertical force crushed the rock beneath the teeth of the bit.⁴ Drilling fluid (known as drilling mud) was pumped out through holes in the bottom of the bit, which kept the bit clean, cooled it, and carried away the broken rock fragments; at the surface, the drilling fluid was cleaned and reused. Drilling through rock will gradually wear down the bit, requiring an expensive and time-consuming bit change. The stronger the material you can make your bit from, the more durable the bit would be and the longer it will last. The first roller-cone bits were made from steel, and by the 1960s roller-cone bits with even stronger In 1955, GE invented a process for Synthetic diamond cutters were originally developed for use in conventional machining, but it was clear that they might prove useful in rock drilling. At the time, diamond-tipped rock drill bits were used in The first PDC drill bits for rock drilling, using GE COMPAX cutters, were built in 1973. Unlike roller-cone bits (which drilled rock by crushing), and natural diamond bits (which drilled rock by grinding), the PDC bit drilled rock by shearing, cutting away the rock like a machine tool. Because rock has less tensile strength than compressive strength, shearing is theoretically more efficient for drilling, taking on the order of a third of the energy that crushing requires. Their more efficient cutting mechanism, combined with the high strength of diamond, suggested that PDC bits could be an enormous improvement over existing, roller-cone bits: early lab tests showed that PDC bits could cut through rock two to four times as fast as roller-cones, and one test showed a PDC cutter lasting 145 times as long as a tungsten carbide cutter. But field tests revealed serious problems with the bits. Initial PDC bits were essentially existing natural diamond bits, with the natural diamonds replaced with synthetic diamond cutters, but this design didn’t work particularly well, and the bits wore out quickly. Investigation showed that the cutters were too small to get good rates of penetration (ROP), the diamond tables had a tendency to delaminate and break off from the tungsten carbide studs, and the studs themselves tended to break. The drilling fluid also wasn’t properly cooling the bit and carrying away the rock fragments. Bit designers realized that the different rock breaking mechanism of PDC cutters required entirely new bit designs, and over the next several years experiments by bit manufacturers and drilling companies yielded PDC bits which worked significantly better. Cutters were arranged in a series of “blades," the material of the bit body was changed from steel to a matrix of tungsten carbide (though steel bodies continued to be developed), and the hydraulics of the bit were redesigned for improved drilling fluid flow. On the cutters, the tungsten carbide stud was lengthened, and in 1976 GE released a larger diamond cutter (13mm compared to the original 8mm). Three years later, GE developed an improved brazing process, LS brazing, which greatly reduced the diamond delamination problem. While much of this development was the result of field trials by various oil companies, early PDC bit improvement was also heavily driven by research at By the early 1980s, PDC bits had overcome their early teething troubles, and 20 companies were manufacturing PDC bits. But while PDC bits showed great potential, and in some cases performed much better than roller-cone bits, success was intermittent and unpredictable, as a
PDC bits were also found to perform poorly in hard, abrasive rock, limiting their flexibility. By 1982, less than 2% of well footage worldwide was drilled with PDC bits. But experimentation and feedback from the field continued to yield results and improvements. Manufacturers began to roughen the surface between the diamond table and the stud with grooves and other patterns, which improved attachment and cutter performance: these non-planar interfaces were first introduced in 1984 and have since become standard. Cutters were made even larger, rising to 19mm in diameter, diamond tables were made even thicker, and chamfers were added to the disk edges. In some rock, particularly clay and shale, cuttings had a tendency to Bit whirlA major advance in PDC drilling in the late 1980s was the discovery of the effects of “bit whirl," a type of vibration in the drill string. Bit whirl is when a drill bit doesn’t just spin, but rotates eccentrically around a center point. A whirling bit changes the path a cutter takes, resulting in loading on it from undesirable directions and impacts that can damage the cutters. Based on field studies of PDC bits, researchers at Amoco discovered that bit whirl was a major cause of damaged cutters and bit failure: cutters were being bashed against the side of the hole, causing damage and rapid wear. Bit failures that were thought to be due primarily to thermal effects (ie: the bit heating up) were discovered in many cases to be primarily due to bit whirl, with damaged cutters rapidly failing under high heat. The discovery of the effects of bit whirl prompted industry research and development efforts to find ways to mitigate it), resulting in things like the addition of “tracking” cutters to provide grooves for cutters to travel through and low friction “gauge pads” to the edge of the bit. Manufacturers improved their quality control to allow more precise placement of cutters, and more generally focused on designing more balanced bits. Using many of these advances, in 1990 Amoco released an “antiwhirl” bit to the market, which had been designed using a modified version of Sandia’s PDC WEAR program. And outside of efforts to reduce bit whirl, the quality of the diamond tables was increasing. Between 1993 and 1995, diamond cutters got twice as abrasion resistant, and new cutter shapes that were less likely to break were introduced. In the field, rig crews gradually learned how to adjust parameters like bit weight, fluid pressure, fluid flow rate, and RPMs to maximize PDC bit performance and minimize bit whirl. These efforts helped reduce PDC bit failures, made it possible to use PDC bits in harder rock, and made PDC bits much more appealing: a PDC bit that didn’t break or fail prematurely could drill twice as fast as a roller-cone bit, and last two to three times as long before being replaced. Between 1989 and 1996, average drilling speed of PDC bits had risen 60%, and footage drilled per bit had risen 115%. PDC bits were still expensive — 5 to 15 times the cost of a roller-cone bit — but the cost of the bit itself (2-3% of the well cost) was nothing compared to its impact on overall well costs. 75% of the costs of drilling a well were directly or indirectly affected by bit performance, and the improved efficiency of PDC bits was often worth the added expense. Between 1990 and 1995, the share of well footage drilled by PDC bits jumped from 5 to 15% of the market, and by the mid-1990s PDC bits TUNU case studyA case study of an In 1986, PDC fishtail bits were introduced in the TUNU oilfield. Early tests showed around a 20% drilling speed improvement, enough of a success to prompt further experimentation with different types of PDC bits and drilling parameters. As drillers homed in on the best combination of bit design and drilling procedures, drilling performance continued to improve. By 1991, average drilling rate had risen to 10 meters per hour, the number of bits required per well was reduced from 11 to 6, and time per well was cut from 13 days to just over 8 days. Drilling costs fell to $270 per meter. By 1994, it had become clear that impacts on cutters were causing premature bit failure. Based on analysis of bit behavior in the TUNU wells, new PDC bits were designed with larger, Savings from PDC Bits Savings achieved by adopting PDC bits in the TUNU oil field in Indonesia, from 1986 to 1997. Cutters continue to improveBy 2000, thanks to their continued improvement, PDC bits were responsible for 24% of oil and gas footage drilled worldwide. But there were still limits to where the bits could be used, particularly very hard rock. Often wells would start with PDC bits, but be forced to switch to roller-cone bits for the hard rock in the final portions of the well. One major limiting factor was the quality of the synthetic diamond cutters. In the early 2000s one of the major cutter manufacturers, Diamond cutters are made by compressing synthetic diamond grit onto a tungsten carbide disk at very high temperatures and pressures, which fuses the individual grains together in a process called Another major US Synthetic improvement effort was with chemical leaching. The diamond table production process uses liquid cobalt to catalyze bonding the diamond particles together, but once the process is complete, the cobalt becomes an undesirable impurity. Cobalt has a higher thermal coefficient of expansion than diamond, and at high temperatures it will expand more than the surrounding diamond, breaking it apart. However, studies of machine tool cutters in the 1950s showed that the highest temperatures were concentrated in a very thin layer of material at the surface and rapidly dropped below that: if you could remove the cobalt from that thin layer, thermal resistance of the cutters would dramatically improve. As thermal wear is ultimately the dominant factor in overall cutter wear, improving thermal resistance would dramatically improve cutter performance. The company In addition to these efforts, US Synthetic also experimented with different cutter shapes beyond the simple cylinder. Such shaped cutters are now As a result of these improvement efforts, the durability of US Synthetic cutters improved enormously. A common performance measure of diamond cutters is the grinding ratio, or G-ratio, which measures how much material is worn away from the cutter over time: the higher the ratio, the more durable the cutter. Over 15 years, the G-ratio of US Synthetic cutters rose more than 1,000-fold. Limiter-based redesignEqually important as developing more durable, better performing cutters was learning how best to use them, and understanding of PDC bit behavior continued to advance as well. In the early 2000s Fred Dupriest, an engineer working for Exxon Mobil, began to study drilling efficiency using a metric called Mechanical Specific Energy (MSE), the energy required to break up a given volume of rock. The concept of MSE had been developed in the 1960s by R. Teale, who found that MSE was a function of the strength of the rock, and was (theoretically) unaffected by things like drilling rate or drill RPMs. An efficient drill bit that was operating correctly should result in a relatively constant MSE. MSE was historically used to measure drilling efficiency in the lab, but it wasn’t common to use it in the field: instead, rig crews mostly measured efficiency using metrics like feet drilled in a given day. Because rock conditions differed from well to well, this made it difficult to determine how efficiently a bit was operating, or to suggest solutions. When measuring MSE while drilling in the field, Dupriest discovered that it would often rise significantly just before severe bit damage. Dupriest eventually realized that these jumps in MSE were often due to failure modes unrelated to the strength of the bit, such as excessive vibration or material getting stuck to the bit. If they were addressed, drilling rates could be increased, often substantially, until the physical limits of the bit were reached. Dupriest eventually developed a drilling improvement system known as “limiter redesign," based on the physics of how a PDC bit drilled rock. When drilling, the weight of the drill string and vertical force from the drilling rig (a value known as weight on bit or WOB) pushes down onto the bit, which presses the cutters into the rock to a certain depth (known as depth of cut or DOC). As the bit rotates, the rock is cut away: the faster the bit rotates (the greater the RPMs) and the higher the depth of cut, the faster it will drill (known as rate of penetration or ROP). Critically, a higher depth of cut does not make the cutters more likely to fail, since the failure load of the rock is well below the strength of the cutter (which, thanks to the efforts of companies like US Synthetic, had become incredibly strong and durable). Instead, cutter failure is due to the gradual wearing away of the bottom edge of the cutter (known as the wear flat) due to friction as it slides. The wear rate was found to be a function of distance travelled; because greater weight on bit meant a greater depth of cut (and thus more material removed for a given amount of cutter sliding), drilling faster would actually wear the bit less. Theoretically, a driller was best served by increasing the weight on bit to the maximum allowed by the bits’ design, which would allow for the highest possible ROP. However, in practice a bit would likely encounter other failure modes far before maximum weight on bit was achieved. These “limiters," diagnosed by a rise in MSE, would prevent the bit from efficiently transferring energy into the rock, preventing further increases in ROP and likely resulting in damage to the bit. But these limiters could be relaxed by redesigning the bit or by changing drilling parameters, avoiding bit damage and allowing for further increases in ROP until the next limiter was encountered. By addressing each limiter as it arrived, ROP could be increased until the physical limits of the bit were reached. Dupriest ultimately described five major categories of bit limiters: bottomhole balling (cut rock particles accumulating below the drill bit), bit whirl, Within a few years, Dupriest had trained thousands of contractors in limiter-based redesign, and today the strategies have spread from Exxon Mobil and become common in the industry. In some cases these methods allowed for a four-fold or greater improvement in drilling speed. PDC and geothermalThanks to continued improvements in cutters and drilling methods, by 2015 PDC bits were responsible for roughly 90% of oil and gas drilling. Ironically, however, the purpose which originally inspired their development — geothermal energy — still remained the domain of roller-cone bits. Historically, PDC bits’ poor thermal performance and inability to drill the hardest rock prevented them from being used in geothermal applications. However, we’re now seeing the gradual adoption of PDC bits in the enhanced geothermal industry, where the same learning-driven improvement mechanisms at work in the oil and gas industry can be observed. To briefly recap, To tap heat, enhanced geothermal must often drill very deep, down into very hard, hot “ But when the Department of Energy began the
Much of this improvement was driven by Fred Dupriest’s limiter redesign methods; in 2020 Dupriest (now a professor at Texas A&M) was engaged by FORGE to see if such methods could yield improvement in geothermal wells drilled with PDC bits in hot, hard granite. As the wells were drilled, failure modes were noted, and the bits were redesigned to try and avoid them:
The first FORGE well took just under 600 hours to drill. By the fourth well, thanks to constant efforts to redesign bits and adjust drilling parameters in response to limiters, that had fallen to just over 100 hours. Enhanced geothermal startup ConclusionLearning by doing hasn’t been the only driver of PDC bit improvement. One major factor has been Moore’s Law, which has made computationally intensive simulations of things like bit behavior and fluid flow possible. When Sandia was developing its first PDC wearing models, the computational intensity of the calculations was a major limiter on what could be practically simulated; today, such constraints have been greatly relaxed. And there have been other developments only loosely coupled to drilling experience: NOV’s development of cobalt leaching, which requires soaking PDC in acid, isn’t the sort of thing that results from drilling experience and observing bit failure (though of course drilling experience would show whether and how well it worked.) Advances in things like coatings for PDC bits, which make bit balling less likely, are also probably not the direct result of drilling experience. But an enormous fraction of the progress in PDC bit technology has come directly from using the bits and observing how they behave. For a given technological concept in the arc of PDC bit evolution, it’s striking how non-obvious the best way to implement it is. The idea behind PDC bits sounds straightforward enough: use drill bits with cutters made of extremely hard synthetic diamond. But there are an enormous number of ways that such an idea can be implemented. What should the size and shape of the cutters be? How should they be arranged on the drill bit? What material should you attach the cutting disks to, and what should the bit body be made of? What type of drilling fluid should be used, and how should you direct the flow of it over the drill bit? What drilling parameters — RPMs, bit weight, torque, type of downhole motor — work best, and in what types of rock? When a technology is first developed, there’s often very little that can guide you other than trial and error. PDC bits progressed in large part by testing out bits, seeing how they behaved, and gradually modifying them in response. The specific implementation details of a technology matter a great deal, aren't obvious, and take time, effort, and experience to figure out. More generally, when a technology is first being developed, its behavior and performance won’t be understood particularly well. There won’t be an obvious “theory” of the technology or any sort of body of knowledge surrounding it — how manipulating various aspects of it changes its performance, how different parameters relate to each other, what governs the ultimate ceiling on it, and so on. As more experience is accumulated with a technology, beyond simply learning what works and what doesn’t, practitioners will gradually develop more sophisticated models of how it works, and use those models to push performance even further. We see this pattern of ”learning driving better models, which in turn drive improvements” repeatedly in the evolution of PDC bits: The earliest bits simply took existing diamond bit designs and replaced the natural diamonds with synthetic ones; redesigning them based on knowledge of how PDC cutters cut rock dramatically improved performance. Sandia’s lab and field studies ultimately allowed it to develop a model of PDC bit behavior that could be encoded in software and used to help design and optimize bits. US Synthetic’s studies of cutter failures proceeded on a similar trajectory, resulting in improved computational models of cutter behavior and better cutter designs. Amoco’s field studies in the 1980s yielded understanding of an important phenomenon, bit whirl, that was limiting bit performance, and ways that it could be reduced. Research showing that the hottest part of a cutter was limited to a thin layer of material on the surface paved the way for NOV’s cobalt-leaching process, which dramatically improved cutter thermal resistance. Dupriest’s limiter-based redesign work was based on a deep physical understanding of how PDC bits actually cut rock, and using that understanding to diagnose problems in the field; [Dupriest noted](https://substack.com/redirect/575421a7-c980-46e1-9b84-39f4e37e06a3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)that limiter redesign required constantly seeking out new knowledge to improve your understanding of the physics of drilling.And broadly, a major advance in PDC technology was simply the recognition that different bit designs worked better in different rock formations, and there were huge advantages to designing custom bits for a particular application rather than simply using off-the-shelf ones.
A fact about the improvement effects of learning is somewhat masked by the typical learning curve formulation: if you can improve how quickly you can accumulate knowledge and refine your models, you can dramatically increase how quickly you improve in time, even if this doesn’t result in a higher improvement rate in cumulative volume terms. We saw this sort of effect when we looked at It thus seems notable to me that we see a lot of efforts in PDC bit development to deliberately increase the rate of learning, and to accumulate knowledge faster. US Synthetic
With PDC bits, then, we see the importance of learning by doing as a driver of progress. But we also see that “learning rate” as a function of time is distinct from “learning rate” as a function of cumulative volume. There’s much to be gained from emphasizing the former, even if the latter doesn’t change. Thanks to Austin Vernon, Ken Bertagnolli, and Elliot Howard for conversations that informed this post, and for reading a draft of it. All errors are my own. 1 Though even the first formulation of learning curves was not entirely about learning by doing. In his 2 Discovering a new battery chemistry requires learning, of course, but it’s not the sort of thing that’s helped along by increasing your factory output and building more batteries of the existing chemistry. 3 Father of Howard Hughes Jr., founder of 4 A roller-cone bit works via essentially the same mechanism as a rock 5 Roller-cone bits also improved during this period, and for a period TUNU actually adopted improved roller-cone bits instead of PDC, before returning and further improving their PDC bits 6 In some places Dupriest condenses this to four, with bit whirl and stick slip combined into the broader category of “vibration.” Construction Physics articles will always remain free, but if you find this work valuable, I encourage you to Construction Physics is produced in partnership with the Institute for Progress, a Washington, DC-based think tank. You can learn more about their work by visiting their You can also contact me on |