---
subject: "Monthly Roundup #35: October 2025"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-10-15 19:48:23
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
It is increasingly often strange compiling the monthly roundup, because life comes at us fast. I look at various things I’ve written, and it feels like they are from a different time. Remember that whole debate over free speech? Yeah, that was a few weeks ago. Many such cases. Gives one a chance to reflect. In any case, here we go. Table of ContentsDon’t Provide Bad Training DataPeople should be free to squander their money, but when other people make bad choices, this tends to not go well for you either, even when talking about consumer choices, let alone things like ‘building superintelligence thus causing everyone to die.’
There are also times when you don’t want to compete for the good stuff. Or when this makes it easy for you to save money or turn a profit, and it goes well for you. Most of the time, no, you want everyone to choose wisely. When others have good taste, and choose quality products, the market produces quality products. If not, not. When they rate things properly, you can find the good stuff. When we collectively make choices that enrich everyone, that too is good for everyone, and so on. It’s #NotOnlyPolicy. Again, no, you shouldn’t coerce these choices, but you mostly don’t want to live in a world where everyone else is squandering their money in dumb ways. Maybe Don’t Say Maybe
Thus, you should only reply ‘maybe’ if you get high value from the option, or you attending provides a lot of value to the host and you’re genuinely unsure. Assume that by doing so you are imposing a cost. Throwing Good Parties Means Throwing Parties
My biggest new takeaway is I was under considering the ‘know who else is going’ value of using apps like Partiful or Luma. I strongly endorse that if you want to leave a group at a party, you straight up walk away, don’t say anything (and if a group is bigger than ~5, strongly consider leaving it). One thing I challenge is that he thinks if you are gender imbalanced, the sparse gender will stop attending. It’s definitely true that women become apprehensive if too outnumbered, but running the other way is probably symptomatic of party design that didn’t appeal to men in the first place. Men are not, in general, less likely to show up to a party when there’s going to be more women. My biggest old takeaway, the first one on the list this time, that throwing a part at all is good, is you are not throwing enough parties, and you should not let the perfect be the enemy of the good. The MVP (minimum viable party) is inviting friends over, providing some food, and chilling. That’s a remarkably valuable public service. If obsessing over details would top you from throwing or enjoying it, skip those details.
Also one can reiterate Air Travel Gets Worse
My quick math says that this is not common enough you should worry much about it as a passenger, and that air travel remains far safer than other forms of travel even in the worst case. Claude did a worst-case scenario estimate based on the claims and came up with a cost per flight of 0.00003 QALY, which is still at least one order of magnitude lower than any alternative form of transportation. But this is worth noticing. Bad NewsThe French left is being heavily influenced by a so-called ‘economist’ Halloween, a holiday so not deep that you don’t even get the day off of work or school, is out of control, complete with not only sales and banners but people who put intentional nightmare fuel (as in, items intentionally created to be scary especially to kids)
I’m not saying we should ban you from displaying that stuff if you want to, it’s your house. I am definitely saying that you shouldn’t want to beyond a few days tops, because it is cool in the context of a party or active trick-or-treating, and totally not cool left in place for several days before or after that. Halloween is of course only a secondary offender when compared to Christmas.
An article I suspect is itself slop (but in this case, fair!) says You Do Not Need To Constantly Acknowledge That There Is Bad NewsThere is a lot of bad news in the world. There is also a lot of good news in the world. I cannot emphasize enough that the existence of bad news, and especially of political bad news, should not be a constant preface to conversation or good news. You do not need to continuously self-flagellate to show that you care about the bad news. If others do insist that you do this, that is no good, you need to push back. This applies across all causes, across the political spectrum, and it especially applies to AI and the fact that it is likely that someone is going to build superintelligence and then everyone will die. Yes, And That’s Terrible, and we should spend some of the time trying to prevent it, but at other times the show must go on.
Prediction Market Madness
If I was asked to draw a graph of what insider trading on a prediction market looks like, I would draw this graph. At a time when the outcome could plausibly be known, a rapid shoot upwards of the winner, up to some upper limit that still allows substantial gains, then settling at that limit, until the jump to ~100%. The even better news is that since insider trading mostly exhibits such obvious patterns, it is easy to avoid it. Here, there are two easy principles to learn. Do not trade after the decision has already been made and could be known. If you must trade, do not trade against this kind of sharp move up. Definitely, absolutely do not have resting sell orders on the book this late.
The person buying is claiming to know the outcome, that the fair price is 100. You might choose to trade against that person if you think they’re often wrong, but understand that this is what you will be doing. Should insider trading be allowed here, as it is on Polymarket? I say yes. It depends on your goal. Do you want to be able to trade at and know the non-insider price, or to know the insider price and info? You can get at most one of those two things.
No Reply Necessary
The obligation to respond is that if others see a criticism [Z] to which you don’t respond, or others mischaracterize your [X] as if you said [Y] and respond to [Y], and especially if others then argue about [Y], then you’re in trouble. In the first case, your failure to respond will imply you don’t have a good response to [Z]. In the second case, they’ll start to believe you really did say [Y]. The ultimate source of this obligation to respond is, essentially, that your failure to respond would be Bayesian evidence of inability to respond, or to respond well. As in, if I get a comment [C] that says [Z], and I had a good response [R] that answers [Z], then why didn’t I respond to [Z] with [R]? A conspicuous non-answer suggests I don’t know of any such [R]. A bad answer [B] also suggests I don’t have a good [R]. A non-conspicuous non-answer does not. One price of consistently engaging with critical comments or statements, in any context, is that an increasing share of non-answers become conspicuous. Indeed, one of the reasons I rarely respond to comments these days is that I do not wish to create this obligation to respond to other comments, to avoid the time sink. When I do consider a comment worth responding to, because many would want to see that, I will often do so by quoting it in a full post. The theory on guess versus ask culture is that the distinction is about how many ‘echoes’ you trace. As in, ask culture traces zero echoes, you simply ask for what you want, and they are responsible for saying no and not holding the ask against you. Whereas guess culture traces one echo, you think about how they would respond, and you can imagine sophisticated others (guess harder!) tracking many echoes. I think this is an interesting idea but I don’t think it is right. In both guess and ask culture, you are responsible for an unlimited number of potential echoes. The difference is what consequences and thus echoes an action causes. Technically speaking, I think the actual dial is either or both of these: Narrowly: Ask culture is created by radically raising the penalty for imposing a penalty upon someone for refusing an explicit request. As you turn up that penalty, and turn it up under a broader set of circumstances, you get Ask culture. Broadly: Guess culture is created by, in an increasing variety of circumstances, punishing fully generally the creation of common knowledge.
In case #1, I am less penalized for saying no, which means that there is far less reason to penalize you for asking, which in turn means you should ask, and indeed because you should ask I can then put the impetus upon you to ask, and impose various penalties upon you for instead trying to have me guess, and also my guess if you don’t ask is that you probably aren’t implicitly asking either. Explanation #2 is more compete, more general, and cleaner, once you grok it. Ask culture very much does not get you out of tracking social echoes in general. The ultimate both guess and ask culture move here is the anti-ask, as in: No Reply Necessary, or saying (NRN) the way you would with an email. Duncan mentions less blunt ways to say this, but I prefer the classic version, the straight NRN, without further explanation. As in, here is some information, and it is 100% fine on all levels to simply ignore it if you do not find it useful. While I Cannot Condone This
I totally buy that if there is an open self-checkout line and an open cashier, and you are buying a pregnancy test, you are going to go for self-checkout on the intensive margin. Sure. But if anything, this effect looks surprisingly tiny. Customers are only willing to pay 8.5 cents in additional time? That’s not a lot of stigma. If one values time at $20 per hour, then this is on the order of fifteen seconds. Do you have any idea what people will do in other contexts to avoid mild social awkwardness? If people had the opportunity to pay money to not have to look anyone in the eye, some would pay $0, but you could get some people for dollars, and also you can stimulate new demand.
If you worry about ChatGPT or Claude’s memory on this, which I wouldn’t, you can use a temporary chat, or delete the chat afterwards. Let’s not panic and use Grok. Also, yeah, I absolutely hate the thing where you hire a person to do [X], and then you get pressure to do [X] for them in advance to avoid looking bad or being rude or what not. The whole point of hiring them is to get them to do [X] so you don’t have to, or so they can do it better. Another commentator notes that the right amount of stigma is sometimes not zero, indeed one can see this because for some prosocial items we approve of the existing negative stigma (as in, you buy wisely and the cashier looks at you approvingly). Antisocial Media
Banning not only political dissent but any and all pessimistic speech in this way is, shall we say, highly pessimistic speech, not a sign things are going well.
I do not expect this to end well. Are you excited for this new method of sharing content on Twitter? I know I am.
This is a tricky problem. Obviously you can’t make everything in every algorithmic feed (or ‘for you’ page) the responsibility or speech of the platform, as the Third Circuit did here, or you effectively ban such feeds. Also obviously, if you intentionally steer users towards particular content sufficiently strongly, then that should be on you. So you need a limiting principle to determine what constitutes a sufficiently non-neutral algorithm.
I cannot emphasize #3 enough, and I should try #5. With notably rare exceptions in high value spots, the rule is to never, ever, ever interact with something you want to not see in the future, no matter how wrong someone is on the internet. Negative interaction is interaction. That does not include muting or blocking, or saying ‘see less of this,’ which might not do much but are at least not going to make it worse.
Government Working[Editor’s note: As always, if you like avoiding politics as much or even more than I do, especially in 2025, consider skipping this section. The failure to mention other political topics here or elsewhere does not mean that I am not aware of or do not care about them, or that the ones I did choose to mention are the most important.] It is currently not working due to a shutdown. This is mostly not about that.
The free speech situation is extremely terrible. I don’t care who started it, or who did what first, free speech is the most important, most sacred principle, period.
Many Trump statements have repeatedly made it clear he does not believe in free speech and demands control over the media, that he thinks the media needs to support him, or at least not oppose him, or else. While the situation is extremely dire, we need to avoid saying things like ‘unprecedented attacks’ on free speech, or that it’s all over for free speech, or anything like that. This is a clear misunderstanding of the history of free speech, and an example of the kind of ‘spreading negativity’ that does indeed make you part of the problem, except unlike China I would never want to tell you that you couldn’t say it. Free speech has always been constantly under attack even in America, and I’m mostly not talking about the last decade. Our second president, John Adams, went hard after the speech of his opponents. We’ve been going back and forth on this for a very long time. Woodrow Wilson went after it hard. McCarthyism went after it extremely hard. Things after 9/11 or around 2020 were very not good. And so on. Social pressure on speech, including by the government, is universal. It was only Many of the statements that got accounts suspended ultimately proved accurate, although of course many others were both highly irresponsible and highly false. Presumably, if I had done readings of my Covid posts on YouTube, or reposted the texts to Facebook, I would have been suspended many times over.
I am glad to see these changes, but it does make one ask about the limiting principle?
I think my answer is ‘the pressure on YouTube here is in practice okay because it is (1) a push towards more speech and (2) undoing previous government pressure,’ and it would be unacceptable if either clause was untrue. For this go around, I’d draw a clear distinction, so far, between incidents directly related to Charlie Kirk, and incidents about other things. Performative lawsuits and wishful or general statements aside, so far from what I have seen actual consequences have been confined to people who decided to say ill-advised things specifically related to Charlie Kirk or his assassination, or at least to people’s actions surrounding that. Which is a relatively reasonable and compact thing to get bad mad about. Even comedians have the rule of ‘too soon.’ Let us not forget all the hard earned progress we have made, even if the last decade has involved some backsliding and dialectic escalation. That doesn’t mean we can relax. We have to fight for this all the more. It does mean don’t despair. Things are quite bad, but don’t catastrophize. Whenever you see a decision like I also notice that, as terrible as this is, If you strike down a Kimmel, and then there’s enough noise that Disney puts him back, you’ve very much gone into Streisand Effect territory and also royally pissed everyone involved off, pretty much across the comedy and journalist spectrums. Then if you respond to the restoration by announcing you’re going to sue ABC, because they dared give into your previous lawsuit to bend the knee and keep the peace?
As long as the primary platforms for free speech are mostly owned by companies with a wide array of business interests, upon which the government can exercise broad discretion, it is very difficult for them to push back too hard against attacks on speech, although some good news is that a large part of the public will still to some large extent turn against any platform seen to be caving. It is easy to see why a Disney or Paramount would fold, at least up to a point. Disney found out that not folding has its own dangers. It is also easy to see why The New York Times didn’t fold.
I am very confident Michael is correct that the lawsuit against the New Your Times has no merit. I mean, you may have thought previous lawsuits had no merit, but this is a new level of not having merit. We’re talking a complete and profound absence of even the fig leaf of potential merit, Looking back on that now that the time for a monthly roundup has come, I notice that we have largely moved on, and the pressure on this already feels like it is subsiding. It would be nice if we stopped committing murders, by which I mean
As in, don’t worry about whether a job produces anything of value, or anyone is willing to pay you a lot to do it, ask whether someone is ‘experienced’ in that job. I have found zero people making any argument whatsoever, even an invalid one, in favor of using these ‘wage levels’ rather than salary. I never want Robin Hanson to stop Robin Hansoning, and I would never want Tyler Cowen to stop Tyler Cowening, There is a real objection in such cases, which is that externalities exist that can’t be properly priced in, and we are unwilling or unable to reasonably price such externalities, and thus pure allocation by price will fail to be a full first best solution. It still beats the current allocation strategy of allocation via lottery, or via allocation via willingness to wait in line, including for the purposes Tyler worries about, and is vastly better in the vast majority of allocation decisions. The current system already has a huge invisible graveyard of trips and talent and so on. Vivian Darkbloom points out that in this case that Pichar is a terrible example and would definitely have made it in under the $100k proposed fee, whereas without the fee he has to survive a lottery draw. I would bet that under a pure auction system (as in, you choose a fee that roughly clears the market), the amount of top talent secured goes way up, there will be a huge correlation with willingness to put up the $100k fee. If you want to additionally subsidize extraordinary people? Sure, if you can identify them, also we have the O-1. Perhaps this is the best way to make the simple case: It seems Trump took the government shutdown
This is on top of the loss of 2,400 staff, or 18% of the agency, earlier in the year. About half the initial firings were rescinded this time around, it seems this government has a pattern of thinking it can fire a bunch of people and then say ‘oops’ on some of them later and it’s no big deal, and in this case it seems they’re blaming many of them on ‘coding errors in their job classifications’ which shows the level of attention to detail going on. Trump seems to be framing this as retaliation for the shutdown because the CDC is a ‘Democratic’ program, and taking a very ‘ Others are pushing back on the theory that the CDC is bad and incompetent, actually, so this is good actually, a line I’ve seen both from MAGA people I have not been especially impressed with the CDC, shall we say, on Covid-19 related fronts or in other places I’ve gotten a close look. The problem is that presumably we can all agree that we need a well-staffed, highly functional and effective Centers for Disease Control in order to, ya know, track and control disease? Does ‘the Ebola response team has been hard hit’ sound like a wise move? With AI potentially enabling biological threats this now more than ever is not a program you cut. It seems highly plausible that CDC wasn’t doing a great job, but in that case we should be replacing or reforming the agency. I don’t see any sign of doing that. I continue to see a steady stream of nightmare stories coming out of the UK. I don’t consider this my beat, but I must note that things seem deeply, horribly wrong. We see things like
It is sufficiently bad that When, one must ask, will the people rise up as one…
…and say ‘but this time, you’ve gone too far’? Tylenol Does Not Cause AutismSections I did not expect to have to write. I am ashamed of every news article and comment on the subject that does not lead with, or at least put very high up, the obvious fact that Tylenol does not cause autism. It’s not only that The White House is also citing uncontrolled rises in autism rates over time that are very obviously caused mostly by expanded diagnostic criteria and active pushes to diagnose more high-functioning individuals, including calls for ‘diagnostic equality.’ The vast majority of people I know that are considered on the spectrum would have been undiagnosed back when I was a child. To be fair, there is
Also there is this:
This is all actually a really big deal, to give women access to zero painkillers and ways to bring down fewer is dangerous, it is extremely painful, and would lead to obvious reactions if we actually act this stupid and cruelly:
We could also leave this here:
Jones Act Watch
This is not a detailed case, nor does it lay out the full costs involved, but yes.
|