---
subject: "The Go Bag (Paperwork) Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-06-13 13:30:27
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Guan here. There have been several “go bag” editions of WITI, including Why is this interesting? In situations requiring a quick escape, the biggest obstacles are often not a lack of drinking water or an inability to treat injuries, but the ones governments and bureaucracies put in our way. Can you prove your identity? Do you have the required documents to exit the country you’re in and enter another one? Can you qualify for a long-term visa or even citizenship somewhere else? Having the right paperwork, not just the right gadgets, is key to a complete go bag. The below, ideally, is what you’ll have in yours. The Nansen passport was issued to stateless refugees after World War I WITI Classifieds: We are running some weekly classifieds in WITI again. If you’re interested in running an ad, Where did Cormac McCarthy publish the ONLY non-fiction piece of his career? Nautilus. A science newsletter where intellectualism thrives. — The team at Passport. A passport is essential for international travel: it means a state vouches for your identity and is proof of your right to enter that state. Both features combine to make a passport essential to travel: the passport proves who you are, and it shows that there is at least one place you can be deported to, where you will (most likely) not be turned back. Many states also require their citizens to have a passport It’s good to keep at least a couple of years of validity on a passport: in 2021, the US pretty much New York apostilles from the author’s collection Birth certificate with apostille. A passport is sufficient for short trips, but if you urgently need to move somewhere, you may need civil documents such as birth certificates, marriage certificates and school diplomas. Get an Outside Apostilleland, documents require a country-specific “consular authentication.” These are a huge pain and are not practical to do in advance, unless you can predict where you might want to move to. But the apostille is still expanding: China, Canada and Rwanda have joined in the past year, three countries that together account for 20% of world GDP. A second (or third or fourth or fifth) citizenship. Every country has a hierarchy of travel and residence rights. Tourists and visitors have the least rights, long-term residents have more rights, permanent residents even more. But laws can change and rights can be taken away, as Brits learned after Brexit, and Vanuatans found out when they In case you don’t qualify for a second citizenship by naturalizing where you live, or through a relative or ancestor, it is possible to buy one through citizenship-by-investment programs. In the Commonwealth of Dominica, citizenship can be obtained with Citizenship can still be lost and states are Proof of source of funds. If you are forced to start over from scratch in a strange place, you will hopefully have some savings to get you started. In this age of AML/KYC (Anti Money Laundering/Know Your Customer) regulations, the financial institutions where you land will want evidence that your money comes from a legal source and that you paid tax on it. A history of paystubs, business contracts, financial statements and tax receipts will help establish this. You could even get all this paperwork apostilled. With all of these documents, along with tourniquet and space blanket, you should at last be set up for success in your new life. _ Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Guan (GY)
You're currently a free subscriber to |