---
subject: "a16z: The Power Brokers"
from: "Not Boring <notboring@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-01-09 18:35:21
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Not Boring", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2982495070691762429", "UNREAD"]
---
Welcome to the 310 newly Not Boring people who have joined us since Tuesday! Join 256,606 smart, curious folks by subscribing here: This article reflects the views and opinions of the author and does not necessarily reflect the views or beliefs of a16z. Investment returns are included throughout this article. Past performance is not indicative of future results. See related fund returns and disclosures at the end of this piece. Hi friends 👋 , Happy Friday! IT’S TIME TO WRITE about a16z. Today, a16z is announcing $15 billion in fresh funds. To commemorate the occasion, I’m writing a Deep Dive on the Firm. I spoke with Firm’s GPs, LPs, ~$200 billion worth of portfolio founders, reviewed documents and presentations, and analyzed returns data for a16z’s funds since inception (see appendix with disclosure information at the end). There is a lot of writing on the internet about what’s wrong with a16z’s approach. You probably know the arguments. They’ve followed the firm since inception. I think it is much more interesting to understand just what it is that all of these smart people who have been right in the past think it is that they’re doing now. And look, I am about as far from an unbiased observer as anyone without an @ For more than two years, I was an advisor to a16z crypto (but am currently not compensated by the firm). Marc Andreessen and Chris Dixon are LPs in not boring capital. From time to time, I am on the same cap table as a16z. I am friends with a lot of people in the Firm and with most of the New Media team. I partner with, like, and respect these people. But look, we’re not counting on me to analyze whether a16z’s pitch at this moment in time is worth investing in. Sophisticated institutional LPs have decided, to the tune of $15 billion, to do so. It will take a decade to know whether they made the right decision, and nothing either I or any hypothetical critic could say will change that outcome, just as it hasn’t in the past. What I can hopefully bring is a way to think about what a16z actually is from my unique experience. I think a16z is the best-marketed Firm in venture. It can, and does, tell a story about itself. Based on my experience, I can tell you that its story is consistent with its actions. The things that a16z says about itself to the public are the same things it trains its team on internally. The pitch it makes is the same one it’s made since its first Offering Memorandum. And you will be able to judge the returns for yourself. There are a lot of great venture capital funds and investors, some of the best of whom have been profiled recently. Their approaches and successes are increasingly well-appreciated and well-understood. But a16z is doing something different, bigger, less… understated. It doesn’t feel like venture capital is supposed to, in part, I think, because I don’t think a16z cares if it’s doing “venture capital.” It just wants to BUILD the future and eat the world. To read the full Deep Dive in your browser, Let’s get to it. Today’s Not Boring is brought to you by… |
|
Some attention is cheap and derivative. The New Media team wants to make attention mean something. The team runs a full in-house media operation that builds and operates high quality owned channels (on X, YouTube, Instagram, and Substack), executes launches and timeline takeovers, and embeds directly with portfolio companies during critical periods.
“We are going through a bit of a PR challenge,” Flock Safety’s Garrett Langley told me a couple of weeks ago, before his company helped solve the murders at MIT and Brown, and at least for a little while, win back the PR cycle, “and while most of our cap table has ideas, a16z took action. Erik and his team jumped in. Literally. They are in our Slack now. They are in our positioning/branding docs. [We just did a podcast with Ben this week](https://substack.com/redirect/02163eeb-eae6-4c91-a57b-cf7e54a449e1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Having a trusted and respected brand, like a16z, come and stand up for what we do is critical for both the market and our employees.”
They are there when times are good, too, in those exciting early days. Fei-Fei Li, legendary computer scientist and founder of World Labs: “Four weeks before our Marble launch, their New Media team proposed an idea I had never seen before. They wanted to shoot our announcement video on a 3D LED volume stage, with our own product generating the environments in real time. They partnered with us on everything: the cinematic video, a behind-the-scenes documentary, a launch event, introductions to influencers in the VFX world. The launch went viral. We hadn’t built up our marketing muscle yet, and they helped us lay the groundwork for our operation. That kind of support, from creative vision to company building, is not something you find elsewhere..”
I am biased, because these are friends and long-time collaborators, but they are some of the very best in the business.
Erik has been obsessed with building new media organizations for a long time, which is why I turned to him to produce [Age of Miracles](https://substack.com/redirect/c99e9df5-c19c-4657-96b3-d64bd7dc5df5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). He’s also been [obsessed](https://substack.com/redirect/67704065-17be-47d3-804c-fca82be2268c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) with the idea that venture firms can have structural advantages.
Like, Erik and I had a chat about how he was thinking about building out the team, and never in a million years did I think he’d recruit Alex Freaking Danco.
|
If [Writing is a Power Transfer Technology](https://substack.com/redirect/f2e13d4f-eec7-4351-9d4a-420014ab1308?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), and I clearly think it is, getting Alex Danco, and newer-hire Elena Burger, to write with and for you is an incredible superpower that money can’t buy. When every company is trying to hire a Chief Storyteller, a16z is just collecting them and spreading them across the portfolio.
Or, I first met Erik and David Booth when I did On Deck in 2019. No one in tech thinks about building community in the way that David does. Now, he gets to run what he’s learned with significantly more resources and access to the world’s best talent in order to attempt to make a16z into an even better “preferential attachment” machine and VC into a network effects business.
|
I realize that I’m gushing a bit here, and that a16z has tried to own the narrative in the past with initiatives like [Future](https://substack.com/redirect/0188ff19-7f05-4e06-951d-9f428988cb99?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), which fizzled out, but 1) by the economic logic above, a16z should be taking 100 shots like Future and 2) this is the platform team I know best, because it’s what I do, and I wouldn’t have even thought these people were gettable. If that’s the level the other teams operate at, it makes me more confident that they really are building a machine with compounding advantages that companies couldn’t build on their own.
Every dollar spent telling the stories of the Firm and its portfolio companies is amortized in so many directions that they become a rounding error, and if all of those dollars, almost no matter how many a16z spends, mean winning and helping just one more Databricks, Coinbase, Applied Intuition, Deel, Cursor, or insert your favorite a16z company here, they’ve all been worth it.
That’s the economics a16z is playing with across everything. It’s the same logic the Firm applies to investing in startups - “The most you can lose is the dollar you invested, but your upside is practically limitless” - applied to everything the Firm does.
It makes more sense for a16z to build the best version of a thing that most of its portfolio companies will need (but is not core to those companies) than it does for any single company to, at least until it gets much bigger.
Very tactically, the two things that I heard from every founder I spoke with is that a16z has been particularly impactful in two areas: hiring and sales.
Hiring has been a core part of a16z’s offering since the beginning, when Marc and Ben brought in Shannon Schiltz (Callahan) from Opsware, Shannon convinced Ben to hire Jeff Stump as Talent Lead, and the two of them built out a Talent Team that early stage money can’t buy.
“The scale and the quality is just different,” Ali said about a16z’s Talent Team versus other VCs’. “It’s like a little side thing, I’ve hired a couple people to help you with recruiting on the side versus a big recruiting department whose job it is, and who is measured on really closing candidates and giving you top funnel.”
Founders across stages told me that the Talent Team is helpful from the beginning to the very end.
[Cursor](https://substack.com/redirect/b5b9dcfe-f79b-414d-9cc2-bbfcc32d9bb1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) co-founder and President [Oskar Shulz](https://substack.com/redirect/d4dee2c8-6411-4fd6-80c8-19747f4d9f02?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) said over email that “a16z’s size allows them to be helpful across a few different functions,” among the most impactful of which have been “engineering / research hiring, executive hiring. Other, smaller firms don’t have the resources to give us a good talent pool overview.”
Resources can mean GPs, too. In a [recent conversation between a16z AI Infra GP Martin Casado and Cursor CEO Michael Truell](https://substack.com/redirect/f955f303-3319-4301-a9fb-b3fd97689d80?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), the two discuss that Martin spends his nights and weekends recruiting for Cursor. “Have your board members do lots of calls until they cry uncle,” Truell joked. “Take advantage of their time.”
Qasar Younis, the founder and CEO of $15 billion Applied Intuition, said that, “A number of our early employees, including the President of our company, came through a16z. Our number two in finance came from a16z. We’ve even had multiple a16z employees work at Applied, including Matthew Colford, who was an early a16z gov public member.”
Deel co-founder and CEO Alex Bouaziz said that as his company has gotten bigger, and become a bigger part of the a16z portfolio, it’s been able to take advantage of more of its resources:
From when we started working with a16z, Shanbar [Executive Talent Partner Shannon Barbour] has felt like a part of our talent acquisition team. We’ve gotten to work closely with her and Jeff Stump on executive hiring, and when we were hiring our CFO, Ben [Horowitz] interviewed everyone we were considering for the role, which was pretty cool. The CFO we wanted [
[Joe Kauffman]] is a very talented, demanding guy, so Ben and Anish helped me close him. Anish was texting him. Ben was texting him.
Now that Deel has crossed $1 billion in ARR, and getting its board public-ready, “a16z has helped us hire two of our three independent board members - [Francis deSouza](https://substack.com/redirect/c1a69b26-eac5-433a-88c2-44076dead43d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) (Google Cloud COO, Disney Board Member) and [Todd Ford](https://substack.com/redirect/bcc1066c-23eb-490d-bf19-c2c33ed86399?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) (ex-CFO of Coupa, HashiCorp board member). They helped source, go through deep diligence, reference check, make intros. They spent the time to be a true strategic partner.
a16z has been equally helpful with sales, both directly and indirectly, from the early days to later stages.
Ian Brooke, the founder and CEO of a16z American Dynamism and not boring capital portfolio company [Astro Mechanica](https://substack.com/redirect/b692fd0b-924d-4052-b349-cb51c96aaece?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) (which I [wrote about in April 2024](https://substack.com/redirect/8bf9ac36-5fdf-4642-8388-f44539055749?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)), said that both the direct and indirect are important for his business’ attempts to sell to Defense.
“I don’t think there’s any other fund we could bring up to our government partners that has the credibility and brand recognition that a16z does. That’s especially true inside the DoD,” he said of the indirect stuff. Directly, “they make sure to be known inside of government agencies, so they can make the right introductions, like the connections they made for us with the Air Force Rapid Capabilities Office, among others.”
“Working with the government is all about relationships with the right people and offices,” he continued, “And a16z actually makes a point to cultivate and share those relationships. A senior person within the DIU (Defense Innovation Unit) literally told me, ‘We take the a16z recommendations very seriously. We ask them, “Who should we meet?”’”
Qasar, whose company sells to auto manufacturers and increasingly to defense and other American Dynamism industries, credited a16z with helping it break into defense: “Our first defense customer came through an EBC (Executive Business Center) kind of thing that they do.” Applied gets targeted introductions, too, no matter the industry. “Anyone I want to get a hold of, Marc can get a hold of,” Qasar said. “Whether that’s with our defense business, automotive business, our construction, mining, he can get to them.”
Of course, a16z can help sell software, too. It’s the Firm’s bread and butter, where the network effects and benefits to scale really show up.
[Jordan Topoleski](https://substack.com/redirect/2df35518-ee0d-43bc-8708-2e8f706a80d2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), the COO of Cursor, which a16z first backed at the Series A, explained how a16z has helped them sell: “The platform team introduced us to nearly 200 CTOs at key target customers during our first year working together. They held daily standups with us, came by our office late at night, and had a dedicated team focused on organizing strategic meetings for us. As we scaled our footprint in financial services, they once scheduled 34 c-suite meetings in a single week at their office for us. They’ve felt like an extension of our GTM team.”
Then there’s Databricks, which credits the EBC with 50% of its early sales, and credits Ben in particular with making the transformative Microsoft deal happen.
And Alex at Deel said that while it was hard for his company to sell into enterprise in its first couple of years, it’s now using a16z’s Enterprise Marketplace and its GTM (Go-to-Market) Team to help access large organizations and win. Today, 10-15% of the business is enterprise.
Both Alex and Garrett at Flock Safety said that while the hands-off-then-swarm motion is true at the earlier stages, as their companies have grown, a16z’s platform teams embed within the right teams in their companies. It’s a way of giving founders space while helping their businesses.
“It’s often hard for me to tell investors what I need help on,” Alex said, “but when you have dedicated platform people embedded – the recruiting and GTM teams there are aligned with my similar teams - it’s better than needing to make a specific ask.”
Garrett at Flock Safety described a VC barbell:
Some firms, you are picking the GP and the firm is secondary. I’d argue A16Z is on the opposite side, you are picking the firm, not the GP. While DU technically sits on our Board, I spend time with Ben, DG [David George] (leads growth), Alex I [Immerman] (also on the growth team), Erik [Torenberg] (for comms/branding), Stump (exec recruiting), look I could keep going but I think you get the picture.
And that’s just me, my exec team also has specific contacts at the firm for every function. That’s incredibly helpful.
Being so deep in the weeds with its biggest companies means that a16z can help the business grow in both big and small ways, ways that are tangible and measurable.
But it also, maybe more importantly, means that a16z knows the businesses well enough to back up the Belief Truck, and the money truck, when the time comes.
Qasar Younis has had a great experience with a16z. Marc is on his board, which is rare, and Marc and the broader Firm have been there whenever he needed, opening up its Rolodex.
“But,” he admits, knocking on wood, “we haven’t had any real problems. I think that’s really the crucible for an investor, how they react when you have a problem.”
To that end, what both Garrett at Flock Safety and Alex at Deel had to say about the firm speaks volumes. We talked earlier about the New Media team embedding itself within Flock during a recent PR challenge.
Alex at Deel was no stranger to PR challenges last year.
“As a firm,” Alex told me, “whenever there was bad media, they stood with us straight.”
I remember this. I remember seeing Ben and Anish tweet in support of Deel almost immediately after Rippling had accused it of spying and thinking that it was … bold.
But, Alex said, “They said, ‘We know who you are, how you work, your background, your ethics. We stand with you.’ They came out very publicly, very immediately. And behind closed doors, they were reminding people, ‘Guys, you know Alex.’ When someone like Ben knows all of the details, and has been abreast of this exact situation with you for two to three years, it’s such a strong representation.”
“Investors were supportive,” he said, “but they were just another level. They were figuring things out, helping me figure out how to manage it, getting the best people to help, getting their own hands dirty. When a lot of this bullshit came out, I couldn’t have asked for a better partner.”
What’s the point of having fuck you legitimacy if you can’t say fuck you on behalf of your portcos?
Then, Deel crossed $1 billion in ARR, and then it raised [$300 million](https://substack.com/redirect/1ad57180-aeea-419f-9c7f-c1ffec6816e0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) from new investor Ribbit Capital, who presumably did its diligence and came to the same conclusion a16z did, at a $17.3 billion post-money valuation, $5 billion higher than the valuation set in the Series D pre-drama in February 2025. a16z, of course, participated, as it has in every round, including secondaries.
“They’re very loyal investors,” Alex said. “Every time there was a secondary happening or investor selling, a16z bought all the stock it could. They bought every share of Deel in the market because they were so embedded. The rest of the market didn’t know us well because Deel hadn’t fundraised.”
There was also the time that Deel needed money to buy a company. “Our C round wasn’t a proper round,” Alex remembered. “I wanted to buy a company, I needed money, and I talked to a few investors. There is nothing like raising money from a fund like a16z who you can turn to and say, ‘This is going to be game-changing’ and they can move fast to drop $100 million for the acquisition you want.”
Today, as a result of that consistent support, a16z owns “twenty-something percent” of Deel across its funds, per Alex, building a position well-earned through belief and specific tactical support.
It is a validation of the model: know your companies so well, work so closely with them, that you know them better than anyone else and can go all-in when others can’t, all while helping them become larger than they would otherwise.
It is clear talking to its founders that working with a16z has had a direct, material impact on their business. As with a16z’s policy work, though, the Firm’s impact is both direct and indirect. Even the founders outside of a16z’s portfolio benefit from the change it’s brought to the industry.
Which means that the other way a16z helps its portfolio companies, and new technology companies more broadly, is by forcing other funds to spend their management fees on helping startups win.
“A lot of the stuff that a16z promoted in those early years have become really mainstream venture views,” Qasar at Applied Intuition told me.
“Being founder-focused, having technical GPs, having a platform. You look back at Benchmark, Founders Fund, KP, Sequoia, Khosla—they would take pride in writing a check and disappearing. There was a real point of ‘Hey, you’ll never talk to us.’ That was a feature, not a bug. And now it’s actually really flipped where founders say, ‘Well, what more can you do for me? I can get money anywhere.’”
“That’s an a16z fingerprint.”
As I wrote in [Venture Capital and Free Lunch](https://substack.com/redirect/fc28631f-ee8e-462e-8916-e3fbfe951fc6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) back in early 2024, I think management fees are “among the most interesting buckets of capital in the world”¹¹, and a16z has a lot of them. This has been one of the main criticisms of the Firm - that of course it wants to raise a lot of money, because it earns management fees on every dollar, every year, no matter what.
A more interesting observation might be: of course it wants to raise that money, because then it can invest a boatload into building the type of stuff that almost no other pool of capital is incentivized to in order to help its companies, and new technology, win.
Working with a16z crypto is what brought me to that realization originally, and in writing this piece, it’s become clear that no firm has applied its management fees to beneficial ends as long, as consistently, as aggressively, or as successfully as a16z.
“From my vantage point,” David Haber said, “One of the structural advantages that the firm had early on was that Marc and Ben were already very wealthy and so didn’t need to take salaries. Instead, they’d play the long game and invest management fees into the platform, and build sources of compounding competitive advantage. We continue to make that trade: instead of paying people more money and bonuses, like many funds do, we choose to invest in the firm and compound our advantage over time.”¹²
You can spend $1 billion of your LPs’ money building a machine to try to help all of the new technology companies in your portfolio succeed, it pays itself back many, many times over on one Databricks, and it continues to pay itself back over and over with every Coinbase, Applied Intuition, Deel, Cursor, you name it.
So of course, every large venture firm is now trying to build such a machine, which means that founders have billions of dollars and hundreds of smart, connected people working on their behalf in their mission to displace sclerotic incumbents, eliminate waste, fight off death, shrink the globe, keep it safe, and do all of the things that technology is supposed to do in service of the future.
Which is the whole point.
When anyone joins a16z, which happens frequently these days with more than 600 employees, they must sign the Firm’s Culture Doc.
While everyone at the Firm reads the doc, Katherine Boyle thinks that “we don’t give it the actual reverence it deserves.”
“There’s one line,” she says, “number three: We believe in the future and bet the Firm that way.” Katherine loves that line. As she sees it:
Everyone in Silicon Valley misinterprets this. It means that we will never take the negative. That is why sometimes we look stupid compared to all of the other firms that will take the negative. It’s in our culture doc that we will never bet against the future.
I actually think it should be number one. No other firm can say that. Other firms will send out memos like “it’s about to be a macro crisis.” “We believe in the future and bet the firm that way” is literally why Marc and Ben created the firm.
Marc and Ben have no problem looking stupid. But if you ever bet against the future in any category, you will be fired.
Wholehearted, full-throated belief in the future sounds quaintly naïve at best, and like bullshit, at worst.
Before I saw inside a16z a few years back, I thought it was at least partially bullshit, too. These were elephant hunters! They just wanted to win. You can wrap yourself in the future just the same way you can wrap yourself in the American flag.
From the outside, what it looks like a16z is trying to build is one of the largest financial institutions in the world. It looks like that, in part, because that is what it happens to be building. ~$90+ billion in regulatory assets under management is real money where I come from.
When we discussed a16z’s funds in the context of large financial institutions, capital-F Firms like Apollo and Blackstone, David Haber pointed out that a16z is still small in comparison. Blackstone manages $1 trillion; Apollo will soon.
There is a lot for a16z to learn from those Firms, about compounding advantages and scale and incentives and internal operations and what it takes to run a global financial institution. On the surface, there are similarities between what those Firms are today and what a16z hopes to become.
I think there is a big difference.
Apollo and Blackstone don’t believe in anything, really. They are financial institutions meant to deliver financial returns. And there is absolutely nothing wrong with that. The economy needs what they provide, and they are very good at providing it. The very best.
a16z believes. a16z is building a company to bring about a glorious future through technology, one that uses finance as a means to that end. One that grows and compounds and, like any normal technology business, gets better as it does. One that is able to wield evermore resources and power on behalf of that future in which it believes, even if it doesn’t know quite what it will look like yet.
That’s the entrepreneurs’ job. They provide the details. a16z provides the belief.
As we wrapped up our call, I asked Ali what he thinks is most misunderstood about the Firm that he’s worked with for over a decade. He didn’t have to think hard.
“Ben and Marc are believers,” he said. “If that’s not clear from reading their blogs, I think they are tech believers to a fault. They truly believe that tech can revolutionize the world. And in every startup they’re involved in, that’s how they envision it. They envision the full potential of the thing.”
The history of a16z to date is the history of everyone believing that Marc and Ben were doing venture capital the stupid way, waiting about ten years, seeing the results, realizing they were right, and then trying to do the same thing themselves, without the benefit of everything that had compounded for a16z during their competitors’ decade of disbelief.
And then doing it all over.
Of course it worked when the funds were only $300 million, even $1 billion. It won’t work at this scale.
Of course it worked in the early days of social networking. It won’t work in, say, crypto. Or American Dynamism. Or AI.
And then, of course, at least to date, for the most part, it has.
When a16z believes, it believes harder and longer than anyone else. It has the resources to be patient, and the resources to know that its steadfast commitment will likely be rewarded.
Whether you think they’re right this time or not, whether you agree with them or not, whether you like how they’re playing the game or not, Marc and Ben and the team they’ve built at a16z really do believe that they are working on behalf of the future, and in so doing, working on behalf of us all.
As odd as it sounds to say it, theirs is one of the most humble approaches to venture capital I’ve seen: if a lot of really smart people are excited about something, there’s probably something to be excited about. Follow them there. Raise a whole fund to follow them, before anyone else even thinks there’s a there there.
You can disagree with this approach. You should disagree! There is no one right way to do venture, but you must believe in something.
What you should probably not do is judge a16z without understanding the game it’s playing or the bets it’s making.
a16z is betting that technology will eat more and more of the economy, and that when it does, the new companies will be 10x, 100x bigger than the old ones they replace. That is a foundational one, but one that is available to any venture fund with some cajones.
a16z is betting that it can help make that future bigger and better than it would otherwise be, sooner, through policy and platform and power, and help its portfolio companies win in the process. Based on my conversations with a16z’s founders, this bet seems to be paying off today, and it is an unbelievably asymmetric one. Each win can pay for a lot of capabilities. The machine compounds.
The most interesting bet it’s making, in my opinion, in light of the first two, is the one that seems most obvious, when you put it like I’m about to put it:
That a VC firm can, like nearly every other type of company in the universe, get better with scale.
If it’s right, and I think it is, then a16z’s best years are ahead of it.
Which is great. I like those guys.
But the magical thing about a16z’s product, the thing that it is actually improving with scale, is that when it’s able to build more resources, skills, network, and power, then every new technology company it works with, and even many it doesn’t, improves with its scale, too.
A world in which a16z succeeds is a world in which new technology companies can compete with incumbents on a more equal footing, may the best product win.
A world in which a16z succeeds is a world in which new technology - at every layer of the stack, from energy to AI, crypto to self-driving cars - diffuses through the economy more quickly and impactfully.
A world in which a16z succeeds, if you believe, like I do, that new technology gives humans the means with which to make the world better, is a more abundant one, sooner.
a16z works on behalf of the future. If it’s really right, all of our best years are ahead of us, too.
A big thank you to everyone who spoke with me for this piece.
That’s all for today. We might even be back in your inbox this weekend, though. It’s a brave new [not boring world](https://substack.com/redirect/bcfcda30-7b0a-46bb-9605-9a41df5d8a64?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).
Thanks for reading,
Packy
Appendix
Important Disclosures Related to Performance
This appendix is provided for informational purposes only and does not constitute an offer to purchase any interest in any fund managed by a16z Capital Management, LLC (“ACM”). This presentation information should not be relied upon in any manner as legal, tax, investment or accounting advice. An investment in any fund managed by ACM involves a high degree of risk including a risk that the entire amount invested is lost.
All figures as of 09/30/25 unless otherwise noted. All performance figures, valuations and fund summaries contained herein are unaudited and subject to change. Past performance is not indicative of future results. There can be no assurances that any future a16z Capital Management, LLC fund or investment will achieve comparable results. Furthermore, performance of any future ACM fund will not be comparable to performance of existing funds due to material differences in market conditions, differences in investment strategy and other factors. No individual investor or fund received investment performance illustrated above.
Gross and Net performance figures provided herein do not represent and should not be used as a substitute for the actual performance of each ACM managed fund. Performance figures of certain funds reflect the use of a warehouse, capital call, or similar line of credit. Performance would differ if calculated from the time of the opening of such line of credit rather than from the initial contribution of capital and may be lower. Performance includes performance for the primary or “main” fund identified herein as well as any vehicle that aggregates capital from multiple unaffiliated investors for the primary purpose of investing directly into such primary fund, including those funds which do not charge a management fee or carried interest. If such funds were excluded, performance would be lower. Fund performance does not include funds in ACM Bio and Health strategy or the Cultural Leadership Fund strategy; single-investor vehicles; or special-purpose/single-investment vehicles (SPVs), unless specifically mentioned.
Performance figures include reinvested capital and may differ if such performance was excluded. Performance reflects voluntary General Partner fee waivers and would be lower if such fee waivers were excluded. Any investments and portfolio companies described or referred to in this report are not representative of all investments in vehicles managed by ACM and there can be no assurance that the investments described are or will be profitable or that other investments made in the future will have similar character or results. Performance figures do not include all investment funds managed by ACM. Visit a16z.com/portfolio for a list of all investments in a16z-managed vehicles.
Gross/Net Total Value to Paid-In Capital (TVPI): represents the sum of (1) the aggregate amount of distributions made to the all limited partners of those Funds and (2) the fair value of all limited partners’ capital accounts as of the end of the period indicated expressed as a multiple of the aggregate amount of capital that has been contributed by all limited partners of a given fund. Net includes the effect of management fees, fund expenses and carried interest allocations.
Net DPI: Net Distributions to Paid in Capital for ACM funds represent the aggregate amount of distributions made to the limited partners of those funds expressed as a multiple of the aggregate amount of capital that has been contributed by those limited partners of a given fund.
Gross Metrics (Fund-Level): Includes cash still held, and any other assets and liabilities of the Fund. Gross return adds back management fees, carried interest, and fund expenses.
1
The rival’s analyst crunched the numbers and estimated 7.5%. Close. Andreessen Horowitz’s average ownership in its portfolio companies was 8%.
2
Pitchbook data lists Founders Fund Growth III ($4.6B) and Founders Fund IX ($972M) closed in 2025.
3
Per Pitchbook, US VC funds raised in 2025 totaled $82.0B, including a16z’s $15B.
4
Source: Valuations per Pitchbook as of September 14, 2025.
5
Source: Ilya Strebulaev, Venture Capital Initiative, Stanford GSB, April 2025.
6
Source: Based on Pitchbook data available as of July 31, 2025. Excludes AI unicorns in China and Hong Kong.
7
Past performance is not indicative of future results. See appendix for important disclosures and information on related fund returns.
8
I see you, Insight Partners fans. The $20B Fund XII it raised in 2022 includes a Buyout fund.
9
For more on LSV, check out David George’s excellent recent conversations with [Patrick O’Shaughnessy](https://substack.com/redirect/a11e2616-a85c-4ab7-927d-9fb85d136fbc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) and [Harry Stebbings](https://substack.com/redirect/9595ba68-cb03-40b1-aad1-aebcdfaa3b0e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).
10
a16z closed on $1.7 billion for Fund X AI Infra, $1.6 billion used for illustrative math.
11
“The rationale is simple: if megafunds are confident that they’ll benefit from the growth of the early stage tech ecosystem, they can justify paying for all sorts of pro-ecosystem things. If you believe that technology is good, and I do, then management fees applied to strengthen the tech ecosystem are like charity that keeps paying for itself.
a16z [recently announced](https://substack.com/redirect/fc0bda7d-7426-49ec-8e7c-2a57f47b332f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) that it would be “supporting candidates who align with our vision and values specifically for technology.” It also built a world-class [crypto research team](https://substack.com/redirect/b87e0ab2-a0df-4f2b-b69f-d53b75c53690?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) based on the belief that “There is an opportunity for an industrial research lab to help bridge the worlds of academic theory with industry practice.” The team has since built and open sourced a number of useful research-based products, including [Lasso and Jolt](https://substack.com/redirect/c41dcc66-c802-4c6c-b48a-8f3f2ce0db21?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).
For firms with a long view, there’s an economic incentive to support the kinds of things that have long, uncertain payoffs that doesn’t exist anywhere besides government and academia, both of which have become increasingly sclerotic and slow-moving. I wouldn’t be surprised to see more VC-supported basic and applied research labs, for example.”
12
To be clear, the a16z team is paid quite well. You can put away your violins. The point is that instead of paying a small amount of people galaxy-owner dollars, it chooses to pay many more people very well in order to build compounding advantages.
You're currently a free subscriber to [Not Boring by Packy McCormick](https://substack.com/redirect/0c9ae308-bf4c-4243-aefa-34643a5ca505?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). For the full experience, [upgrade your subscription.](https://substack.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.17Y9eKAbH9W0K4luolkeNAJDd-YXTutkBnJRCCp0cU0?&utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email&utm_content=postcta)