---
subject: "Dating Roundup #9: Signals and Selection"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-12-30 12:37:08
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Ultimately, it comes down to one question. Are you in? For you, and for them. You’re Single Because They Got The IckThe Ick, the ultimate red flag, makes perfect sense and is all about likelihood ratios.
One gets The Ick because a small act is evidence of one’s general nature. The right type of person would never do [X], ideally never want to do [X], and at minimum would have learned not to do [X]. Often this is because they would know this is indicative of attribute [Y]. Indeed, if they should be aware that [X] is indicative of [Y], then their failure to do [X] is indicative not only of a lack of [Y], but also of a lack of desire or ability to even fake or signal [Y], especially in a romantic context. They don’t respect [Y]. Thus, this is extremely strong evidence. Thus, The Ick. The person is not consciously thinking through this, but that’s the point. That doesn’t mean that The Ick is always valid. Quite the contrary. Mistakes are made.
To what extent is The Ick a win-win? The majority of the time, I think it’s win-win, because them caring so much about this little thing, combined with you not caring, means it was never going to work. But on occasion there’s a classification mismatch, and when that happens it is super bad. And even if the particular person getting The Ick here is good, overall reaction to you continuing to do that thing is still bad, it’s almost certainly a mistake. So in general, if there’s something that is known to give The Ick, it’s worth making an effort to not do it. You Are Still Single Because You Are Inventing Red FlagsThis might be the new strangest take. It’s bad if he bought a house?
Any sane person would view ‘I own a house’ a highly positive sign. ‘Too prepared’? If it’s a case of ‘I own this house and refuse to move’ then I can see an issue, and you should think about whether you want to live in that house. But houses can be sold. This is what the wise man calls ‘favorable selection.’ If they turn you down because of this you presumably dodged a bullet. If someone thinks you should be paying 7.5% in interest rather than 2.9% so that you can avoid signaling you’re ‘too prepared’? Run. Or, rather, you don’t have to run, all you have to do is stay put. That’s the idea. I hope and presume not too many people are treating ‘owns a house’ (but not an apartment, that would mean you’re doing great king?) in particular as a red flag. Note that in the next section, one of Claire’s demands is that the man ‘has a small house,’ so a direct contradiction. I wonder if a large house is okay for her? The more important point is yes, there is a large trend of judging based on a single data point, and looking for ways in which to find that data point a red flag. Stop it, or at least stop it once you’ve got substantial amounts of other information. You’re Still Single Because You Demand The Same Generic ThingsIf you’re looking for the same things everyone is looking for, it’s rough out there.
The good news is this is not 15 things, it is more like 5. A lot of redundancy. As Mason says, there’s nothing wrong with anything on the list but also nothing that differentiates what you in particular want, and it focuses on exactly the legible universally desirable features that put someone in high demand. The useful list has the things that you value more than ‘the market,’ and importantly drops some things that you value less. You’re Single Because Everyone Is Too PickyWhen the going gets weird, be careful not to inadvertently turn pro. The problem is that
Any given thing you want, or want to avoid? Mostly you can solve for that. Combine enough different such things, and you quickly get into trouble. The search algorithms are not that robust.
But two big differences work against this in the dating case. You have an uncertain number of shots at this, taking each shot is costly in several ways, the pool you’re drawing from starts getting worse over time after a while, each time you’ve previously drawn may impose its own form of penalty to the final outcome, and you can easily miss outright. And once you pick, the comparisons directly impact your satisfaction levels. Thus, you want to be much quicker on the trigger. You’re Single And They Will Never Tell You Why
It should be common knowledge at this point that not explaining, and especially outright ghosting, is making your life easier at the expense of the person ghosted. It can be the right move anyway, as in it sometimes helps you more than it hurts them. Not ghosting can have its own downsides, starting with them demanding a reason, or if you share a reason arguing about it, offering to change or getting really angry about it or using it against you (or in non-dating contexts outright suing). The less you say, the safer and better, and if you change your mind your options might be open. Despite this, by default, you should be ghostminning. If you know that you don’t want to continue talking to someone, say so. By default treat ghosting as a black mark on the person doing it. This applies to all forms of ghosting, not only in dating. Also, if they decide to ghost you, in some ways that’s a black mark on your ability to credibly signal that they don’t have to. You’re Single Because You Won’t Tell Them The Problem
Cate is correct that this is ludicrously terrible advice. He has hit a good vibe two dates out of three, everything else about him is great. Obviously you tell him that this cologne and aesthetic did not work for you. When did this become a ‘right to micromanage’ anything? Is there any possible world in which the guy is better off if you dump him rather than telling him, or silently suffer and never tell him? I do think Jorbs is right that this reads like a ‘good on paper’ description, and she may be looking for an excuse. But that’s dumb, if you don’t want to date him then don’t.
A good starting rule is that if them changing one eminently changeable thing would make dating worthwhile, you should tell them about it. You’re Not Single But The Clock Is Ticking
The more I think about this question, the more it seems like an obvious mistake to stay in a long term relationship for years and not fully commit. I realize this is easier said than done. It is scary to go full The Ultimatum and insist on a rapid move up or move out, when you have something pretty good. It does seem like it is obviously a mistake to give things more than a year or at most two. You’re Single Because of Your BodycountHow much does it matter?
This looks like a relative ranking, so it does not tell you how much this ‘willingness’ matters. Claiming ‘it literally does not matter at all’ would be bizarre, certainly this number contains information especially if the number is zero or one. Also, I flat out defy the data on there being no double standard? No way. Even if on some abstract 1-9 scale it looks similar, the practical impact is very obviously totally different. Yes, a male body count of 60+ is functionally a negative, but not at the same level. You’re Single Because You Failed To Read The SignsAstrology is a problem for men when dating, because: A remarkably high percentage of women believe in it to remarkably high degrees. If taken at all seriously, it is deeply stupid. Even as a clearly delineated [fake framework](https://substack.com/redirect/b557f824-5b76-48ac-b936-d31d5411b2c0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), it’s pretty terrible.
It is also an opportunity, because the subset of humans that use astrology talk is not random, and the details of how a person interacts with astrology, no matter how seriously they do or don’t take it, are even less random.
Responding with visible annoyance, or declining to answer with your birthday or sign, is everywhere and always an unforced error. Don’t do that, even if you’re effectively writing her off and no matter how actually annoyed you are. There’s no reason to make things unpleasant, especially before you know how far she’s going with this. However, well, do you still respect her as a potential partner? Should you? Annoyance here can come from many places. One of which is ‘oh god I have to deal with this now,’ another related one is ‘damn it I am no longer as interested.’ There are three related but distinct stories from Moon here about a reaction of annoyance. You have logic versus control, and you have skepticism versus contempt, and you have ability to indulge in whimsey and retain respect. There is also the claim motte and bailey claim that of course she doesn’t actually believe in astrology and won’t let this influence things beyond a little whimsy. That brings us back to Purpskurp. There is a continuum of possibilities, but centrally three cases. Topic of whimsy. It’s a way of making conversation, seeing how you play off an arbitrary set of predictions to get things rolling, a form of cold reading. This is still a negative update even once you establish this, because she is indicating she thinks this is a good move. Why? Because unless this was maximally explicit, she is engaging in a form of selection, and that choice of selection tells you about her, and it makes this less likely to be a good match. That said, this is totally survivable, especially if the whimsey is clear. Thus, you don’t want to fail the s*** test aspect of this by showing annoyance up top. If this is approached explicitly and strategically up front as a fake framework, then that is totally fine.
Taken somewhat seriously as actual Bayesian evidence, as in it might influence her decisions regarding you, including in the future. That’s trouble, potentially of two distinct forms. It’s a bad sign on her general decision making capabilities and epistemics, and given you are reading this it’s a really bad sign about your compatibility across the board. It’s a red flag. The actual astrological implications could be bad news for you. Then again, they might also be good news. What matters is her interpretation of this, on whatever level she understands astrology. It’s worth noting that astrology is super flexible, so if you have green flags elsewhere you can ‘fight back’ if you know enough to play within the game.
Actual real belief in astrology, the way I believe in having lunch. For the long term, this is a dealbreaker, period, straight up. How it impacts the short term is, of course, up to you.
An ‘interest in’ astrology or tarot cards can be fine, although tarot cards are strictly better and astrology indicates poor taste. Actual belief?
You're currently a free subscriber to |