---
subject: "When Step One is to Light Money on Fire and Measure How Fast it Burns"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <the-diff@ghost.io>"
to: ""
date: 2025-04-28 14:41:44
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
In this issue: - When Step One is to Light Money on Fire and Measure How Fast it Burns—There are some businesses where the key uncertainty is how quickly some process scales, and the only way to get useful datapoints is to spend an unknown amount on them. This creates an interesting opportunity, because the potential failure of this model looks so obvious that it's embarrassing to try.
- Groupchats and Norms—On leaks, information asymmetry, and how groupchats compete with media.
- Venture—Cheaper but more abundant capital through financial engineering.
- Made in America—The wrong tariffs can be quite expensive for US manufacturers.
- Real Estate Elasticity—Offices are worth less, but being in the city is worth more.
- Lagging Investments—How Exxon went green.
When Step One is to Light Money on Fire and Measure How Fast it BurnsThere's a continuum of chunkiness and predictability in unit economics, from stamping out the nth Model Y or Chipotle location at one end to open-ended R&D in biotech or quantum computing at the other. And, in the middle, there's a unique category of enterprise where the problem in question is solvable in principle, but the big unknown is how quickly efficiency improves along the relevant axes. Which means that step one is to spend some unknown amount of money—but probably a large amount, for whatever value of "large" has scared everyone else off from spending it thus far. Step two is to take what you learned, do it again, and see if the results get any better. This repeats for a while until the next step is either "achieve positive free cash flow" or "run out of money." This shows up in a variety of places. The first was Affirm: TikTok followed a similar path in a different place. The concept was that if there were an effectively infinite supply of short videos, and a good recommendation algorithm for showing them to viewers, it would be a great product, and since one of the best ad formats in history was short commercial messages interspersed with middle- to low-brow entertainment, there would probably be a nice business model there—but a better one that ad-supported television, since there would be more opportunities to target people. But to get to that point, they needed a critical mass of viewers, and of content for them to view. And that's a question of spend. Specifically, buying ads in venues where people are likely to consume and perhaps even create short-form videos as well as paying creators directly to make content on TikTok. So, for a while, the TikTok model was a wealth transfer to Meta shareholders, in the form of ads for TikTok that acquired users who would almost never find anything worth watching, and would consequently almost always leave soon after. But those departures were informative, and the ad spend was really R&D to find which set of videos would convert to more loyal viewers. But it's not just consumer-facing products that have this dynamic. It can also apply to healthcare, specifically, to solving one person's health problems with a very large budget, probably provided by that person or an immediate family member. Some health problems have clear solutions, some are basically a death sentence, but there's a long tail of niche health problems that might, in principle, be solvable, but that are for the average person once again a death sentence. But for the non-average person, who got luckier with exit liquidity than with cell division, there's sometimes a chance to do a mini-Manhattan Project around their particular illness. Death skews all sorts of utility calculations, one of which is: if you're probably going to die in N years, then spending And cancer, as an illness, is fascinating: it's a partial clone of you, growing inside of you. Evolution will select against it killing you, but through only two methods: 1) it kills you, and then dies, or 2) you kill it first. Which is cold comfort to the people who end up with some other particular cancer, but which will eventually lead to an accumulation of ideas that start out as ways to treat one person, turn into ways to help a dozen, and end up benefiting hundreds, or thousands, or many more than that. This category of project is probably underinvested in, in the aggregate, for purely social reasons: it's incredibly embarrassing to get one wrong. (Obviously, the people with terminal illnesses don't have a lot of embarrassment to worry about when their particular efforts don't pan out.) But this is the shape of some pressing economic problems: sometimes, what we need to know is how inefficient it is to throw money at a problem, and the only way to find out is to throw money at it. In a few fields, this is prestigious—several billionaires have tried to solve public education, for example, and while there are cheaper ways to get positive press, at least they recovered a few pennies on the dollar from an investment that was otherwise completely wasted. But it's still high-status to try. Whereas if the open question looks less like "how can I make the world better for the average student" and more like "how can I make a boatload of money and/or outlive something that would kill a mere centimillionaire," it's not as prestigious. But that means this is where more of the opportunities will lurk: in places where all you know is that you have to spend a lot before you even know how much you have to spend to make a real difference. Disclosure: long META. R&D happened fastest on the ad side, and [The Attention Factory](https://www.thediff.co/r/cd04589e?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)notes that the best-performing ads were usually random TikTok videos. At the level of individual ads, TikTok was the Platonic example of the worst imaginable ad business, where they literally paid to show people a random-seeming assortment of videos.[↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/0342775c?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)For anyone who can spend this much on healthcare, we'll go ahead and assume that their heirs are already taken care of with some sort of clever trust structure, or QSBS-shielded low-cost-basis investments in the family firm. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/cd9a3cd6?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)This is just a matter of math: for the cancer to exist at all, it has to be growing at a higher percentage rate than its host. So either you're outgrowing your cancer and it will eventually get unlucky and die, or it's outgrowing you. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/3defb5cd?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)The more people benefited by a single-purpose win, the more likely that win is to be one use case for a general-purpose tool. NASA was no doubt thrilled that Fairchild Semiconductor was able to produce such a lightweight, reliable guidance computer. But the biggest economic upside did not turn out to be the moon landing, even though that was pretty cool. It’s also important to note that success in cancer treatment doesn’t generalize across the entire disease population in many cases; a personalized treatment plan that incorporates breakthrough science might work for one person, but the human body is a complex adaptive system and evaluating whether something works for one person vs. the majority of a disease population requires a very different standard. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/dd878c94?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. See a sampling of current open roles below: - A Google Ventures-backed startup founded by SpaceX engineers that’s building data infrastructure and tooling for hardware companies is looking for a software engineering manager with 7+ years experience building large scale distributed systems. (LA, Hybrid)
- A multi-stage, fintech focused investment firm is looking for an investment associate to support thematic opportunity identification, diligence, and execution. Investing experience OR high-growth operating/investment banking/consulting experience and demonstrated interest in fintech required. (NYC, London)
- YC-backed company that’s turning body cam footage into complete police reports and automating other cumbersome law enforcement workflows with AI is looking for a junior backend engineer to operate in a forward deployed capacity. Entry-level ok, ability to pass an FBI background check required. (SF)
- YC-backed startup using AI to transform how companies quantify and optimize engineering productivity is hiring formidable full-stack and AI engineers. Experience with React + Typescript, Go, or Python on the ML side a plus. (SF)
- A hyper-growth startup (10x growth in 9 months) that’s turning customers’ sales and marketing data into revenue is looking for a head of deployments who is excited to work closely with customers to make the product work for them. Experience as a forward deployed engineer and leading enterprise deployments preferred. (NYC, SF)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. ElsewhereGroupchats and NormsFor a long time, I've wanted to write a piece about the rise of groupchats as a social network. But I've always run into the unavoidable problem that this piece would necessarily be informed by the groupchats I'm in, and that even if I took pains to anonymize broad statements, someone would feel singled out (and it doesn't exactly mollify someone to say that I didn't have them in mind with a given statement, because that amounts to saying that they're a walking stereotype). Also, Sriram Krishnan Anyway, Ben Smith at Semafor has The existence of "group chats" is just a slight shift in the connection between social network topology and the physical kind. It's just not an especially big deal that the way to get a certain number of bits of private information shifted from "go to the right parties" to "get invited to the right Signal chat." But what is interesting is the response: two of the people mentioned in the piece put out This is partly an issue of production functions: a news story happens through the confluence of a source willing to talk and a writer willing to listen, and both of these can be implicitly coordinated through broader narratives. But leakers are people, too, with incentives of their own, and one thing they can do is selectively leak in a way that advances some agenda. (This is not necessarily the result of a cynical attempt to manipulate, just an earnest attempt to filter data.) This leads to VenturexAI Made in AmericaThe US still manufactures a lot, in absolute terms, but Real Estate ElasticityHybrid work has some interesting economic features: it means that it's still important to live within commuting distance to the office, but also means that a given office can support a larger number of workers than before. And that means that there's less demand for commercial real estate, but more demand for big city amenities, which raises demand for nearby housing. Real estate developers are Lagging InvestmentsBig energy companies have faced a fun capital allocation question for a while: the market was telling them, for a while, that they should bet on lower emissions. Government subsidies weren't pushing that message quite so loudly, so the question was whether the market was right about the direction of future policy, or whether it made more sense to keep investing in the status quo and to wait until the full energy transition made immediate economic sense. A few of them overshot on their climate bets, and had to dial back, and |
||||||||||||||||
|
|
|
||||||||||||||||
|