---
subject: "AI #36: In the Background"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-11-02 17:58:08
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Wow, what a week. We had the Executive Order, Simultaneously there was the UK AI Summit. There was also robust related discussion around Responsible Scaling Policies, and the various filings companies did in advance of the Summit. I touched on Anthropic’s RSP in particular in previous weeks, but I did not do a sufficiently close analysis and many others have offered more detailed thoughts as well, and the context has evolved. So I am noting that I am not covering those important questions in the weekly roundup, and they will be covered by one or more later distinct posts. I also potentially owe an after action report from EA Global Boston, if I can find the time. This post is instead about everything else. Table of ContentsWhile top sections of this post are highlighted in bold, if you read one thing this week, I would read Introduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. Which ones offer the most? Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. Or so say many civilians. GPT-4 Real This Time. Use all the ChatGPT features at once, coming soon. Fun With Image Generation. I want my tank man. Best Picture. Mission Impossible: Make Biden worry about AI. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. I’ve read (summaries of) your work. They Took Our Jobs. Look how many are at risk, says yet another study. Get Involved. UK Model Taskforce, Our World in Data and Open Phil, still. OpenAI Frontier Risk and Preparedness Team. Looks good. They are hiring too. Introducing. New AlphaFold, Time(Series)GPT, Phind as an LLM for code. In Other AI News. Chinese overview of alignment, model weight theft methods. Quiet Speculations. The branching paths of our possible futures. The Quest for Sane Regulation. Tyler says do nothing, California explains why. The Week in Audio. Shane Legg, Paul Christiano, Demis Hassabis. Rhetorical Innovation. Make it as simple as possible, but no simpler. Open Source AI is Unsafe and Nothing Can Fix This. 1918 flu edition. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. AI hides its thoughts. People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Prove it is safe? What a concept. Please Speak Directly Into This Microphone. The most extreme EO take of all. The Lighter Side. Thank you for reading.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
The article emphasizes that GPT-4 is ‘slow and expensive’ opening up room for competition. It is amazing how quickly we are spoiled, but indeed it is slow and expensive compared to the competition. For most purposes, I assert there is no comparison. The marginal cost of using GPT-4 for human interactions is very close to zero. If a human is reading the words, do not pinch pennies. Speed can still be a question, so in some cases you would want to use GPT-3.5 or Claude Instant. Things get more interesting when humans will not see the words. If you are simulating lots of characters in an open world, or doing a study, or otherwise going industrial in size, then the cost can add up fast. At that point, it makes sense that a non-commercial model would be enough cheaper to get an edge in some spots. As the post notes, it makes sense then to get less ‘monogamous’ on model use, the same way I use a mix of GPT-4 and Claude-2 and occasionally Bard or Perplexity.
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
It is proven that some people try GPT-4 and DALLE-3 and do not come away impressed. They look for the flaws, find something to criticize, rather than trying to understand what they are looking at. If you want to not be impressed by something, if you are fully set in your ways, then it can take a lot to shake you out of it. I get that. I still don’t fully get the indifference reaction, especially to image models. How is this not completely crazy that we can get these images on demand? The moon is in the wrong place so who cares? It will tell you what it thinks you will react well to, not what you want to hear.
They tried to hack the ChatGPT API. GPT-4 Real This TimeSometimes a thing happens that surprises you, but only because its failure to have happened already was also surprising and forced you to update? Thus,
This is big. You can now combine vision with image generation with web browsing with reading PDFs. A lot of new use cases will open up as we explore the space. Rowan first points to uploading an image and asking for variations on it, which seems exciting. Another would be asking for images based on browsing or a PDF, or asking to browse the web to verify information from a PDF. Even if these things could have been done manually before, streamlining the process is in practice a big game. I don’t have access to it yet, so I won’t know how big until I have time to play with it. I will probably start with image manipulation because that sounds like fun, or with PDF stuff for mundane utility to see if it can replace Claude-2 for that.
That is what is called a highly correlated portfolio. A company that gets wiped out when their product gets incorporated into a Microsoft product (or Google, or strictly speaking here OpenAI) is a classic failure mode indeed. An investor who gets wiped out needs a better understanding of diversification. Also the Nvidia call options aren’t doing that great recently? I am guessing this is the market being dumb but something about it staying crazy longer than you can stay solvent. As for the companies, I do not think it is crazy to quickly build out a feature and prey that you can make that into something valuable before it gets incorporated, but it is quite the risk, and it happened here. Fun with Image GenerationClaim that saying things like Tank Man from Tiananmen Square was too sensitive a topic,
Best Picture
There was little discussion of Dead Reckoning among the worried, with
As a refresher, here was my spoiler-free review:
We now must modify the paragraph about whether to see this movie. Given its new historical importance, combined with its action scenes being pretty good, if you have not yet seen it you should now probably see this movie. And of course it now deserves a much higher rating. For more motivation, here’s a scene from the movie?
I mean, that’s great. Further thoughts at It is presumably too late, but it seems like an excellent time to make extra effort to get into the writers’ room for Part 2 to ensure that perhaps some of this could be how some of this works and we can help send the best possible message while still making a good popcorn flick. I especially want to see the key turn out to be completely useless. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
This seems tricky to do but clearly doable, provided you are content with undergraduate-level results and not fazed by errors and omissions of all sorts. I too did not expect it quite this soon but such things are coming. Mortiz makes a common mistake here. In a costly signaling game, or when such signals are used as gates, the instinctive play is to reduce the cost of the signal. That is good for the individual in isolation. Too much of it destroys the purpose of the costly signal, the equilibrium fails, and what replaces it could be far worse. Would I use such a tool on occasion for various purposes? If quality is good enough then yes, and mostly not for cold emails. What will humans do in the future in this cold email situation? Presumably step up their game, show deeper understanding and more humanness to get around this and other AI substitutes, until such time as humans lose the ability to win that battle. Or alternatively we will have to find some other way to costly signal. Two obvious ones are money, which is always an option, or some form of hard-to-fake reputation that we can point to. A third response is to react to such emails in a way that only profits those who we want to engage with, a principle which generalizes. I do not currently have much of a barrier to an AI or person using AI getting my attention, but what does it profit them? I also have little barrier to humans getting my attention, including in ways it would indeed profit them, and yet almost no humans use them. Most other interesting or valuable people also have this. Yet almost no one reaches out. I do not expect this to change (much or for very long) now that I’ve noticed this out loud.
I mean, bullshit? The information environment is awful for reasons that have nothing to do with AI and often have a lot more to do with the New York Times. The fakes and false information, both deep and otherwise, are mostly low quality, but various sources - again, this includes you, New York Times - are falling for or choosing to propagate them anyway, and that is making people very reasonably not trust anything, and none of that has that much to do with AI, not yet. Target demand, not supply. They Took Our JobsAIPI
It is easy to conflate ‘jobs at risk’ with ‘jobs that will go away’ with ‘jobs that will change and maybe people move around.’ Even if AI becomes technologically capable of automating 20% of all jobs, that will not mean 20% of jobs get automated, nor that all those people will ‘need retraining’ even if AI did do that. I also call upon all those making such studies to make actual predictions backed by actual dates. What does it mean to be vulnerable to automation? Does that mean this year? In five years? In twenty? How many do they expect to actually get automated? In short, I have no idea how to operationalize this report, and all that detailed work goes mostly to waste. Fake news? Get Involved
OpenAI Frontier Risk and Preparedness Team
Great stuff. As they say, this complements and extends existing risk mitigation work. It is not a substitute for other forms of safety work. It is in no way a complete solution to anything. It is a way to be informed about risk, and find incremental mitigations along the way, while another department works to solve alignment. From what I can tell, this announcement is unadulterated good news. Thank you. Introducing
In Other AI NewsFrom China with many authors, a new paper:
I don’t remember seeing the backward versus forward taxonomy before, and find it promising. I do not currently have the time to look at the paper in detail, but have saved it for potential later reading, and would be curious to get others’ takes on its contents.
Huge if true! Absolutely worth trying. I agree that the approach seems underexplored. I remain skeptical that such a thing is possible.
Quiet Speculations
How fast will compute capabilities improve? Rather fast.
Suhail would say this means we must fight hard against any kind of cap on compute. I would say this means we urgently need one. So strong disagreement and also common ground.
Is there an epistemic crisis? In some ways I think very much so, our discourse standards and epistemic standards have decayed greatly, in ways that are unrelated to AI. However we also have vastly superior access to information, and forget the many ways in which the past was impoverished on such fronts the same way it was impoverished in material goods. Vital things have been lost that must be recaptured, without applying the Lost Golden Age treatment where it does not apply. His main argument is that AI instead has the power to help make this and also the position of creators better rather than worse. He offers a pitch that his company
Type 1 failure: No one particular group is primarily responsible. Type 2 failure: Extinction caused by a particular group. They did not expect a major impact on society. Type 3 failure: Extinction caused by a particular group. They did expect a major impact on society, but did not expect to pose substantial risk or harm. Type 4 failure: Extinction caused by a particular group. They knew it would cause harm and did not care enough to stop. Type 5 failure: Extinction caused by a particular group. They were a non-state actor intentionally attempting to cause harm. Type 6 failure: Extinction caused by a particular group. They were a state actor intentionally attempting to cause harm. Critch has (30%/10%/15%/10%/10%/10%) on each of these scenarios, for a total doom percentage of 85%. The lines blur a lot between scenarios. If you build it and we all die because you knew someone else was about to also build it and they would have also gotten everyone killed, I think technically that is Type 1 here, but that feels weird? If group A would have gotten us all killed, but in response group B does something else that gets us killed faster, either instead of or in addition to? If one group creates something that could then be unleashed by a variety of actors, and then one of them does? In particular, Type 1 does not seem to differentiate well between importantly distinctive scenarios. And I don’t typically find it helpful to focus on who was to blame in a proximate cause sense, rather than asking how we could prevent it. I do however think that any such taxonomy will always have similar issues, and this illustrates one of several ways in which people narrow down their worrisome scenarios, before finding a way to dismiss the one scenario they choose to focus on. The Quest for Sane Regulations
Now this is the kind of regulatory burden I can get behind an objection to.
I complained about the definition of AI in the executive order, but here AI literally means any machine-based system that can make recommendations or decisions, so yes this literally means any machine system at all. An excel spreadsheet counts. Here consequential decision is anything that has any material consequence on a wide variety of things, any deployer is anyone who uses such a tool to make any consequential decision, so basically anyone who does anything ever. And what must they do in order to use any computer tool to make almost any decision that impacts another person in some way? Note that it is not the developer of the tool that must do this, it is the deployer:
So yes, as I read this, if in California under this law you want to use almost any tool including a spreadsheet to help you make choices that matter, you - yes, you - will first need to file all of these things for each tool, and have a governance program, and notify everyone impacted, and so on. If actually enforced as written this would be quite the epic pain in the ass, in exchange for very little in the way of benefits. It is an absurdly bad bill. Of course, laws in California are often more of a suggestion, and I presume they would not actually go after you in fully idiotic fashion here. But you never know. The Week in Audio
I would yes-and Eliezer’s response, in that even if the AI was internally motivated to act ethically as reflected by the content of such tests that level of ethics, or the level of ordinary human ethics, does not get us where we need to go, I do not see this path working far enough up the capabilities chain even if it succeeds. I’d also echo Eliezer that this does not mean that Legg does not have better answers and better ideas, and it certainly does not mean Google or DeepMind does not have better answers and ideas, in addition to this one. They are huge, they can contain multitudes, and the good ideas are at best explainable in the 4-hour-Dwarkesh-interview format rather than the 45-minute one here. You know who else Dwarkesh Patel also interviews?
Rhetorical Innovation
Most of the post is a very negative reaction to the executive order, of the all-regulation-is-bad, all-AI-safety-concerns-are-motivated-by-regulatory-capture, no-one-can-know-the-future-so-we-need-no-precautions variety.
Alternatively, Julian Hazell presents it as AI changing world versus not.
I see this as two distinct questions. If you do not think AI is definitely capable of transforming the world any time soon, then the correct view is to see it as being like any other technology. It is a tool people can use, and mostly we should let people build it and use it and profit from it. If you do think AI is likely to soon transform the world, that AI is more than a tool, then we get to Musk’s question of whether or not you are a fan of the humans, along with questions about
(Note: I am sick and tired of the cognitive trick that the alternative to ‘let anyone who wants to risk killing everyone on the planet do so’ is called authoritarian, and the assumption it would imply some sort of oppressive or dictatorial state. It wouldn’t.)
The problem with C2, and the idea of a human-oriented future with uncontrolled ASIs, is not that it does not sound cool or even potentially glorious, it is that it is incoherent and does not make any sense. C2→C3. I appreciate the people who stand up and say C3 - they have their own section heading and catchphrase and everything - because they are facing down reality and expressing a preference. I disagree with that preference, and expect most of you do as well, and we can go from there. Whereas those who claim C2 is a thing seem to me to either be lying, fooling themselves, thinking quite poorly or most commonly not really thinking about how any of this works at all.
Open Source AI is Unsafe and Nothing Can Fix This
Once again, this is not a solvable problem, except by not open sourcing model weights.
Yes, I see what else we could even do. So, OK, sure, I am all for be effective altruist, ban gain of function research, no papers on the internet show how to cause a pandemic, party where there is cake. Then we can double check to see if it still only costs $200 to create Spicy-Llama-2. Until then, the papers exist, they are available, anyone else could have done the same thing, I actually don’t see what else could we even do? Unless the plan is, be Meta, release open source LLMs, malicious actors fine-tune it for $200 and feed it some papers, they now know how to create pandemics? And yes, if you were a sufficient domain expert who could parse such papers you could with more effort figure out all the same things. No one is saying Llama-2 is producing outputs here that expert humans could not produce. We are saying that this changes the expertise threshold from ‘there are select people who can do this with effort’ to ‘there are a lot of people who can do this faster and easier.’ In practice, this matters. Terrorist groups and apocalyptic cults have a practical history of seeking biological weapons and the ability to cause pandemics, and failing due to exactly this lack of technical expertise. The cults in Japan were discussed on a recent 80,000 hours podcast. To be concrete: So far, Hamas has not to our knowledge used biological weapons or attempted to cause a pandemic. Was that because they would not do such a thing? Or was that lack of practical capability? Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is DifficultWhat would be worse than the AI telling people what they want to hear?
I don’t know that this particular example worries me. Telling someone they are a liberal isn’t telling them what they want to hear so much as stating a true implication of their statement based on their dislike of Tricky Dick. The principle still stands. If there are thoughts the model wants to think with CoT without us noticing, it could gain the ability to do that.
Traditional alignment problems, including traditional human alignment problems. If you crack down on visible X, but X gets better results, you likely get hidden X. I would generalize the implications here. If you use RLHF or other similarly flawed feedback, the AI will adapt to the exact things that trigger the feedback. You will get situations like this, where that which you don’t want to see is hidden, and that which you want to see is presented whether or not it is then used or meaningful in any way. If the users that provide the feedback that counts want to be told they are a liberal, the AI will learn to tell them, whether or not that helps it reason. If those users punish such declarations, the AI learns to not give them. Except the fully general version of that. And over time, it will do this with a much better understanding of what is actually determining our decisions than we ourselves have, and an utter indifference to whether this corresponds to anything we would or should endorse.
It is a strategy one could pursue, to forgo inner alignment. Instead of aligning the core LLM, tell the LLM to play an aligned character, and have it aligned to the playing of characters on request, and ensure no one ever asks an AI to play a different character. For multiple different technical reasons I despair of this actually working when it matters in way that results in us not being dead, even if you ‘pulled it off,’ and would expect most alignment researchers to agree. People Are Worried About AI Killing EveryoneI am considering a new polling segment called ‘
I do find it disappointing, but unsurprising, that working with non-allies is not yet more popular. Please Speak Directly Into This MicrophoneThe most honest reaction to the Executive Order, or any move at all to do anything about the fact that AI might not be an unadulterated good or even might, ya know, kill everyone, is that you/we are trying to build AGI as fast as possible, how dare the government want you not to do that, this order might interfere with you building AGI as fast as possible.
Yes! He admit it. The whole point of (these parts of) the executive order is that you fools are rushing to build AGI as fast as possible. As much as we admire your current product lines, we would like you to not do that, sir.
In addition to my human extinction is bad stance, I am going to also take a bold war is bad stance. I’d say fight me, but I’d rather you didn’t. And in case you were wondering if his aim is recursive self-improvement and fast takeoff?
The Lighter Side
ChatGPT attempts to ensure we think about The Roman Empire:
You're currently a free subscriber to |