---
subject: "Capital & Taste"
from: "Not Boring <notboring@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-10-31 12:54:38
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Not Boring", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2982495070691762429", "UNREAD"]
---
Welcome to the 2,139 newly Not Boring people who have joined us since last Monday! If you haven’t subscribed, join 162,527 smart, curious folks by subscribing here: 🎧 For the audio version, listen on Today’s Not Boring, the whole thing, is brought to you by…
Hi friends 👋 , Happy Monday! The Phillies are tied 1-1 in the World Series and the Eagles are still undefeated. How could the week start any better? A deep dive on one of my favorite companies, This is a piece that I’ve wanted to write for a very long time, pretty much since I met then-Party Round founder Jordi Hays in early 2021. The plan Jordi laid out to me back then seemed crazy, but it hit close to home: build a media business focused on founders, monetize through financial services. In the intervening year and a half, I’ve become more and more impressed with both Jordi and the company that he’s building. It’s like a reverse mullet: party in the front, business in the back. Or like an onion that looks like candy on the outside but becomes healthier and healthier each layer you peel off. I’m not great at short analogies. Please allow me ~6,000 words to explain. This essay is a Sponsored Deep Dive on a company I’ve invested in every time I had the chance. I’ve been retweeting Party Round into your Twitter feeds for a while; this is my opportunity to explain why I’m so bullish. You can read more about how I choose which companies to do deep dives on, and how I write them Let’s get to it. Capital & Taste"The relationship between capital and taste is complex and often contradictory." - Pierre Bourdieu Think about your bank. Really bring it to mind. Swim in it. Picture the website: the sign-on flow, transferring money, finding your account information, downloading transaction histories. Transport yourself into one of the brick-and-mortar locations: the faux-wood desks, the blue carpet, the line for the teller, the swipe-ATM-to-access after it’s been locked up for the day at like 5pm. Recall the last time you saw its marketing: smiling multicultural friends, exhortations to use the app anywhere and anytime, the big blue or red logo at the end. Would you say that your bank has taste? In his book, Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste, French sociologist Pierre Bourdieu argues that taste isn’t just a matter of personal preference; it’s shaped by our social position. (Admission: I’d never heard of Pierre Bourdieu before last week, but Anyway, Bourdieu believed that to have good taste is to have the capital – economic, social, and cultural – to acquire it. Hence the complex relationship between capital and taste. Capital of some form is necessary to acquire taste, but it’s clearly not sufficient. Think of the gaudy nouveau-riche. Think, again, of your bank. So much capital. So little taste. I don’t mean to pick on banks. They do their job. They make a lot of money. And they’re already under attack from dozens or hundreds of well-funded startup neobanks. Neobanks attack incumbent banks on a number of vectors. They ditch brick-and-mortar and pass savings on to customers. They do away with usurious ATM and overdraft fees. They make it dead simple to send a wire. They serve increasingly small demographic niches with tailor-made features. They benefit from a race among banking APIs to arm the rebels with sophisticated add-ons. But as the feature set gets commoditized, there’s one vector that’s remained untapped because it’s so ineffable and hard to pin down that it’s strategically risky to pursue: taste. Taste is difficult to even define. Like Justice Potter Stewart’s definition of porn, you know it when you see it. It’s about doing things that others wouldn’t dare do, and pulling them off in style. A good test might be: when someone tells you they have a marketing drop coming, do you cringe in pre-embarrassment or get excited knowing for a fact it’s going to be great? By that test, Capital started its life as Party Round, the easiest way for founders to raise money from investors. If you follow me on Twitter, you’ve likely heard of Party Round. Every time Party Round launched a new drop, or really tweeted anything at all in the past two years since Not Boring Capital first invested, sure as night follows day, a DM popped into my Twitter inbox, demanding amplification. And I’m always happy to amplify, because they’re always so damn good. The only thing wilder than the volume of their drops is their consistent quality. From But Party Round was just an appetizer for the company’s main course. The most recent DM in my inbox from Party Round wasn’t from @PartyRound. It was from @capitalxyz, sharing this tweet:
|