---
subject: "Horace P. Yuen (1946-2025)"
from: "Maxim Raginsky from The Art of the Realizable <realizable@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-07 18:46:37
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Maxim Raginsky", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3440436245007788095", "UNREAD"]
---
Three weeks ago I received the sad and shocking news that my PhD advisor, Horace P. Yuen, My first encounter with Horace was in 1998, before I even started entertaining any thoughts of pursuing a graduate degree. I was an Electrical Engineering junior at Northwestern University. At that time I was mainly interested in optoelectronics and fiber optics and was eyeing an engineering career in industry, at a place like Lucent or Corning. There was the usual chatter among our cohort about which classes to take and with whom, and, when it came to the second required course in electromagnetics, the overall sentiment was something like, “don’t take it with Yuen, he’s an old school guy with a PhD from MIT and he expects you to know all this math.” Some part of me must have reacted like, “oh yeah? I think I could totally do it,” so I registered for his class. That was the turning point. He would stroll into the lecture room, carrying a manila folder with two or three handwritten sheets of notes. He barely looked at them when he lectured. He wrote on the board in perfect longhand and would often add personal anecdotes about science and scientists or philosophical digressions about the difference between physics and engineering. One of his frequent sayings was, “mathematicians care about rigor, engineers care about precision.” What others had been saying about his demands on our mathematical knowledge was not entirely accurate—while he certainly emphasized mathematical sophistication, to him it was not about having lots of tricks at your disposal, but more about your ability to drill down to the conceptual core of things, even when thinking about something as basic as the definition of angle. Compared to your typical class where the emphasis was about grinding out problem sets, this was a refreshing experience. My interest in photonics led me to quantum electronics and quantum optics, and Horace was the one to talk to about these things. He was Horace’s information theory course was challenging but incredibly rewarding not just because of the original way he presented the material (his introduction of Shannon entropy as “asymptotic combinatorial complexity” will forever be etched in my memory), but also because of all the stories he would tell. He was first a student and then a researcher at MIT when Shannon was on the faculty there, and his insights into the history and the conceptual development of information theory were remarkably deep. He gave us a lot of additional reading, including Shannon’s original papers, Jim Massey’s When I eventually became his PhD student, I had complete freedom to work on whatever I wanted. Horace was always there to suggest relevant references. He had an incredible memory and a quick way of seeing straight to the heart of the matter. At one point, when I became interested in reliable computation with unreliable circuit elements after having read We remained in touch after I defended my PhD in 2002, and even later when I switched fields from quantum information to machine learning and control. He would take me out to dinner either at one of his favorite Cantonese restaurants in the Chicago area or at one of the upscale establishments in Evanston, and we’d have long conversations about whatever was on our minds. He was always open to learning new things, and he brought his skeptical attitude, his incredibly broad knowledge of a vast array of subjects, and his remarkable memory to everything. I don’t remember exactly how the subject of philosophy came up, but at one point I was telling him about my reading of MacIntyre’s After Virtue. Little did I know that, among many other things, he was deeply read in both continental and analytic philosophy, going back to the time when he and his ex-wife Sunny Auyang would attend philosophy seminars at MIT and study Heidegger and Husserl together. In that discussion we had about MacIntyre, he brought up Nozick’s Anarchy, State, and Utopia and Rawls’ Theory of Justice and had interesting critical takes on both and on their relation to MacIntyre’s views. He retired in 2021, shortly after the COVID pandemic, and we kept having long discussions over email. He wanted to understand recent developments in machine learning and AI and how they relate to ideas in philosophy of mind. As usual, he was incredibly quick in the way he understood things and got straight to the core; his replies to me were full of references to Rudolf Carnap, Daniel Dennett, and Jaegwon Kim. He was unconvinced by Kim’s physicalism, but found his books to be the best defense of the physicalist view. Just as in the old days, he believed that electrical engineers, and not computer scientists or physicists, were best equipped to make sense of AI; he was unimpressed by Geoff Hinton’s In some our last exchanges, we were getting into philosophical issues of Buddhism and Daoism, and I wanted to get Horace’s perspective as I was making my way through
Farewell, Horace. I hope you are now happy and carefree, like those minnows in the River Hao. The Art of the Realizable is free today. But if you enjoyed this post, you can tell The Art of the Realizable that their writing is valuable by pledging a future subscription. You won't be charged unless they enable payments. |