---
subject: "SB 1047: Our Side Of The Story"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-10-10 12:20:20
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
I. My ex-girlfriend has a weird relationship to reality. Her actions ripple out into the world more heavily than other people's. She finds herself at the center of events more often than makes sense. One time someone asked her to explain the whole “AI risk” thing to a State Senator. She hadn’t realized states had senators, but it sounded important, so she gave it a try, figuring out her exact pitch on the car ride to his office. A few months later, she was informed that the Senator had really taken her words to heart, and he'd been thinking hard about how he could help. This is part of the story behind SB 1047 - specifically, the only part I have any personal connection to. The rest of this post comes from anonymous sources in the pro-1047 community who wanted to tell their side of the story. (In case you’re just joining us - SB 1047 is a California bill, recently passed by the legislature but vetoed by the governor - which forced AI companies to take some steps to reduce the risk of AI-caused existential catastrophes. See State Senator Scott Wiener, unusually for California politicians, is a thoughtful person with a personality and a willingness to think outside the box. When there’s a really interesting bill that makes people wake up and pay attention, it’s usually one of his. Some of his efforts I can get behind - he’s a big YIMBY champion, and gets credit for the law letting homeowners build ADUs. Others seem crazy to me - like a law which lowered penalties for knowingly exposing someone to HIV (you can read his argument for why he thought this was a good idea The New York Times
...so I guess it wasn’t entirely due to my ex. But the bill owes much of its specifics and support to its three co-sponsors - Center for AI Safety, Encode Justice, and Economic Security Project Action.
II. Along the way SB 1047 picked up an impressive number of endorsements. Elon Musk was the one I was most excited about. The bill's Silicon Valley opponents tried to frame it as nanny-state Democrats trying to crush progress. But Elon Musk has impeccable credentials as a pro-progress non-nanny-state-Democrat, and was the perfect person to puncture this objection. He's always been interested in AI safety, but I imagine Hendrycks gets a lot of the credit for him weighing in on this particular issue. Another major endorsement came from SAG-AFTRA (formerly Screen Actors Guild), a politicially influential union of Hollywood creatives. The big AI companies split among themselves. OpenAI, Meta, and Google opposed the bill, X.AI supported, and Anthropic dithered on an earlier version but ultimately came out in support after their feedback was taken into account. Many opponents claimed that the bill was a Trojan Horse attempt at regulatory capture by the big AI companies, so it was fun watching three of the biggest AI companies come out against it and prove them exactly wrong. I don’t think any opponents ever changed their minds, admitted they’d made a mistake, or even stopped arguing that it was a big AI company plot - but hopefully enough people were paying attention that it discredited them a little for the next fight. The list of opponents included some tech investors, AI trade groups, and Nancy Pelosi. Nancy’s involvement was the biggest surprise. The boring explanation is that she represents San Francisco and has a lot of tech investor friends and donors, but you can get more conspiratorial. For example, Pelosi (current net worth $240 million) is known to get The other opponent everyone talks about is Marc Andreesen and his Andreesen Horowitz (“A16Z”) venture capital firm. Their campaign was especially public-facing, confrontational, and dishonest, and got most of the Twitter buzz. But in the end they were only one of several major players, and maybe not the one with the most political clout. III. The most important supporter was, of course, The Average Californian. Opponents tried to confuse people by releasing a biased poll - basically “do you support this HORRIBLE BILL which will DEVASTATE INNOVATION by creating a GIANT BUREAUCRACY?” (exact wording Supporters responded with an adversarial collaboration between both sides to come up with a fair wording; with IV. Based on considerations like these, the bill made it through California’s Assembly and Senate relatively smoothly, passing the State Assembly 49-15 and the State Senate 29-9. It then went to Governor Gavin Newsom for signature/veto. He sat on it until almost the last possible moment, then vetoed it September 29. His
I’m not sure there’s a single person in the world who actually holds this opinion. Opponents of the bill worried that it could potentially crush innovation by regulating smaller models that weren’t dangerous, and demanded guarantees that this would only apply to the big companies that were able to pay the regulatory costs. Supporters accepted this was a risk and offered those guarantees gladly. The constituency for rejecting SB 1047 because it didn’t go far enough in regulating small models is zero. Newsom obviously has no plan to come up with a stricter bill that also regulates the small models, so on the basis of “this doesn’t regulate enough” he is ensuring that nothing gets regulated at all. One of my sources generously interprets Newsom to mean something like “don’t regulate the models, regulate the end applications”. IE if OpenAI trains GPT-5, and then LegalCo fine-tunes it to do paralegal work, leave most of the safety responsibility on LegalCo, not OpenAI. This fails to engage with the motivations behind the bill, which are things like “what if someone uses AI for bioterrorism”? If Meta trains LLaMa-4, and al-Qaeda fine-tunes it for terrorism, instead of regulating it at the Meta-level, we should regulate al-Qaeda? Are we sure al-Qaeda will comply with California regulations? Our side is not sure that even this generous interpretation is very well has been thought through very well. But I prefer an ungenerous interpretation: Gavin Newsom is bad. On some level, I don’t mind having a bad governor. I actually have a perverse sort of fondness for Newsom. He reminds me of the Simpsons’ Mayor Quimby, a sort of old-school politician’s politician from the good old days when people were too busy pandering to special interests to talk about Jewish space lasers. California is a state full of very sincere but frequently insane people. We’re constantly coming up with clever ideas like “let’s make free organic BIPOC-owned cannabis cafes for undocumented immigrants a human right” or whatever. California’s representatives are very earnest and will happily go to bat for these kinds of ideas. Then whoever would be on the losing end hands Governor Newsom a manila envelope full of unmarked bills, and he vetoes it. In a world of dangerous ideological zealots, there’s something reassuring about having a governor too dull and venal to be corrupted by the siren song of “being a good person and trying to improve the world”. But sometimes you’re the group trying to do the right thing and improve the world, and then it sucks. Which particular special interests and cronies influenced Newsom, and how come they could get more money and favors than we could? Ron Conway is one of Newsom’s closest allies and biggest donors. In 2021, after Newsom broke his own COVID rules to go to a fancy dinner, some Californians tried to him recalled (ie got votes to hold a special election to impeach the governor). Conway (net worth $1.5 billion) I don’t fully understand where his SB 1047 opposition comes from. He has some AI investments, but no more than a lot of other people, and he also shows some signs of personal pro-innovation opinions, so I could go either way here. Still, it seems important to him for some reason, and the governor owes him a lot of favors. Something vaguely similar probably applies to Reid Hoffman and Garry Tan… …two of the bill’s other influential Silicon Valley billionaire opponents. I think these people beat us because they’ve been optimizing for political clout for decades, and our side hasn’t even existed that long, plus we care about too many other things to focus on gubernatorial recall elections. Newsom is good at politics, so he’s covering his tracks. To counterbalance his SB 1047 veto and appear strong on AI, he signed several less important anti-AI bills, including a ban on deepfakes
We’ll see whether Newsom gets his better regulation before or after OJ completes his manhunt. (yes, I realize OJ is dead) V. Some opponents were gracious in victory: Others were less so. While supporters’ “concession speeches” ranged from defiant: …to maybe slightly threatening. A frequent theme was that some form of AI regulation was inevitable. SB 1047 - a light-touch bill designed by Silicon-Valley-friendly moderates - was the best deal that Big Tech was ever going to get, and they went full scorched-earth to oppose it. Next time, the deal will be designed by anti-tech socialists, it’ll be much worse, and nobody will feel sorry for them. Dean Ball
Last year, I would have told Dean not to worry about us allying with the Left - the Left would never accept an alliance with the likes of us anyway. But I was surprised by how fairly socialist media covered the SB 1047 fight. For example, from
Current Affairs, another socialist magazine, also had a good article,
I don’t want to gloss this as “socialists finally admit we were right all along”. I think the change has been bi-directional. Back in 2010, when we had no idea what AI would look like, the rationalists and EAs focused on the only risk big enough to see from such a distance: runaway unaligned superintelligence. Now that we know more specifics, “smaller” existential risks have also come into focus, like AI-fueled bioterrorism, AI-fueled great power conflict, and - yes - AI-fueled inequality. At some point, without either side entirely abandoning their position, the very-near-term-risk people and the very-long-term-risk people have started to meet in the middle. But I think an equally big change is that SB 1047 has proven that AI doomers are willing to stand up to Big Tech. Socialists previously accused us of being tech company stooges, harping on the dangers of AI as a sneaky way of hyping it up. I admit I dismissed those accusations as part of a strategy of slinging every possible insult at us to see which ones stuck. But maybe they actually believed it. Maybe it was their real barrier to working with us, and maybe - now that we’ve proven we can (grudgingly, tentatively, when absolutely forced) oppose (some) Silicon Valley billionaires, they’ll be willing to at least treat us as potential allies of convenience. Dean Ball calls this strategy “an unholy alliance with the unions and the misinformation crusaders and all the rest”, and equates it to selling our souls. I admit we have many cultural and ethical differences with socialists, that I don’t want to become them, that I can’t fully endorse them, and that I’m sure they feel the same way about me. But coalition politics doesn’t require perfect agreement. The US and its European allies were willing to form an “unholy alliance” with some unsavory socialists in order to defeat the Nazis, they did defeat the Nazis, and they kept their own commitments to capitalism and democracy intact. As a wise man once said, politics is the art of the deal. We should see how good a deal we’re getting from Dean, and how good a deal we’re getting from the socialists, then take whichever one is better. Dean says maybe he and his allies in Big Tech would support a weaker compromise proposal that broke SB 1047 into small parts. But I feel like we watered down SB 1047 pretty hard already, and Big Tech just ignored the concessions, lied about the contents, and told everyone it would destroy California forever. Is there some hidden group of opponents who were against it this time, but would get on board if only we watered it down slightly more? I think the burden of proof is on him to demonstrate that there are. I respect Dean’s spirit of cooperation and offer of compromise. But the socialists have a saying - “That already was the compromise” - and I’m starting to respect them too. VI. A final interesting response to the SB 1047 veto came from the stock market. When Newsom nixed the bill - which was supposed to devastate the AI industry and destroy California’s technological competitiveness - AI stocks responded by doing absolutely nothing ( You can’t see it in the screenshot, but the first stock is NVIDIA, the second TSMC, the third Alphabet, and the fourth Microsoft. On average they went up about 0.5%, on a day when the NASDAQ as a whole also went up about 0.5%. Some people objected that maybe it was “priced in”. But the day before SB 1047 got vetoed, the prediction markets gave it a 33% chance of passing: So we should expect the stock market shift to equal 1/3 of the total damage to AI companies that the bill would have caused. But the stock market shift was indistinguishable from zero. Should we have expected a single California law to have an effect visible in the markets? According to Daniel and VII. Some people tell me they wish they’d gotten involved in AI early. But it’s still early! AI is less than 1% of the economy! In a few years, we’re going to look back on these days the way we look back now on punch-card computers. Even very early, it’s possible to do good object-level work. But the earlier you go, the less important object-level work is compared to shaping possibilities, coalitions, and expectations for the future. So here are some reasons for optimism. First, we proved we can stand up to (the bad parts of) Big Tech. Without sacrificing our principles or adopting any rhetoric we considered dishonest, we earned some respect from leftists and got some leads on potential new friends. Second, we registered our beliefs (AI will soon be powerful and potentially dangerous) loudly enough to get the attention of the political class and the general public. And we forced our opponents to register theirs (AI isn’t scary and doesn’t require regulation) with equal volume. In a few years, when the real import of advanced AI starts to come into focus, nobody will be able to lie about which side of the battle lines they were on. Third, we learned - partly to our own surprise - that we have the support of ~65% of Californians and an even higher proportion of the state legislature. It’s still unbelievably, fantastically early, comparable to people trying to build an airplane safety coalition when da Vinci was doodling pictures of guys with wings - and we already have the support of 65% of Californians and the legislature. So one specific governor vetoed one specific bill. So what? This year we got ourselves the high ground / eternal glory / social capital of being early to the fight. Next year we’ll get the actual policy victory. Or if not next year, the year after, or the year after that. “Instead of planning a path to victory, plan so that all paths lead to victory”. We have strategies available that people from lesser states can’t even imagine! 1 Trying to be maximally charitable, I think he’s saying that the penalty for infecting someone with HIV was much more severe than the penalty for infecting people with other diseases, that this was a relic of the age of mass panic over AIDS, and that now that we’re panicking less we should bring the penalties back into line. But his argument style actively alienates me, focusing as it does on “reducing stigma” against AIDS patients. This brings back too many bad memories of the days when we weren’t allowed to try to prevent COVID from reaching the US, or prepare for it when it did, because that might “cause stigma” against Chinese people. I’m now permanently soured on all stigma-based arguments, and declaring that it’s not such a big deal to intentionally give people AIDS - because if we admitted it was bad then that might cause “stigma” - is a perfect example of why this turns me off. I’d be more comfortable if he’d ignored the “stigma” angle and just tried to argue that the penalties were out of line with equally dangerous diseases (which I haven’t seen him present evidence for, and which I’m not yet convinced is true). 2 I got some pushback on this claim and agree it’s confusing. Hendrycks 3 I don’t want to overplay this. Garrison Lovely, author of the Jacobin article, is himself an effective altruist, one of our few really committed socialists. I’ve 4 I’ve also clashed You're currently a free subscriber to |