---
subject: "The Joy Of Submission"
from: "Robin Hanson from Overcoming Bias <overcomingbias@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-08-15 18:39:03
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Overcoming Bias", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8616244883382228708", "UNREAD"]
---
Death really matters to people. Yes, we seem relatively calm and unemotional when the subject of death comes up abstractly, but give us concrete indications that that we might personally die soon and one can elicit far stronger emotions from us. Status is also very important. And while we similarly seem calm and detached when we discuss the topic abstractly, one can elicit far stronger emotions from us by suggesting that our personal status might soon rise or fall substantially. Some say that our status emotions are mainly greed toward rising in status, and terror of falling. We all have a deep “lust for power” and most all we you do are strategies to gain and preserve power, to dominate as much as possible. Others distinguish dominance and prestige in status, and note that we approve more of the latter than the former, and thus can have positive respectful feelings toward prestigious associates. But I still think that underestimates the emotional power here. We often form partnerships of unequal status, where the high status partner really treasures, guides, and protects the lower status one, while the lower status partner is deeply grateful and loyal due to this treatment, and the extra respect they get from being in this partnership. There is not only a lust for power, but often an even stronger joy of submission. This may help to explain the otherwise surprisingly powerful emotions associated with religion. Such as elaborated in William James famous book Varieties of Religious Experience. I’ve previously analyzed what “sacred” things are and why they exist, and yes that helps explain some aspects of religion. But religious emotions seem quite strong compared to many other things we treat as sacred, and it seems we need a further explanation for that. Consider that the main emotional power of the main world religions today might be: the joy of submission. We already have deep ancient capacities for loyalty and gratitude toward higher status partners. Monotheism can crank that up by creating such a partner with max dominance and prestige, via max power and admirable features, including wisdom and concern for your well-being. Then add that it is listening to you all the time. And add some key loyalty conditions, which you must pass for them to actually be your partner, to trigger ancient human anxieties re they might reject you, and a deep joy via showing loyalty and gratitude to them for accepting you. This plausibly explains the immense joys people feel toward God. But why do so many so easily believe that this God actually exists? Yes, there is the social proof that many associates so believe, and a strong feeling where having an unusually strong emotion of joy re X feels like The theory that the strongest religious emotions today are due is the joy of submitting to something great and sacred can help explain several correlates of religion. Women are more religious than men plausibly because traditionally women and men had a submissive to dominant relation in romance. And religion has declined over the last few centuries due to our being
Plausibly a similar joy of submission helps explain the great appeal of monarchy in history. And as we can robustly expect our descendants to vary far more than we do now in most features, we should expect the joy of submission to have a long powerful future, even if we aren’t very sure who will be worshipping whom. You're currently a free subscriber to |