---
subject: "Why is Queenstown interesting?"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-06-23 09:50:00
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Ben Young ( Looking up Lake Wakatipu. Esther Young. There are few places on planet earth that are so remarkable, it makes you feel rooted and present, like the earth is flowing through you as you walk. I've had that feeling in the early mist walking down through the clouds to see Machu Picchu or the in the vibrant energy of Copenhagen on a perfect sunny day. Queenstown, New Zealand also such a place. The mountains are even called the Remarkables. Remarkables Mountain range. The light there seems brighter and clearer, illuminating the landscape with a special radiance. It doesn’t surprise that that New Zealand is often referred to as "God's own country." Even during the COVID-19 pandemic, as the world came to a standstill, Auckland Tourism shared a poignant video illustrating how nature healed and patiently awaited our return. In my family, Queenstown holds a special place due to my grandad's lifelong connection to the area. Rarely leaving New Zealand, he made only one obligatory business trip to Australia. When asked why, he explained that he had met people from all around the world who spoke of the remarkable nature of his homeland. Their words resonated with him, compelling him to appreciate the homegrown treasures. The history of Queenstown is deeply intertwined with the gold rushes of the 1800s, drawing people from all corners of the globe in search of wealth. The remnants of this era still linger in the land, from the traces of tailings and old mining equipment to the empty tunnels that failed to divert the rivers. Tales of fortunes found through chance encounters, such as discovering gold flecks in a horse's mane after traversing a flooded river or stumbling upon a rock laden with gold on a mountain pass, reflect the richness of the place. A must-visit recommendation in Queenstown is the Macetown track adventure. Hop into a Skippers Canyon, a once used mining track. While Queenstown's outdoor wonders are captivating, the town itself exudes a charm of its own. Everything you need is conveniently located within a five-minute walk, offering easy access to a variety of delights. Among my personal favorites is Winnie’s, a place where you can indulge in pizzas like the Tri-Factor while enjoying the unique experience of the roof opening to release the heat. For a cozy ambiance, pay a visit to Bardeaux, where you can savor the warmth of the roaring fire while sipping on port wine. And how could I forget Ferg Burger? Legend has it that the proprietor created a burger so exceptional that it would drive the McDonald's truck out of town, which would often block his restaurant during resupply. It’s so popular that it only closes for two hours a day during peak season, dedicated to cleaning and restocking. As you continue your exploration, venture to Glenorchy, known as Paradise, for rafting or jet boating down the river. Don't miss the opportunity to hike the renowned Routeburn track or explore the Rock Burn with a knowledgeable guide. Keep an eye out for earthworms surfacing during rainfall—they're longer than you've ever seen—and take note of the larger-than-usual snails on plants. This undisturbed beauty of Queenstown allows nature to thrive, earning its well-deserved "holy" reputation. Towards Glencory. Wine is also a draw, allowing you to savor mineral-forward wines infused with water that has flowed down from the mountains to the plains. The wine business in New Zealand is flourishing, with annual exports exceeding a billion dollars. Alternatively, consider exploring the newly developed cycle tracks. Hop on an e-bike and immerse yourself in the diverse landscapes and charming towns at your own leisurely pace. Another option worth considering is the new water taxi, offering convenient transportation from downtown to the Hilton near Frankton, providing a perfect opportunity to unwind or grab a bite to eat. Routeburn Track at the start. Jetboating across Lake Wakatipu. Lots of people visit Auckland. But Queenstown is a destination that defies expectations and with landscapes, warm Kiwi charm, and rich history and adventure. And hopefully I’ll be one of those suspiciously friendly Kiwis welcoming you. |