---
subject: "Are you impressed with LLM generated code yet?"
from: "Arnav Gupta from system bashing <systembashing@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-03-12 00:51:15
labels: ["Arnav Gupta", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_2739595779997728054", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
So I have already started discovering a pattern about how "amazed" people are with LLMs generating code. 1. PMs, non-tech founders, wordcels and yappers are the most amazed. They can sit on their couch and write "make me an app" on their iPhone, and it makes them yet another landing page. They cannot stop waxing eloquent about how AI is changing the world. 2. Indie developers, script kiddies, and more junior developers also love "vibe coding". They keep saying "Fix it" to Cursor till it works, and mostly they like that instead of searching StackOverflow and figuring out what to copy from there, this is a much faster approach to coding 3. The senior engineers, neckbeards, old-school nerds wrangling with complexes codebases have mostly been saying "eh... it is good, in places. I don't like the code it writes, but I like how I can ask it to explain API docs and new pieces of code I have not seen before". They are using it to write some pieces of code in languages they are not well versed with, and they prefer 'copilot' mode more than 'chat and generate' mode. 4. The absolute elites (like Linus below), basically just say "it is all hype", and are not impressed at all with it, and are mostly ignoring it. I think I am somewhere between 2 and 3 myself, and it was quite a bit of cognitive dissonance initially to find my friends from both 2 and 3 buckets give such contradicting signals about it. Then I started seeing the pattern. Those who are objectively worse programmers than me, were objectively more impressed by it than I am. Conversely those who I look up to as much better engineers than me, seem to be impressed even less than me with it. So yeah, basically LLMs write code like a ~p75 programmer (probably ~p50 when codebase is large), and anyone below that mark is impressed by it, and those above it find it overwhelming, and mostly an irritating pair programmer, whose code they need to keep nitpicking. system bashing is free today. But if you enjoyed this post, you can tell system bashing that their writing is valuable by pledging a future subscription. You won't be charged unless they enable payments. |