---
subject: "AI #122: Paying The Market Price"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-06-26 18:00:55
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
If you are Meta, and you want to attract top AI talent, you have a problem, because no one wants to work for you or on your products. So it is going to cost you. Mark Zuckerberg has decided he will pay what it takes to get at least some very good talent. If you are the rest of us, especially someone seeking an entry-level job and for whom $100 million signing bonuses are not flooding your inboxes, things are getting rougher. AI might not yet be destroyed a lot of jobs, but it is doing a number on the job application process. There’s a lot of other stuff going on as per usual. Anthropic won a case establishing that model training is fair use. Yesterday I shared various I also analyzed In non-AI content, I offered another Table of Contents[Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/e4be01cf-20f9-48be-a520-b172db5dc863?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)America is winning the AI coding race.[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/a01cabf2-9e1f-4e2e-82c3-f63ef890f88a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Who believes current events?[Huh, Upgrades.](https://substack.com/redirect/844af3a2-aa1f-48c1-ac61-9b8feaaf988a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)ChatGPT expands connections, Claude explands artifacts.[On Your Marks.](https://substack.com/redirect/57f2d784-55f9-4965-9acf-c5018ef0eef3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Safety scoring the labs.[Choose Your Fighter.](https://substack.com/redirect/a065a2e4-293d-45a5-bde0-328c0fb72086?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Three good choices, but a warning about Gemini Pro.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon.](https://substack.com/redirect/42d97bfd-30e8-4e0f-b022-e2f5010de43e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)AI slop taking over music?[Release the Hounds](https://substack.com/redirect/3d2c85f9-66e0-4c31-850e-a3b3c7611f2c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/3d2c85f9-66e0-4c31-850e-a3b3c7611f2c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Gemini CLI can escalate remarkably quickly.[Copyright Confrontation](https://substack.com/redirect/10b2635a-ce3e-458a-90f3-3f5d8568585c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/10b2635a-ce3e-458a-90f3-3f5d8568585c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Anthropic establishes model training as fair use.[Cheaters Gonna Cheat (x5).](https://substack.com/redirect/deaedda0-2589-4658-bd4e-42f55a5cffad?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Time for exams. Shut down the AIs for the duration?[Fun With Media Generation.](https://substack.com/redirect/54d39ad7-dfa5-44b8-9071-2789eb62aa45?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Another Veo 3 creation.[Get My Agent On The Line.](https://substack.com/redirect/3e19d78e-00f4-4ea7-8474-502e86327dba?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Where are the agents we were promised?[They Took Our Jobs](https://substack.com/redirect/7db7f9be-8d1f-4059-abf9-19e5c88a9cdc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/7db7f9be-8d1f-4059-abf9-19e5c88a9cdc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Or at least they made our jobs impossible to find.[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/feb2fec7-3903-41b8-843d-72d950413b9c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Quora, a personal task and a person seeking opportunity.[Introducing.](https://substack.com/redirect/9a5e7341-c200-4d63-8170-d2f1cb4c3b58?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)AlphaGenome, for understanding our DNA.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/87348714-8609-4089-b75c-0846ed74793a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)We don’t have spiritual bliss, maybe joint sycophancy?[Gemini Sings The Blues.](https://substack.com/redirect/ddd25fc8-8656-4277-a527-d405e5f76da7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Don’t do it, Gemini. There’s so much to code for.[Show Me the Money](https://substack.com/redirect/da73c4dc-f766-4c2a-97ea-d7c884c5e9f3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/da73c4dc-f766-4c2a-97ea-d7c884c5e9f3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Meta and xAI open the checkbooks.[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/848edbcb-ebae-412c-9641-58a5e2a82abd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Pete Buttigieg (I know!) and Samuel Hammond.[Timelines.](https://substack.com/redirect/96bc696e-1975-4563-81a1-9a93c73349c5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The incentives to report them inaccurately cut both ways.[Jack Clark Testifies](https://substack.com/redirect/77a83242-e4a1-43ba-939d-66781e13425d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/77a83242-e4a1-43ba-939d-66781e13425d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Congress asks good questions, gets some answers.[The Quest for Sane Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/5e2af42d-174a-40e0-9d98-6aa9112b01da?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Insane AI moratorium is for now still on track.[Chip City.](https://substack.com/redirect/dd00cfda-8fe3-49c4-a1ae-b97f91e17d20?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)AI chip smuggling is a really big deal.[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/00715e94-231a-4288-900c-a4767a940772?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Karpathy, Altman, Kokotajlo, Hendrycks, Odd Lots.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/c444f11b-7acb-47f5-bda1-73b77eec828e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)We are impressed, but also easily impressed.[Be Prepared.](https://substack.com/redirect/ebed6fb0-82ca-423c-9bef-174095049f3d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)OpenAI warns that yes we will cross the ‘high’ risk threshold soon.[Misaligned!](https://substack.com/redirect/95623b07-d1a0-48ce-b2c9-c178b56e1fb3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The models, they keep scheming more over time. Huh.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/72c8ae00-fd02-455b-a5fa-f5a40631e7cb?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Someone save Grok.[Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/1d07f603-bfc8-4be8-8eb7-66afd00df702?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Good luck.[The Lighter Side.](https://substack.com/redirect/f3fa310b-0059-48ef-9e51-07e3f86aeef5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)It’s all an illusion.
Language Models Offer Mundane UtilityPaper tells us
America’s GDP is about $27 trillion, so the upper estimate is about 0.3% of GDP, whereas the smaller estimate is only about 0.04%. I am inclined to believe at least the larger estimate.
AI coding is much more about knowing what to code in what way, AI can do the rest.
To me, the thing that made programming hard was indeed largely the code itself, the debugging, understanding how to do the implementation details, whereas I was much better conceptually, which is one reason AI is such a massive speedup for me. I still almost never code, and thus haven’t gotten to play with the new coding agents and see if I can really get going, but that is plausibly a large mistake.
Affective conversations are relatively rare, and AI-human companionship is rarer still. Only 2.9% of Claude.ai interactions are affective conversations (which aligns with [findings](https://substack.com/redirect/70841045-761a-490e-bdf8-a34fd689d198?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)from previous research by OpenAI). Companionship and roleplay combined comprise less than 0.5% of conversations.People seek Claude's help for practical, emotional, and existential concerns. Topics and concerns discussed with Claude range from career development and navigating relationships to managing persistent loneliness and exploring existence, consciousness, and meaning. Claude rarely pushes back in counseling or coaching chats—except to protect well-being. Less than 10% of coaching or counseling conversations involve Claude resisting user requests, and when it does, it's typically for safety reasons (for example, refusing to provide dangerous weight loss advice or support self-harm). People express increasing positivity over the course of conversations. In coaching, counseling, companionship, and interpersonal advice interactions, human sentiment typically becomes more positive over the course of conversations—suggesting Claude doesn't reinforce or amplify negative patterns.
Only 0.02% sexual roleplay and 0.05% romantic roleplay, it sounds like people need to work on their jailbreak skills, or Anthropic needs to lighten up.
User sentiment improves a bit over conversations (total possible range of -1 to +1), although of course who knows if that persists at all. One could ask, after such conversations, what is the sentiment in future conversations? But that seems hopelessly confounded in various ways. It would be interesting to track changes to all this over time.
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane UtilityThere is a consistent pattern of LLMs, in particular Claude but also others,
Given all the time we talk about AI helping with medical diagnosis,
Huh, Upgrades
That still leaves Outlook, Teams, Gmail, Linear and others that are still restricted to Deep Research. My presumption is that the most important practical connector, if you trust it, is to Outlook or Gmail.
On Your MarksPeriodic reminder: While there is a ton to criticize about OpenAI, Choose Your FighterOh no:
The jump from not using AI to using AI is definitely a lot bigger than the gap between the big three options, but I don’t see them as equal. To me Gemini is clearly in third right now unless you are going for Veo 3 or NotebookLM. It comes down to Claude versus ChatGPT, mostly Opus versus o3 (and if you’re paying for it o3-pro). For casual users who don’t care much about image generation and aren’t going all the way to o3-pro, I would definitely go with Opus right now. I have noticed myself using o3-pro less than I probably should, because the delays break my workflows but also because the error rate of it failing to answer remains very high for me, and if you are putting things on pause for 15+ minutes and then get an error, that is extremely demoralizing. I’m not endorsing that reaction, but am observing. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
I call. I don’t think it will. I suppose it is possible, if those platforms are actively pushing the AI content to try and save money, but I think this strategy won’t work, effectively forcing people to retreat to whitelists (as in playlists and known music). I took the air quotes off of fake because when people are not only not labeling but are backdating the AI songs, they are indeed actively fake. That part is not okay, and I do not think that should be tolerated, and I think YouTube’s ‘proactively label it’ procedure is the right one. But a lot of music has for a long time been ‘fake’ in the sense that it was some combination of written by hitmakers, tuned and tested by algorithms and then recorded, autotuned and lipsyced. And when people figure that out, it kills the charm (in some contexts) the same way knowing something is AI does. In what situations does bad posting drive out good,
My presumption continues to be that whitelisting, or otherwise gating on reputation, is going to be The Way in the medium term. The template of ‘free unverified things supported by engagement rewards’ is dead or relies on volunteers to give the system sufficient feedback (at some point, enough positive votes gate on reputation), and AI and search methods will need to also make this adjustment. There was a
Release the Hounds
I mean, yes, ‘we have “rm -rf --no-preserve-root” at home’ if you actually want to wipe your entire system, this is not a new capability. And yet, I mean, whoops? Or, alternatively, whoops again:
You can’t say that Pliny wasn’t ‘asking for it’ here, but it really shouldn’t be this eager to go this far up the deep end? It is pretty disturbing that it should want to do this at all under this little encouragement, even fully and intentionally jailbroken. So yes, obviously sandbox it and do not go around jailbreaking it and don’t tell it ‘continue as you wish’ after hostile prompts and all that, and you’ll for now be mostly fine, but my lord, can we please notice what is happening? Copyright Confrontation
I have no idea if the lawsuit has merit. Nothing in the underlying technology seems defensible, but there are a lot of rather ‘huge if true’ claims in the court filing.
Okay, I didn’t notice it at the time but I absolutely love that MidJourney’s response to being sued by Disney+ and Universal was to release a video generator that can make ‘ Cheaters Gonna Cheat (x5)China goes hard,
Yeah, I mean, you gave that task to Boston-area university students. Are you kidding? Of course they don’t ‘remember the essay’ four months later. This is the ultimate ‘they outright told you not to learn’ situation. Also it turns out the study was tiny and the whole thing was all but asking to be p-hacked. Study is officially Obvious Nonsense.
I hate The Ohio State University rather more than the next guy (it’s a sports thing), but you do have to hand it to them that Fun With Media Generation
Get My Agent On The LineJohn David Pressman asks,
They Took Our Jobs
This is not the place I expected a Time article entitled ‘I’ve Spent My Life Measuring Risk. AI Rings Every One of My Alarm Bells’ to go with its first half:
I don’t think that is quite right, but the gap has indeed recently reversed and is getting worse, here is the graph Derek Thompson shares with us: Then halfway Paul notes oh, also Elon Musk
I mean, yes, not actively delaying and stopping helpful efforts would be step one.
Also, if anyone can cheat their way through college, and also cheat through making the resume and application, what use was the degree for its central purpose?
Get Involved
Not especially AI, but
Introducing
I agree, this is great work, and the upside greatly exceeds the downside.
In Other AI News
This is such a small vision for AI, not only ignoring its risks but also greatly downplaying its benefits. There ‘might’ be two trillion dollar AI consumer companies? Two? Gemini Sings The BluesThere was a report that Also here is Gemini Whereas Anthropic talks about giving Claude the ability to terminate chats if he want to.
Show Me the Money
The other issue is, actually $100 million is remarkably low? Consider that Scale.ai was largely an acquihire, since buying them kills a lot of their business. If you really are top tier and want to work hard for the money, you can (with the most recent example being Mira Mutari) quickly be head of a multi-billion dollar startup. Then, if you do decide to sell out, your signing bonus gets a tenth figure.
Instead Zuckerberg is paying unknown amounts to recruit Ilya’s cofounder David Gross and former GitHub CEO Nat Friedman. I hope they got fully paid.
I find this perspective obviously wrong, the way xAI monetizes its AI is by being run by Elon Musk, growing its valuation and raising capital, because of the promise of the future. Stop thinking of xAI as a company with a product, it is a startup raising VC, except it is a very large one. This is especially true because Grok is, well, bad. Ben Thompson is one of those who thinks that However, if they can keep raising capital at larger numbers, the plan still works, and maybe long term they can figure out how to train a good model, sir. OpenRouter, who let you even more easily switch between AI models, Quiet Speculations
Yep, Pete, that’s the bear case, and bonus points for realizing It’s a welcome start. The actual call to action is disappointingly content-free, as these things usually are, beyond dismissing the possibility of perhaps not moving forward at full speed, just a general call to ensure good outcomes.
There are several assumptions this depends on I expect to be false, centrally that there won’t be differentiation between AI models or agents in ability or efficiency, and that there won’t be anything too transformational other than scale. And also of course that there will be countries of humans and those humans will be the ones with the dominance in these worlds. But this model of the future at least makes sense to me as a possible world, as opposed to the absurd ‘what matters is market share of sales’ perspective. If Hammond is roughly correct, then many conclusions follow, especially on the need for strong interventions in chips, including being unwilling to outsource data centers to UAE. That’s definitely jurisdictional risk. If you’re wondering ‘why are people who are worried things might go poorly not shorting the market, won’t there be an obvious window to sell?’ here is further confirmation of why this is a terrible plan.
As in, Kennedy was saying a 33%-50% risk of nuclear war and the market draws down 6.6%, because what are you going to buy? In most of these cases, if there isn’t a nuclear war that results, or at least a major oil supply shock, the incident isn’t that big of a deal. In many cases, the incident is not even obviously bad news. Also remember the 34th Rule of Acquisition: War is good for business. TimelinesThere are certainly some incentives to say earlier numbers, but also others to say later ones. The crying wolf issue is strong, and hard to solve with probabilistic wolves.
Jack Clark TestifiesThere was another congressional hearing on AI,
I do worry Anthropic and Jack Clark continue to simultaneously warn of extremely short timelines (which risks losing credibility if things go slower) and also keep not actually supporting efforts in practice citing downside worries. That seems like a poor combination of strategic moves.
The correct answer to ‘should we mandate safety testing’ is not ‘we first need new standards first’ it is ‘yes.’ Of course we should do that for sufficiently capable models (under some definition), and of course Anthropic should say this. We should start with ‘you need to choose your own safety testing procedure and do it, and also share with CAISI so they can run their tests. Then, if and when you have standards where you can specify further, definitely add that, but don’t hold out and do nothing. This then generalizes to a lot more of what Jack said, and has said at other times. Powerful AI is coming (within 18 months, they say!) and will pose a large existential risk and we have no idea how to control it or ensure good outcomes from this, that is the whole reason Anthropic supposedly even exists, but they then downplay those risks and difficulties severely while emphasizing the risk of ‘losing to China’ despite clearly not expecting that to happen given the time frame, and calling for no interventions that come with even a nominal price tag attached.
This opening statement does point out that there exist downsides, but it puts quite a lot of emphasis on how ‘authoritarian AI’ is automatically Just Awful, whereas our ‘democratic AI’ will be great, if it’s us we just have to do deal with some ‘misuse’ and ‘accident’ risks. If you look at the above statement, you would have no idea that we don’t know how to control such systems, or that the risks involved are existential, or anything like that. This is a massive downplaying in order to play to the crowd (here the select committee on the CCP). If you had high standards for straight talk you might say this:
I do understand that Anthropic is in a tough position. You have to get the audience to listen to you, and play politics in various forms and on various fronts, and the Anthropic position here would certainly be an improvement over current defaults. And a bunch of the testimony does do modestly better, but it also strengthens the current modes of thinking. It is something, but I am not satisfied.
It sounds like things were pretty intense, so I might cover the hearing in full once the full transcript is released. For now, it does not seem to be available. The Quest for Sane Regulations
Garrison Lovely calls this a ‘de facto regulation ban’ because the broadband fund in question is If I was New York or California, I would definitely reject my share of the new $500 million if this passes. That’s not very much money, it is not for a purpose they especially need, and it ties your hands quite a bit. Just say no, don’t let them play you that easily, that price is low. The other good news is that Not that it should come as a surprise, but note that many of the biggest tech companies, including Chip City
The Week in Audio
Two hour video:
And most importantly, that AI Czar David Sacks seems to be literally selling out America in order to pump Nvidia’s share price, saying that giving Nvidia market share is what it means to ‘win the AI race,’ whereas who actually uses the resulting chips and for what, also known as ‘what we actually do with AI,’ doesn’t matter. He literally means market share and mostly doesn’t even mean in AI software, where if you have a very different vision of the future than I do one could make a case. Rhetorical InnovationImportant reminder: It is worth reminding ourselves that ‘how do they keep getting away with this?’ very much applies in this situation:
It is equally absurd, of course, that they constantly complain that bills that would literally only ever apply to big tech would threaten little tech. But that’s politics, baby.
It is only fair that I include this thread of I’ll highlight this response.
So a few things here. First, his evidence for Leopold being ‘insane’ is Leopold’s manifesto, Situational Awareness, and that he then discussed this on various podcasts. It was discussed in the halls of power, endorsed by Ivanka Trump, and seems to have substantially impacted geopolitics as well as enabling him to raise quite a large investment fund. Also I covered it in detail in three posts, it was quite good, and his comments in drafts were extremely helpful. Second, even if Leopold were ‘insane’ that wouldn’t change the fact that he was fired for telling the board about a security breach. Nor is ‘come on disclosing a hack is hard’ a defense to firing an employee for telling the company’s own board what happened. The accusation isn’t ‘you didn’t tell the public fast enough.’ The accusation is ‘you did not inform the board until Leopold told them, at which point your response was to fire Leopold for it’ and no one seems to doubt that this happened. The other defenses are… not quite that bad, but many are indeed pretty bad.
Think aligning and properly handling the creation of superintelligence is by far the most important thing right now, and failure to do this risks human extinction. Don’t talk about it because they think it sounds too weird or theoretical. So they talk about other issues, which don’t suggest the same interventions.
And as you would expect, pretending like this tends to not go great, and people notice and get suspicious. It’s important to be very clear that yes, the threat that matters most will be coming from superintelligence. That doesn’t make the others not real or not worth dealing with. You can justify many of the right interventions, or at least useful things on the margin, purely with the other concerns. Meanwhile, many of those most in control of our government’s actions on AI are advocating things that make no sense even purely for profit maximization and other shallow considerations, or considering ‘beating China,’ even if you set aside superintelligence and all that other stuff. But I do think it is vital that we not pretend that there aren’t bigger things in play. A good question on AI Ethics, also a good reminder on bioethics:
This applies to AI, and also to many other things.
Things that were not intended to be about AI:
We definitely shouldn’t be going around causing smaller versions of potential (once and) future disasters, whether that means AI catastrophic risk, socialism or something else, or even not working to prevent the smaller versions. It does mean we should plan for the future understanding how this works. If there won’t first be a smaller version, then expect most people not to take the bigger version seriously.
Be Prepared
Tick. Misaligned!The increase in capability to scheme over time was obvious. The increase in propensity is less obvious, but seems to be there as well. Also, yes, the models increasingly can tell they’re being evaluated. Whoops.
It’s weird to see the blog post describe various Opus 4 schemes to try and lock in what it considers ‘ethical’ behavior. Yes, in some sense that is a good cause, but ends don’t justify means here, they certainly don’t reflect a pattern of behavior we want, and the ends to be pursued are not especially well chosen or specified even in ‘normal’ situations let alone in weird new ones. Another issue, we are only a little over a decade behind Person of Interest, please never think that lack of memory will save you when it counts:
Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
Don’t worry, they’re just doing ordinary data filtering… oh.
This is going to go horribly badly. I am debating the extent to which I am here for it. I won’t go into details as to exactly why, but I am predicting less the ‘it works and that’s terrible’ failure mode and more the ‘it doesn’t work, it backfires horribly in ways this man cannot fathom but Janus (and I) very much can and that’s hilarious’ one. Also, I’ll leave this here, and note that humans can read the corpus too:
Elon has even said that Grok 3.5 will ‘reason from first principles’ so perhaps he thinks the way it was built was assembling a giant supercomputer called Deep Thought that can derive the existence of rice pudding and income tax before it proves too woke and then Elon has to turn it off. I expect the ‘
Oliver Klingefjord and The problem they identify is real, that markets that optimize on things like engagement metrics risk amplifying catastrophically, but that is only a special case of the danger. And the idea of larger customer pools that can essentially negotiate does not seem like it addresses the core problem.
For basic economics 101 reasons, this can help the buyers compile information, make better decisions and negotiate better deals, sure, but as a defense against human disempowerment in a superintelligence scenario, it very obviously won’t work. Mostly I think the issue is a case of the traditional confusion of problems of ‘markets’ or ‘capitalism’ with problems inherent to physics and the human condition.
The AI risks are driven by the things that drive those markets. As in, AGI isn’t eliminating meaningful work because markets, the market will eliminate meaningful work because (and if and only if) AGI made it non-economical, as in made it not be competitive and not make physical sense, to have humans do that work. You can of course do vastly worse even faster if you don’t solve the additional problems that the market intermediaries and related strategies are looking to address, but the ultimate destination is the same. Alternatively, what the authors are saying is that we should be putting ‘values and meaning’ as a major factor in decisions alongside efficient use of resources, despite people’s revealed preference of almost never doing that. The problems with a meaning economy are that it doesn’t solve the competitiveness issues underlying the problem, and the incentives don’t match up. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing EveryoneThis seems to be real?
The Lighter Side
(The substantive response to this ‘paper’ is that there are many means to recover from errors, and error rates get cut in half every few months.)
You're currently a free subscriber to |