---
subject: "The Fado Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-10-25 10:01:23
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Eric here. In 2017 my wife, dog, and I took a gamboling, rambling road trip from Barcelona up into the Cote de Basque, then across Galicia before dropping down and passing through Portugal as we made our way back to BCN. In Lisbon, we stumbled across a small tavern that featured fado. After ordering some wine, we were hushed by the barkeep as he proceeded to lock the doors, dim the lights, and began to sing mournfully to an intricate twelve-string guitar. Twenty minutes later, the lights came up, the doors reopened, and we had been transformed. With zero understanding of Portuguese, we’d been completely drawn in, drowned, and reborn by the storytelling we’d just been immersed in. WITI Classifieds: We are experimenting with running some weekly classifieds in WITI. If you’re interested in running an ad, Another interesting newsletter: Making the case for good content, clear writing, and the creative process. Subscribe to the Hand & Eye.
Want to aggregate data from third-party servers automatically? Check out HTL Exec by HTL Inc. Beats In Space with Tim Sweeney: weekly DJ mixes + interviews on Apple Music A publication exploring the most interesting and innovative consumer businesses, products, and trends https://newconsumer.com/
Fado, as explained by “Evoking urban emergence themes, singing the daily narratives, Fado is profoundly related to social contexts ruled by marginality and transgression in a first phase, taking place in locations visited by prostitutes, faias, sailors, coachmen, and marialvas.” Why is this interesting? This year, I returned alone to Portugal, and with a few days free in Porto before the sharp end of my trip began, I sought out the fado experience again. Several venues were recommended to me, all requiring a dinner reservation and a commitment to both the meal and three progressing sets of music. Intrigued by this difference from our Lisbon experience, I selected a different restaurant for each of the nights I had available. The first was an older spot, in a touristic area near the water across from the famed port wine district, owned by an affable family of brothers. The musicians were accomplished, though they seemed to not always be in sync with each other. I noted, and would see repeated, that the rhythm or bass player rested his chin on the upper bout of his instrument during particularly complex sequences, the better to absorb the resonance and hold tempo. The The second night was my favorite, with excellent food in a more modern setting and a young enthusiastic team whose passion for their establishment carried the mystique of the music forward. In fact, it was On the last night, I visited what was claimed as the oldest establishment in town, which opened in 1968. I asked the proprietor where fado originated. He looked at me a bit incredulously, then with bemusement and emphasis, declared “ I find fado, like flamenco and other ‘folk’ music, to be a portal through which emotion flows not only from the lyrics, notes, and gestures but through the bricks and boards of the room—through us in the audience and the spacetime of the stories the performers retell. It is a sharing of history through myth, tradition, and repeated interpretation. Language becomes feeling, it is not necessary to understand the words (though it would no doubt change the experience even further). The fadista is a — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Eric Matthies (EM) —
You’re a free subscriber to |