---
subject: "Canada and America in Better Times"
from: "Marginal REVOLUTION <donotreply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-03-26 11:21:09
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tyler Cowen", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2466199532210586699", "UNREAD"]
---
On November 4, 1979, a mob of radical university students and supporters of Ayatollah Khomeini, surged over the wall and occupied the US Embassy in Tehran. Fifty two Americans were taken hostage but six evaded capture. Hiding out for days, the escapees managed to contact Canadian diplomat John Sheardown and Canadian Ambassador Ken Taylor and asked for help. [The Government of Canada reports](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=13cdbc28ee398872c6797e8a04231e4681d3346fe85590a2292a2be8baf1ce4e&blog_id=42693868&post_id=90314&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=d6f68c72d5fa27cd7d081f474ca4cf2e&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuaW50ZXJuYXRpb25hbC5nYy5jYS9nYWMtYW1jL2hpc3RvcnktaGlzdG9pcmUva2VuLXRheWxvci5hc3B4P2xhbmc9ZW5n&email_id=594c8a1e40b663cb8bfbb00f52951188):
Taylor didn't hesitate. The Americans would be given shelter – the question was where. Because the Canadian Chancery was right downtown, it was far too dangerous. It would be better to split up the Americans. Taylor decided Sheardown should take three of hostages to his house, while he would house the others at the official residence. They would be described to staff as tourists visiting from Canada. Taylor immediately began drafting a cable for Ottawa.
...Taylor's telegram set off a frenzy of consultation in the Department of External Affairs....Michael Shenstone, immediately concurred that Canada had no choice but to shelter the fugitives. Under-Secretary Allan Gotlieb agreed. Given the danger the Americans were in, he noted, there was "in all conscience...no alternative but to concur" despite the risk to Canadians and Canadian property.
The Minister, Flora MacDonald, could not be immediately reached as she was involved in a television interview. However, when finally informed of the situation, she agreed that Taylor must be permitted to act...[Prime Minister Joe Clark was pulled] from Question Period in the House of Commons, she briefed him on the situation and obtained his immediate go-ahead. Soon after, a telegram was sent to Tehran – Taylor could act to save the Americans. He was told that knowledge of the situation would be on a strict "need-to-know" basis.
The [CIA reports](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=a217c3d362e6410fbe9e94530c4d7160706c6209d1c56848818db0a85309bc3d&blog_id=42693868&post_id=90314&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=60d1585c7d404d64fea2029ef895419e&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuY2lhLmdvdi9sZWdhY3kvbXVzZXVtL2V4aGliaXQvcmVzY3VlLW9mLXRoZS1jYW5hZGlhbi1zaXgtbi1hLWNsYXNzaWMtY2FzZS1vZi1kZWNlcHRpb24v&email_id=594c8a1e40b663cb8bfbb00f52951188):
The exfiltration task was daunting–the six Americans had no intelligence background; planning required extensive coordination within the US and Canadian governments; and failure not only threatened the safety of the hostages but also posed considerable risk of worldwide embarrassment to the US and Canada.
…After careful consideration of numerous options, the chosen plan began to take shape. Canadian Parliament agreed to grant Canadian passports to the six Americans. The CIA team together with an experienced motion-picture consultant devised a cover story so exotic that it would not likely draw suspicions–the production of a Hollywood movie.
The team set up a dummy company, “Studio Six Productions,” with offices on the old Columbia Studio lot formerly occupied by Michael Douglas, who had just completed producing The China Syndrome. This upstart company titled its new production “Argo” after the ship that Jason and the Argonauts sailed in rescuing the Golden Fleece from the many-headed dragon holding it captive in the sacred garden–much like the situation in Iran. The script had a Middle Eastern sci-fi theme that glorified Islam. The story line was intentionally complicated and difficult to decipher. Ads proclaimed Argo to be a “cosmic conflagration” written by Teresa Harris (the alias selected for one of the six awaiting exfiltration).
President Jimmy Carter approved the rescue operation.
The American diplomats escaped and all the Canadians quickly exited before the Iranian government realized what had happened. The Canadian embassy was closed. The story of the ex-filtration is told in the excellent movie, [Argo](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=5ee8148d0dffd400e626c4a219e3ae4c0c7e70a203e318dc84a4dc4076a0d4b2&blog_id=42693868&post_id=90314&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=d254af03a258ee0a99f6459e1dc1884a&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly9lbi53aWtpcGVkaWEub3JnL3dpa2kvQXJnb18oMjAxMl9maWxtKQ=&email_id=594c8a1e40b663cb8bfbb00f52951188), directed by and starring Ben Affleck. (The movie ups the American involvement for Hollywood but is still excellent.)
The CIA reports on what happened when [the Americans made it back home](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=a217c3d362e6410fbe9e94530c4d7160706c6209d1c56848818db0a85309bc3d&blog_id=42693868&post_id=90314&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=60d1585c7d404d64fea2029ef895419e&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuY2lhLmdvdi9sZWdhY3kvbXVzZXVtL2V4aGliaXQvcmVzY3VlLW9mLXRoZS1jYW5hZGlhbi1zaXgtbi1hLWNsYXNzaWMtY2FzZS1vZi1kZWNlcHRpb24v&email_id=594c8a1e40b663cb8bfbb00f52951188):
News of the escape and Canada’s role quickly broke. Americans went wild in celebrating their appreciation to Canada and its Embassy staff. The maple leaf flew in a hundred cities and towns across the US. Billboards exclaimed “Thank you Canada!” Full-page newspaper ads expressed American’s thanks to its neighbors to the north. Thirty-thousand baseball fans cheered Canada’s Ambassador to Iran and the six rescued Americans, honored guests at a game in Yankee Stadium.
I remember this time well because my father, a professor of Mechanical Engineering at the University of Toronto, happened to be giving a talk in Boston when the news broke. He was immediately mobbed by appreciative Americans, who thanked him, clapped him on the back, and bought him drinks. My father was moved by the American response but was also somewhat bemused, considering he was also Iranian. (Though, in truth, my father was the ideal Canadian and he had his own experiences exfiltrating people from Iran—but that story remains Tabarrok classified.)