---
subject: "Long and Short: Where do the odds lie in PB Fintech’s hospital bet?"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-05-14 01:31:55
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
Long and Short
Wed, 14 May 25
The story behind the numbers and motivations driving India's stock market..
Good Morning Ishan,
From selling insurance to selling assurance. That’s the chasm PB Fintech, the parent of Policybazaar, wants to cross by backing a new business in healthcare. It’s a chasm because selling insurance is, fundamentally, a low-trust endeavour. Selling assurance, on the other hand, is a high-fidelity, high-trust exercise. You sell a dream of healthcare, and on equated monthly instalments (EMI).
Last week, PB Health raised $218 million in what is perhaps India’s largest seed round. General Catalyst, the US-based early-stage investor, has led the investment in which PB Fintech, as a strategic investor, is putting in [$62 million](https://entrackr.com/news/pb-healthcare-raises-218-mn-in-seed-round-led-by-general-catalyst-9046716) for a 26% stake. One other institutional investor in the round remains unnamed.
Earlier in September, when PB Fintech disclosed its move to enter healthcare, the stock market didn’t like the backward integration into health, maybe because it meant stepping away from an asset-light approach to an asset-heavy one. On the day of the announcement, the share price fell nearly 10%—the steepest in two years. Incidentally, after the current funding announcement, the share price has been trending up.
Evidently, everyone has bought the novelty story.
PB Health is embarking on an ambitious new model of integrated health care—selling health assurance that integrates payers and providers and frees up people from worrying about claim rejections, room rents, sub-limits, and so on. It’s a model to streamline patient experience and improve outcomes.
Unlike the Indian insurance system, which is designed only for long stay and catastrophic illness, the assurance model, theoretically, is designed to keep a person healthy, and covers everything around it—daycare, scans, simple procedures, and doctor consultation.
Globally, insurers like Bupa (in the UK) and Unitedhealth (in the US) follow this model and have a huge roster of doctors on their rolls. California-based Kaiser Permanente, which has figured a few times in PB’s communication on their managed-care approach, started its first plans in 1945. A mix of three entities, two of which are non-profits, Kaiser Foundation Health Plan and Kaiser Foundation Hospitals, Kaiser reported revenues of $115.8 billion for 2024.
But unlike the big brand names cited above, PB Fintech’s Policybazaar is an insurance aggregator and sells health, life, and motor coverage on behalf of insurers and contributes to over 60% of the group’s revenue. And while the new venture, PB Health, will own hospitals, it’s not going to have an in-house insurer in the group.
This is unlike Narayana One Health, the new initiative from Narayana Health, which, after two decades of conventional hospital service and learning from the broken patient experience, has taken to assurance. It has obtained a standalone insurance licence and underwrites from its own books.
As of today, PB Health hasn’t indicated becoming an insurer.
A well-heeled VC like General Catalyst, which first funded a health-assurance startup, Pune-based Loop Health, six years ago; a promoter group with a wealth of experience and intent; and a large market crying for affordable and credible health coverage—what’s not to like or laud about PB Health’s bet?
Except for a few early observations, and a memory refresh that PB Fintech’s first bet in healthcare, Docprime—an online doctor-consultation platform—[didn’t quite pan out](https://the-ken.com/story/policybazaar-group-set-to-hand-docprime-reins-to-new-investor/).
Over the years, as the PB group expanded into credit, payments, and lending, every other insurance startup thought of not just distributing third-party policies but also creating new ones of their own. PB Fintech co-founder Yashish Dahiya was heard saying several times that he’d never “create his own policies”.
That brings one to the exchange of value in healthcare —the complex, and often opaque, interplay between care provider, payer, patient and pharmaceuticals. The 4Ps of modern healthcare, as it were.
“The opacity is driven by asymmetries in technical know-how as well as profit seeking…Optimising ‘value’ is also impeded by issues in measurement and lack of standards,” said a healthcare professional watching this space closely.
In various markets, including the US, providers and payers have come together to either improve the service or claim a greater share of profits, but with varying degrees of success.
“[In essence, such an] integration could also contribute to asymmetries in mobility of consumers or patients, which in itself is an economic inefficiency. Further, a consumer is not likely to tie up with insurers who back reputable ‘brands’ (synonymous with quality of care),” said the above professional. If a payer compels consumers to move to a “new brand” that they happen to own, it’s unlikely consumers would adopt, he argued.
It’s hard to miss the conflict in what PB Health is trying to do. For its part, Narayana Health is upfront about the conflict in its model. The patient or the buyer knows that at the time of buying a plan, the insurance will push patients to Narayana Health, and Narayana Health will push this insurance. But with PB Health, the insurance money is coming from somebody else.
How PB Health will resolve this conflict, we don’t know.
And even though the PB Group says the two businesses will be at arm’s length, the fact that an insurance aggregator knows exactly where the claims data is coming from, or who is paying for what and how much, must have been a motivation behind backing PB Health.
Everyone loves the National Capital Region (NCR).
If you’ve attended analyst calls of listed hospital chains such as Fortis, Narayana Health, Max Healthcare, et al, you’d have heard how they get grilled by their public investors on their excessive NCR focus.
“It’s a saturated region,” conceded a hospital promoter who operates in Delhi. Yet, they all add more beds, two obvious reasons being the high paying capacity and high patient concentration (including out-station) in the NCR.
Per a December Axis Securities report, private healthcare companies plan to add 15,000 beds over the next three to four years, of which 5,000 beds will be allocated to NCR.
The PB group has said that after the initial 1,000 beds in this region through four to five hospitals, they’d branch out to other cities. It’s aiming to serve the “missing middle”, the [860 million people](https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/toi-plus/health/why-health-insurance-looks-like-a-trap-to-so-many-indians/articleshow/120041083.cms) in India who don’t have health insurance.
Now wouldn’t it be putting its money where its stated goals are if it started from non-NCR places? Especially, as the chart below shows, its insurance business is increasingly moving to non-tier-1 cities.
PB Health’s lead investor, General Catalyst, funded Loop Health in 2018, which has raised nearly $40 million from various investors so far. Though the company claims tremendous growth, it reported Rs 8.9 crore in revenue and Rs 30 crore in losses in [FY24](https://platform.tracxn.com/a/d/company/xFx6c-GnXJqqIrMPTOlAIhWJtyGnGdxs1R6x_3GAMnE/loophealth.com/#a:financials) via offering “preventive healthcare services with group health insurance”. Four years after starting, the startup got a corporate licence to sell insurance in 2022.
Surely, General Catalyst has learned some things from backing Loop that it’ll be applying to PG Health. But like all VCs, it’s in a hurry. Setting up 1,000 beds in NCR in the first year is godspeed.
“They could acquire some existing hospitals, but for that kind of scale and speed, maybe they’d go to a real-estate company, like, say, DLF and get cookie-cutter built-to-spec hospitals,” said the hospital promoter quoted above.
Real-estate geniuses can build such 200–250-bed hospitals in no time, but the human resources or expertise required to run them cannot be scaled with the same speed.
“Healthcare quality is an earned competence that sits on a substratum of strong processes, governance, and clinical talent to deliver care in a controlled setting. This is a ‘muscle’ that cannot be ‘purchased’… which is a barrier to entry for new entrants,” rued the healthcare professional quoted above. “Any such [speeded up] initiative is surely not as ‘linear’ a path as it seems. It is an Amazonian [forest] on its best day.”
Even if not as ominously hard as the above quote makes it out to be, selling a new healthcare concept to Indian consumers isn’t anything like selling a discounted pair of sneakers, sunglasses, or a smartphone.
But here’s the point—even if PB Health succeeds only in building hospitals, it’d still emerge as a winner. The voracious appetite among big PEs today for buying hospitals—The Ken [wrote](https://the-ken.com/story/how-many-hospitals-can-pe-firms-buy-before-patients-say-enough/) about it—will at least ensure the investors of PB Health get their financial return.
That’s a wrap for this week. Please write to [longandshort@the-ken.com](mailto:longandshort@the-ken.com) with your thoughts or leave a comment on our web edition.
Best,
Seema
Got a tip? If you have a lead for a great story that The Ken can pursue, please send it to [tips@the-ken.com](mailto:tips@the-ken.com) or share it through [this form](https://theken.typeform.com/got-a-tip). To find out more about how to do this securely, read our [blog post](https://the-ken.com/blog/help-the-ken-tell-the-next-big-story/) about sharing tips with The Ken.
Sponsor The Ken's next live eventOn 19 May, Monday, we’ll be conducting our second live subscriber event in Bengaluru called “Beyond the First Order: The Next 10 Years of Investing, Wealth, and Markets”. Since 2016, The Ken has been exclusively subscriptions-driven. That has allowed us to stay independent, unbiased, and subscriber-focused. With our live events, we are experimenting partnering with select organisations as sponsors. Sponsors will have zero influence on the editorial content or conduct of our events. Would you like to become a sponsor? Let us know by clicking the link below. |