---
subject: "Some garbage announcements"
from: "Garbage Day <hi@www.garbageday.email>"
to: ""
date: 2025-10-08 16:53:49
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Ryan Broderick", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_7525463136350272325", "UNREAD"]
---
Hi again, Managing Editor Cates here, | We promised not to bug you, our dear free readers, too much, but we recently announced some big changes to Garbage Day and we also have some exciting announcements for you. So forgive the email! | First, and most importantly, for folks who may have missed the news, we’ve shifted from two free issues a week to one, the Monday issue. We’re not going to flood your inbox about this too often, but we thought a reminder would be good, considering the switch happened earlier this month. | We’re putting more behind the paywall. So consider upgrading if you want more Garbage Day in your inbox and access to the Discord where a fun group of people hang out and share, well, a lot. It’s a great community that I’ve gotten to know well over the last few months, even if there are far too many requests to reveal Ryan’s shoe size. We recently held a Power Point Party and it was a blast, so we’re going to do it again soon! | If you want to pay for a subscription, it’s $5 a month or $45 a year or $60 for folks who want to really support us. You can hit the button below to find out more: | | We’re throwing a party in Queens tomorrow! | | On October 9th, we’re taking over TV Eye for a big party in Ridgewood. It’s going to be a bit different from the live events we’ve done before, but it should feel substantially garbage-y. Special musical guests include Kill Alters, Reagen Holiday, and RGEM. Click the big green button below to grab your tickets while you still can! | | We’re also hosting a movie night later this month! | | We’re taking over Low Cinema in Ridgewood, Queens on October 22nd for a special showing of the Slenderman-themed web series Marble Hornets. Ryan and Grant will also be doing a live recording of Panic World post-screening. Come join us — I’ll be there, probably hiding my eyes for half of the screening because I am a total wuss when it comes to scary things! | | Ryan is speaking At ZEG London next month! | | It’s at The Old Finsbury Town Hall in London on October 18, 2025 and it goes all day. He’ll be talking about radicalization, the end of democracy, and, also, his dad lol. There’ll be lots of other great speakers and panels. If you’re there make sure to bug Ryan. | | And finally, Panic World was nominated for a Signal Award! | | We were nominated in the “Conversation Starter” and “Weird” categories (sounds about right lol). You can also vote for us to win the Listener's Choice Award! Voting runs through October 9th, so click the links below to cast your ballots, and know that we were able to get here because of listeners like you 🎉 | | And… | | Ok, bye lol. |
|