---
subject: "The Olympic Break(danc)ing Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-08-13 13:01:48
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Calvin Son (CS) is a copy director and casual b-boy based in Philadelphia. Calvin here. This past weekend, break(danc)ing made its Olympic debut in Paris.
Why is this interesting? Breaking is a messy, misunderstood dance that required a hasty makeover to become Olympics-ready. For starters: Most people call it the wrong name. The term “breakdancing” is a remnant of shaky reporting from the 1980s, which also helped cement other common misconceptions, including that… Breaking is [the same](https://substack.com/redirect/d88038d4-aa80-4dba-94e7-043de0e8aa35?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)as “pop-locking.” (Popping, locking, and breaking are all actually distinct dances with their own histories and traditions.)Breakers are exclusively Black or Hispanic. (Breaking was born from Black culture as an element of hip-hop, and today’s top breakers span the globe.) New York is the world’s epicenter of breaking. (It’s true that breaking was born in the Bronx — but [other](https://substack.com/redirect/38d6900b-fcbf-4a6d-b8cc-4d023df114c8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[scenes](https://substack.com/redirect/465f3e1c-bf18-48f1-b6fa-2791a565e734?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)have grown dominant over the past 50 years.)Breakers spin on their heads. (Okay, this one’s sometimes true.)
Those stereotypes, along with some But even putting public perceptions aside, breaking has long resisted becoming sterilized or standardized for easier viewing. It’s a complicated dance to understand, with a huge system of esoteric moves, traditions, and hand signals. (Two fingers up means “You did that move twice.” Tapping the floor means “You messed up and hit the ground.” And so on.) In a culture where battling is glorified, there have been decades-long debates about the best judging methods. Or the merits of “style” versus “power.” Or whether the dance even That’s not even scratching the surface of all the rules that would seem absurd in any other Olympic event. For instance, you have to improvise to whatever song the DJ plays. You need to be facing your opponent any time you stop moving. You can’t use a move more than once — for the duration of the entire competition. You’re allowed to mock your opponent and their moves while they’re dancing. But then your opponent might You might even see a world-champion breaker The process that brought Raygun to the Olympics — as well as the breaking competitions’ rules and To some breakers, that’s the cost of quickly building infrastructure in a relatively young, unstandardized artform. To The WDSF’s roots are in promoting ballroom dance — maybe breaking’s most distant, least hip-hop cousin. The organization’s secret goal, critics argue, is to use breaking as a Trojan horse to Regardless of the WDSF’s intentions, breaking’s future in the Games is stalled indefinitely. Even before the dance made its official Olympic debut, breaking was excluded from the 2028 Summer Games in Los Angeles. That leaves the dance in an interesting place. Coasting along after a rapid, jagged media ascent. No set path forward. And watched by an audience that seems set on seeing breaking as mere meme content, despite Luckily, breaking is filled with weirdos who’ve built a tolerance for this kind of thing. Along with the calluses on their hands, and the — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Calvin (CS) —
You're currently a free subscriber to |