---
subject: "The BLT Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-08-11 11:27:13
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Gabe Here. As we move through August, I have one thing on my mind: BLTs. The Bacon, Lettuce, and Tomato has a humble ranking in the sandwich world. As the sixth-most popular sandwich in the United States, it falls behind the ham, roast beef, turkey, grilled chicken, and grilled cheese sandwiches (Source: There is little evidence of BLTs prior to 1900. The BLT is most likely an alteration of the club sandwich, which was introduced in the 1903 Good Housekeeping Everyday Cook Book by Dr. Evan Mee, and includes sliced turkey along with bacon, lettuce, tomato, and mayonnaise. The rise of the BLT can be tied to the rapid expansion of supermarkets after World War II, which allowed ingredients to be available year-round. In 1958, in an effort to boost sales, Hellmann’s pushed mayonnaise as the “traditional” BLT condiment, further moving the sandwich into public consciousness. I have to agree with Hellmann’s: although I prefer Why is this interesting? Ultimately, the beauty of the BLT lies with sage fashion advice credited to Coco Chanel: “Before you leave the house, look in the mirror and take one thing off.” In this case, the slice of turkey was the bucket hat that you left on the dresser before you met your friends at the bar. The BLT is less of a sandwich and more of the world’s most perfect tomato delivery device. I eat 95% of my BLTs during the months of July and August, when tomatoes are at their perfect peak. The BLT from Winner in Park Slope, Brooklyn showcases their amazing bread. I wanted to learn more from the folks putting out the best BLTs in NY, so I went down to The Diner BLT With BLTs, as with life, you never know what you’re going to get! Ultimately, high-quality seasonal BLTs are like rare Pokémon for locavores: catch them while you can. (GSB) BLT Recipe of the Day: My ideal BLT to make at home consists of the — WITI x McKinsey: An ongoing partnership where we highlight interesting McKinsey research, writing, and data. Sustainability and innovation in fashion. The leader of a cutting-edge institute talks about innovative new materials that “eat” carbon and may enable cotton to grow without irrigation, as well as the potential for building the world’s shortest supply chain in two 40-foot containers. Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Gabe (GSB) —
You’re a free subscriber to |