---
subject: "from chaos to order"
from: "web3 weekly from a16z crypto <a16zcrypto@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-07-29 18:30:08
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "a16zcrypto"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_2535365729249697677"]
---
1. Moves & news: Financial innovation & technology for the 21st centuryThis week, the House Why is this so significant? It is the first, but very important step, towards a bill becoming law. The next step is for the bill to move to a vote on the House of Representatives floor with bipartisan support (as this week’s events indicated it is indeed a bipartisan issue). And while there is still a long way to go to make this bill a law — it still needs to pass the House, Senate, and be signed by the President — it could significantly decrease regulatory confusion in the crypto industry. share: related reading: “Crypto bill passes congressional committee in victory for industry” / [Reuters](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/48e89dfd-d803-4a23-90e5-914d3d912cba?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)“Crypto regulatory bill advances to floor” / [Axios](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/a56334f0-56c1-4e06-b011-330aebfb942b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)
other resources: [Engaging Policymakers](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/8afc55a7-3a37-4fec-b02a-fa7928fa4b5a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)101 with Collin McCune / a16z crypto Startup School[Crypto Policy & Regulation: What's Going On?](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/d9b8ea57-5af4-41a3-9a95-84c2d7d9cbf4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)with Miles Jennings, Brian Quintenz, Collin McCune, Sonal Chokshi / web3 with a16z podcast[Crypto Regulations, Illicit Finance, Privacy and Beyond](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/6e550c44-38c7-4c77-9c82-6715d12b4513?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)with Michele Korver, Jai Ramaswamy, Sonal Chokshi / web3 with a16z podcast
see also: 2. Op-ed: It’s time to move crypto from chaos to order (in Fortune)Miles Jennings and Brian Quintenz Many believe blockchains and crypto are a groundbreaking technology that enable creativity and entrepreneurship, while some regard these tools as just another internet fad. Regardless of where you stand, it’s indisputable that consumers and entrepreneurs alike in the burgeoning crypto and web3 sector face tremendous regulatory uncertainty — which holds the legitimate industry back, and allows bad actors to flourish. This tension was on full display as a federal district court recently issued a much-anticipated summary judgment in the Securities and Exchange Commission’s lawsuit against Ripple Labs and two of its founders. While it was a potentially significant win for crypto (and a rebuff to the SEC’s ongoing war against it), the ruling results in a confusing set of outcomes that highlights the long standing uncertainty plaguing an industry clamoring for stability. So what are entrepreneurs to make of the decision? 3. Resources: 17 misconceptions about SNARKs — and why they hold us backJustin Thaler An important cryptographic tool that opens up exciting new possibilities in system design, “SNARKs” (Succinct Non-interactive ARgument of Knowledge) have several applications in blockchains — and beyond — because they facilitate trust where it otherwise may not exist. And if a SNARK satisfies the property of
subscribe to our podcast ' |