---
subject: "Model City Monday 2/3/25"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-03 23:59:12
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Prospera Declared UnconstitutionalThe Honduras Supreme Court The background: in the mid-2010s, the ruling conservative party wanted charter cities. They had already packed the Supreme Court for other reasons, so they had their captive court declare charter cities to be constitutional. In 2022, the socialists took power from the conservatives and got the chance to fill the Supreme Court with their supporters. In September, this new Supreme Court said whoops, actually charter cities aren’t constitutional at all. They added that this decision applied retroactively, ie even existing charter cities that had been approved under the old government were, ex post facto, illegal. Prospera’s lawyers objected, saying that the court is not allowed to make ex post facto rulings. But arguing that the Supreme Court is misinterpreting the Constitution seems like a losing battle - even if you’re right, who do you appeal to? So the city is pursuing a two-pronged strategy. The first prong is waiting. Prospera is a collection of buildings and people. The buildings can stay standing, the people can still live there - they just have to follow regular Honduran law, rather than the investment-friendly charter they previously used. There’s The second prong is international arbitration. When the conservatives approved charter cities, they signed international contracts promising their investment partners that Honduras wouldn’t go back on its word; if it did, they could be sued for damages. Prospera is suing for $10 billion, ~2/3 of Honduras’ annual budget. Observers say they have good lawyers and a strong case. Honduras has responded by backing out of its agreements and saying it won’t accept international rulings, but this only goes so far; the agreements say Prospera can sue to confiscate Honduran assets abroad if the government won’t cooperate. So far they seem to be holding off on this, probably because they’d rather do this the easy way by waiting for the conservatives to retake power, but the lawsuit is a strong argument for whoever wins in November to see things their way. You might expect this instability to chill investment, but apparently not - this January, another funding round led by Coinbase It looks like a big part of investors’ hope for Prospera is biotech research and medical tourism. It hosted (and will host again) the Neom Neom Neom Neom NeomNeom, Saudi Arabia’s insane giant linear city project, has …sort of! The original plan for a 170 km Line by 2030 has been replaced with a more modest 2.4 km, just big enough to host the 2034 World Cup. Even a 2.4 km Line is extraordinarily ambitious, but here I am less than totally entirely 100% certain that it won’t happen. To soften the blow, Saudi Arabia has announced even more bizarre subareas of NEOM with silly names, like And And They also Last year, I predicted with 99% confidence that less than one kilometer of NEOM’s linear city would get built. I would still take this at even odds, but I regret my high confidence now - it sounds like they have a more realistic target that might, if they’re incredibly lucky, allow them to get something done. Charter Cities In . . . America?In 2023, Trump As usual, he’s light on details, but says that the federal government owns lots of land, it’s mostly unused, and he wants to "hold a contest to charter ten new cities and award them to the best proposals for development". I bet Charter Cities Institute has already tried to reach out to the administration on this. You can see hints of where they might go in He proposes some alternatives, of which the most controversial is the Presidio - a federally-owned historic fortress in the middle of San Francisco which is now mostly used as a park. But the government technically has the rights to the land, and if they wanted to, they could zone the whole thing for six-story apartments and add 120,000 people to SF. I don’t know which part of this is most likely to make San Franciscans explode with rage - the loss of their (admittedly beautiful) historic park, the Donald Trump involvement, or the prospect of actually constructing things in their city. It would be a blowup for the ages. If Trump isn’t ready for quite that much of a fight, Lutter suggests other promising pieces of federal land, including the Lowry Range near Denver and Guantanamo Bay (!), which could:
Unfortunately there are multiple ways to read the phrase “bringing immigrants to Guantanamo Bay”, and so far the Trump administration California EventuallyCalifornia Forever, the ambitious planned city an hour north of San Francisco, is on hold. They had originally planned to fight NIMBYs in the November election via a ballot initiative which would give them the right to proceed. But after
Opponents seemed optimistic that this would give them time to crush the project, or at least frustrate the investors enough to make them go away. But in the past few days, the situation has changed. Suisun City, a nearby small town, has announced that You Had Me At “Dragon King”In 2021, Art Finch proposed that Bhutan turn the village of Geluphu into a cool high-tech charter city that would create jobs for Bhutanese youth and prevent them from emigrating. Finch, a South-African-American entrepreneur with Bhutanese connections, got the highest levels of the government to listen to his idea. Then something went wrong. Based on So far this is the story of every promising charter city, but what happened next was a little different - the Dragon King of Bhutan (of course they’re ruled by a Dragon King) announced that Bhutan would build their own version of the city, without help from any international partners. Thus The target population is one million (Bhutan’s current largest city, Thimphu, has a population of only 100,000, and is famous for being one of only two national capitals without traffic lights). The projected cost is $100 billion with a b (Bhutan’s current GDP is $3 billion/year). So how are they going to do this? Bhutan’s usual strategy is to play off neighbors India and China against each other, seeing which of them will give it more money in exchange for its friendship, and some American investors also seem interested. But it’s not even clear what industries would be involved - proposals include agribusiness, hydroelectric power, and - the last refuge of every desperate poor country - cryptocurrency (you can see some extremely meaningless PR statements about this Still, the aesthetics will be Bhutan says they have partnered with the As for Art Finch, he
But he seems to have landed on his feet - Elsewhere In Model Cities1: After ~five years without so much as a site having been picked out, Praxis has 2: British actor Idris Elba 3: Devon Zuegel, who previously ran the 4: Kanye West has announced interest in You're currently a free subscriber to |