---
subject: "In What Sense Is Life Suffering?"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-11-07 09:39:19
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
“Life is suffering” may be a Noble Truth, but it feels like a This is the starting point of many people’s objection to Buddhism. They continue: if nirvana is just a peaceful state beyond joy or suffering, it sounds like a letdown. An endless gray mist of bare okayness, like death or Britain. If your life was previously good, it’s a step down. Even if your life sucked, maybe you would still prefer the heroism of high highs and low lows to eternal blah. Against all this, many Buddhists claim to be able to reach I don’t know the orthodox Buddhist answer to this question. But I got the rationalist techno-Buddhists’ answer from Naively, there are two kinds of temperature: hot and cold. When an environment stops being hot, then it’s neutral - “room temperature” - neither hot nor cold. After that, you can add arbitrary amounts of coldness, making it colder and colder. But scientifically, there’s only one kind of temperature: heat. Apparent “neutral” at room temperature is a fact about human perception with no objective significance. The “zero heat” isn’t room temperature. It’s absolute zero, which feels colder than we can possibly imagine. In the same way, naively, there are two kinds of emotion - joy and suffering. When a situation stops being bad, then it’s neutral, ie “okay”, neither joy nor suffering. After that, you can add arbitrary amounts of joy, making yourself happier and happier. But scientifically (according to the Buddhists) there’s only one kind of emotion: suffering. Apparent neutral is a fact about human perception with no objective significance. The real “zero suffering” isn’t neutral / blah / just okay. It’s nirvana, which feels more blissful than we can possibly imagine. In this model, the statement “life is suffering” is equivalent to “temperature is heat” and literally true. An ignoramus might boggle at this: all temperatures are heat? What about fifty degrees below zero on a winter’s night in Alaska? Sorry, that’s heat too - 228 degrees Kelvin. It’s colder than the reference temperature you dubbed neutral, but that was always fake. Likewise, it seems surprising that all life is suffering: even when you’re on heroin? Even when you’re having sex? But to Buddhists, both of those states are some number of degrees worse than the absolute zero suffering of nirvana. Why should we believe this model? First, regardless of whether we believe it or not, I find it helpful in understanding what Buddhists are asserting. It removes my urge to have tedious arguments where I accuse them of being anti-human and forgetting that life includes good things. But also, it does seem to match some of the other ground we’ve covered about what people notice during meditative experiences - for example, in The emotion “happiness” is a form of brain activity which is more regular and symmetrical than usual - maybe the most regularity and symmetry we can get in the normal course of things. But ice is a form of matter which is colder than usual - yet if you drop it into liquid helium, it will add heat, not subtract it. Thus the insistence among meditators that happiness is an obstacle and you should seek nirvana instead. You're currently a free subscriber to |