---
subject: "Fertility on demand"
from: "Works in Progress <worksinprogress@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-05-01 13:28:06
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Works in Progress"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_1644361085112560554"]
---
Read the latest issue of Works in Progress The gender pay gap has barely changed since the early 2000s. In the US women who work full time earn Women know this gap exists and plan accordingly: in countries where the motherhood penalty is keenest, the birth rate is Governments have worked to address gender pay gaps by introducing Taking time out of the workforce to bear and raise children while in their twenties and thirties means women have less time to accumulate the network, skills, and experience necessary to rise to the top of their fields. The later women wait to have their first child, the more they earn. But unfortunately, women’s fertility falls with age. If women wait until they are 40 to have children, they can probably achieve the career they want, but they are unlikely to have as many children as they would like – and they may not be able to have children at all. How to manage this tradeoff is a pressing question for any woman in the modern world. But emerging technology may solve this problem. In fact, this may be a unique few decades of history where women have the option to choose professional accomplishment but risk (unwanted) childlessness as a price. New technology may soon allow women to maintain their fertility into their forties and fifties, giving them the same options that men have. The motherhood pay gap and greedy careersPeople choose their careers for more than just money. They also want to gain respect, do interesting work, and have a positive impact. However, the top of many careers is where the most rewarding and influential work is done, and women face not just a pay gap but an overall career gap. They make up We have come a long way from the explicit sex discrimination of the past. Today, the gap is primarily driven by the career toll exacted by motherhood. Mothers This time investment does not hurt women in fields with constant returns to hours – where each hour worked is about as productive on average as the last hour worked, like fast food workers or But the gap does hurt women in ‘ Executives and managers have particularly greedy jobs, and as such, the motherhood career gap is especially pronounced in these roles. Earnings of the University of Chicago MBA graduating class Annual salaries in 2006 USD, on natural log scale Academic career paths are another illustration of this ‘ A race against timeMany women, especially Women wishing both to establish their careers and to have children are in a race against time. This is particularly true given that one’s thirties are a particularly defining decade in greedy careers. In law, for example, this is Aware of this, women often delay pregnancy until they have advanced in their careers as far as possible. This is particularly true for women with PhDs or professional degrees. Women without a bachelor's degree tend to have 1 to 1.5 children on average by age 28, while those with higher educational attainment have around 0.25 children by the same age. Highly educated women attempt to catch up during their thirties, with their birth rates increasing more rapidly compared to less educated groups. However, this compensatory period is limited, as fertility rates across all education levels tend to plateau around age 39. Thus, the educated group ends up with fewer children despite its members' attempts to compensate for lost time. Childbearing by education level in the US The average number of children born to women by a given age and education level The chance of conceiving a baby naturally with regular sex drops from 25 percent per month in one’s twenties to about five percent per month at 40, while the chance of miscarrying rises from about eight percent for women under 30 In Technology as a solutionPeople often think that solving problems via biological means is nearly impossible, whereas behavioral and social interventions are merely very difficult. By contrast, semaglutide and other GLP-1 agonist medications have been found Preventing the spread of HIV through social interventions was somewhat successful during the 1980s and 1990s, but What if the same were true for the motherhood penalty? Perhaps there are technologies that could extend women’s fertility in the same way that Expanding the reproductive timeframe for women could also boost birth rates, especially among the most educated who exhibit Freezing eggsIn 2019, Erramatti Mangayamma made headlines when she Chances of successful birth after embryo transfer Percentage of transferred embryos that result in a live birth, by the age of donors and patients For some women, donor eggs are a solution, but many others have a strong preference for raising children who are genetically their own. So far, the only proven way to extend a woman’s fertility window with her own eggs is by freezing those eggs at an earlier age. The process is straightforward on paper: a young woman’s eggs are collected and stored at minus 196 degrees Celsius to preserve their quality. Then, after years or even decades, the eggs can be thawed and used for conception in a standard IVF process. In essence, egg freezing allows a young woman to become an egg donor for her future, older self. But there is a big difference between theory and implementation. First, there is the question of whether the process of egg freezing is even efficient. Women have only been freezing eggs in large numbers since 2012, meaning there is much less data on their outcomes than there is for women who use IVF with fresh eggs. However, a number of media reports have been less sanguine about egg freezing. The same NYU Langone study was used as the basis for an article titled ‘ Still, 70 percent is far from a perfect success rate. Many women cannot retrieve 20 eggs or more It’s not just the cost that puts young women off egg freezing. The egg collection process, which involves around two weeks of hormonal stimulation, is often Improving egg freezingEgg freezing would be much better if it were cheaper, less painful, and more efficient. Egg freezing and IVF One of the best- Overture has also ventured into automating the egg vitrification (flash freezing) and thawing processes with their These early successes are not yet confirmed in larger cohorts or copied across other parts of the egg freezing and fertilization processes, but they show promise for reducing the need for experienced human labor, as does the start-up The promise of in vitro maturation and in vitro gametogenesisMost cells in our bodies develop from stem cells and share the same DNA as one another, yet have staggeringly diverse forms and functions. This is possible because, as stem cells mature, they gain epigenetic modifications – modifications on top of or surrounding their DNA – which act as additional instructions on how to interpret their DNA code. This process is crucial for cells to specialize. It means a liver cell, for example, will ‘read’ its DNA differently from a muscle cell. But once a cell has differentiated into a mature cell, it normally cannot go back to its original stem cell state: except in rare cases, such as during cancer and wound healing, it is locked into its fate. Cellular reprogramming allows us to modify a cell’s destiny. By adding a cocktail of four proteins to cells in a dish, researchers have been able to reverse a cell’s differentiation and obtain stem cells from mature, specialized cells. These artificially produced stem cells, called induced pluripotent stem cells, can now be differentiated into a whole range of desired cell types, allowing researchers to convert one type of mature cell into another. Since their discovery, pluripotent stem cells have become ubiquitous in medical sciences, facilitating advances that range from Companies such as The main advantage of IVM is that it allows immature eggs to be collected instead of mature ones, which significantly reduces the burden of hormonal stimulation. Collecting immature eggs can be done with just three days of low-dose follicle-stimulating hormone, often just one jab, compared to 12 days that are required for mature egg collection. This means much less The scenario described above involves women opting for minimal ovarian stimulation. But IVM is a versatile technique that could also be used alongside standard IVF to improve its overall efficiency. As it currently stands, In vitro maturation is not a faraway dream. Gameto IVM could be seen as the first step towards achieving something much more ambitious and riskier: the creation of not merely ovarian support cells but actual eggs from stem cells. This approach is called in vitro gametogenesis (IVG), and it would bypass the need for egg freezing entirely. Interest in this technique spiked in 2016 when an academic team in Japan Translating successes in mice into a reliable method for human oocyte production is not going to be easy. Even in mice, the process has been very inefficient, with only one to three percent of the pluripotent-stem-cell-derived eggs able to produce live pups. And given that oocyte development differs in humans compared to mice in significant ways – including the fact that it takes much longer – translating even this modest level of success between species is not going to be trivial. But why is this so hard? If we have successfully produced so many types of cells from stem cells, including ovarian support cells, what’s holding us back when it comes to eggs? Eggs are a very special type of cell. They must contain all of the necessary components to initiate and support the development of an entire new organism, like nutrients, mitochondria, and enzymes, while also providing half of the genetic material for it. In-vitro gametogenesis is much riskier than in-vitro maturation. With maturation, the technology is used to turn stem cells into ovarian support cells. This means any mistakes won't carry forward to the baby because the ovarian support cell is discarded after the egg has matured. All it needs to do is allow the extracted egg to mature properly. In IVG, however, the egg itself comes from stem cells. This egg will go on to provide the blueprint for all the future baby's cells and any mistakes in copying the genetic material could cause severe consequences for the baby. The biggest risk is epigenetic. Epigenetic marks are small chemical structures on the outside of DNA which tell cells how to 'read' the DNA. Marks are very sensitive to environmental stressors and so could change during the IVG process in unpredictable ways. Seemingly small changes in epigenetic marks could have dire consequences for the developing embryo. Exposing cells in culture to cocktails of proteins to induce their development will clearly not be enough to ensure the proper deposition of these sensitive epigenetic marks. CRISPR, a well known DNA editing method, could potentially fix this. If we are ever going to consider this in humans, extensive trials on other species will have to be carried out first. But the higher risks of IVG also come with higher rewards. If companies like Conception are successful, we will be able to completely side-step the egg collection and freezing process. This technique could open up Delaying aging to delay egg agingAll of the approaches discussed so far have involved manipulating the egg outside the woman’s body. Another way to expand the female reproductive window is by delaying egg aging itself. There are good reasons to favor this approach as opposed to egg freezing or in vitro gametogenesis. Firstly, compared to egg freezing, it could be far less invasive. Secondly, unlike in vitro gametogenesis, it would not risk introducing genetic and epigenetic defects through extensive cellular manipulation. There could be other positive spillovers. Delaying egg aging might postpone the onset of menopause. As a woman’s eggs are depleted, the ovaries send out fewer chemical signals, and she goes through menopause. Menopause then brings on age-related diseases such as Unfortunately, we are still quite far away from knowing how to achieve this. To the extent that advances have been made, they are usually merely translations of insights from the broader field of aging. An example is the recently launched What accounts for our relative lack of knowledge when it comes to female reproductive aging? One reason is that it’s difficult to study the female reproductive system: as with many other elements of human health, we cannot carry out experiments ethically, so we are forced to rely on observational evidence that is often causally uncertain and deeply unreliable, or on studies done on other animals. But the female reproductive system is unusual in animals. Menstruation happens only in humans and a Extending fertility to end the motherhood penaltyOver the past century, much of the world has made big strides against gender inequality in the labor market, through things like changes to cultural norms, laws against discrimination against women, and technology that has made jobs more flexible. The next frontier is conquering the motherhood penalty, which has the dual effect of holding women back in their professional lives and stopping them from having the families they would like to have. Of course, part of this will involve policy and social change – women have basically the same biology in Sweden and South Korea, yet the motherhood penalty is much larger in South Korea. But we can go further. Technological advances that extend women’s fertility windows give women the option to invest in their careers in their thirties and have children later. A hundred years from now, women having children well into their forties may be as commonplace as married women and mothers in the workforce are today. This article first appeared in Ruxandra Teslo is a PhD candidate in Genomics at the Sanger Institute. You can follow her on Substack 1 Some studies have challenged the magnitude of the motherhood wage gap. For example, First, we know that the IVF process itself is highly disruptive – in the UK as Second, failing IVF is strongly associated with mental health issues, which we should reasonably expect to have a negative impact on productivity. Indeed, a Third, women who fail IVF are probably less physically healthy than the women who succeed, meaning they aren’t direct comparisons. Fourth, there is Last, the IVF studies do not look specifically at greedy careers, which depend more on compounding gains in one’s thirties. Thanks for subscribing to |