---
subject: "Substack and Other Blog Recommendations"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-06-30 17:13:45
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Substack recommendations are remarkably important, and the actual best reason to write here instead of elsewhere. As in, even though I have never made an active attempt to seek recommendations, approximately half of my subscribers come from recommendations from other blogs. And for every two subscribers I have, my recommendations have generated approximately one subscription elsewhere. I am very thankful to all those who have recommended this blog, either through substack or otherwise. As the blog has grown, I’ve gotten a number of offers for reciprocal recommendations. So far I have turned all of these down, because I have yet to feel any are both sufficiently high quality and a good match for me and my readers. Instead, I’m going to do the following: This post will go through the 16 blogs I do currently recommend, and explain what I think is awesome about each of them. I will also go over the top other non-substack blogs and sources I read regularly. Then I will briefly review the 10 other substacks that sent me the most readers. I will plan on doing something similar periodically in the future, each time looking at at least 10 previously uncovered substacks, and each time evaluating which blogs I should add or remove from the recommendation list. In the future I will skip any inactive substacks. The comments section will be an opportunity to pitch your blog, or pitch someone else’s blog. Please aggressively like comments to vote for blogs.
Table of ContentsNote on PaywallsI have a very high bar for being willing to go behind a paywall, the same way I have decided not to have one of my own. If something is behind a unique paywall, then almost all of my readers can’t read it, and the post is effectively outside of the broader conversation. So not only do I have to be excited enough about the content to initiate a subscription, I have to be excited enough despite it being unavailable to others. I am of course happy to accept and respond to gift subscriptions for various content, including other blogs and newspapers, which substantially increase the chance I read, discuss or ultimately recommend the content in question. The Substacks I Recommend (Not Centrally AI)Going over this list, I notice that I highly value a unique focus and perspective, a way of thinking and a set of tools that I want to have available, that is compatible with the rationalist-style perspective of thinking with gears and figuring out what will actually work versus not work. I want to be offered a part of that elephant I would otherwise miss, a different reality-tunnel to incorporate into my own. What I do not need to do is agree with the person about most things. I have profound and increasing important disagreements with most of the people on this list. When I recommend the substack, I am absolutely not endorsing the opinions or worldview contained therein. I also reminded myself, doing this, that there is a lot of great content I simply don’t have the time to check out properly, especially recently with several things creating big temporary additional time commitments, that will continue for a few more weeks.
|