---
subject: "Claude 4 You: The Quest for Mundane Utility"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-05-26 13:00:12
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
How good are Claude Opus 4 and Claude Sonnet 4? They’re good models, sir. If you don’t care about price or speed, Opus is probably the best model available today. If you do care somewhat, Sonnet 4 is probably best in its class for many purposes, and deserves the 4 label because of its agentic aspects but isn’t a big leap over 3.7 for other purposes. I have been using 90%+ Opus so I can’t speak to this directly. There are some signs of some amount of ‘small model smell’ where Sonnet 4 has focused on common cases at the expense of rarer ones. That’s what Opus is for. That’s all as of when I hit post. Things On Your MarksAs always, benchmarks are not a great measure, but they are indicative, and if you pay attention to the details and combine it with other info you can learn a lot. Here again are the main reported results, which mainly tell me we need better benchmarks.
That’s a remarkably large leap. Visual physics and other image tasks don’t go great, which isn’t new, presumably it’s not a point of emphasis.
Here are the results with Opus also included, both Sonnet and Opus underperform. It’s a real shame about Gemini 2.5 Pro. By all accounts it really did get actively worse if you’re not doing coding.
The top of the full leaderboard here remains o3 (high) + GPT-4.1 at 82.7%, with Opus in 5th place behind that, o3 alone and both versions of Gemini 2.5 Pro. R1 is slightly above Sonnet-4-no-thinking, everything above that involves a model from one of the big three labs. I notice that the 3.7% improvement from Gemini-2.5-03-25 to Gemini-2.5-05-06 seems like a key data point here, as only a very particular set of tasks improved with that change. There’s been a remarkable lack of other benchmark scores, compared to other recent releases. I am sympathetic to Standard Silly Benchmarks
It’s very clear what is going on here. Max is intentionally invoking a very specific, very strong prior on trick questions, such that this prior overrides the details that change the answer. And of course, the ultimate version is the one specific math problem, where 8.8 - 8.11 (or 9.8 - 9.11) ends up off by exactly 1 as -0.31, because (I’m not 100% this is it, but I’m pretty sure this is it, and it happens across different AI labs) the AI has a super strong prior that .11 is ‘bigger’ because when you see these types of numbers they are usually version numbers, which means this ‘has to be’ a negative number, so it increments down by one to force this because it has a distinct system determining the remainder, and then hallucinates that it’s doing something else that looks like how humans do math.
Why do we do this every time?
Yeah, actually it’s fine, but also you have to worry about adversarial interactions. Any mind worth employing is going to have narrow places like this where it relies too much on its prior, in a way that can get exploited.
All right then. I continue to think it is great that none of the major labs are trying to fix these examples on purpose. It would not be so difficult.
API Upgrades
Coding Time HorizonOne of the pitches for Opus 4 was how long it can work for on its own. But of course, working for a long time is not what matters, what matters is what it can accomplish. You don’t want to give the model credit for working slowly.
The Key Missing Feature is MemoryWhen do we get it across chats?
Dario teased in January that this was coming, but no sign of it yet. I think Claude is enough better to overcome the lack of memory issue, also note that when memory does show up it can ‘backfill’ from previous chats so you don’t have to worry about the long term. I get why Anthropic isn’t prioritizing this, but I do think it should be a major near term focus to get this working sooner rather than later. Early Reactions
I still do like o3 a lot in situations in which hallucinations won’t come up and I mostly need a competent user of tools. The best way to be reasonably confident hallucinations won’t come up is to ensure it is a highly solvable problem - it’s rare that even o3 will be a lying liar if it can figure out the truth. Some were not excited with their first encounters.
I haven’t noticed a big sycophancy issue and I’ve liked the personality a lot so far, but I get how someone else might not, especially if Peter is mainly trying to do nutrition calculations. For that purpose, yeah, why not use Haiku or Gemini Flash? Some people like it but are not that excited.
It’s funny (but fair) to think of using the web as the not lazy option. Some people are really excited, to varying degrees.
That’s definitely Our Price Cheap. Look at absolute prices not relative prices.
I disagree. People are talking about it. Is it too eager, or not eager enough?
Is there a tradeoff between being a tool and being creative?
Everything impacts everything, and my understanding is the smaller the model the more this requires such tradeoffs. Opus can to a larger extent be all things at once, but to some extent Sonnet has to choose, it doesn’t have room to fully embrace both. Here’s a fun question, if you upgrade inside a conversation would the model know?
Opus 4 Has the Opus NatureThere are many early signs of this, such as the spiritual bliss attractor state, and reports continue to be that Opus 4 has the core elements that made Opus 3 a special model. But they’re not as top of mind, you have to give it room to express them.
Another thing about being early is that we don’t yet know the best ways to bring this out. We had a long time to learn how to interact with Opus 3 to bring out these elements when we want that, and we just got Opus 4 on Thursday.
I expect to see a lot more similar posting and exploration happening over time. The early read is that you need to work harder with Opus 4 to overcome the ‘standard AI assistant’ priors, but once you do, it will do all sorts of new things. And here’s Claude with a classic but very hot take of its own.
Ringo is great, but the greatest seems like a bit of a stretch. Unprompted Attention
Max SubscriptionI’m subscribed to OpenAI’s $200/month deluxe package, but it’s not clear to me I am getting much in exchange. I doubt I often hit the $20/month rate limits on o3 even before Opus 4, and I definitely don’t hit limits on anything else. I’m mostly keeping it around because I need early access to new toys, and also I have hope for o3-powered Operator and for the upcoming o3-pro that presumably will require you to pay up. Claude Max, which I now also have, seems like a better bet?
In Summary
Fun activity: Asking Opus to try and get bingo on that card. It gets more than half of squares, but it seems no bingo? You're currently a free subscriber to |