---
subject: "Games Without Frontiers"
from: "Maxim Raginsky from The Art of the Realizable <realizable@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-12-26 21:19:36
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Maxim Raginsky", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3440436245007788095", "UNREAD"]
---
Hermann Weyl’s The Open World, published in 1932 and based on the Terry Lectures he gave at Yale a year earlier, has very interesting things to say about the interplay of limitation and freedom in mathematics. Weyl’s book appeared right around the time when the work of Gödel and Turing was starting to expose certain fundamental limitations in the foundations of mathematics. Here, though, I want to comment on the relevance of the dualism between limitation and freedom to ongoing debates about the present and future of mathematics and theoretical science in light of LLMs. The well-known AI researcher François Fleuret tweeted this two years ago: Fleuret’s take certainly applies to David Hilbert’s formalist view of mathematics as a game of symbolic manipulation according to fixed rules, without any attention paid to meaning. As we watch LLMs perform However, I think it is premature to say the same about metamathematics where, as Weyl says, “the game itself becomes the object of cognition.” This is the realm where we subject the games we play to a process of reflection, question the rules of these games, and invent new games. Intelligence, natural or artificial, is a joint property of the cognizing subject and the environment in which the subject is embedded, and this is where the tension between limitation and freedom comes into play. The key is to dissolve the limitations of closed formal systems by embedding them in larger open systems, where one has the freedom to introduce new axioms, new rules of inference, and new value systems. This act of reflective creation is what James P. Carse called Coming back to limitations versus freedom, when Weyl talks about it, he is referring to the tension between potentiality and actuality, becoming and being, data and process. That is,
The act of theoretical cognition is to transcend the limitations of the actually given by passing to “the field of possibilities that is open to infinity.” Here there are several options. One can follow L.E.J. Brouwer and other intuitionists and to view the field of possibilities as a potential infinity, something we can never fully access in its entirety, but which we can keep discovering iteratively using constructive procedures. Or one can go the route of Cantor and use the tools of set theory to visualize actual infinities. Weyl rejects Cantor’s platonic sensibilities in favor of moderate constructivism. Towards the end of The Open World he writes the following:
Moreover, he highlights the fundamental role of action in the progress of theoretical science:
When Weyl says that the objective sphere is “impervious to reason,” he means that you cannot understand the world by simply thinking about it or by computational simulation detached from experience. In other words, The Art of the Realizable is free today. But if you enjoyed this post, you can tell The Art of the Realizable that their writing is valuable by pledging a future subscription. You won't be charged unless they enable payments. |