---
subject: "Data on the effects of censorship in early modern England"
from: "Marginal REVOLUTION <donotreply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-08-21 10:02:14
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tyler Cowen", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2466199532210586699", "UNREAD"]
---
We use a panel-data framework to study the effects of print censorship on early-modern England's cultural production. Doing so requires distilling dispersed qualitative information into quantitative data. Integrating the historical record implicit in a large language model (LLM) with facts from secondary sources, we generate an annual index of print censorship. Applying a machine-learning (ML) algorithm to a major corpus, we construct document-level measures of the innovativeness (quality) and volume (quantity) of cultural production. We use pre-existing topic-model estimates to apportion each document among distinct cultural themes-three affected by censorship and five unaffected. We thereby assemble a yearly theme-level panel for 1525-1700. We use local projections to estimate censorship's dynamic effects. Paradoxically, censorship raises the level of innovativeness in censorship-affected themes relative to non-affected themes. Censorship has a temporary chilling effect on the quantity of cultural production, with output recovering within a decade. Our findings are robust to the use of an instrumental-variable approach addressing the endogeneity of censorship. Our findings are unchanged when using three alternative LLMs to produce the censorship index. Using LLMs and ML to measure hard-to-quantify phenomena like censorship and cultural production, we provide new insights into the drivers of cultural evolution.
Here is [the full paper](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=43277a8c8d7bf1825c7bce34d278c6b1fc36c3a8be416b6a1f58ae49dd504135&blog_id=42693868&post_id=91334&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=d187a7c8817129981b6f48fc1bed662a&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly9wYXBlcnMuc3Nybi5jb20vc29sMy9wYXBlcnMuY2ZtP2Fic3RyYWN0X2lkPTUzODIwNzA&email_id=762912d82567b016181866a631332377) by Peter Murrell and Peter Grajzl. Via the excellent [Kevin Lewis](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=355be5bd7c54950d546e6221a4fd95b14166c83b438189f1194809aed6a7c35b&blog_id=42693868&post_id=91334&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=f3a2e6461988f9ae704bdfc612686e37&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cubmF0aW9uYWxhZmZhaXJzLmNvbS9ibG9nL2RldGFpbC9maW5kaW5ncy1hLWRhaWx5LXJvdW5kdXAvdGltZWxpbmVz&email_id=762912d82567b016181866a631332377).