---
subject: "On Claude 3.5 Sonnet"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-06-24 11:51:58
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
There is a new clear best (non-tiny) LLM. If you want to converse with an LLM, the correct answer is Claude Sonnet 3.5. It is available for free on Claude.ai and the Claude iOS app, or you can subscribe for higher rate limits. The API cost is $3 per million input tokens and $15 per million output tokens. This completes the trifecta. All of OpenAI, Google DeepMind and Anthropic have kept their biggest and more expensive model static for now, and instead focused on making something faster and cheaper that is good enough to be the main model. You would only use another model if you either (1) needed a smaller model in which case Gemini 1.5 Flash seems best, or (2) it must have open model weights. Updates to their larger and smaller models, Claude Opus 3.5 and Claude Haiku 3.5, are coming later this year. They intend to issue new models every few months. They are working on long term memory. It is not only the new and improved intelligence. Speed kills. They say it is twice as fast as Claude Opus. That matches my experience.
Low cost also kills. They also introduced a new feature called Artifacts, to allow Claude to do various things in a second window. Many are finding it highly useful. BenchmarksAs always, never fully trust the benchmarks to translate to real world performance. They are still highly useful, and I have high trust in Anthropic to not be gaming them. Here is the headline chart.
Anthropic also highlight that in an agentic coding evaluation, Claude 3.5 Sonnet solved 64% of problems versus 38% for Claude Opus, discussed later. Needle in a haystack was already very good, now it is slightly better still.
You can say ‘the recent jumps are relatively small’ or you can notice that (1) there is an upper bound at 100 rapidly approaching for this set of benchmarks, and (2) the releases are coming quickly one after another and the slope of the line is accelerating despite being close to the maximum. Human Evaluation TestsWe are still waiting for the Arena ranking to come in. Based on reactions we should expect Sonnet 3.5 to take the top slot, likely by a decent margin, but we’ve been surprised before.
Those were the high water marks, and Arena preferences tend to be less dramatic than that due to the nature of the questions and also those doing the rating. We are likely looking at more like a 60% win rate, which is still good enough for the top slot. The Vision ThingHere are the scores for vision. Claude has an additional modification on it:
ArtifactsOther than ‘better model,’ artifacts are the big new feature. You have to turn them on in your settings, which you should do.
I have not had the opportunity to work with this feature yet, so I am relying on the reports of others. I continue to be in ‘paying down debt’ mode on various writing tasks, which is going well but is going to take at least another week to finish up. After that, I am actively excited to try coding things. PrivacyThey commit to not using your data to train their models without explicit permission.
Kudos, but being the only one who does this puts Anthropic at a large disadvantage. I wonder if this rule will get codified into law at some point? SafetyThere are two headlines here. Claude Sonnet 3.5 is still ASL-2, meaning no capabilities are too worrisome yet. The UK Artificial Intelligence Safety Institute (UK AISI) performed a safety evaluation prior to release.
The review by UK’s AISI is very good news, especially after Jack Clark’s statements that making that happen was difficult. Now that both DeepMind and Anthropic have followed through, hopefully that will put pressure on OpenAI and others to do it. The refusal rates are improvements over Opus in both directions, in terms of matching intended behavior. Beyond that, they do not give us much to go on. Advancing the FrontierYes, Anthropic will advance the frontier if they are able to do so. Recently, there was a discussion about whether 3.0 Claude Opus meaningfully advanced the frontier of what publicly available LLMs can do. There is no doubt that Claude Sonnet 3.5 does advance it. But wait, people said. Didn’t Anthropic say they were not going to do that? Anthropic is sorry about that impression. But no. Never promised that. Did say it would be a consideration. Do say they held back Claude 1.0 for this reason. But no. That’s the story Anthropic’s employees are consistently telling now, in response to the post from Dustin saying otherwise and Gwern’s statement.
My understanding after having investigated is that Anthropic made it clear that they would seek to avoid advancing the frontier, and that they saw doing so as a cost. They did not, however, it seems, make any hard promises not to advance the frontier. You should plan and respond accordingly. As always, pay very close attention to what is a hard commitment, and what is not a hard commitment. To my knowledge, Anthropic has not broken any hard commitments. They have shown a willingness to give impressions of what they intended to do, and then do otherwise. Anthropic’s communication strategy has been, essentially, to stop communicating. That has its advantages, also its disadvantages. It makes sense to say ‘we do not want to give you the wrong idea, and we do not want to make hard commitments we might have to break.’ But how should one respond to being left almost fully in the dark? The Race is OnYes. The race is on. The better question is to what extent Anthropic’s actions make the race more on than it would have been anyway, given the need to race Google and company. One Anthropic employee doubts this. Whereas Roon famously said Anthropic is controlled opposition that exists to strike fear in the hearts of members of OpenAI’s technical staff. I do not find the answer of ‘none at all’ plausible. I do find the answer ‘not all that much’ reasonably plausible, and increasingly plausible as there are more players. If OpenAI and company are already going as fast as they can, that’s that. I still have a hard time believing things like Claude 3.5 Sonnet don’t lead to lighting fires under people, or doesn’t cause them to worry a little less about safety. Whispers of Recursive Self-ImprovementThis is not the thing. But are there signs and portents of the thing?
Alex does this in a sandboxed environment with no internet access. What (tiny) percentage of users will do the same?
This is obviously not any sort of foom, or even a slow takeoff. Not yet. But yes, if the shift to Claude 3.5 Sonnet has substantially accelerated engineering work inside Anthropic, then that is how it begins. To be clear, this is really cool so far. Improvement and productivity are good, actually.
Dean Ball is of course correct that improving labor productivity is great. The issue is when you get certain kinds of productivity without the need for any labor, or when the labor and time and compute go down faster than the difficulty level rises. Improvements accelerate, and that acceleration feeds on itself. Then you get true RSI, recursive self improvement, and everything is transformed very quickly. You can have a 'slow’ version, or you can have a faster one. Will that happen? Maybe it will. Maybe it won’t. This is a sign that we might be closer to it than we thought. Logic FailsIt is time for an episode of everyone’s favorite LLM show, The New Model Is An Idiot Because It Still Fails On Questions Where It Incorrectly Pattern Matches.
Here’s another classic.
Davidad points out that it can be solved, Colin of course also
As ever, the question:
The answer is that these questions are chosen because they are known to be exactly those six year olds can solve and LLMs cannot easily solve. These are exactly the same failures that were noted for many previous LLMs. If Anthropic (or OpenAI or DeepMind) wanted to solve these examples in particular, so as not to look foolish, they could have done so. It is to their credit that they didn’t. Remember that time there was this (human) idiot, who could not do [basic thing], and yet they gained political power, or got rich, or were your boss, or had that hot date? Yeah. I do too. Practical Reports
As a practical matter, what else could the answer be? If Jan or anyone else skims a paper, or even if they read it, they will make mistakes. If you have a faster and more accurate method, you are going to use it. It will sometimes be worth verifying the answer, and sometimes it won’t be. You use your judgment. Some types of statements are not reliable, others are reliable enough. This is setting one up for a potential future where there is an intentional deception going on, either by design of the model, by the model for other reasons or due to some form of adversarial attack. But that’s also true of humans, including the paper authors. So what are you going to do about it?
There is always a downside somewhere:
What Comes NextCoding got another big leap, both for professionals and amateurs. Claude is now clearly best. I thought for my own purposes Claude Opus was already best even after GPT-4o, but not for everyone, and it was close. Now it is not so close. Claude’s market share has always been tiny. Will it start to rapidly expand? To what extent does the market care, when most people didn’t in the past even realize they were using GPT-3.5 instead of GPT-4? With Anthropic not doing major marketing? Presumably adaptation will be slow even if they remain on top, especially in the consumer market. Yet with what is reportedly a big jump, we could see a lot of wrappers and apps start switching over rapidly. Developers have to be more on the ball. How long should we expect Claude 3.5 Sonnet to remain on top? I do not expect anyone except Google or OpenAI to pose a threat any time soon. OpenAI only recently released GPT-4o. I expect them to release some of the promised features, but not to be able to further advance its core intelligence much prior to finishing its new model currently in training, which has ambition to be GPT-5. A successful GPT-5 would then be a big leap. That leaves Google until then. A Gemini Advanced 1.5 could be coming, and Google has been continuously improving in subtle ways over time. I think they are underdog to take over the top spot before Claude Opus 3.5 or GPT-5, but it is plausible. Until then, we have a cool new toy. Let’s use it. You're currently a free subscriber to |