---
subject: "The Paradox of Highly Optimized Tolerance"
from: "Maxim Raginsky from The Art of the Realizable <realizable@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-12-31 22:47:18
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Maxim Raginsky", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3440436245007788095", "UNREAD"]
---
As 2025 is drawing to a close, I think I can finally articulate my thoughts on social and technological risks pertaining to AI. I am not talking about superintelligence explosion (because
Alfred North Whitehead’s monumental Process and Reality presents what is probably the most fully articulated process ontology that elaborates upon this open-systems view. In the new year, I will devote a few posts to exploring Whitehead’s thought in the context of technology. Here, though, I want to present a more focused take which, nevertheless, contains a kernel of process-oriented thinking. I am a techno-pragmatist. I view technology as a means of problem-solving rather than of truth-seeking. This design viewpoint will naturally “meet with friction and opposition” at every layer, as it should be. Some of this friction and opposition has roots in material reality, some is grounded in societal and political domains. Nevertheless, instrumental rationality à la Max Weber is at the core of the technological worldview, and here we encounter a very important feature: In any sufficiently complex open system, implementing instrumental rationality at a particular layer of abstraction will inevitably expose (or even create) vulnerabilities in other interconnecting layers. For me, the relevance of this to AI was evident even if I couldn’t articulate it precisely. However, things really clicked in my mind as I was carefully studying the work of Jean Carlson and John Doyle on highly optimized tolerance. Their
The creation of the Internet is, indeed, one of the success stories of instrumental rationality. However, as Carlson and Doyle point out next, it comes at a price:
Abstraction and virtualization are indispensable tools for enabling effective interaction. At the same time, they require systems to be open, to have the capacity to affect and to be affected by other systems. This is where we see emergence of unforeseen behaviors or new failure modes. Software that was used to design and implement some kind of a beneficial “user illusion,” such as various user interfaces, is an open attack surface for designing and implementing malicious user illusions (or even manipulating users and systems without any overt indication that this is happening). The possibility of this kind of “hijacking” is a universal trait of complex multilayered architectures, both engineered (think about computer viruses, cryptocurrency scams, DDoS attacks, etc.) and biological (think about actual viruses, parasites, cancers, autoimmune disorders, etc.). This is also a bug/feature in complex social systems like modern markets and democracies — highly beneficial abstractions like voting, finance, law, social networks are vulnerable to hijacking by virtue of their (relative) openness in the sense that they interact with other architectural layers in the overall system, and the constraints imposed on one layer will inherently deconstrain others. In this sense, AI is, indeed, a normal technology. It aims to instrument certain kinds of “user illusions,” e.g., the illusion of communicating with intentional, anthropomorphic entities, and these systems are RHLF’d ad infinitum to force them to operate in a HOT state. However, this is exactly where we come face to face with the paradox of highly optimized tolerance¹. Language is, itself, a multilayered architecture, where robustness at one layer can mask a great deal of of complexity at lower layers. Have you noticed the extra “of” in the preceding sentence? In case you haven’t, this is exactly what I am talking about: We are trading off the accuracy in the semantic layer against speed of processing at the syntactic layer, so small typos, repetitions and the like may not register at all if we pay attention to sentences and not to individual tokens like word parts or letters. We can go lower down the hierarchy of layers and talk about neuronal activity that takes place in our brains as we interact with the world. Much of it is un- or sub-conscious. That includes the tremendous web of associations and dynamical links on which conscious activity supervenes, and that’s where language offers both a powerful interface for abstraction and an attack surface vulnerable to hijacking. To my mind, this removes much of the mystery of One of the last books I read this year was Happy New Year! 1 Yes, this (and the title of the post) is a reference to Popper’s paradox of tolerance. The Art of the Realizable is free today. But if you enjoyed this post, you can tell The Art of the Realizable that their writing is valuable by pledging a future subscription. You won't be charged unless they enable payments. |