---
subject: "Will Iran’s Regime Change?"
from: "Tomas Pueyo from Uncharted Territories <unchartedterritories@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-07-03 12:01:54
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tomas Pueyo", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_28238133486362596", "UNREAD"]
---
Last week, we covered This article is the last one in this series. Here are all the articles on Iran and the war against Israel: [Iran](https://substack.com/redirect/93ac7ce7-3a22-484d-958c-2cf52f7fd7cd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o): Its geopolitics, and why it’s impossible to invade on the ground.[Why Did Israel Strike Iran Now?](https://substack.com/redirect/2749a848-8dea-472f-ab1c-265d0c5f14a9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o): Why Iran’s current government hates Israel so much, why it developed a nuclear program, and why now was a uniquely good time for Israel to attack Iran.[Where Will the Israel – Iran War Go from Here?](https://substack.com/redirect/148e39ef-2980-461f-9249-201817ba5cde?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o): Israel’s goals in this war, how they’ve fared so far, and what’s left for them to do.[Will Iran Pursue the Nuclear Bomb?](https://substack.com/redirect/f6b96c51-59eb-434d-9735-196beba9d0c0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Yes, and how that pushes Israel to want to topple the Iranian government.
Which leads us to this: Israel’s situation room, July 3rd 2025 PRIME MINISTER NETANYAHU: Gentlemen, we’ve lived under the yoke of Iran’s threats since the 1979 Islamist Revolution. For decades, we’ve feared their buildup of proxies around us, their ballistic missiles, and more importantly, their nuclear program. But we saw a unique EYAL ZAMIR, CHIEF OF THE GENERAL STAFF OF THE ISRAEL DEFENSE FORCES (IDF): Today, but not tomorrow. Iranian government leaders will see their weakness and conclude that their only hope to hold onto power is a nuclear weapon. So should we wait for them to succeed? NETANYAHU: Can we even do that? We should weigh the pros and cons of trying. David? DAVID BARNEA, DIRECTOR OF THE MOSSAD: We should break the question down into four pieces: We can’t topple a popular government. Do Iranians want the current government to stay or leave? Iran is a country with [very strong secret services and tools to oppress its population](https://substack.com/redirect/93ac7ce7-3a22-484d-958c-2cf52f7fd7cd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Can we weaken that machinery?You can’t just hit the current government and hope somebody else will emerge to take over power. Are there alternative sources of power that can challenge the current government? If so, how can they actually take power?
1. How Much Do Iranians Want Another Government?Iranians have been I still remember the As recently as May 2025, there were During Israel’s bombing of Iran, people manifested their discontent with the regime: But demonstrations might not be representative. What do people really think? It’s a tricky question, because who do you ask? Iranians inside the country can’t speak freely. That said, this is the data we have: Here’s A less biased¹ source suggests the number of people who would oppose the Islamic Republic in 2019 was 70%. A leaked study by the regime’s Ministry of Culture and Islamic Guidance found that Additionally, This is partly due to sanctions, but Iranians know it’s not only that. I’m going to assume that 50-80% of Iranians want a regime change. But they don’t want just any regime change:²
And if 50-80% of Iranians want the regime to change, it means 20-50% don’t. Who are these people? Iran ranks 151 out of 180 in corruption: But wait, if there’s corruption, it means somebody benefits from it, right? In Iran, if you are upper class or upper-middle class, you are part of the government, whether directly or indirectly. The military, public jobs, businesses with government contacts… All are supported by the government, This means there are tens of millions of people with a vested interest in the regime staying in power. So: A powerful minority of Iranians want the current regime to stay, because they benefit from it. While the vast majority wants the regime to be toppled. However, they’re scared of what would happen if the current regime falls.
More importantly, they fear the regime’s oppression:
2. Iran’s Oppressive MachineryIt’s hard to coordinate an uprising when an oppressive machinery is liable to kill you every time you step outside. Iran is rated People feared this would become ten times worse after Israel’s bombings. They were
Israel’s Attacks on Iran’s Repression MachineryThis is how we should interpret Israel’s intense bombing of Iranian defense forces, focused on the You can witness the specific targeting of IRGC here: Israel The Basij headquarters in Tehran and Isfahan IRGC provincial units in the Alborz Province and in Tehran The Evin prison for political prisoners The IRGC Amand Missile Base near Tabriz The Imam Hossein missile base in Yazd The Shahid Mostafa Khomeini base in Qom (which housed ballistic missiles and drones) The IRGC’s Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting (IRIB) The Ministry of Intelligence and Security (MOIS) The Law Enforcement Command (LEC) headquarters
And many more. And Israel won’t stop here: But this is not enough. External SupportWe saw Obviously, the US is not thrilled with an Iran that used to be an ally and now wants its elimination. Iran is also against Saudi Arabia, because Saudi Arabia is: A monarchy Aligned with the West Emerging as a local power that challenges Iran’s goals of regional domination Is Sunni (as opposed to Iran, majority Shia)
It’s why Iran has supported Houthis in Yemen against the interests of Saudi Arabia, or why Iran Jordan and the UAE are other Sunni monarchies, and see themselves similarly at odds with Iran. Egypt is a republic like Iran, but it’s a secular one. In fact, the Muslim Brotherhood is banned there—not what theocratic Iran loves. So Egypt is no fan of Iran either. Up till now, the biggest benefactor was Russia, but Russia never wanted a competitor, only a subordinate ally, so it never aggressively pushed for Iran’s development. And now that it’s entangled in Ukraine, it can do little to support Iran. So Iran is uniquely alone today. Its oppressive regime is being pummeled by Israel, and is not supported from outside. But as you can imagine, you can weaken the leadership of the Basij and IRGC and starve it of support, but you can’t bomb your way to eliminating hundreds of thousands of members. You need others to be strong enough to rise and topple the regime. 3. Alternative Sources of PowerIn 1979, when Shah Pahlavi escaped Iran, Khomeini was already famous as a strong voice against the pro-Western government, which An obvious candidate is He was active on social media to push for an uprising, and he was hoping to help transition from the current regime.⁴ At some point he had some support: Even from the military: But of course, not everybody wants a monarchy, especially led by someone who spent his life in the US. It’s unlikely he will take power in the coming weeks. There’s Another alternative could be Mir Hossein Mousavi, who likely won the popular vote against Ahmadinejad in 2009, but the government rigged the election. He’s been under house arrest ever since. There are also Then there’s this:
One of the keys to these uprisings is that ethnicities span across borders, and this is true in Iran, too. The Kurds have already found some autonomy via military force in Syria and Iraq. It would not be a stretch to expand it in Iran. Azeris also have their share of military experience. Azerbaijan recently won against Armenia in its The Baloch are in a remote, desertic, mountainous area that straddles Afghanistan and Pakistan, although they’re not politically organized as strongly as the other groups. If we look at what happened in other countries in the region, when ethnic conflict challenges the central power, there’s civil war. Iran knows this and suppresses these regions more violently than the Persian heartland. And here we face a coordination issue. Kurds, Arabs, Baloch… all are small minorities that can’t challenge the Persian heartland. Only the Azeris are big enough to do it, and they could be supported by Azerbaijan, but there are only 10 million Azeris in Azerbaijan, so their support from outside could not single-handedly topple the Iranian government, or even allow Azeris to proclaim independence. If all minorities rise in arms at the same time, they could split the focus of the military and have a chance at remaining independent after a civil war, but how could they coordinate? Very hard with an Iranian regime so aggressively present in the regions. 4. How Can Alternative Sources of Power Win in Iran?Iranians demonstrated in 1979 and toppled the government. This leads us to a core misconception in politics today: Demonstrations don’t usually work. People take to the streets, make noise, nothing happens, and then they go home. Some examples outside of Iran are the Why? Because people in power don’t want to lose it. They won’t simply vacate it when there’s opposition. The only way they will change is if their power is threatened. In democracies, power can be threatened if the demonstrations are huge and if they raise awareness on a previously unknown injustice. This can swing people’s vote, and throw the current parties out of power. But if the protest does not reveal new information, everybody already knows about a problem and protesting against it won’t change opinions much, so it won’t change who’s in power. And this is in democracies! In autocracies like in Iran, the government doesn’t care about people’s opinions: Their vote doesn’t count anyway! So what moves the people in power? A threat to their lives. If they think they can be killed, they will run away. But of course, the government controls the security forces. Who owns the gun owns the power. In democracies, the military follows the constitutions of the country so they don’t influence political outcomes. In autocracies, the autocrats control the guns—and that’s especially true in Iran.⁵ So how can opposition win? Only if, somehow, they can get ahold of the guns. This is how we should interpret Israel’s constant attacks on the leadership of the government, the IRGC, and the Basij militias. Note who is not present there: the leadership of the rest of the military. That’s because after 46 years of radicalization of the IRGC and Basij, it’s unlikely they will turn on the government. But the military is not as radicalized, is farther from the government, and has more to win by toppling it. We’re now ready to understand everything Israel and Iran are going to do in the coming months. Takeaways: The Next Few Months in IranIranians want the end of the regime. But they’re concerned about chaos and what might emerge from regime change. The regime doesn’t want to be toppled, so it’s doubling down on its brutal suppression of dissent. Supported by a strong and powerful minority that benefits from the regime
The oppression has prevented alternative sources of power from emerging in the past, and there are few valid ones today. Regardless, autocracies usually only fall when they’re threatened by guns. Ethnic minorities could access these weapons. If they revolted, they could drag Iran into a civil war. But they don’t necessarily want that unless the Persian government is weakened, and they can’t easily coordinate between themselves to rise at the same time. The grip on power of the current government is based on the guns of the IRGC and Basij militias, who are not about to topple it as they’re the most vested in its success. But the broader military is not as close to the government, so it might be the most interested in rising up. And this might be especially true now that Iran has few superpowers supporting them.
All of this is why prediction markets don’t think the Iranian regime will fall in 2025: So the government is unlikely to fall, but Israel will nevertheless try to make it happen. MOSSAD DIRECTOR: This won’t be easy. To topple the Iranian regime, we need to decapitate the government, the IRGC, and Basij. The weaker these guns, the more likely alternatives can emerge. Then, we need to talk with all sorts of alternative political leaders inside and outside of Iran, to see if they could form a coalition against the government. At the same time, we need to talk with anybody who might help ethnic minorities rise: Azerbaijan and Azeri leaders in Iran; Kurdish leaders across Iran, Iraq, Syria, and Turkey; Arab leaders in Khuzestan; Baloch leaders; Turkey or Saudi Arabia if they want to support any of these ethnicities; the US if they want to help… HEAD OF THE IDF: Not just ethnic support. We also need to make sure that no external government props up Iran. We need to break any support from Russia, and we need to definitely prevent the Chinese from jumping in. MOSSAD DIRECTOR: Yes, that’s true. Then, with all these collaborators, we must provide them with either weapons, money, coordination, or all of the above. Finally, we must get in touch with all the military leaders we can outside of the IRGC and the Basij, and try to give them support (money and coordination?) to rise up against the government whenever the right moment arrives. NETANYAHU: So, destroy the current government, prop up new centers of power, push them against each other, and prevent Russia and China from intervening. That is a long shot… This article ends the Iran series. In the premium article this week, we’re going back to the deep patterns of fashion, to understand why we dress the way we dress through examples like jeans, athleisure, suits, and saris. Subscribe to read it! 1
2
3 I asked this to Grok and ChatGPT, and looked at the sources. I didn’t check every one of these, so don’t take this list as final. Rather, I thought it illustrates well a fact that I haven’t seen disputed anywhere yet: That Israel is targeting with special intensity the IRGC and the Basij militias. 4 And maybe attain power…? 5 Note that when the Shah Pahlavi lost, a key element was that he lost the control of the military, because You're currently a free subscriber to |