---
subject: "TikTok Nearby 📱, Twitter whistleblower 🐦, sounds from a black hole 🌌"
from: "\"TLDR 🤖\" <dan@tldrnewsletter.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-08-24 10:21:24
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "TLDR", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_795315172960844453", "UNREAD"]
---
[TikTok is testing a new ‘Nearby’ feed to display local content (3 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftechcrunch.com%2F2022%2F08%2F23%2Ftiktok-testing-nearby-feed%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000182cf5ef90f-0aa97e3e-56b6-443a-8c1e-093d3595b60d-000000/GDorQTPgJEl2oPP3r6cAIp6Kia527GVEVS2uhr1NjMs=263)
TikTok is testing a 'Nearby' feed designed to display local content to users in Southeast Asia. Users who are part of the test will see a new feed tab displayed alongside the 'Following' and 'For You' feeds. The feed is testing alongside a feature that lets creators add location tags to their videos. It could open up new opportunities for local advertisers and help users discover nearby venues and products. TikTok says the feature may change before launch or be scrapped altogether.
|
[Google research AI image noise reduction is out of this world (2 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftechcrunch.com%2F2022%2F08%2F23%2Fnerf-in-the-dark%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000182cf5ef90f-0aa97e3e-56b6-443a-8c1e-093d3595b60d-000000/z4HksbYnPyFukVO7LZyzHzsv5gXhtaICurl3qUC2jbc=263)
MultiNeRF is a project from Google Research that includes algorithms that can figure out what images should look like without noise generated by imaging sensors. The algorithms can remove noise from images to significantly improve their quality, especially in low-light scenes. They can also vary exposure, tone maps, viewpoints, and focus. A video showcasing the technology is available.
|
Science & Futuristic Technology
|
[First material found to "remember" its own history (2 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fnewatlas.com%2Fmaterials%2Fvanadium-dioxide-memory-material%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000182cf5ef90f-0aa97e3e-56b6-443a-8c1e-093d3595b60d-000000/exZ9r9Fgv-Rwg7ot9s6t8BI9IddXlSH1-WnbbPdSJWQ=263)
Vanadium dioxide (VO2) is a material that is normally an insulator, but it changes structure and acts like a metal when heated to 68 degrees Celsius. It can conduct electricity without conducting heat. A team of scientists recently discovered that VO2 can 'remember' phase transitions for at least three hours. It is the only material known so far to behave this way. The discovery could lead to a new class of memory and data processing devices.
|
[NASA Recorded The Sound From a Black Hole, and It's Super Eerie (3 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.sciencealert.com%2Fnasa-recorded-the-sound-from-a-black-hole-and-its-super-eerie%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000182cf5ef90f-0aa97e3e-56b6-443a-8c1e-093d3595b60d-000000/wXfxW64-LFA4WisKdiH8tfKEB1wMo6lYF5nZnR66QF0=263)
NASA has released an audio clip of sound waves from a supermassive black hole located 250 million light-years away. The waves had to be transposed up 57 and 58 octaves to be audible to humans. They include the lowest note in the Universe ever detected by humans, a B-flat just over 57 octaves below middle C. Sound waves may play a vital role in the evolution of galaxy clusters over long periods of time. The audio clip is available in the article.
|
Programming, Design & Data Science
|
[Crawlee (GitHub Repo)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fapify%2Fcrawlee%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000182cf5ef90f-0aa97e3e-56b6-443a-8c1e-093d3595b60d-000000/iFKged4FcHV2BpqTbkEqIAPuHpi2-P_abYCJReN8LuI=263)
Crawlee is a TypeScript web scraping and browser automation library. It makes crawlers appear human-like with its powerful anti-blocking features. Crawlee features a single interface for HTTP and headless browser crawling, a persistent queue for URLs to crawl, pluggable storage for tabular data and files, automatic scaling, and integrated proxy rotation and session management.
|
[Diffusers (GitHub Repo)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fhuggingface%2Fdiffusers%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000182cf5ef90f-0aa97e3e-56b6-443a-8c1e-093d3595b60d-000000/fToruTDkmX7WdbaAdOlOaoMHBBTd7VhHhv-1XpzTans=263)
Diffusers provides pretrained diffusion models across multiple modalities and serves as a modular toolbox for inference and training of diffusion models. It features state-of-the-art diffusion pipelines, various noise schedulers, multiple types of models, training examples, and inference examples. Diffusers is fully compatible with Stability AI's Stable Diffusion text-to-image model.
|
[Remote Startups Will Win the War for Top Talent (4 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ffuture.com%2Fremote-startups-hire-top-talent%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000182cf5ef90f-0aa97e3e-56b6-443a-8c1e-093d3595b60d-000000/YmzwajWAbwjx_mYJRQBSwj_2xNa0wARyl8FkGBqAVao=263)
Workers are leaving companies that treat them poorly, underpay them, or hinder their quality of life. Many are moving towards remote work, which allows them to organize work around living. Studies have shown how working in offices can be detrimental to employees and their quality of work. The most talented workers will leave companies that don't adapt and go to companies that embrace remote work.
|
[Twitter’s former security chief says company lied about bots and safety (4 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.theverge.com%2F2022%2F8%2F23%2F23317857%2Ftwitter-whistleblower-zatko-security-spam-safety%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000182cf5ef90f-0aa97e3e-56b6-443a-8c1e-093d3595b60d-000000/bvFZURJ57i2bhBjJuVb-Owvm8eXxfw3qEo250dh7Vkk=263)
Twitter's former head of security has accused the company of negligent security practices. He claims that Twitter misled federal regulators about its safety and that the company fails to properly estimate the number of bots on its platform. About half of Twitter's 7,000 or so full-time employees have access to users' sensitive personal data and internal software. Twitter has failed to delete user data in the past as the records were spread too widely among internal systems to be tracked. The company could face significant fines if the accusations are proven to be correct.
|
|
What did you think of today's newsletter?
|
I also write a daily newsletter on crypto, if you'd be interested in receiving TLDR Crypto, [sign up here](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftldr.tech%2Fcrypto%2Fsignup/1/01000182cf5ef90f-0aa97e3e-56b6-443a-8c1e-093d3595b60d-000000/BC5Dt60qV-Oug8l8-6nfFS3BZTdbjEz68k08OBYgAyc=263)!
If you have any comments or feedback, just respond to this email!
Thanks for reading,
Dan
|
|
|
|