---
subject: "The Nutgraf: Two stories of layoffs from TCS and Microsoft"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-08-02 04:32:39
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
Before I begin, a quick shoutout to the wonderful subscribers who attended last week’s event in-person and via our livestream. We spent a fantastic Saturday morning discussing how AI was changing the rules of traditional product development and collectively figuring out the new rules. The panelists were almost as accomplished as the audience itself, who were some of the most successful leaders, founders, academics, and CEOs in India. Several of them said later that they learnt so much about what was going on. We even involved them in the discussion itself.
If you attended, thank you.
I hope you had as much fun as we did.
This was our fourth event.
As always, we want to do another next month. We’re still figuring it out, but I can promise it’ll also be about another topic that’s as high-stakes and urgent as this one.
Anyway, on to today’s edition.
I guess we should talk a bit about the biggest news from last week.
India’s largest software services provider, Tata Consultancy Services (TCS), will be letting go of 2 percent of its workforce, or roughly over 12,000 employees, over the next year, in a bid to become more agile and future-ready amid rapid disruptions in technology.
“We have been calling out new technologies, particularly AI and operating model changes. The ways of working are changing. We need to be future-ready and agile. We have been deploying AI at scale and evaluating skills we will be requiring for the future. We have invested a lot in associates in terms of how we can provide them with career growth and deployment opportunities. Still, we find that there are roles where redeployment has not been effective. This will impact roughly 2 percent of our global workforce, primarily at middle and senior levels. It has not been an easy decision and one of the toughest decisions I have had to take as CEO,” TCS CEO K Krithivasan told Moneycontrol in an interview on Sunday.
TCS to cut 2% of workforce, affecting 12,000 employees amid skill gap and tech shift, [Moneycontrol](https://www.moneycontrol.com/news/business/tcs-to-cut-2-of-workforce-affecting-12-000-employees-amid-skill-gap-and-tech-shift-13333687.html/amp)
Was there anyone who did not see this coming?
Surprisingly… yes.
Or well, maybe they did, but everyone went through their own version of the stages of grief when the news broke. We all knew AI would eventually make its presence felt in India’s IT services sector—but it feels like TCS’s decision is significant. Years later, when we look back, I suspect this will be widely seen as the first stone that kicked off the avalanche. This is hardly a controversial opinion. Since the announcement, TCS has caught the attention of not [one](https://www.news18.com/business/economy/tcs-layoffs-labour-ministry-summons-it-firm-over-mass-job-cuts-hiring-delays-9473015.html)… not [two](https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/bengaluru-news/tcs-layoffs-row-karnataka-seeks-clarity-on-reported-termination-of-12-000-employees-101753973521745.html)… but [three](https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/business/india-business/tcs-layoffs-it-ministry-closely-monitoring-12000-job-cuts-claims-report-it-union-calls-tech-firms-move-illegal/articleshow/122967092.cms) separate government bodies, both at the state and the national level. Others have started doing calculations of the second-order effects of these layoffs, such as on [real-estate](https://www.newindianexpress.com/business/2025/Jul/29/tcs-layoffs-could-impact-housing-market-in-key-tech-cities) prices. This is not a normal reaction. This is what panic looks like.
Tune in to The Ken’s premium audio experience
From original podcasts to writer-narrated versions of our subscriber newsletters, existing Premium subscribers can listen to all our premium audio, available exclusively via our subscriber apps. Discover them all at [the-ken.com/podcasts](https://the-ken.com/podcasts), including the [latest volume](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/the-nutgraf/two-stories-of-layoffs-from-tcs-and-microsoft/) of this newsletter.
Not a Premium subscriber? You can subscribe to [The Ken Premium](https://podcasts.apple.com/in/channel/the-ken-premium/id6744577070) on Apple Podcasts for an easy monthly price (Rs 299 in India).
I have a [lot](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/ai-breaks-the-blood-brain-barrier/) of [complex](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/what-creatives-know-that-ai-startups-dont/) [thoughts](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/ai-has-changed-search-forever/) [about](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/ai-sells-swords-at-dawn-and-shields-at-dusk/) AI (as readers of this newsletter know by now), but one thing I’m increasingly certain of is that it’s going to strike deep, crippling blows to India’s labor market—and I don’t believe we’ll bounce back from it, which is what I [wrote](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/build-ai-and-they-will-ask-you-to-go/) about a couple of months ago.
The strongest evidence for this argument is also the most noteworthy detail about the TCS layoff announcement. When TCS broke the news about layoffs, guess what happened to its stock price?
It fell by 3% in a week.
And investors didn’t just punish TCS, they punished [most](https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/business/india-business/tcs-layoffs-it-companies-face-stock-slump-as-shares-fall-up-to-3-infosys-wipro-hcl-under-fire/articleshow/122948743.cms) Indian IT companies last week.
I don’t want to read too much into stock movements, but I found this interesting, and perhaps a bit counterintuitive.
When Microsoft announced multiple rounds of layoffs over the past few months, they used more or less the same corporate jargon that TCS did: AI transformation, agile, future ready. The layoffs also impacted the same cohort of employees across both companies—middle and senior management.
And yet, the response couldn’t have been more different.
Here’s how investors rewarded Microsoft.
And here’s how they reacted to TCS.
Before you start drafting those angry emails, I realise that these are two completely different companies with separate products, business models, cash flows, narratives, and contexts. This is just an illustrative example to get your attention.
Pay attention to my larger point: investors are responding differently to India’s IT companies, despite them doing more or less the same thing that their Silicon Valley counterparts are doing. You are probably thinking, “well, that’s because they are structurally different companies.”
Yes, but what exactly is the point of difference?
I’m posing this question because the prevailing assumption in my mind was that investors reward layoffs and restructuring. There’s significant empirical evidence for this. And that’s not just specific to Microsoft, or even tech companies. Meta announced a layoff of 11,000 employees in 2022 and its stock price jumped by 25%. A year later, they announced another headcount reduction of 10,000 people and the market rewarded them with a jump of another 20%. Spotify announced layoffs in late 2023 and its stock price jumped by 7.5%.
The list is [quite long](https://www.forbes.com/sites/petercohan/2025/07/28/microsoft-stock-up-more-than-amazon-dont-buy-into-ai-staff-cuts/). Microsoft. Amazon. Salesforce. Intel. Union Pacific. Verizon. Even banks like Citigroup and JP Morgan announced layoffs recently and their stock price went up in the short-term.
Anyway, so I went looking for the [answer](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1748-8583.12532), and like most things in life, the ones who’ve thought about this deeply are not the tech people, but academics. I found a paper [published](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1748-8583.12532) a couple of years ago titled Stock investors’ reaction to layoff announcements: A meta-analysis, where authors Kamran Eshghi and Vivek Astvansh analysed around 35,000 layoff announcements taken from 126 samples featured in 78 studies. I recommend reading it in full (please don’t just ask an AI to summarise it for you). Essentially, the paper concluded that the “average investor reaction is significantly negative” to layoff announcements.
Well, that’s the average reaction.
The authors categorise past layoff announcements using multiple parameters that try to measure the “signalling” of the layoff itself and try to see patterns. They use multiple hypotheses to measure whether the firm’s announcement of layoffs was seen as “proactive” or “reactive”, and eventually, you get cool illustrations like this where they use parameters like the size of the layoff, the year when it was announced, the size of the firm, etc.
There are several conclusions the authors draw based on the analysis, all of which are interesting. For instance, they find that investors have become less punitive over time (indicating that layoffs have become more acceptable). They’ve also concluded that it’s better for companies to announce several smaller layoffs instead of one large layoff (which is quite counter to the conventional wisdom which suggests that companies need to rip the bandage quickly).
But there are two other conclusions to their paper which I found relevant to what makes TCS different from all the other examples we’ve seen so far.
The first was the kind of country where the layoff occurs, and whether laws favour employers or employees. In the United States, investors “are better informed than those in civil-law countries and thus the former have less reason to react more sharply, whereas the latter have reason to estimate the worst-case scenario and thus tend to react more punitively”.
The second reason is much more interesting, and the authors specifically give Meta as an example to illustrate it. I’ll share the finding below in full:
“A firm can nullify investor penalty by framing the layoff announcement to indicate its proactive management of its internal problems or external environmental challenges. Equally—if not more importantly—the firm’s announcement should not indicate reactive management of its problems and challenges.”
A few lines later, they drive their point home.
“Our research informs layoff-announcing firms that reactive layoffs evoke a penalty, whereas proactively framed announcements elicit no reaction from stock investors”
I suppose, in the end, that’s what sets India’s IT companies apart from the rest.
Regards,
Praveen Gopal Krishnan