---
subject: "Space Industries Are Lifting Off"
from: "Tomas Pueyo from Uncharted Territories <unchartedterritories@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-12-09 18:18:37
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tomas Pueyo", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_28238133486362596", "UNREAD"]
---
In In Of course, the biggest example is SpaceX’s Starlink, which has just But today, I want to look at less well-known examples: Helium on the Moon Pharma manufacturing AI Data Centers
1. Helium on the MoonIn
I was wrong! We have! The 3rd one on that list. Turns out the Moon has plenty of Helium-3! According to Our Sun shines because it fuses hydrogen into helium. Some of that helium is the more stable He-4, but some is the radioactive He-3. Some of these helium particles are expelled from the Sun in solar winds. The Earth is protected from these winds by its magnetic field and its atmosphere, which is why we have little He-3. But the Moon has no magnetic field and barely any atmosphere! So apparently helium lands on its surface and is captured by the ground’s regolith. Wow! So He-3 is scarce on Earth, but what is the demand for it?
OK so we need radioactive helium to make quantum computers (!!). Wait, it gets better! Helium used to cost something like $1M/kg, but its price has been skyrocketing. And why is that? Listen to this. Because He-3 used to be a by-product of nuclear arms programs,¹ but as nuclear weapon production has dwindled, so has He-3 production on Earth. That’s why Helium-3 costs about In any case, if your price per kg is $26M, that gives you a lot of leeway to harvest and bring that thing to Earth. How much? A
Over 28 days, that’s 33,600 tons⁴, which backs out to about 0.49 kg per harvester per month.⁵ Two years of operation would yield about 13 kg, more than the entire cargo that Bluefors has requested for 10 years of operation. That harvester will weigh about 3 tons.⁶ ChatGPT tells me you need to add 12 tons of other stuff (processing plant, solar panels, storage, radiators, cryoseparation…), for a total of 15 tons. 15 tons is three Falcon 9 missions, so about $200M.⁷ If all of this works well, Bluefors will be paying $300M to Interlune so that it can spend $200M of that on sending hardware to the Moon. That leaves $100M to develop all this tech and bring the helium back to Earth. Once that’s done, Interlune would have the entire thing paid for in two years, and it would then have an ongoing harvesting operation on the moon, producing millions per kg of helium. This is freaking science fiction, but it sounds like it’s happening, and it’s worth summarizing. We are building quantum computers, for which we need cryogenic cooling that only one element, Helium-3, can provide. Until now, the only place we could harvest it economically was from aging nuclear warheads, and it cost millions per kg. But as nuclear arms have dwindled, the price of that element has skyrocketed to tens of millions per kg, so we’re trying to figure out where to get the damn stuff. It turns out there’s a lot of it on the freakin’ moon. It has accumulated there over millions of years because that’s precisely what the Sun produces when it fuses hydrogen and then sends it flying through space. We don’t catch it because Earth has an electromagnetic shield and an atmospheric shield, which the moon doesn’t have, so the Moon bakes the helium into its soil. We’re now about to send lunar harvesters via reusable rockets so that they can automatically harvest the helium with energy from solar panels, but only two weeks at a time because of lunar cycles. Fuck. Yeah... Keep reading with a 7-day free trialSubscribe to Uncharted Territories to keep reading this post and get 7 days of free access to the full post archives. A subscription gets you:
|