---
subject: "GPT-5s Are Alive: Outside Reactions, the Router and the Resurrection of GPT-4o"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-08-12 12:39:35
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
A key problem with having and interpreting reactions to GPT-5 is that it is often unclear whether the reaction is to GPT-5, GPT-5-Router or GPT-5-Thinking. Another is that many of the things people are reacting to changed rapidly after release, such as rate limits, the effectiveness of the model selection router and alternative options, and the availability of GPT-4o. This complicates the tradition I have in new AI model reviews, which is to organize and present various representative and noteworthy reactions to the new model, to give a sense of what people are thinking and the diversity of opinion. I also had make more cuts than usual, since there were so many eyes on this one. I tried to keep proportions similar to the original sample as best I could. Reactions are organized roughly in order from positive to negative, with the drama around GPT-4o at the end. Tomorrow I will put it all together, cover the official hype and presentation and go over GPT-5’s strengths and weaknesses and how I’ve found it is best to use it after having the better part of a week to try things out, as well as what this means for expectations and timelines. My overall impression of GPT-5 continues to be that it is a good (but not great) set of models, with GPT-5-Thinking and GPT-5-Pro being substantial upgrades over o3 and o3-Pro, but the launch was botched, and reactions are confused, because among other things: The name GPT-5 and all the hype led to great expectations and underdelivery. All the different models were launched at once when they’re actually different. GPT-4o and other models were taken away without warning, GPT-5 baseline personality is off putting to a lot of people right now and it isn’t noticeably more intelligent than GPT-4o was on typical normal person usage. Severe temporary limits were imposed that people thought would be permanent. The router was broken, and even when not broken doesn’t work great.
I expect that when the dust settles people will be happy and GPT-5 will do well, even if it is not what we might have hoped for from an AI called GPT-5. Previously on GPT-5: Tyler CowenTyler Cowen finds it great at answering the important questions.
Tyler Cowen has been a big booster of o1, o3 and now GPT-5. What OpenAI has been cooking clearly matches what he has been seeking. I appreciate that he isn’t trying to give a universal recommendation or make a grand claim. He’s saying that for his topics and needs and experiences, this is a big upgrade. Ethan Mollick Thinks Ease Of Use Is A Big Deal
Okay, why is it a big deal?
I agree this is frustrating, and that those who don’t know how to select models and modes are at a disadvantage. Does GPT-5 solve this? Somewhat. It solves two important subproblems, largely for those who think ‘AI’ and ‘ChatGPT’ are the same picture. Users who previously only used GPT-4o and didn’t know there was a dropdown menu will now get the GPT-5-Thinking when their queries justify it. Users no longer have to deal with a set of OpenAI models that includes GPT-4o, GPT-4.1, GPT-4.5, o3, o3-Pro, o4-mini and so on. We can all agree this is a mess.
What it doesn’t do is solve the problem overall, for three reasons. The RouterThe first is that the router seems okay but not great, and there is randomness involved.
I was quite relieved to know I could do manual selection. But that very much means that I still have to think, before each query, whether to use Thinking, the exact same way I used to think about whether to use o3, and also whether to use pro. No change. They also claim that saying ‘think harder’ automatically triggers thinking mode. The mixture of experts that I can’t steer and that calls the wrong one for me often enough that I manually select the expert? It is not helping matters.
I do not think, contra Sichu Lu, that it is The second issue is that the router does not actually route to all my options even within ChatGPT. There are two very important others: Agent Mode and Deep Research. Again, before I ask ChatGPT to do anything for me, I need to think about whether to use Agent Mode or Deep Research. And again, many ChatGPT users won’t know these options exist. They miss out again. Third, OpenAI wishes it were otherwise but there are other AIs and ways to use AI out there. If you want to know how to get best use of AI, your toolkit starts with at minimum all of the big three: Yes ChatGPT, but also Remember To Use Thinking ModeMany report that all the alpha is in GPT-5-Thinking and Pro, and that using ‘regular’ GPT-5 is largely a trap for all but very basic tasks.
Taelin is happy with what he sees from GPT-5-Thinking.
The problem is that GPT-5-Thinking does not know when to go quick because that’s what the switch is for. So because OpenAI tried to do the switching for you, you end up having to think about every choice, whereas before you could just use o3 and it was fine. This all reminds me of the tale of Master of Orion 3, which was supposed to be an epic game where you only got 7 move points a turn and they made everything impossible to micromanage, so you’d have to use their automated systems, then players complained so they took away the 7 point restriction and then everyone had to micromanage everything that was designed to make that terrible. Whoops.
A lot of the negative reactions could plausibly be ‘they used the wrong version, sir.’
Even if they ‘fix’ this somewhat the choice is clear: Use the explicit model switcher.
The One Who Does Not Know How To AskGetting back to Ethan Mollick’s other noted feature, that I don’t see others noticing:
Is that… good?
Yes, that was work that would have taken humans a bunch of time, and I trust Ethan’s assessment that it was a good version of that work. But why should we think that was work that Ethan wanted or would find useful?
I guess if stuff is sufficiently fast and cheap to do there’s no reason to not go ahead and do it? And yes, everyone appreciates the (human) assistant who is proactive and goes that extra mile, but not the one that spends tons of time on that without a strong intuition of what you actually want.
I mean, okay, although I don’t think this functionality is new? The main thing Ethan says is different is that GPT-5 didn’t fail in a growing cascade of errors, and that when it did find errors pasting in the error text fixed it. That’s great but also a very different type of improvement. Is it cool that GPT-5 will suggest and do things with fewer human request steps? I mean, I guess for some people, especially Nabeel Qureshi
Other Positive Reactions
Well, sure, there’s that. But is it a good model, sir?
I am asking everyone once again to not use ‘superintelligence’ to refer to slightly better normal AI as hype.
This is not in any way, shape or form superintelligence, universal basic or otherwise. If you want to call it ‘universal basic intelligence’ then fine, do that. Otherwise, shame on you, and
I fear that the answer to that will always be no. If we started using ‘transformational AI’ (TAI) instead or ‘powerful AI’ (PAI) then that’s what then goes in this post. There’s no winning, only an endless cycle of power eating your terms over and over. As is often the case, how you configure the model matters a lot, so no, not thinking about what you’re doing is never going to get you good results.
It’s A Good Model, SirBut not a great model. That is my current take, which I consider neutral.
Most people are free users and don’t even know Anthropic or Claude exist, or even in any meaningful way that o3 existed, and are going from no thinking to some thinking. Such different worlds. The Battle for Cursor SupremacyGPT-5 is now the default model on Cursor. Cursor users seem split. In general they report that GPT-5 offers as good or better results per query, but there are a lot of people who like Jessald are objecting on speed.
The whole perspective of ‘whose model is being used for [X] will determine the future’ or even in some cases ‘whose chips that model is being run on will determine the future’ does not actually make sense. Obviously you want people to use your model so you gain revenue and market share. These are good things. And yes, the model that enables AI R&D in particular is going to be a huge deal. That’s a different question. The future still won’t care which model vibe coded your app. Eyes on the prize. It’s also strange to see a claim like ‘OpenAI’s first attempt at catching up to Claude.’ OpenAI has been trying to offer the best coding model this entire time, and indeed claimed to have done so most of that time. Better to say, this is the first time in a while that OpenAI has had a plausible claim that they should be the default for your coding needs. So does Anthropic. Automatic For The PeopleIn contrast to those focusing on the battle over coding, many reactions took the form ‘this was about improving the typical user’s experience.’
Or as he put it in his overview post:
The problem with the for the people plan is the problem with democracy. The people. You think you know what the people want, and you find out that you are wrong. A lot of the people instead want their sycophant back and care far more about tone and length and validation than about intelligence, as will be illustrated when I later discuss those that are actively unhappy about the change to GPT-5. Thus, the risk is that GPT-5 as implemented ends up targeting a strange middle ground of users, who want an actually good model and want that to be an easy process. Skeptical Reactions
Noting that this claim that it lies a lot wasn’t something I saw elsewhere.
I enjoyed Agnes’s test, also I thought she was being a little picky in one spot, not that GPT-5 would have otherwise passed. One has to be careful to evaluate everything in its proper weight (speed and cost) class. GPT-5, GPT-5-thinking and GPT-5-pro are very different practical experiences.
Colin Fraser Colin FrasiersIt’s a grand tradition.
But I do think it is good to check.
I wanted this to be technically correct somehow, but alas no it is not. I like that the labs aren’t trying to make the models better at these questions in particular. More fun and educational this way. Or are they trying and still failing?
|