---
subject: "My Hopes For Rationality"
from: "Robin Hanson from Overcoming Bias <overcomingbias@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-08-31 19:03:32
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Overcoming Bias", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8616244883382228708", "UNREAD"]
---
When I wrote “ Let’s call people “rational” re certain decisions if they explicitly and realistically consider their goals, options, and complications to estimate which options best achieve those goals in the presence of those complications. This will typically encourage them to have relatively consistent, coherent, and evidence-based values and beliefs. When are we more vs less rational? Human rationality seems to peak at modest scale decisions, and to fall greatly for much smaller or larger decisions. At one extreme, we make most small decisions unconsciously, like where to step next as we walk or the next word to say as we speak. At the other extreme, we tend to be conscious but not so rational re our big personal decisions, like choice of career or marriage partner. And as reviewed above, we are even less rational re our collective decisions, such as government policy, especially regarding larger scopes and time scales. For these big decisions, we are emotional and social, and greatly influenced by symbols, rhetoric, and the sacred. However, we rationalize on far more decisions than we are rational on. When asked to explain or justify most decisions, we typically try to explain their processes and outcomes in rationality terms. And as most decisions are not at all made randomly, such rationalizations can typically make some sense of them. And we are usually uncritical enough of such rationalizations to accept them. But in fact, careful studies usually show otherwise. If we think that our explicit goals actually correlate greatly with our real goals, and our beliefs to correlate greatly with what our evidence actually supports, then we should want our societies to be more rational, especially re our biggest decisions. As we expect explicit rational analysis to greatly help us to actually achieve those goals. Those of us who are especially good at rationality should be especially eager for this, as we can see just how much we are losing now by not doing this, and as we’d likely be valued move highly in such a scenario. However, our habit of rationalization makes it hard to pursue the goal of increasing our rationality, as we are quite prone to believe that we have succeeded when we actually have not. Human specialists seem to be especially rational in engineering and finance, at least when their goals are clear and technical. So you might think we could make the rest of the world more rational if we induced them to ape the styles common in engineering and finance analysis. But it seems hard to generalize engineering and finance analysis methods to most other topics. Both academia and journalism claim to constrain themselves to follow methods that promote rationality on a much wider range of topics than do engineering and finance methods. And specialists in these areas do obtain unusually high prestige, and wide audiences. But while they may in fact make our world more rational in its big choices than it would otherwise be, their influence is clearly also quite limited; politics remains mostly not about policy. When it started in ’06, this blog was near the center of the origin of a “rationalist” movement wherein idealistic youths tried to adapt rational styles and methods. While these habits did often impress others, and bond this community together, they alas came to trust that their leaders had in fact achieved unusual rationality, and on that basis embraced many contrarian but not especially rational conclusions of those leaders. Having long been an academic, I’ve long been skeptical about the potential for style and method norms, of which academic has in abundance, to increase rationality. Such norms can be quite effective at channeling prestige to those who can master difficult methods, but are much less effective and preventing people from rationalizing motivated beliefs. I’m much more optimistic about creating institutions that make and preserve strong incentives for rationality on a wide range of topics. Such a prediction markets, decision markets, etc. The problem here is we need most people to be okay with allowing them legally to exist, and to sufficient respect market price estimates to use them as a guide to action. And also to get enough people, perhaps just a small minority, to sufficiently subsidize such markets on questions they care about. However, given how widespread and powerful is rationalization I can’t be very optimistic that we will adopt such institutions because we agree we want more rationality. But there’s a lot of randomness in which institutions get adopted where, and there’s reason to hope that cultural selection may favor more rational institutions, at least in competitive contexts. So I still have hope for the You're currently a free subscriber to |