---
subject: "More on US Pedestrian Deaths"
from: "Construction Physics <constructionphysics@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-10-16 12:49:00
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Construction Physics", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8588207018748827248", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Last week I wrote about the I looked through data on pedestrian fatalities from the National Highway Transportation Safety Administration (NHTSA), but I couldn’t find a singular explanation that satisfied me. The piece of evidence that most compelled me was this: the rate of pedestrian fatalities has increased substantially across many different states, even as overall pedestrian collisions have stayed close to constant. This suggests that pedestrian accidents are getting more deadly, which in turn suggests that the increase in popularity of big SUVs might be causing the increase in deaths. However, the number of pedestrians killed by sedans seems to be rising as well. That can’t be caused by SUVs getting bigger and more popular. This article got lots of attention, and readers had many theories about the drivers of the increase. In this follow-up post, I wanted to further investigate some of the most compelling theories and angles on the question. Unfortunately, this exercise left me more confused than before. What previously seemed like the most promising explanation (the rise of large SUVs) now looks less compelling. But no other explanation has emerged to take its place. Deaths and darknessSome folks pointed me to a The NYT is correct; This was an error on my part that stemmed from not looking closely enough at the data behind a bad summary statistic. I was correct that there hasn’t been much change in the proportion of deaths during the hours of 6pm to 6am. But 6am is night at some times of year and location, and day in other times and places.. Lighting conditions are not just a function of the clock. If you look at deaths by lighting condition, you find that the increase in deaths is mostly in times of darkness. Deaths in daylight are only up 28% since 2009; deaths in darkness or lit darkness (streetlights, etc.) are up 103% and 87%, respectively. On its own, this data doesn’t tell us what’s causing the increase in deaths (indeed, the NYT quotes a researcher at the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety saying, “I don’t have any definitive answers for this”), but it’s a useful correction. Increases in speedOne theory I heard was that small increases in vehicle speed have a disproportionate impact on the deadliness of collisions, so the cause may be small increases in vehicle speed that aren’t large enough to show up in increased rates of speeding. Risk and Vehicle Impact Speed Risk of severe injury or death when a pedestrian is struck by a vehicle at different speeds. It’s true that the risk of death rises substantially with vehicle speed: going from 23 mph to 32 mph increases the risk of death from 10% to 25%. However, if we look at the frequency of deaths by the speed limit of the road they occur on, deaths have increased at every speed limit, including at very high speed limits (60 mph and above) where death was already virtually certain. Percentage-wise, the biggest increase is actually at the top end of the scale, particularly with 70-79 mph speed limits (where deaths have nearly tripled). This doesn’t seem consistent with “minor increases in speeding” as a cause of increased deaths. Another possibility is that speed limits have risen across the board on US roads, making them more deadly even though “speeding” (going over the speed limit) hasn’t increased. Speed limits in the US Location of deathsThe previous article looked at the location of pedestrian deaths by state, and by type of road, but didn’t go more granular than that. I was pointed to a
Unfortunately, this doesn’t tell us much about what’s causing the uptick in deaths. Covid-19In the previous article I looked at rates of pedestrian crashes overall vs fatal crashes in several different states, noting that the fatality rate had almost always increased over time. But for each state I only looked at two times, 2009 (or as early as data was available) and 2023/2024. I decided to look at actual time series for states to see if there was anything notable. The graph below shows pedestrian crashes and pedestrian fatalities for Arizona, Illinois, Pennsylvania, and South Carolina, normalized so that 2009 values are equal to 100. (There was nothing special about these states, they were simply the first states I looked at where data went back to 2009.) Pedestrian Crashes vs Pedestrian Fatalities Pedestrian crashes and fatalities in Arizona, Illinois, Pennsylvania, and South Carolina. Normalized to 2009 = 100. Each state has pedestrian deaths rising faster than overall collisions, and in some states collisions are falling even as pedestrian deaths are rising. But the time series also shows a jump during 2020 due (presumably) to Covid-19: pedestrian crashes suddenly have large declines, but pedestrian fatalities only show modest declines (Pennsylvania), are flat (Illinois), or increase (Arizona, South Carolina). My guess is that while daylight driving declined significantly, (due to things like people working from home), night-time driving declined much less. In Arizona, for instance, the number of daylight pedestrian crashes declined by 27% from 2019 to 2020; nighttime crashes only declined by 3%. Distracted pedestriansIn the previous article I noted that there’s not much evidence for increased “driver distractedness” as a factor (which would include drivers distracted by phones), though it’s hard to rule out. People also wondered if pedestrian inattentiveness (because of phones or headphones) could be a factor. Since 2010 FARS has tracked “non-motorist contributing factors,” which includes whether pedestrians were “inattentive.” However, as with driver distractedness, there’s not much evidence that this is a factor. The number of killed pedestrians classified as “inattentive” is a tiny fraction of overall pedestrian deaths. This doesn’t necessarily mean that a pedestrian wasn’t distracted by their phone or something else: as with driver distractedness, it may simply not have been recorded (though all else equal, I would expect drivers in these collisions to happily place blame on pedestrians looking at their phones, so the fact that they’re not seems telling). Similarly, if distracted pedestrians were a major factor, I would expect pedestrian collisions overall to have increased, but they don’t seem to have (at least not consistently). BicyclistsSome readers wondered if a similar uptick in fatalities has been seen for bicyclists. It has: bicyclist deaths are up 86% since 2009. So whatever is causing the increase also seems to be affecting cyclists. Demographic changesOther than the age of drivers and pedestrians, my previous article didn’t really look at any demographic factors, and folks wondered whether there might be any notable changes in composition there. For gender, there’s not much change for either drivers or victims: men have stayed around 70% of both: Pedestrian Fatalities and Gender Fraction of pedestrian fatalities and drivers involved in pedestrian fatalities that are male. For race, the fraction of white victims has stayed roughly constant (save for a big decline in 2023 for some reason). There was an uptick in the fraction of black victims around 2015, and a corresponding decrease in the fraction of other races. Because “Hispanic” isn’t a racial category, we need to look at that separately. Interestingly, the number of Hispanic victims was declining until around 2017, after which it rose substantially (from 24% of pedestrian deaths in 2017 to 40% of deaths in 2023), though still within the range of what we’ve seen historically. This doesn’t quite line up with the spike in pedestrian deaths overall (which began in 2009), but it’s interesting to note. Other readers also wondered if an increasing homeless population could be behind the increase. Evidence here seems mixed. The number of homeless in the US has been increasing in recent years, but the increase started around 2015-2017, not in 2009. This seems largely true on a state-by-state level as well. However, although the data isn’t amazingly robust, it does seem like a large fraction of pedestrians killed by motor vehicles are homeless. In Hawaii 13 of 37 pedestrians killed in motor vehicle accidents in 2024 were homeless, and 8 in 28 in 2025. It’s also the case that the rate of death from traffic accidents among the homeless has dramatically risen in recent years. This doesn’t tell us about causation: it’s not clear if homeless are increasingly at risk because of something they’re doing ( wandering into traffic more, say), or if they’re just victims of other factors. I did find it notable that homeless mortality rates from many different causes are up substantially, and that the increase in traffic deaths is greater than the increase in pedestrian deaths more generally. It suggests that something might be causing increased homeless deaths across the board, which might also include increased traffic deaths. It also seems that while homeless deaths are a large fraction of pedestrian deaths in cities, they’re still a relatively small fraction of pedestrian deaths overall. In 2020 there were 6,565 pedestrians killed by motor vehicles. If we assume that the death rate of 150 per 100,000 found in the study applies to the homeless population overall ( Big SUV skepticism, phone use theoryJohn Burn-Murdoch of the Financial Times wrote Some folks suggested that perhaps American SUVs are uniquely large and dangerous — SUVs in other countries seem like they’re often much smaller than the huge ones we have in the US. But Canada seems to contradict this. SUVs and trucks in Canada look just as large as US ones: four of the top 10 most popular vehicles Burn-Murdoch also points to an Burn-Murdoch points to some evidence that it might be phone use, showing that US drivers seem to spend much more time on their phones than Canadian drivers. But this data (which only covers a year) isn’t enough to show whether there’s been a change in US phone use over time. I looked up some reports from the firm that gathers this data (Cambridge Mobile Telematics), and it does seem to show an increase in driver phone use in the US over time. Its 2020 report “ And its “ So it’s possible that US drivers simply use their phones more in the car than drivers in other countries, and that this problem has grown worse over time. This is suggestive, but I don’t think it’s definitive: if increased smartphone use were the problem, I’d expect collisions of all types to be up (which they aren’t), and wouldn’t expect the problem to be limited to night. Driver blind spotsStill other readers suggested that an increase in the size of vehicle blind spots might be behind the increase. This initially seemed like a very plausible explanation. Visibility in US Cars Area visible in square meters in 10 meter radius in front of various US cars for different model years. This decrease seems to be partly driven by more stringent NHTSA safety standards for roof crush resistance, which incentivize making cars with very This is also potentially an area where the US is different from Europe. Europe not only has If this theory was correct, pedestrian accidents would be getting more deadly not because cars are getting larger and heavier, but because drivers increasingly can’t see pedestrians, and aren’t slowing down before hitting them. This would also explain why cyclist deaths have risen in roughly the same proportion. Another notable item here: modern vehicles mostly have However, once again Canada throws a wrench into this explanation. Canada has very similar vehicle safety requirements as the US, including no limits on driver visibility obstructions and similar roof crush standards as the US. The NHTSA actually publishes a list of ConclusionLooking more deeply into possible explanations for the rise in US pedestrian deaths has left me more confused than before. Our most promising original explanation — increasingly large SUVs — was already somewhat shaky, and now looks even less promising. Other countries have had similar increases in SUVs without a corresponding increase in pedestrian deaths. The most promising new explanation — an increase in the size of US vehicle blind spots — is hard to square with the fact that Canada has very similar vehicle safety regulations as the US (and thus presumably a similar increase in driver blind spots, though I haven’t verified this), but hasn’t seen an uptick in pedestrian deaths. The “distracted by phones” theory seems somewhat more plausible to me now, but I still wish there were stronger evidence here. We did uncover some interesting new factors. The increased deaths are mostly taking place at night. Cyclists’ deaths have increased by roughly the same amount in percentage terms. Deaths seem to be occuring less in downtowns, and more in suburban areas. A large fraction of pedestrian deaths are homeless (though probably not large enough to entirely explain the increase), and the rate of homeless killed in traffic accidents has increased dramatically in recent years, as has the absolute number of homeless in the US. The fraction of victims who are Hispanic (many of whom are likely also homeless) has risen dramatically since ~2017. But once again, these factors don’t point to a single clear explanation. Are homeless people increasingly likely to wander into traffic, or are they simply the most common victim of some other increase in road deadliness? If it’s the former, why? Is the increase in Hispanic fatalities connected to an uptick in illegal border crossings (this seems hard to square with the fact that illegal border crossings were My (unsatisfying) current theory is that the increase in pedestrian deaths is due to a multitude of small factors (an uptick in homelessness, an increase in drug use, a reduction in traffic law enforcement, etc.) and/or some sort of complicated multi-factor interaction (such as reduced driver forward visibility exacerbating American’s tendency to use their phones while driving). But I’m not particularly confident of this. There’s research that could be done to better try to pin down this question. More extensive studies of vehicle blind spots, across the US, Canada, and Europe could tell us how much these have been changing in different places. It also seems like a large-scale study using 1 These graphs do not seem especially consistent to me. For both of them, I don’t see how 2023 could have higher annual phone motion than 2020, when the time series shows it consistently below it. Construction Physics articles will always remain free, but if you find this work valuable, I encourage you to Construction Physics is produced in partnership with the Institute for Progress, a Washington, DC-based think tank. You can learn more about their work by visiting their You can also contact me on |