---
subject: "AI #93: Happy Tuesday"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-12-04 00:22:45
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
You know how you can sometimes have Taco Tuesday… on a Thursday? Yep, it’s that in reverse. I will be travelling the rest of the week, so it made sense to put this out early, and incorporate the rest of the week into #94. Table of Contents[Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/cbc1de78-60d1-4a0a-9d16-66c22d28ab11?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The price is fixed, so share and enjoy.[Dare Not Speak Its Name.](https://substack.com/redirect/70a43756-2750-4dfc-a3b6-1f064de782a6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)David Mayer. David Mayer! Guido Scorza?[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/70250cc5-8664-4814-9894-9438ab98e1c7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)It’s a flop.[Huh, Upgrades.](https://substack.com/redirect/f23541d2-3495-4e61-94b3-c38ba2fcbbbc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Cohere, and reports on Claude writing styles.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon.](https://substack.com/redirect/7a9eefd5-a7ea-418f-820d-8564c61816f6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Why do we not care about spoof calls?[Fun With Image Generation.](https://substack.com/redirect/f4cbace5-8156-4f3f-8734-fb926ccf41e8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Scott Sumner explains why he cares about art.[The Art of the Jailbreak.](https://substack.com/redirect/b7a2c800-8499-47c1-94f4-cf60157baf0a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)You had one job.[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/c09b9ae1-1554-4df3-ab45-3b9d11b4039f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Anthropic AI safety fellows program, apply now.[Introducing.](https://substack.com/redirect/9580f2e5-29f1-49c7-afb1-daf154da8c7b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)a voice customization tool and a new eval based on various games.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/ea768aef-03b7-42a5-8acf-f49d84c192f4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Where do you draw the line? Who leaves versus who joins?[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/24eae730-fbb3-46f3-bec1-54d31cd50c70?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Rumors of being so back unsubstantiated at this time.[Daron Acemoglu is Worried About Job Market Liquidity.](https://substack.com/redirect/2f45cb75-c2c1-45be-b229-4af52b05f133?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)I kid, but so does he?[Pick Up the Phone.](https://substack.com/redirect/7a2f0cbf-362b-46d5-9586-e1e6719e30e3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Report from China, not the same info I usually see.[The Quest for Sane Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/a6d6a30c-5271-40e4-be28-1da4238e0bef?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Google antitrust foolishness, Cruz sends letters.[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/8678dadd-0446-488d-8ce6-2aadf74cc3b7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Got a chance to listen to Dominic Cummings, was worth it.[AGI Looking Like.](https://substack.com/redirect/8139e648-d3b7-4c09-8c25-bb9cadfa9f00?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)You are made of atoms it could use for something else.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/c400460b-1768-4da0-981d-d7b136bbed68?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)My (and your) periodic reminder on Wrong on the Internet.[Open Weight Models are Unsafe and Nothing Can Fix This.](https://substack.com/redirect/db5bb203-1d67-4f4a-930c-2ce05a4797b8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Deal as best you can.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/f4d640ab-b7d6-4d8f-92e7-133474880c4f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Even words are tricky.[We Would Be So Stupid As To.](https://substack.com/redirect/ccadc20f-cfa2-451a-a9b3-c3a51e182755?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Once you say it out loud, you know the answer.[The Lighter Side.](https://substack.com/redirect/1e223422-cf58-4551-97d5-c6608050557e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)It’s time to build.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
If you had AIs that behaved exactly like humans do, you’d suddenly realize they were implicitly colluding all the time. This is a special case of the general problem of: We have a law or norm saying you can’t do X. People do X all the time, it’s actually crazy or impossible not to. If you look at the statistics, it is quite obvious people are doing X all the time. But in any given case we do X implicitly and deniably, because laws and norms. This can still be valuable, because it limits the magnitude and impact of X. An AI does a similar amount of X [and everyone loses their minds](https://substack.com/redirect/c8db5a66-c005-4a7f-8dd2-621d1ce0d2c6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).The equilibrium breaks, usually in ways that make everything worse.
Occasionally pause to ask yourself, what are you even doing? Question to ponder, if students intentionally avoid and ‘transcend’ the ‘median’ essay is their work going to be better or worse? How do you grade in response?
Dare Not Speak Its Name
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
Why should I spend my flops increasing flop utilization efficiency when I can instead use my flops to get more flops? The key thing AI does is it allows me to be horribly flop-inefficient and I love that so much. Whereas getting older means you get to distill your models and be vastly more flop-efficient, but at the cost of steadily reducing your locally available flop count, which is net helpful until eventually it isn’t. If I had the efficiency I have now and the flops I had when I was 22, that would be a hell of a thing.
Huh, Upgrades
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse SoonThe closer examples are to people you know, the more meaningful it is,
I am confused why we place so little value in the integrity of the phone system, where the police seem to not care about such violations, and we don’t move to make them harder to do. It also seems like a clear case of ‘solve for the equilibrium’ and the equilibrium taking a remarkably long time to be found, even with current levels of AI. Why aren’t things vastly worse? Presumably malicious use of AI will push this to its breaking point rather soon, one way or another.
In case whoever did that is wondering: Yes, I would happily do that, sure, why not? Sounds like fun. If I had to guess I’d pick Thucydides. But seriously, do rethinking the ‘rewriting the classics’ part. Also, it’s amusing to see lines like this:
Even if we see relatively nothing: You aint seen nothing yet. Fun With Image Generation
The Art of the Jailbreak
Get Involved
Introducing
In Other AI News
Where should you draw the ethical line when working on AI capabilities? So the question then becomes, what about things that have many applications, but also accelerate tracking, or something else you deem harmful? Presumably one must talk price. Similarly, when dealing with things that could lead to existential risk, one must again talk (a very different type of) price. Quiet Speculations
This doesn’t mean we, with only human intelligence, can pull this off soon, but:
He also points out that when we compare the best public models, the labs are often ‘not sending their best.’
Given we are now approaching three months having o1-preview, this also emphasizes the question of why OpenAI continues to hold back o1, as opposed to releasing it now and updating as they fix its rough edges or it improves. I have a few guesses.
Will we see distinct agents occupying particular use case niches, or will everyone just call the same generic models? If I’m understanding this correctly, their technique is to use pairs of existing models to create ‘child’ hybrid models, you get a ‘heat map’ of sorts to show where each model is good which you also use to figure out which models to combine, and then for each square on a grid (or task to be done?) you see if your new additional model is the best, and if so it takes over, rinse and repeat. I mean, sure, I guess, up to a point and within distribution, if you don’t mind the inevitable overfitting? Yes, if you have a set of N models, it makes sense that you can use similar techniques to combine them using various merge and selection techniques such that you maximize scores on the tests you are using. That doesn’t mean you will like the results when you maximize that. Daron Acemoglu is Worried About Job Market LiquidityI wouldn’t cover this, except I have good reason to think that Daron’s Obvious Nonsense is getting hearings inside the halls of power, so here we are. This is the opening teaser of his latest post, ‘
What would it even mean for AI to have massive labor displacement without having transformative potential? AI can suddenly do enough of our work sufficient well to cause massive job losses, but this doesn’t translate into much higher productivity and wealth? So the AI option reliably comes in just slightly better than the human option on the metrics that determine deployment, while being otherwise consistently worse? It seems his vision is companies feel ‘pressure to jump on the bandwagon’ and implement AI technologies that don’t actually provide net benefits, and that most current uses of AI are Bad Things like deepfakes and customer manipulation and mass surveillance. This view of AI’s current uses is simply false, and also this worry shows remarkable lack of faith in market mechanisms on so many levels. As in, he thinks we’ll en masse deploy AI technologies that don’t work?
That’s not how productivity works, even if we somehow get this very narrow capabilities window in exactly the way he is conjuring up to scare us. This is not a thing that can happen in an unplanned economy. If there was mass unemployment as a result of people getting replaced by AIs that can’t do their jobs properly, making everything worse, then where is that labor going to go? Either it has better things to do, or it doesn’t. So after drawing all this up, what does he want to do? He wants to use AI for the good pro-human things he likes, such as providing accurate information and shifting through information (as if that wouldn’t be ‘taking jobs away’ from anyone, unlike that bad stuff) but not the other anti-human things he doesn’t like. Why can’t AI provide only the use cases I like? He blames, first off, a ‘fixation on AGI’ by the labs, of a focus on substituting for and replacing humans rather than ‘augmenting and expanding human capabilities.’ He does not seem to understand how deep learning and generative AI work and are developed, at all? You train the most capable models you can, and then people figure out how to use them, the thing he is asking for is neither possible nor coherent at the lab level, and then people will use it for whatever makes the most sense for them. His second obstacle is ‘underinvestment in humans’ and to invest in ‘training and education.’ People must learn to use the new AI tools ‘the right way.’ This is a certain mindset’s answer for everything. Why won’t everyone do what I want them to do? I have actual no idea what he has in mind here, in any case. His third obstacle is the tech industry’s business models, repeating complaints about digital ad revenue and tech industry concentration the ‘quest for AGI’ in ways that frankly are non-sequiturs. He seems to be insisting that we collectively decide on new business models, somehow? Here is his bottom line, while predicting only 5% job displacement over 10 years:
I don’t even know where to begin, nor do I think he does either. This comes after several other instances of different Obvious Nonsense from the same source. Please do not take this person seriously on AI. Pick Up the Phone
We have a huge funding advantage due to having the largest tech corporations and our superior access to venture capital, and China’s government is not stepping up to make major AI investments. But, if we were to start some sort of ‘Manhattan Project,’ that would be the most likely thing to ‘wake China up’ and start racing us in earnest, which would advance them far faster than it would advance us. That makes a lot of sense. I don’t even think it’s obvious USG involvement would be net accelerationist versus letting private companies do what they are already doing. It helps with the compute and cybersecurity, but seems painful in other ways. Whereas China’s government going full blast would be very accelerationist. This is another way in which all this talk of ‘China will race to AGI no matter what’ simply does not match what we observe. China might talk about wanting the lead in AI, and of course it does want that, but it is very much not acting like the stakes are as high as you, a reader of this post, think the stakes are about to be, even on the conservative end of that range. They are being highly cautious and responsible and cooperative, versus what you would see if China was fully situationally aware and focused on winning. Ideally, we would pick up the phone and work together. At a minimum, let’s not fire off a starting gun to a race that we might well not win, even if all of humanity wasn’t very likely to lose it, over a ‘missile gap’ style lie that we are somehow not currently in the lead. The Quest for Sane Regulations
Alex’s core argument is that a default search engine is a The argument that ‘if Google benefits from being big then competition harms customers, actually’ I found rather too cute. There are plenty of situations where you have a natural monopoly, and you would rather break it up anyway because monopolies suck more than the monopoly in question is natural.
While it is certainly possible that registrations might have been required in some circumstances, the bulk of Cruz’s statement is highly Obvious Nonsense, the latest instance of the zero sum worldview and rhetoric that cannot fathom that people might be trying to coordinate and figure things out, or be attempting to mitigate actual risks. To him, it seemingly must all be some ‘misinformation’ or ‘equality’ based conspiracy, or similar. And of course, more ‘missile gap’ rhetoric. He is very obviously a smart guy when he wants to be, but so far he has here chosen a different path. The Week in Audio
Dr. Oz, future cabinet member,
On the same podcast,
I confirm that
AGI Looking Like
It’s a hilarious bit by everyone involved, but give James Irvings his due, he is well aware he is doing a bit, and the good lines continue:
Yet, well, the stramwen are real (in the replies).
This particular week I won’t retry the arguments for why AGI (or ‘powerful AI’) would be a huge deal, but seriously, it’s so weird that this is a question for people.
I wonder which ones are actually managing ( Rhetorical Innovation
Also a different (decidedly less omnicidal) The obvious solution is to stop engaging at all in such situations, since it takes up so much time and emotional energy trying to engage in good faith, and it almost never works beyond potentially showing onlookers what is happening. And indeed, that’s my plan going forward - if someone repeatedly tells you they consider you evil and an enemy and out to destroy progress out of some religious zeal, and will see all your arguments as soldiers to that end no matter what, you should believe them. What I did get out of it was a clear real example to point to in the future, of the argument that one cannot anticipate consequences (good or bad!) of technological changes in any useful way. I wonder whether he would agree that one can usefully make the prediction that ‘Nvidia will go up.’ Or, if he’d say you can’t because it’s priced in… who is pricing it in, and what are they anticipating? Open Weight Models are Unsafe and Nothing Can Fix ThisUnsafe does not mean unwise, or net negative. Lots of good things are unsafe. Remember those old school playgrounds? Highly unsafe, highly superior.
This is true both because of the damage it would cause, and also the crackdown that would inevitably result - and if it is ‘too late’ to contain the weights, then you are really, really, really not going to like the containment options governments go with.
How far could we push capabilities before we hit sufficiently big problems that we need to start setting real limits? The limit will have to be somewhere short of AGI but can we work to raise that level? As usual, there is no appetite among open weight advocates to face this reality. Instead, the replies are full of advocates treating OSS like a magic wand that assures goodness, saying things like maximally powerful open weight models is I have no idea how to work with pure absolutists, who believe they are special, that the rules should not apply to them, and constantly cry ‘you are trying to ban OSS’ when the OSS in question is not only being targeted but being given multiple actively costly exceptions to the proposed rules that would apply to others, usually when the proposed rules would not even apply to them. It’s all quite insane. This ties in with the encounter I had on Twitter, with an argument that not only shouldn’t the person creating the change think about the consequences of that change or do anything about them, no one else should anticipate the change and try to do anything in advance about it, either. What is going on with these claims? Finally, unrelated, Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
The discussion question, then, would be: As capabilities improve, will this stop being
That’s obviously pretty great for Claude Sonnet, in its current state. Alas, the universe does not grade on a curve, so ask yourself whether there is a point at which this would stop ending well. We Would Be So Stupid As To
I mean, surely, no one would be so stupid as to actually catch the AI trying to escape and then continue to deploy it. This message brought to you by the authors of such gems as ‘obviously we would keep the AIs inside a box’ or ‘obviously we wouldn’t give the AI access to the open internet’ or ‘obviously we wouldn’t give the AI access to both all your accounts and also the open internet while it is vulnerable to prompt injections’ or ‘obviously you wouldn’t run your AI agent on your computer without a sandbox and then leave it alone for hours.’ Which is to say, yes, people would absolutely be so stupid as to actual anything that looks like it would be slightly easier to do. Thus, I propose ( The Sixth Law of Human Stupidity: If someone says ‘no one would be so stupid as to’ then you know that a lot of people would absolutely be so stupid as to at the first opportunity. No exceptions. He has now realized this is the case, and that AI labs making this commitment even in theory seems rather unlikely. Follow them for more AI safety tips, indeed. The Lighter Side
You're currently a free subscriber to |