---
subject: "A Newsletter That Pays You to Make Newsletters"
from: "1729 <support@1729.com>"
to: ""
date: 2021-03-26 12:56:17
labels: ["1729", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_1655087446004800712", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX"]
---
|
|
|
It's not obvious, but if you want to live forever you should start a newsletter. Why? Because as this Amazingly, the Specifically, if we can organize a few thousand anti-aging activists with their own newsletters, social media channels, and (literal) never-say-die attitude, we can start putting this on the agenda of the founders, funders, writers, and regulators around the world. I appear to have It'll be a big lift. We're talking about reversing a multi-generational slowdown in ambition and biomedical innovation, visualized in part by And we'll need a similar group of zealous technological progressives to reverse Eroom-like stagnation in All of that means content creation: writing, yes, but also podcasts, videos, games, memes, movies, the works. Newsletters are a good place to start because they can be the conduit for everything else. And that newsletter should be at a domain you control, because over time we may need the full panoply of crypto-based censorship-resistant technologies to get around the informational blockades. Why? Well, on biomedical matters in particular, third-party services have made themselves enforcers of an ever-shifting conventional wisdom: Remember when wearing masks There's no doubt that genuine breakthroughs on life extension will be subject to similar noise as the whole COVID situation, and we'll need both technological megaphones and microscopes to arrive at decentralized truth. Megaphones to make sure we can't be censored, and microscopes to make sure our facts are rigorously accurate. With regards to uncensorable megaphones, in later tasks we may explore going full crypto, with decentralized domains, hosting, payments, and maybe even some But step one is to start building your voice. Sovereignty starts with a siteIf you haven't already done so, go set up a newsletter at your own domain, one that allows you to get in touch with your readers via the original decentralized protocol (email!). Let’s call it a blog, but it’s really more than a blog - it’s your homestead on the internet. Here are three I recommend: - Ghost. Probably the best new blogging software out there, with v4.0 recently released. Because Ghost is
[open source](https://ghost.org/docs/hosting/), you can start with their hosted solution at ghost.org, and later self-host using something like[cloudron.io](https://docs.cloudron.io/apps/ghost/). We wrote a[detailed tutorial](https://balajis.com/set-up-a-paid-newsletter-at-your-own-domain/)on registering a domain and setting up Ghost at your domain using their hosted offering. - Substack with custom domain. Even though Substack is very much a centralized platform, and does not currently have an open source offering, it (a) allows you to use your
[own domain](https://blog.substack.com/p/new-add-a-custom-domain-to-your-substack)and (b) allows you to export all your[emails](https://support.substack.com/hc/en-us/articles/360037465992-How-do-I-export-my-email-or-subscriber-list-)and[content](https://support.substack.com/hc/en-us/articles/360037466012-How-do-I-export-my-posts-). So in a pinch, you can move from Substack to your own site, and there are even tutorials on[how to do that](https://ghost.org/docs/migration/substack/). - Wordpress. This is the oldie-but-goodie, a battle tested piece of software that combines a hosted offering at wordpress.com and an open source version at wordpress.org. Here's how to get set up with a custom domain in
[Wordpress](https://wordpress.com/support/domains/map-existing-domain/). You can then use one of their[plugins](https://wordpress.org/plugins/newsletter/)to get started with a newsletter.
If you just want one recommendation, do this Once you've set up your site, or if you already have one, submit the form below. You'll earn $100 in BTC if we think it's pretty good and if it has content that helps advance technological progress. That means it should have at least a few posts! Not necessarily on aging, but on the kinds of things that technological progressives are interested in. For inspiration, check out these sites: Submit a link to your site below and we'll pay prizes for the 10 best submissions. For extra credit, put up a post that updates the |
|||||
|