---
subject: "The Monday Media Diet with Mark Vanhoenacker"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-07-10 10:02:21
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Tell us about yourself. I’m an airline pilot—I fly the Boeing 787 Dreamliner for British Airways—and a writer. I’m a I grew up in Pittsfield, a small city in the Berkshires region of western Massachusetts. In fact, my hometown serves as a touchstone in the new book, which is both a travelogue and a memoir. I found that recalling my small first city helped me reflect on my childhood dreams of becoming a pilot, as well as on the ways in which each of our lives—but especially, perhaps, a pilot’s life—may be imagined in geographical terms. Describe your media diet. On writing days, I set strict limits on my media consumption. I’ll start writing at 7am or so and go until a late lunch at around 2pm. I won’t check any news until then. Of course, it’s hard to avoid the news when I’m using a laptop to research and write. One trick that helps: my homepage is set to When I do turn to the news, I start with the two places I write for most often, the New York Times and the Financial Times. I love the Economist. For fascinating stories that don’t involve the news, I turn to On flying days, I tend to read the news on the bus and train that get me to Heathrow. I also listen to a lot of podcasts when I’m on the move: What’s the last great book you read? I’ll read anything about Japan. I completed a homestay there in high school, then returned in college and in my business-world job. Now I’m a pilot who flies regularly to Tokyo. I recently read A Diplomat in Japan, in which Ernest Mason Satow relates his experiences in mid- to late-nineteenth century Japan, an era of pivotal importance to the country’s modern history. What are you reading now? I’m nearly finished re-reading Isak Dinesen: The Life of a Storyteller, Judith Thurman’s highly praised biography of a writer whose descriptions of flight are among the loveliest I know. Those aviation-themed passages appear in Dinesen’s Out of Africa, but in fact it’s her short stories that I return to most often. They reach us as if from a fantastical, pre-modern Europe—one that even in Dinesen’s time had already passed into myth. As a pilot I’ve had a chance to visit Dinesen’s two former homes—in When I was researching What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication? A what copy? Seriously, though, as a pilot it’s so much easier to do my reading online. One magazine I still receive in paper form, however, is Who should everyone be reading that they’re not? Many Americans were forced to read portions of Moby-Dick in school, found it very hard going, and have never returned to it. I can sympathize—growing up in Pittsfield, Massachusetts, where Melville wrote his epic, I had to read more Melville than any kid should. Nevertheless, Moby-Dick, is worth a second (or first) look. I’m partial, of course, to globe-spanning journeys. And the complexity of the book’s structure (and even of its heavy, unwieldy sentences) are a rewarding challenge for those of us whose literary attention spans have been shortened by online media. On that maritime note—I’m so enamored with aviation’s ties to the nautical realm that some years I read more about sailing than flying—I’d like to recommend three more nautical books. What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone? No question here—it’s Plane or train? No guesses for how a pilot might answer. Nevertheless, I do love trains—indeed, my Twitter bio describes me as ‘fan of anything with windows and seats’. I recently wrote an article for the New York Times about What is one place everyone should visit? I’ll double down on Japan. To me, it’s the most reliably fascinating place in the world. I fly to Tokyo Haneda at least every other month. Tokyo is a great place to start your explorations of Japan. After you’ve been dizzied and dazzled by the largest city to have ever existed, head to the mountains or to I’ll also recommend Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into. In 2009 or so a friend introduced me to sourdough bread. I read up on it and decided to grow my own sourdough starter. Sourdough is meant to have a terroir much like wine, and so I suppose mine was the taste of north London. This was also around the time I first joined Facebook, so I christened my starter ‘Sour Stan’ and got him his own Facebook account. Sour posted updates on his diet—flour—and occasional offered up wisdom in the form of bread-themed quotes and proverbs. My friends would sometimes engage online more with Sour than with me. I baked bread every day for months. Eventually we moved house and Sour expired, but I still get e-mails from Facebook reminding me that Sour’s friends haven’t heard from him in a while. Maybe I should do one of those memorial pages for him. Aside from the jokes, and all the tasty bread that I broke with my friends and family, I’m grateful to Sour for another reason: one of the first articles I ever wrote was about Sour and how ancient traditions might intersect with the modern online world. A newspaper editor in London—I’d written to her at random—liked the article, published it, and encouraged me to keep writing. (MV) |