---
subject: "More Thoughts On Critical Windows"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-08-24 02:18:48
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
On One of my distant cousins won't eat tomatoes. His parents say when he was very young, he bit into a cherry tomato and it exploded into goo in his mouth, and he was so upset he wouldn't eat tomatoes from then on. Now he’s in his 30s and still hates them. Is this fairly described as a “critical window” for food preferences? Both of these sound like trapped priors: a very strong early event coloring experience so hard that it becomes impossible to update away from it. This can happen whenever: trauma is an age-neutral example. So why are there so many examples in childhood? In a typical AI training run, the AI starts at a very high learning rate (also called “temperature”) and gradually “cools” down over time. Think of this as a solution to a Plausibly, Many critical periods are more specific and better-defined than these: animals that can’t see out of one eye for the first few months of life permanently lose the ability to process that eye. So learning rate decay is probably better seen as a general principle which is implemented differently (and at different timescales, and with different levels of severity) in different systems. This still doesn’t explain the unpredictable nature of preference-changing events. My cousin had a bad experience with a tomato in childhood, but was that really his worst childhood experience? I had a really scary time at a beach once during childhood, where I thought I would be swept away and drowned - but I got over it and now I like beaches just as much as everyone else. Was my cousin’s experience with the tomato worse (along some axis) than my experience with almost drowning? What about all of us who see cartoon animals but heroically resist becoming furries? I think it’s helpful to notice these kinds of events seem more common in childhood - but even with a theory to explain them, they’re still pretty mysterious. You're currently a free subscriber to |