---
subject: "Chinese dams hold billions of people to ransom"
from: "Works in Progress <worksinprogress@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-10-09 17:03:55
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Works in Progress"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_1644361085112560554"]
---
Works in Progress is becoming a print magazine. Our first print issue, Issue 21, will land in November. If you live in the United States or the United Kingdom, you can subscribe When India suspended the But without new infrastructure, India can only Many other nations are There is a technological solution for these people. Cheap, accessible desalination can reduce water scarcity for both upstream and downstream nations without them having to depend on diplomacy or worse. Why we damDams are typically built for three main reasons. First, to store water for later. By storing water behind a dam instead of letting it flow by, operators can better match supply to demand. Second, to control its flow and generate power. For hydroelectric dams, the impounded water is a means to store potential energy. The height difference between the water level behind and in front of the barrier determines how much energy it can create. The power of the rushing water can be used to spin a turbine, creating hydroelectricity. Hydroelectric generation is especially valuable because it creates little carbon dioxide, and because it is highly flexible – the floodgates or valves that feed the turbines can be opened or closed at will to respond to demand smoothly. When not in use, the energy is easily stored for later as potential of the water behind the dam. In this configuration, the dam and its turbines act as a huge battery. Stored hydro is the only battery type that
Third, dams can also divert water rather than storing it or controlling its flow volume. The dams of the Catskill Watershed divert water through Dams are powerful pieces of infrastructure with many benefits. However, when a dam is placed on an international river, there is no governing body tasked with ensuring the benefits accrue to upstream and downstream populations equally. The dam builder has near-total control. Downstream countries, in turn, have little recourse to right this imbalance. Bringing countries with headwater control to the negotiating table is difficult when they have all the leverage. As a result, countries reliant on the upstream nation are often forced to make concessions. Consider the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam, built between 2011 and 2023, one of the biggest hydroelectric infrastructure projects in Africa. It has the largest reservoir volume of any transboundary dam, at up to 74 billion cubic meters of water. Constructed on the Blue Nile river, the dam is designed to provide 5.15 gigawatts of electricity to the Ethiopian grid. While the dam sits upstream of much of the Blue Nile’s catchment basin, if the Ethiopians started with an empty reservoir and began filling it to its full capacity they could still reduce the total flow of water in the Nile by 39 percent for up to 18 months. The threat of this one-two punch has caused Egypt’s attempts at stopping the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam’s filling process to become Egypt claims that the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam is an attempt by the Ethiopian government to gain the diplomatic upper hand against downstream nations. There are many other examples of transboundary rivers whose management is a point of conflict between countries. The Daryan Dam diverts up to He who controls the Tibetan plateauNowhere is the impact of damming shared rivers more pronounced than in Asia. An estimated Controlling the flow of that water is uniquely easy. Glaciers on the plateau accrue water during the region’s winters, when water demand is at its lowest, and release it when demand peaks in the hot summers. The mountainous nature of the plateau allows for deep reservoirs to be created in mountain valleys, cheaply holding large volumes of water and multiplying its value by increasing the potential energy that can be used to generate electricity for more people, but also withholding more fresh water from populations downstream. This natural offset from seasonal demands, paired with the water being stored at high elevations, makes the plateau function as the ‘ While India’s moves on the Indus have made the news, they do not come with the ability to fully implement India’s threat. Thanks to previous adherence to the Indus Water Treaty, New Delhi can only restrict 4.4 cubic kilometers of Pakistan’s rivers, far below the volume it would need to throttle the system for more than a few days – which is why the pact has historically withstood political shocks. In contrast, Tibet’s waters are uniquely prone to being cut off in China. The rivers and basins of the Tibetan Plateau are clustered close together in a choke point known as the Chinese dams on the Mekong and Brahmaputra Rivers in particular represent threats to the water security of Bangladesh and India, along with much of continental Southeast Asia. China’s planned Across its hydro-portfolio, China plans to divert up to 200.6 billion cubic meters of water per year from the Tibetan Plateau to the Yellow and Yangtze river basins. This scheme diverts as much water as about five Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dams. Were it not diverted, much of this water would flow out of China and into Southeast Asia and India. The damming projects planned for these rivers go beyond diverting their course. The proposed dams also hold the water back. The downstream impact of these projects is already being felt: China’s damming activities have been By controlling when to divert flow or fill and empty their reservoirs, nations can threaten to reduce downstream countries’ access to water if they do not comply with their demands, with devastating consequences for the downstream economies and environments. On the flip side, countries could open the floodgates during the monsoon season, when areas downstream of the Tibetan Plateau are regularly inundated with local floodwaters. India and Bangladesh are currently especially vulnerable due to their reliance on the Brahmaputra River for fishing, farming, transport, and industry. Bangladesh is a country built around a river delta, and any significant change to the Brahmaputra and Ganges Rivers would threaten the nation’s existence. Because the Water in China is exceptionally cheap compared to other countries Combined water tariffs for households ($ per cubic meter) in 2013 In the last 20 years, the country has lost an estimated China has both the means and the method to accomplish its goals. The Much of this sprawling system of waterways, pipelines, and channels was built on the backbone of China’s Grand Canal. Construction on the Grand Canal dates to the fifth century BC and eventually resulted in a system spanning almost 1,800 kilometers. The Grand Canal connected the Yangtze, Yellow, and Huai rivers of China’s heartland and allowed people, goods, and water to travel between them without the high energy costs of overland travel. This hugely expanded the size of the Imperial Chinese market that the typical Chinese person could access and allowed for local shortages to be balanced by surplus across the empire. The Grand Canal can be understood as a The This is not simply a product of China’s scale. Hydroelectricity’s share is disproportionate in comparison to the rest of the Chinese grid. Whereas the US grid runs on about five percent hydropower, the UK on about two percent, and Japan about seven percent, hydroelectricity accounts for almost 13 percent of total electricity generated in China. While there are other countries like Norway or Iceland that are even more reliant on hydropower, their small populations require far fewer projects to support. So far, international policy has failed to curb the threat China poses to its downstream neighbors. The last major effort to govern China’s actions was a non-binding Desalination: a possible solutionChina’s economic ascendance has largely freed it from the sort of international pressure that might have driven it to sign such an agreement. In parallel, the increased domestic need for water makes further cooperative efforts even less likely to bear fruit. Upstream nations have too much leverage to be convinced to share water resources more equitably. The solution might be to focus on reducing downstream nations’ reliance on those resources in the first place. Desalination is the process of separating dissolved salt and water. Humans have been doing this for more than 8,000 years. But for most of history we’ve focused on harvesting the salt rather than the water, which we’ve simply let evaporate. If you’ve ever looked out the window of a flight into San Francisco Airport, you’ve likely seen this process at work, producing the salt that is used for industry, roads, and pharmaceuticals, as well as on your table. Harvesting salt is as easy as filling a pond and waiting for the water to evaporate, while harvesting water is comparatively difficult. Seawater contains about 35 grams of dissolved salt per liter, and drinking water should contain no more than about 0.5 grams per liter of any dissolved materials, including salt, minerals, metals, and so on. This means we have to remove roughly 98.6 percent of the salt and every other contaminant present in water before it is fit for human consumption, which is a tall order. There are two methods of desalination in use in the roughly 18,000 desalination plants around the globe: distillation and reverse osmosis. Distillation is a contained version of the normal water cycle. Salt water is heated into steam, which is then cooled, condensed, and captured as freshwater distillate. A great deal of energy is needed to initiate the phase change from water to steam. But these costs can be offset by using waste heat from power plants and avoiding scale buildup from deposited salts. Flash evaporation is a type of distillation that manipulates pressure to boil different parts of a mixture at different times, allowing for separation. It is highly efficient and largely avoids the problem of scale buildup, thanks to the low temperature at which it operates. Flash evaporators are especially popular in freshwater-scarce environments like the Middle East and oceangoing ships because they are so efficient and reliable. Aircraft carriers commonly use flash distillation because their onboard nuclear reactors produce ample spare power for the energy-intensive process. The second approach is reverse osmosis, which is the most intense form of membrane-based desalination. It uses high-pressure pumps to push saltwater against a membrane that has pores small enough for the water particles to pass through, but not the salts. This separates the water from the salt and other dissolved solids. As with distillation, the main problem with reverse osmosis is the energy cost. Running the pumps is expensive and energy-intensive. The size of the particles in the water is another challenge. Dissolved salts are among the smallest particles in water filtration, which means the pores in the membrane need to be extremely small. And the smaller the pore, the higher the pressure needs to be to push the water molecules through. Fortunately, advancements in membrane-based desalination technologies have With the advent of cheap solar power, the last chokepoint that has frustrated global desalination efforts is finally loosening. The cost of the energy used by desalination plants over time dwarfs the initial cost of their construction, so the availability of cheap solar power greatly increases their viability. The ease with which countries can store water also means that solar power’s chief drawback, intermittency, may be much less of a problem here than in other uses. Of China’s downstream neighbors, only Laos lacks access to a coastline from which to withdraw saltwater. But even they may be able to cooperate with their coastal neighbors to manage their shared rivers. Downstream countries don’t necessarily need sufficient treatment capacity to fulfill their entire annual demand. It might only be necessary to be able to create a reserve of freshwater that is large enough to cover demand during the dry season, so that these nations can resist pressure precisely when they are most vulnerable. Having access to cheaper membranes for reverse osmosis also opens up opportunities to treat and reuse fresh water more efficiently. These countries could also build and fill their own freshwater reservoirs to empty into existing rivers, or use technologies like aquifer storage and retrieval, in which a bubble of clean water is pumped into underground reservoirs and held for later, to store clean, membrane produced or distilled water in local aquifers where it won’t evaporate. Existing intakes on the river can then pick up the water and deliver it to residents as they always have. This means that countries won’t need to build an entirely new water distribution infrastructure as long as they can build the pipelines to transport water from the desalination plants to the existing river basins. One way to reduce the costs involved in reverse osmosis would be to make the process more efficient by only treating seawater to the point that it can be mixed with the water the nation already has access to. Water produced by reverse osmosis is typically much purer than is needed, and is often intentionally remineralized. Allowing a certain amount of dilution with groundwater, for example, would be less costly while still producing water that is safe to drink. Rivers are now battlefieldsThe threat of water scarcity is a global phenomenon The most obvious example of this hydro-political arms race expanding beyond China is India’s suspension of the Indus Water Treaty. Although India lacks the infrastructure to wholly follow through on the action, it shows that rivers are now battlefields. Of greater concern is when capabilities coincide with intent. As recently as July 19th 2025, China Desalination can turn the zero-sum game around transboundary freshwater resources into a positive sum game. In the near term, desalination technology can provide downstream countries with a reliable source of freshwater, reducing their dependence on upstream countries and making them less vulnerable to pressure. Over the long term, it has the potential to increase the freshwater supply for all nations, neutralizing much of the world’s water-based conflict. Connor Tabarrok is an engineering consultant at Kimley-Horn and Associates and the author of the Substack |