---
subject: "AI #50: The Most Dangerous Thing"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-02-08 14:17:23
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
In a week with That is, until right before press time, when Google rebranded Bard to Gemini, released an app for that, and offered a premium subscription ($20/month) for Gemini Ultra. Gemini Ultra is HereI have had the honor and opportunity to check out Gemini Advanced before its release. The base model seems to be better than GPT-4. It seems excellent for code, for explanations and answering questions about facts or how things work, for generic displays of intelligence, for telling you how to do something. Hitting the Google icon to have it look for sources is great. In general, if you want to be a power user, if you want to push the envelope in various ways, Gemini is not going to make it easy on you. However, if you want to be a normal user, doing the baseline things that I or others most often find most useful, and you are fine with what Google ‘wants’ you to be doing? Then it seems great. The biggest issue is that Gemini can be conservative with its refusals. It is graceful, but it will still often not give you what you wanted. There is a habit of telling you how to do something, when you wanted Gemini to go ahead and do it. Trying to get an estimation or probability of any kind can be extremely difficult, and that is a large chunk of what I often want. If the model is not sure, it will say it is not sure and good luck getting it to guess, even when it knows far more than you. This is the ‘doctor, is this a 1%, 10%, 50%, 90% or 99% chance?’ situation, where they say ‘it could be cancer’ and they won’t give you anything beyond that. I’ve learned to ask such questions elsewhere. There are also various features in ChatGPT, like GPTs and custom instructions and playground settings, that are absent. Here I do not know what Google will decide to do. I expect this to continue to be the balance. Gemini likely remains relatively locked down and harder to customize or push the envelope with, but very good at normal cases, at least until OpenAI releases GPT-5, then who knows. There are various other features where there is room for improvement. Knowledge of the present I found impossible to predict, sometimes it knew things and it was great, other times it did not. The Gemini Extensions are great when they work and it would be great to get more of them, but are finicky and made several mistakes, and we only get these five for now. The image generation is limited to 512x512 (and is unaware that it has this restriction). There are situations in which your clear intent is ‘please do or figure out X for me’ and instead it tells you how to do or figure out X yourself. There are a bunch of query types that could use more hard-coding (or fine-tuning) to get them right, given how often I assume they will come up. And so on. While there is still lots of room for improvement and the restrictions can frustrate, Gemini Advanced has become my default LLM to use over ChatGPT for most queries. I plan on subscribing to both Gemini and ChatGPT. I am not sure which I would pick if I had to choose. Table of ContentsDon’t miss [Introduction](https://substack.com/redirect/10854c08-3eed-4165-80c6-dcbbe1ac78c0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Gemini Ultra is here.[Language Models Offer Mundane Utility](https://substack.com/redirect/dfbe85ac-47c4-4259-940b-c4eecbf3d7e9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Read ancient scrolls, play blitz chess.[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility](https://substack.com/redirect/adc60d27-f097-47c5-90d8-aeadbdee2532?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Keeping track of who died? Hard.[GPT-4 Real This Time](https://substack.com/redirect/58f89d13-3f72-43e3-a5f1-9a3d7fdecd5b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). The bias happens during fine-tuning. Are agents coming?[Fun With Image Generation](https://substack.com/redirect/f6ef627b-f5be-4bbd-b942-22664ced608a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Edit images directly in Copilot.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon](https://substack.com/redirect/a0573f80-dfc4-4afa-8421-192b1cc5f31c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). $25 million payday, threats to democracy.[They Took Our Jobs](https://substack.com/redirect/ff20198e-8915-4500-ba56-3a12edccf066?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Journalists and lawyers.[Get Involved](https://substack.com/redirect/597ee572-fee6-414e-a137-1b66541cc0e1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Not much in AI, but any interest in funding some new vaccines?[Introducing.](https://substack.com/redirect/cfb07ce6-d2ce-40f3-a52b-30611af57656?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Nomic is an actually open source AI, not merely open model weights.[In Other AI News](https://substack.com/redirect/ce26fa75-25fe-4e57-8018-03b74266aaab?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Major OpenAI investors pass, Chinese companies fall in value.[Quiet Speculations](https://substack.com/redirect/c1e401f5-c9c7-4fae-92ae-a1ac8f0cc194?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). How to interpret OpenAI’s bioweapons study?[Vitalik on the Intersection AI and Crypto](https://substack.com/redirect/c1e401f5-c9c7-4fae-92ae-a1ac8f0cc194?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Thoughtful as always.[The Quest for Sane Regulation](https://substack.com/redirect/e5cec9ce-53ea-4529-8f00-01ff237b4e23?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). France will postpone ruining everything for now.[The Week in Audio](https://substack.com/redirect/db65647f-9aef-47cf-8c7a-24cb0f457cc7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Two big ones as noted above, and a third good one.[Rhetorical Innovation](https://substack.com/redirect/00c0e4bb-1cbd-46a2-b831-7e79fadaa6bf?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). What you can measure, you can control.[Aligning a Dumber Than Human Intelligence is Still Difficult](https://substack.com/redirect/21d44849-d506-4899-a35c-400e6cb98cf4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Sleeper agents.[People Are Worried About AI, Many People](https://substack.com/redirect/26742e94-ebf7-4e77-974f-bf56e7c7c26b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Well, not exactly. A new guest.[Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone](https://substack.com/redirect/04f0def7-cc6b-4037-b31c-43ecaa4e28ea?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Paul Graham.[The Lighter Side](https://substack.com/redirect/110426dc-4d66-47e0-b234-7bc3e0429636?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). There was a meme overhang.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
I think it is trying to compete? Although it is indeed a really promising technology. Also it is not eating half of Google’s business, although LLMs likely will eventually do so in all their forms. ChatGPT use compared to search remains miniscule for most people. Whereas yes, if I would have done a Google search before, I’m now about 50% to turn to an LLM.
I have not been asking for code so I haven’t experienced any of the laziness.
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane UtilityYou can’t collect your pension if the state declares you dead,
It is also unclear to me from the post what is causing this massive error rate. My presumption is that there are people in local government that are trying hard to get people off the rolls, rather than this being an AI issue.
GPT-4 Real This TimeWhat is the latest on LLM political preferences in base models? One way of thinking about this is that ‘what we want to hear’ as judged by those doing the RLHF training is reliably left-libertarian. No matter what you (if you are say Elon Musk) might want, in practice that is what you get. However, if you actively want RightWingGPT or LeftWingGPT, they are easy to create,
This was always coming, this speeds up the expected timeline a bit. Colin Fraser’s note is apt here. The old OpenAI philosophy was incompatible with hype about future abilities that would doubtless drive others to invest more into the AGI race. The new OpenAI seems not to care about that. Nor does it seem to be that worried about all the risk concerns.
It will almost certainly not be that easy for an attacker, but the underlying problems continue to have no known solutions. Fun with Image Generation
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
Why is the ability to say different things to different people a ‘threat to democracy’? I do get that such things are different at scale, and I get that this might increase ad revenue, but it is a level playing field. It is not obviously more or less symmetric or asymmetric than untargeted ads, and offers the potential to offer more sophisticated arguments, and leave people more informed. The ‘strategic falsification of political popularities’ also seems an add concern. There are very easy ways to check, via polls, if such popularity is real or not, and ‘draw attention to someone or some cause’ is a known technology. Again, I get the idea, that if you can swarm social media with bots then you can give off a false impression far easier, but this is already not difficult and people will quickly learn not to trust a bunch of accounts that lack human grounding and history. I am again not worried. The falsification of audio and video evidence also seems not that big a deal to me right now, because as we have seen repeatedly, the demand is for low-quality fakes, not high-quality fakes. People who are inclined to believe lies already believe them, those who are not can still spot the fakes or spot others spotting them, although yes it makes things modestly harder. I predict that the worries about this are overblown in terms of the 2024 election, although I can imagine a bunch of issues with faked claims of election fraud. What is the main threat to democracy from AI? To me it is not the threat of misuse of current affordances by humans to manipulate opinion. That is the kind of threat we know how to handle. We should instead worry about future technologies that threaten us more generally, and also happen to threaten democracy because of it. So the actual existential risks, or massive economic disruptions, transformations and redistributions. Or, ironically, politicians who might decide to move forward with AI in the wake of the public’s demand to stop, and who decide, with or without the help of the AIs and those working on them, to elect a new public, or perhaps they are forced into doing so. That sort of thing. We have come full circle, They Took Our Jobs
Get Involved |