---
subject: "Does studying economics and business make students more conservative?"
from: "Marginal REVOLUTION <donotreply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-12-08 19:45:31
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tyler Cowen", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2466199532210586699", "UNREAD"]
---
College education is a key determinant of political attitudes in the United States and other countries. This paper highlights an important source of variation among college graduates: studying different academic fields has sizable effects on their political attitudes. Using surveys of about 300,000 students across 500 U.S. colleges, we find several results. First, relative to natural sciences, studying social sciences and humanities makes students more left-leaning, whereas studying economics and business makes them more right-leaning. Second, the rightward effects of economics and business are driven by positions on economic issues, whereas the leftward effects of humanities and social sciences are driven by cultural ones. Third, these effects extend to behavior: humanities and social sciences increase activism, while economics and business increase the emphasis on financial success. Fourth, the effects operate through academic content and teaching rather than socialization or earnings expectations. Finally, the implications are substantial. If all students majored in economics or business, the college–noncollege ideological gap would shrink by about one-third. A uniform-major scenario, in which everyone studies the same field, would reduce ideological variance and the gender gap. Together, the results show that academic fields shape students’ attitudes and that field specialization contributes to political fragmentation.
That is [a recent paper](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=426554302a5b58d363a5aae2eaaec3e271c1f7469cafb24fe303b2498089cbce&blog_id=42693868&post_id=91994&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=3adbcd98a7307365bad9e66241f03ab6&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly9wYXBlcnMuc3Nybi5jb20vc29sMy9wYXBlcnMuY2ZtP2Fic3RyYWN0X2lkPTUxOTY4ODk&email_id=d5331a4ca676b8e1482826a3de8124bc) from Yoav Goldstein and Matan Kolerman. Here is [a thread on the paper](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=a15447c1409eed4750c00a7d2050c8c3ef99c3be583f67baa753e3a61bba1d83&blog_id=42693868&post_id=91994&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=e963981a9a8c7cd6c34a56c6817e6f0d&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly94LmNvbS9Hb2xkc3RlaW5Zb2F2L3N0YXR1cy8xOTk1OTExMzUzMjAzMDYwNzk3&email_id=d5331a4ca676b8e1482826a3de8124bc).