---
subject: "The New National Champions"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <the-diff@ghost.io>"
to: ""
date: 2025-01-27 15:21:31
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
In this issue: - The New National Champions—The US has many big companies, but its biggest companies are smaller relative to GDP. Some of that is because the US has such a large economy and so many big companies are global, but there are also policy differences at work. And the policies in question are changing.
- Open Source AI—DeepSeek has shifted a lot of market value today, but its economic impact is different.
- Meme Private Credit—Does the Elon Premium apply to debt as well as equity?
- Alpha Generators as an Asset Class—Hedge funds manage portfolios of traders.
- Going Hostile—Less strict antitrust enforcement means that some risks are more worth taking.
- Defense—A big deal in foreign policy terms sometimes plays out partly as a change in accounting.
This issue of The Diff is brought to you by our sponsor,
The New National ChampionsOne of the unique features of the US economy is that while we have some very big companies, the biggest US companies are a comparatively smaller share of national output than the biggest companies in other places. Samsung is about a fifth of the Korean economy, and A lot of this arises from statistical artifacts: these big companies all sell globally, so it's cheating a bit to compare them to local GDPs—Samsung isn't selling 20% of all goods and services within Korea, though in some sense roughly 20% of those goods and services are either made by Samsung or paid for with the proceeds of things Samsung sells elsewhere. If multinationals run into constraints on size—only so many cars or chips can be built and sold—then the ones that happen to be headquartered in other countries will tend to be bigger relative to those countries. The US also has a big, complex economy, and many of its brands and distribution networks were built piecemeal, a long time ago, so there was room for multiple competitors. Another reason for all of this is policy: "pro-business" can mean different things in different contexts If you're describing someone you like, what you probably have in mind is minimal red tape for starting new companies, low taxes, and the like; if you're talking about someone you hate, you probably mean crafting policies that favor big corporate donors at the expense of the common man. Donald Trump is often described by his supporters and detractors as pro-business. There's a particular brand of "pro-business" that the US does a bit less of than other countries, though it was once quite fond of it—selecting a handful of companies and making them partly policy arms of the state (or, equivalently, big companies selecting politicians because it would be nice to have a flag, a currency printing press, a navy, etc., while outsourcing the messy and hard-to-scale business of keeping constituents happy). There are some national interests that are best served with a combination of state-provided capital and protection and some layer of market-based incentives guiding the details. The US did plenty of this in the late 19th century, granting railroads land in exchange for building and operating railroads that would otherwise be unprofitable. Aside from the massive corruption throughout this process, it had a certain kind of elegance: the land was worth a lot more if it had easy access to affordable transportation for both goods and people, so the asset the government gave away was worth less than the asset the railroads got. The US model has moved away from this in most sectors, but still practices certain kinds of protectionism: - Reagan
[put steep tariffs on Japanese chip imports](https://www.thediff.co/r/751ba96c?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99), at a time when the Japanese chip industry was beating the US on both quality and cost. - There's a government-funded bank that is
[very helpful to Boeing](https://www.thediff.co/r/3ba8a489?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99), though, in fairness, Airbus is not exactly free from the helpful hand of the state. - Applying US financial regulations to other countries' financial institutions implicitly protects the US companies that have to abide by those rules anyway. Finance is a special case, though; if you have just one jurisdiction that tolerates numbered accounts and charges low taxes, and it's possible and legal for people to move money there, then all the tax-avoiding money as well as a large fraction of the illicit money will end up in precisely that jurisdiction. So the choice is to either very strictly regulate every entity that has a path to reaching that jurisdiction, or to somewhat strictly regulate every part of the financial system that interfaces with either Americans or US dollars.
Boeing probably counts as a national champion by the same standard, but to a much smaller degree, than a business like Samsung. It is a symbol of American economic might and engineering prowess (for better or for worse, at times), and the US is hardly the first country to tolerate a bit of deadweight loss in exchange for global bragging rights. In fact, Boeing is also the recipient of funds misallocated in exactly the same way; America is, or at least is rumored to be, considering a few new national champions. As with many other instances of national champions, the most value-creating policy, or at a minimum the least value-destructive one, requires some cooperation between the public and private sectors. The US government probably can't run a massive consumer-facing app (though they do employ many of the people you'd want scouring it for backdoors). Oracle probably didn't have that kind of diversification in mind, and Elon's bankers are presumably praying that he doesn't decide to add TikTok to his portfolio. But these groups could conceivably keep the business running (and in Elon's case, he's hopefully gotten some of the obvious mistakes out of his system). Governments have access to certain kinds of capital that aren't fungible with the ones the private sector uses, but that are complementary to it. This can go in dark directions, of course: there were ample synergies between gunboats and United Fruit. But it's created plenty of valuable industries; the entire consumer tech experience is shaped by products that were subsidized by the government due to their early military applications, telcos have natural ties to government that benefit both sides, and the banking system doesn't make sense without a government backstop, and can't function well without regulations that tamp down the behaviors that are unavoidably incentivized by that backstop. A world where everyone carries a computer in their pocket that has access to all of their information, and where opinions are shaped by social media feeds, is a world where consumer-facing software drifts into the same half-public/half-private category. Disclosure: Long TSM. Some national champions do just fine. This is a gilded age version of Paul Graham's [equity equation](https://www.thediff.co/r/d97520be?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99), which is basically the argument that you should sell equity to investors or offer it to employees if the value of the remaining shares rises as a result. This is not a perfect rule—you don't want to take a near-breakeven deal at the expense of doing a better one in a few weeks, and if your company generates enough cash to grow and has a small addressable market, selling the equity is expensive unless the company has a lower return than alternative investments you could make (in which case maybe you're better off as an investor than as a founder, anyway). But it does help people get past the simple mental block of thinking about how much that outside investor would multiply their money in the event of a good outcome.[↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/29ebc0c8?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)If a country has a big market for its manufactured products, and is technologically behind other places, and has high wages—as the US has had since the colonial era—tariffs are basically a way to shift output away from already-adequate consumption and towards high-return investment, which ends up paying off over time. The [East Asian countries that applied a similar model](https://www.thediff.co/r/3473fdff?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)did not have high wages, but they did tend to have authoritarian governments that could stay in power even if the average worker was annoyed that they didn't have an especially good standard of living.[↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/5de941a1?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
You're on the free list for The Diff. Last week, paying subscribers read about A Word From Our SponsorsDo you know what would make your customer service platform dramatically better? Dumping it and switching to Intercom. But maybe you’re not ready to make that big of a change. We get it! That’s why we made Fin, our leading AI customer service agent available on every helpdesk. Fin instantly resolves up to 80% of customer questions around the clock in 45+ languages. That means you can get off the customer service rep hiring treadmill because your tough-to-fill shifts are covered. With Fin handling frontline support, your human agents are freed up to do higher impact work—like managing complex questions and building deeper relationships with customers. And the best part is that you can experience all of Fin’s benefits from the comfort of your current platform—no switch required. See why more than 3,700 companies trust Fin with their customers and business. ElsewhereOpen Source AIThere's some debate about whether DeepSeek's training cost numbers are real, but there's enough evidence that Disclosure: Long META. Meme Private CreditThe valuation of Elon Musk's public company has been on a tear since the election. Does that extend to his less frequently-marked private assets? And, if so, does it extend throughout the capital structure? His bankers appear to believe so; they're Alpha Generators as an Asset ClassHedge fund Eisler Capital is, Going HostileQXO is a planned roll-up in the building products industry, founded by Brad Jacobs, who has previously run several successful rollups in other spaces. They've been negotiating for a few weeks to acquire Beacon Roofing Supply, a publicly traded competitor, but have been rebuffed— DefenseLithuania and Estonia have Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. See a sampling of current open roles below: - A premier proprietary trading firm is looking for smart generalists to join their investor relations team, working with external investors, rating agencies, and the internal finance team. Investment banking and/or investor relations experience preferred. Quantitative background and technical aptitude a plus. (NYC)
- A well-funded startup that’s building the universal electronic cash system by taking stablecoin adoption from edge cases to the mainstream is looking for a senior full-stack engineer. (Singapore, Remote)
- An OpenAI backed startup that’s applying advanced reasoning techniques to reinvent investment analysis from first principles and build the IDE for financial research is looking for product-oriented software engineers. Experience at a high growth startup a plus. (NYC)
- YC-backed AI company that’s turning body cam footage into complete police reports is looking for a tech lead/CTO who can build scalable backend systems and maintain best practices for the engineering org. (SF)
- A company building better analytics for pricing insurance is looking for a senior software engineer who likes turning messy data into clear answers. (NYC or Boston)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. |
||||||||||
|
|
|
||||||||||
|