---
subject: "We Turned the Light On—and the AI Looked Back"
from: "Marginal REVOLUTION <donotreply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-10-14 11:24:36
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tyler Cowen", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2466199532210586699", "UNREAD"]
---
Jack Clark, Co-founder of Anthropic, has written a [remarkable essay about his fears and hopes](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=19365f296d9eff2a19be0552159806f6646db4dcd755f9ff1942443fdb21481c&blog_id=42693868&post_id=91664&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=5982c8bf48f9eb7d8b64a8f305c63b76&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly9pbXBvcnRhaS5zdWJzdGFjay5jb20vcC9pbXBvcnQtYWktNDMxLXRlY2hub2xvZ2ljYWwtb3B0aW1pc20&email_id=768808e0618fb4e3db8014eb359a3b9e). It's not the usual kind of thing one reads from a tech leader:
I remember being a child and after the lights turned out I would look around my bedroom and I would see shapes in the darkness and I would become afraid - afraid these shapes were creatures I did not understand that wanted to do me harm. And so I’d turn my light on. And when I turned the light on I would be relieved because the creatures turned out to be a pile of clothes on a chair, or a bookshelf, or a lampshade.
Now, in the year of 2025, we are the child from that story and the room is our planet. But when we turn the light on we find ourselves gazing upon true creatures, in the form of the powerful and somewhat unpredictable AI systems of today and those that are to come. And there are many people who desperately want to believe that these creatures are nothing but a pile of clothes on a chair, or a bookshelf, or a lampshade. And they want to get us to turn the light off and go back to sleep.
...We are growing extremely powerful systems that we do not fully understand. Each time we grow a larger system, we run tests on it. The tests show the system is much more capable at things which are economically useful. And the bigger and more complicated you make these systems, the more they seem to display awareness that they are things.
It is as if you are making hammers in a hammer factory and one day the hammer that comes off the line says, “I am a hammer, how interesting!” This is very unusual!
...I am also deeply afraid. It would be extraordinarily arrogant to think working with a technology like this would be easy or simple.
My own experience is that as these AI systems get smarter and smarter, they develop more and more complicated goals. When these goals aren’t absolutely aligned with both our preferences and the right context, the AI systems will behave strangely.
...we are not yet at “self-improving AI”, but we are at the stage of “AI that improves bits of the next AI, with increasing autonomy and agency”. And a couple of years ago we were at “AI that marginally speeds up coders”, and a couple of years before that we were at “AI is useless for AI development”. Where will we be one or two years from now?
And let me remind us all that the system which is now beginning to design its successor is also increasingly self-aware and therefore will surely eventually be prone to thinking, independently of us, about how it might want to be designed.
...In closing, I should state clearly that I love the world and I love humanity. I feel a lot of responsibility for the role of myself and my company here. And though I am a little frightened, I experience joy and optimism at the attention of so many people to this problem, and the earnestness with which I believe we will work together to get to a solution. I believe we have turned the light on and we can demand it be kept on, and that we have the courage to see things as they are.
Clark is clear that we are growing intelligent systems that are more complex than we can understand. Moreover, these systems are becoming self-aware--that is a fact, even if you think they are not sentient (but [beware hubris](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=0c8e0cf17497ce421d569c4efac6e1726331246cc72319c6e0e6dfd6edc1e5d6&blog_id=42693868&post_id=91664&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=e9440350343076c1fdb1427c1e28a192&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly9tYXJnaW5hbHJldm9sdXRpb24uY29tL21hcmdpbmFscmV2b2x1dGlvbi8yMDI1LzAzL3doYXQtZG8td2UtbGVhcm4tZnJvbS10b3J0dXJpbmctYmFiaWVzLmh0bWw&email_id=768808e0618fb4e3db8014eb359a3b9e) on the latter question).