---
subject: "I'm looking to hire translators to dub videos"
from: "3Blue1Brown <3blue1brown@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-01-17 18:53:30
labels: ["3B1B", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_4235920960005303993", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
One of my goals this year is to invest in translations for 3blue1brown. I’d like to hire translators directly, preferably with experience teaching, and who are willing to help experiment with some software tools which I hope can make the process less tedious. For early experiments, we’re budgeting for five languages (Arabic, French, German, Spanish, Hindi). If you’re interested in helping out with other languages, feel free to apply, and if we have the capacity to hire more or coordinate volunteer efforts, we’ll let you know. Other ways to helpLast year, my friend Ben Eater put together AI?In light of the recent AI boom, and the technically impressive results with text-to-voice, a number of companies, including YouTube, have been pushing AI dubs. Many of which will generate a voice that sounds like the original narrator. I went down a rabbit hole of experimenting with them last year. In fact, one of the original goals of the community translation site built with Eater was to take community-curated text translations and use them to quickly create auto-dubs. My conclusion right now is that once you get past the initial wow factor, AI dubs are simply not that engaging. I would much rather the voice of the channel in Spanish (or any other language) be a real voice that conveys the feeling of a friendly math teacher than have it be something that vaguely sounds like me. Also, in a world where an increasing percentage of content online is AI-generated, I think the emotional significance of landing on a video whose translated voice is both human and genuine is not to be overlooked. I believe there’s plenty of room for software to help with the process, which can often get bogged down in the tedium of editing, and one goal is to experiment with tooling to help streamline the process. But for the time being, I’m leaning away from AI dubs themselves. |