---
subject: "Monthly Roundup #36: November 2025"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-11-19 20:55:15
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Happy Gemini Week to those who celebrate. Coverage of the new release will begin on Friday. Meanwhile, here’s this month’s things that don’t go anywhere else. Good News, Everyone
Good Advice
Nothing Earth shattering or surprising there, I hope, but yeah, that’s the go-tos. Risks here means taking ‘real’ risks in life, not taking financial risks or gambling. Where’s The Party?
I sense I don’t get invited to his sort of parties, and that’s probably for the best. Antisocial Media
Alternatively, you could do these things more often with tweets that have links or longer articles, especially the likes and retweets. The unfortunate natural pattern is that if you provide a witty comment, the barrier to liking it is low. Whereas if you provide actual value in the form of a link or Twitter article, or you read something on Substack, the threshold for liking it is ‘I actually read the damn thing and not only liked it but didn’t have any issues with anything in it, and also remembered to like it afterwards’ which makes it highly unlikely. Therefore, I’m going to make a request: If you think the world would be better off if more people read the link or article on Twitter, then like the post with the link or article. If not, not. Thank you for your attention to this matter.
What happens if you start a fresh Twitter account using a VPN and the For You page? This is not good business on the part of Elon Musk. Even if your goal is only to advance conservative causes, you need to draw new users in. This doesn’t do that.
Substack being on the list is rather obnoxious, although it seems it was then taken out again and an explanation added?
Government Working
Always be gracious when someone does something good, you don’t necessarily have to ask how we got there, especially since everybody knows:
Home and auto insurance rates are rising,
In this case everyone agrees you pay the troops and the money can be reconciled (if it hasn’t been already) so the de facto fig leaf is ‘it is common knowledge this would have been approved’ but that’s not a norm you can rely on in this spot, the violations of principles here are rather egregious, and once you do it once what stops it happening again? What stops them from spending any and all public funds on whatever the hell they feel like? In general, we follow a pattern of: A rule is broken that, if fully and properly exploited, would mean the Republic has fallen, and it’s time to pack it in. Things get a little bit worse but the thing is not exploited maximally. The Republic does not fall and we do not pack it in.
So we can do things like have unidentified masked people kidnapping citizens off the street and acting like this is fine, we can sink boats in international waters without trial or a declaration of war, have relatives of the president make a billion in crypto, have the Department of Justice selectively prosecute personal enemies on direct presidential orders, For now. It doesn’t seem great that we keep playing that game.
The obviously correct thing is to exempt air traffic controllers from shutdowns. This seems super doable? You can pass a bill that automatically funds the FAA indefinitely from a trust fund. It’s what we do for USPS. It’s not like anyone want the FAA to shut down. Instead, we have widespread flight cancellations and people
In case it wasn’t obvious, Jones Act Watch
Variously Effective Altruism
Big success, a long time coming:
From what I have seen, the ‘spreadsheet altruism’ absolutely includes strategies like ‘research new malaria drug’ and otherwise funding science and making similar bets. Somehow this got 3 million views…
The funny answer is the ‘life extension’ or ‘defense against existential risk’ move if you interpret the $700k as definitely living to 65. But if you take it as intended, that you if you die early you still die in real life, then I really hope one would take $1.1 million here? Putting the amount this high is bizarre. A remarkably large number of people went for the $900k, without even stopping to think that there was no assurance you would even get away with it. Well, that’s engagement farming, I guess. Great Taste, Less FillingThis seems like a good note. I think the actual limiting factor here is mostly time.
If you try to buy antiques or otherwise develop taste you need to worry about matching and you need to get buy-in from others, and it all takes time, alas. Getting consensus is tough. Also once you decorate the first time, it takes a lot of activation energy to start changing, and to shift to a new equilibrium. So I get it. But when I look over at our IKEA-style drawers in this room do I wish they were old school? Oh yeah. There’s also the functionality of the room, which you have to pay attention to and understand. Know your Christopher Alexander. How You Do Anything
Bad News
Listed under bad news because I wouldn’t want this playbook to be the right book, Andreesen and Collision discuss Elon Musk’s management style.
My theory is this is all very much a package deal if you try do more than about two of them. If you try to do half these things, it won’t work. You have to do most or all of them, or try a different approach, and as noted few people can do #3 and I would also add #4, or #2 in any useful sense. You need to be able to keep all the pieces in place, do the engineering work and also create a widespread cult of personality to justify that you keep f***ing with everyone and everything and making everyone’s lives miserable all the time. Looking back on MetaMed in this light, I think we often fell into the ‘do many but not enough of these things and not hardcore and consistently enough’ bucket (not intentionally, I wasn’t modeling on Musk at all), and that’s one high level explanation of why it didn’t work. If I’d been able to go harder in the key missing places, then it plausibly would have worked to the extent the plan was workable at all (or pivoted). The Rage of the Plastic Straw BanWhy do people care so much about bans on plastic straws? Let us count the ways.
Kelsey is spot on. It’s not that it’s such a huge deal, it’s that every time it happens it is so obvious that your life has been made worse essentially out of spite and stupidity and innumeracy, and every time it rubs this in your face. And then they lie to you, and say the paper straws are fine. They’re not fine, they are worse than nothing. That’s why it fills me with rage, even though I cannot remember the last time I used a straw. Affordability Politics
So yes, I worry about this too. In general, any time people say ‘the market has failed to provide what we want’ you are not going to like the proposed intervention. Monks In The CasinoRecommended: I may say more later, for now read the whole thing. Procrastination Is Bad Actually
Yeah, look, no, that’s usually hogwash and it’s important to know it’s hogwash. Are there times when you actually need more subconscious processing? I mean I guess but mostly that’s the flimsiest of excuses. Do the thing already. Many Successful People Adjust Behaviors More
In most situations for most people, even top people, I believe nice is correct regardless, jerk is a mistake, this pays dividends over time. As you get to the top the jerk stories get amplified a lot more. You do have to be willing to be hard nosed in some situations, and there are those who are more willing to consider you a jerk because you’re successful. That doesn’t mean be a jerk, even to someone with no power. However, there is a particular strategy based around maximal incentive gradients, and its final form only works at the top. Trump is the avatar of this. One minute you’re the best, the next you’re the worst, and then you’re back to the best. So you have maximum reason to be sure you’re the best and not the worst. If you’re high enough in relative status and power or usefulness that people still want to deal with you at all, this can be very powerful. If you’re not, it doesn’t work, because no one will want to associate with you at all. So you can only deploy this strategy to the extent, and in the contexts, where people have no choice but to engage. In some places there’s an equilibrium that drives such strategies out, and I prefer such spaces. But the top of business and politics reward it. Take The Money And Run
In terms of causal decision theory, of the direct consequences, obviously yes. You greatly improve an entire nation in exchange for a tiny bag of money. Great deal. Alas, that is not the full deal. The deal also is that future dictators will know they likely have a similar option, even if they are pretty terrible. This goes both ways. First the good news: If others take similar deals, you can rescue other countries similarly. If others know they have this option, they can invest fewer resources in regime stability and buying off loyalty of their chain of command, since failure to maintain power is now often much less bad.
Then the bad news: This makes being a dictator a much, much better deal. This encourages them to maintain strong bargaining positions. This also gives them more incentive to steal money and squirrel it away.
We face similar hostage situations all the time at smaller scale. We strike a balance. We do often pay ransoms, negotiate for hostages and so forth. We also have limits. I think in general we are too willing to negotiate, and should more often tell such folks to go to hell and accept that this particular situation will often end poorly as a result. On the dictator level it is less clear. In this case I would take the deal, if it came not only with him leaving but with a transition to democracy. Indeed, one could make a conditional deal, where his immunity depends on the transition. Work Harder
When I left my interview at Jane Street Capital, I was very excited to work there. When I did my other finance interview? Not so much. Work Smarter
Anti-Suicide ChairsThey are pitching us… Indeed, my guess is the best thing you can do for people in trouble via chairs is to get them actually comfy chairs, so they feel better. The Great American Songbook
I don’t know how much of this is anti-recency bias, and how much of this is those involved being super old, but also the idea of having a canon of music songs, that are listened to over decades, seems itself pretty old now, something only old people would care about? I also checked some of the list, and it’s remarkable how much there simply isn’t a canon from this century, or at least how easy it is to ignore. If you’d made a similar list from the 20th century, I expect I’d have known most of the songs. When I browsed this list, I was running at maybe 15%, and that’s simply to know them, not like them. To be fair to the list, the ones I did recognize seemed like mostly good picks. Tanmay Khale emailed Tyler Cowen to suggest that modern songs Music is different from sports here because you don’t only play against simultaneous competition. A song from 2025 and one from 1975 are both on Spotify, you can choose which one to play or prefer. For Your Entertainment
Have a policy for where your inputs come from. Stick to that policy. Your subscription self it better than your free click self.
I mean, yes, ‘person has heart attack and dies’ is not news. I do wish they’d stop being so damn lazy with all the car accidents in fictional media.
The Subscription Package Dance
The problem is you’re then very tempted to rotate between packages. The long term equilibrium is presumably one package with all of it, so you aren’t constantly either toggling between services or feeling bad about not doing so. Alternatively, they should up their yearly subscription discount game, which I would also find acceptable. Meanwhile there’s a war. Disney owns ESPN and ABC, as well as Hulu and Fubo. Google wants Disney to agree to incorporate their Hulu offerings into the YouTubeTV experience, and Disney is having none of it, and as a result of that (and some amount of pricing argument) we’ve now gone weeks with Disney not available on YouTubeTV. This is wreaking havoc on my ability to experience college football in particular, because the only alternative services, ESPN and Hulu, have remarkably awful experiences for anyone trying to view sports that aren’t live, in a ‘seriously considering not to bother’ way. Was Television Better Before?
That sometimes (rarely) happens, and yes it’s annoying. There’s substantial startup costs. But have you tried watching TV that is 30% advertisements that you cannot skip, and that cannot be paused? Have you tried managing a VCR? Have you tried having to call Yeah, no thanks.
Overall I am firmly on the side that the television experience has never been better, or at least that this will be true once Disney and YouTubeTV resolve their dispute. The Joys Of Partial Task AutomationAs in, it’s not only AI that has jagged capabilities.
Gamers Gonna Game Game Game Game Game
I also am considering doing some power cube drafting on Arena. Sounds like fun.
Occasionally we see Standard formats that end up in this failure mode. The price of printing fun and cool cards, and of the current theory of design, is that this will sometimes happen. When it happens by accident, that’s unfortunate, and I think they could do a better job putting stabilizers into sets to guard against this, but the correct risk of this to take is not zero.
The official response is that this would have required an emergency ban, and formats need stability, so they’re not doing it. I’m sorry, but that’s ridiculous. As of SCG Con, it had been two full months. If you’re unwilling to ‘emergency’ ban then you need more B&R days than this. I’m also sympathetic to ‘balancing Standard is not the top priority of Wizards R&D anymore,’ and I realize this will increase the rate of mistakes made, except that this consideration cannot apply to Standard itself or to its banned list. Standard participation needs to be continuous to keep up with card access, breaking it is deadly. As someone excited to try and find the time to do a fully Limited PT, I cannot overstate how much this failure makes me uninterested in returning to Standard.
Sam Black warns us that The caveat back is that while in theory full flexibility is good, and for experts like Sam Black it’s very good, it can also be a trap (in terms of short term win rates) to be tempted into decks that aren’t good or that you don’t know how to draft, whereas you actually should be forcing the good stuff far more if you care only about winning now. Sports Go Sports
I see the risk in going to a niche service like AppleTV+ over ESPN, given that every serious sports fan presumably will still need ESPN access, but in exchange they hopefully get to present a better product, in a unified way. The obvious deal would have been Netflix, why not unify the core broadcast with Drive to Survive, but I don’t mind what they ended up doing. Apple is also a powerful ally. I think AppleTV+ is exactly on point in saying it wants to own entire entire sports. It is maddening to have to hunt for different games or events and feel forced to buy multiple services. I think this played a substantial part in driving me away from baseball this year. I do warn AppleTV+ to fix their spoiler problem. Their current interface actively spoils everything, constantly, it’s a disgrace. Someone reading this must know someone who knows someone. Fix it. Don’t click the link, but yeah,
It still does not make sense to me. You might not love the coach but at an 80%+ discount you think you can do better? You need to be firing them in the middle of the season like this? It’s madness, I tell you. I think with Franklin and Kelly in particular the problem is that they did great jobs in recruiting, so expectations got very high, then the teams didn’t deliver and they thought let’s axe the coach. Big mistake. The other note is that if the coaches get rehired then the cost will be a lot less, and one expects the top names on this list to get new jobs. LSU and Penn State might not want them, but plenty of schools would love Kelly or Franklin. I’d love to get Franklin for Wisconsin, it seems like a perfect fit. Whereas one I definitely agree with here is Mike Gundy. Gundy is a prime example of a previously excellent coach who is adrift in the new era, you have to cut your losses. One obvious suggestion is to tie the buyouts directly to the record. You say, okay, if we fire you without cause you are owed 85% of the contract, but if you have X losses or fail to hit some milestone, then that’s cause. Seems simple enough, and the coaches at this level have big egos and don’t expect to fail.
You want to calibrate about how often the team can convert. Right now the onside kick recovery rate is too low. The yards to go can be adjusted to taste, and with many yards to go you don’t have to give the refs an excuse. If the refs are actively looking to throw a flag in order to extend the game, and are basically cheating in this particular spot, that’s a different problem. I presume they wouldn’t do it because this is bad for the game. Also the cheap automatic first downs from such penalties should be clamped down on in any case. There are any number of rules changes to fix this, the most obvious being that there can be two types of such flags, the way there’s both running into and roughing the kicker, and you don’t get an automatic first down unless it’s flagrant.
They especially don’t deserve sympathy for when their whales (big customers getting taken for huge amounts that are allowed to do basically anything for huge limits without questions) end up becoming beards (as in placing bets on behalf of actual professional gamblers) and bet $100k or more on an obscure player prop. They’re choosing to do game theoretically unsound things and taking calculated risks. If you’re gonna play with fire then sometimes you’re gonna get burned. My view of player props is that people who seek them out should be allowed to have their fun, sure why not, it’s cool info and a cool mini-game and in some cases it’s even a loss leader (since the wise person betting can pick off your mistakes and passes otherwise), but that the sportsbooks pushing them (and also pushing parlays) on recreational players is predatory behavior. And if they raise the limits on the props, especially on obscure players, that’s at their own risk. I also don’t have much sympathy for the recreational gamblers who take the other side of insider NBA bets. The NBA lines are, as Nate says, full of information about injuries and player usage and intent to tank, often not publicly known, to the point where this is the main thing driving lines away from where they naively ‘should’ be, and where most NBA fans at a sports bar could tell you what the line ‘should’ be if everyone potentially available was healthy and playing. Evaluating and tracking injuries is the main skill. That’s the game you’re playing. Either play it, or don’t. One place I disagree is where Nate mentions in his point #7 that if we banned FanDuel and DraftKings that 70% of that volume might move offshore rather than vanishing. I agree some percentage would move if there were no alternatives, but I would be utterly shocked if it was on the order of 70%. All the advertising would be gone. All the integration with media and teams and stadiums would be gone. Funding would be non-trivial again, as Nate notes you’d largely need to use crypto. You wouldn’t have an app with an optimized UI and wouldn’t be getting all the hyper aggressive customized push notifications on your phone. The entire context would change. No, it wouldn’t go fully back to the old level of activity, but it would drop a lot.
You do still have to account for positional value, and what you in particular need because the trading market is illiquid. It’s fine to make small departures based on what you do and don’t need, but that should be it.
Lindsay Owens here claims that teams are outright making mistakes, that in Atlanta raising ticket prices while lowering concession prices increased sales volume and revenue and fan satisfaction. I buy it. My read is that the higher concession prices raise marginally more revenue, but that you don’t want to be at the top of the revenue curve on this because the bad feeling of overpaying too much not only drives fans away from purchases, it makes the overall experience worse, as the stadium experience is Out To Get You. What you want is to be able to basically order whatever you want and not feel bad about it, and the team should want this for you too. It makes the overall experience much better, keeps people coming back, and turns them into long term fans. In general, teams should be doing less short term profit maximizing at their stadiums. I bet that on most current margins this outweighs the value of the price discrimination. This is not the same as requiring ‘all-in pricing’ on tickets, which I think is just good, and yes you lose the ability to do price discrimination which in theory leaves something on the table. However, I think there are enough differences that I do not want to ‘force them into a good move’ via law. Sometimes People Cheat At PokerNate also discusses the poker cheating scandal, where I’m happy to defer to him and his notes match my understanding. Poker is fun, either with your buddies or at a casino, but if you’re not at a casino avoid raked games where the host turns a profit, there’s too much cheating risk and risk of involvement with people who are bad news. If you get invited to a home game, don’t go unless you understand why you’re invited. I’d highlight the note that cheaters are usually extremely greedy and unable to keep their cheating subtle, as per Nate’s #39. If they were capable of only ‘cheating small’ then they wouldn’t be cheating, so if you pay attention you can usually sense things aren’t right even if you can’t prove it. Hence the Also, as per #40, it doesn’t matter if you think the game is good enough you can win anyway, don’t play in a game where you’re being cheated, period. A similar phenomenon exists in Magic: The Gathering. If someone is cheating, they’re almost always highly suspicious. The problem is that unlike poker you often don’t choose who you play your Magic matches against, so you can be stuck against a likely cheater who hasn’t formally been caught yet. Opportunity Knocks
I strongly recommend going to the Secular Solstice itself if you have the opportunity, either in NYC, SF or other places it is offered. If you are local, and the rationalist megameetup is self-recommending to you, then you should definitely go. If not, consider going anyway. I’m usually there for one of the days. If you’re looking for an idea of what the music is like,
The Lighter Side
If you didn’t watch Sabrina Carpenter on SNL,
You do not get reliably rewarded for risk taking. It’s true! It’s actually not as true as you might think. In many cases you can repeatedly take uncorrelated risks at good odds, and over time you will reliably get rewarded for this. And then it gets better, in response:
And better than that, even! No, I’m not going to explain this one. Perhaps the crowds are not so wise, after all. Or perhaps they weren’t consulted.
A response suggests another way:
Victory is hers!
You're currently a free subscriber to |