---
subject: "Will the China Cycle Come for Airbus and Boeing?"
from: "Construction Physics <constructionphysics@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-10-23 12:01:34
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Construction Physics", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8588207018748827248", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Noah Smith, author of the economics Substack A multinational company puts its factories in China, lured by some combination of cheap production, big contracts, and the dream of huge market opportunities. China appropriates the multinational company’s technology, through some combination of joint ventures, acquisitions, reverse engineering, and espionage. The appropriated technology makes its way into the hands of Chinese domestic companies. The Chinese companies squeeze the multinational company out of the Chinese market. The Chinese companies go overseas and outcompete the multinational company in world markets.
High-speed rail and wind turbines are two industries that have gone through at least steps one through four of this cycle. The first high-speed rail trains in China were designed by several different foreign companies, chiefly a Japanese consortium led by Kawasaki but also Canada’s Bombardier and Germany’s Siemens, all of which partnered with a Chinese company to manufacture the trains. But before the initial order of 200 trains was completed, China stopped purchasing them, and began to manufacture its own high-speed trains, which bear a striking resemblance to the trains of its foreign partners. When development of large wind-farms in China began in the late 1990s, all turbines were imported. But Chinese manufacturers acquired wind turbine technology through joint ventures, licensing, and acquisitions, and by 2009 China’s market was dominated by locally-produced turbines. Today, China’s Goldwind is one of the One industry that hasn’t yet gone far through this cycle is large commercial aircraft (i.e: jetliners), which remains dominated by It’s not yet clear if it will succeed. So far China has spent decades and tens of billions of dollars in its attempts to build a successful commercial aircraft. It hasn’t had much success, likely due to some combination of the complexity of commercial aircraft manufacturing, the reluctance of existing firms to give away their critical technologies, and the leverage foreign governments and organizations such as the FAA and EASA have over China’s aerospace industry. But China seems incredibly motivated to overcome these obstacles and make the industry a success. If it continues to push, there’s a good chance it will eventually succeed. Origins of Chinese commercial aircraft manufacturingChina has been manufacturing aircraft since the 1950s, and has attempted to build passenger aircraft powered by jet engines and turboprops since the 1960s. China’s first attempt at an airliner dates to 1966, when it obtained a license to build the Soviet Over the next 12 years, China manufactured a handful of Y-7s, on the order of 130 in various configurations (exact numbers vary). Most were used domestically, with a few sold to Laos as well as several African countries. An updated Y-7, the China’s first attempt at a jet airliner dates from 1970, when the government decided that China should build its own passenger airliner, styled after the Boeing 707. Some have argued that China attempted to reverse-engineer a Boeing 707 after the first ones were delivered to China in 1972, while others state that it was an independent development effort. Regardless, the program resulted in the 707-esque Following the Y-10 program, China changed its aircraft manufacturing strategy, formulating a “three-step program." It would first partner with a foreign firm to set up a Chinese assembly operation for an existing, foreign aircraft. Then, China would jointly design and manufacture an aircraft with a foreign firm. This would allow China to obtain foreign aerospace technology and manufacturing capabilities. Once such capabilities had been obtained, China would design and build a large commercial aircraft independently. China aimed to accomplish this by 2010. The first step of this plan took place in 1984, when China signed a deal with McDonnell-Douglas to assemble the As part of the agreement, McDonnell provided China with a MD-80 flight simulator and an entire set of manufacturing drawings for the aircraft, which combined were worth an estimated $90 million. To ensure the aircraft would pass FAA certification, McDonnell “completely renovated SAIC’s factories, provided huge amounts of technical data, and had U.S.-based McDonnell Douglas employees provide 55,000 man-hours of technical training in engineering, tooling, and other areas.”³ McDonnell engineers spent extensive time in the Chinese factory, and Chinese engineers In addition to the assembly work, China also manufactured the individual components for the aircraft, and the share of Chinese components gradually rose over time, from 15% at the beginning of the program to 60% at the end.⁴ In the 1990s McDonnell introduced the MD-90 series, an upgrade to its MD-80 series, and planned to leverage Chinese manufacturing even more in an effort to beat Boeing in the race for the Chinese market. In what was known as the “ As China was assembling aircraft for McDonnell-Douglas, it also began the second step of its program, to jointly design and build an aircraft with a major manufacturer. Talks began in 1994 for a joint development program between Boeing, AVIC (China’s state-owned aerospace manufacturer), and a Korean manufacturer, but soon stalled. In 1997, China signed a contract with Airbus to develop the But these setbacks didn’t deter China from its goal of creating a major commercial aircraft manufacturer. In the late 1990s, it started to focus heavily on forming joint ventures with foreign aerospace firms. In 1996 it formed a joint venture with Pratt and Whitney to manufacture engine and gas turbine components; in 1998 it formed one with Rolls Royce to manufacture turbine blades. China formed another joint venture in 2003 with Brazil’s Embraer to manufacture the Many of these joint ventures were almost certainly established in the hopes of gaining access to the large Chinese market; Chinese industry leaders have made “no secret of their desire to trade market access for technology,” and increased sales to China often follow the establishment of a joint venture. Boeing, for instance, was historically the dominant aircraft supplier in China; in the mid-1990s, 8 out of every 10 jets flown in China was made by Boeing, and 80% of China’s new plane orders went to Boeing. Ten years later, 2/3rds of new plane orders were to Airbus, and by 2010 Airbus’ market share had risen to 43%, while Boeing’s had fallen to 55%. This shift in fortunes coincided with Airbus establishing an A320 assembly line in Tianjin. Aerospace industry analyst Sash Tush As it began to establish aerospace joint ventures in the late 1990s, China was also considering another attempt at building its own jetliner, and in 2000 it launched a project to build its own regional jet, the The ARJ21 program has struggled. Its first flight was originally planned for 2005, with commercial deliveries starting in 2007, but due to development problems the first flight didn’t occur until 2008, and commercial deliveries didn’t begin until 2016. China originally planned to sell 850 ARJ21s by 2031, but as of 2024 it’s only sold 142, and is only producing about 20-30 per year. Nearly all of those are going to domestic airlines, which are reportedly not happy about being urged to buy it – one Chinese executive described it as “that stupid airplane” – and there seem to be Its lack of success is attributed to the poor quality of the aircraft: the ARJ21 has COMAC and the C919In 2008, the year of the ARJ21’s first flight, China took further steps to try and make its aerospace industry more competitive. Since the early 1990s, both civilian and military Chinese aircraft had been manufactured by AVIC (the Aviation Industry Corporation of China), a large state-owned enterprise that had been assembled from a collection of smaller aerospace organizations and manufacturers (including Shanghai Aircraft Manufacturing Company). In 2008, AVIC’s commercial operations were spun off into a new company, the Commercial Aircraft Corporation of China, or The formation of COMAC coincided with another new aircraft development project, the C919. The C919 is a twin-engined narrowbody jetliner that would compete with Boeing’s 737 and Airbus’s A320 models, the two best-selling aircraft families in the world. COMAC hoped to ultimately produce 150 C919s a year, a third of China’s domestic demand and roughly 10% of international demand for aircraft in that class. By comparison, Airbus makes over With the C919, China continued its efforts to try and acquire foreign aerospace technology and manufacturing capabilities. Like the ARJ21, the C919 is heavily reliant on foreign subsystems technology; engines, avionics, control systems, communications, landing gear, and other systems are all supplied by foreign firms. But unlike the ARJ21, where many of the key components were manufactured outside China, with the C919 China required foreign-suppliers for the C919 to set up joint-manufacturing operations in China with Chinese firms, though C919 Suppliers with Joint Ventures Major foreign suppliers for the C919 with joint ventures in China. Like the ARJ21 (and like most aircraft development projects), the C919 has taken far longer to develop than anticipated. COMAC initially planned to have the first C919 flight in 2014 and the first commercial deliveries in 2016, but the project was repeatedly delayed (in COMAC also seems to have difficulty with lightweight composite materials, and The C919 lags in performance compared to the most recent offerings from Boeing and Airbus. One way of looking at this is a payload/range diagram, which graphs how far an aircraft can fly while carrying different weights. Below is a payload/range diagram for the C919 (both standard and extended range versions), and its competitors from Boeing and Airbus, the 737MAX8 and the A320neo. Also shown is the predecessor to the MAX8, the 737-800. You can see from the diagram that even the extended range configuration of the C919 is significantly surpassed by the A320neo and the MAX8. While the C919 has slightly higher absolute payload capacity than the 320neo, the 320neo can in general fly farther (in some cases much farther, almost 1,000 nautical miles) carrying the same amount of weight. The MAX8 doesn’t have quite as much of a range advantage over the C919, but it has a significant payload capacity advantage, able to carry much more weight much farther. The C919 appears to be much closer in performance to Boeing’s previous-generation 737-800, suggesting that the C919 is about a generation behind the curve.⁶ Performance lags also show up in relative fuel consumption; the C919 is Part of this lagging performance is due to weight: COMAC appears to have struggled to keep the weight down during development, and the operating empty weight of a It’s not yet clear how successful the C919 will be. It’s secured far more orders than any previous China-produced commercial aircraft ( Most critically, the C919 has not yet been certified by the FAA or the European EASA (it aims to achieve the latter by But in addition to these headwinds, the C919 also has tailwinds. Chief among them are the ongoing supply chain issues at Boeing and Airbus, which are making it hard for the companies to build enough planes to satisfy demand. In June, Airbus And Boeing’s supply chain issues have been compounded by its ongoing safety and manufacturing issues; its reduced rate of production, in service of trying to address Because it’s not clear how these trends will play out, there’s a range of different predictions, even from experts, on how the C919 will fare. Aerospace industry experts like Richard Aboulafia and Michael Boyd have In addition to the C919, COMAC also has tentative plans for even larger jetliners, the ConclusionWhy has China been so much less successful in applying the China cycle playbook to making commercial aircraft than it has in other industries like high-speed trains, wind turbines, and mobile phones? There seem to be a few factors at work. One is simply the sheer difficulty of building a modern commercial aircraft, which is probably one of the five or six most complex technical achievements of modern civilization (along with jet engines, leading-edge semiconductor fabrication, and nuclear submarines). Commercial aircraft must couple a high level of performance in some of the most advanced technologies in existence with a high level of reliability; both of these are needed not only for safety reasons but also to minimize maintenance costs and make the economics of air travel work. A modern commercial jet engine, for instance, needs to operate for An illustration of this difficulty is Japan, which was widely expected to become a major commercial aircraft competitor in the 1980s, but ultimately failed. In 2023 it canceled its own regional jet project, the And it’s not just that aerospace technology is difficult to master. Existing aerospace manufacturers may have been more successful in preventing their technology from being appropriated than manufacturers in other industries. Aerospace firms are well aware that their technology is their critical asset, and that setting up operations in China might allow Chinese firms to obtain it and become competitors. A 2017 RAND study of Chinese aerospace industrial policy stated that all aerospace manufacturers were aware of the importance of protecting technology when operating in China, and took steps to try and prevent it. Historically, with the MD-80 and the ARJ21, while final assembly took place in China, many of the critical aircraft components were manufactured elsewhere. Operations that did take place in China often used older, less advanced technology and manufacturing methods for their Chinese operations, though this might be less true for the C919. A The ultimate goal of securing FAA and EASA certification may also make it more difficult for Chinese firms to appropriate foreign aerospace technology, as Western firms may be able to lobby these organizations to block certification in response. Per the CEO of Textron, parent company of Cessna:
Relatedly, it’s been argued that the reliance of Chinese aerospace on foreign firms for key technologies provides a barrier for them being too competitive with firms like Boeing or Airbus. Western countries might simply opt to stop selling key components like commercial jet engines, which China appears to be even Some have also argued that the Chinese method of top-down, state-owned development doesn’t pair well with commercial aircraft manufacturing and the amount of integration of different technologies and systems it requires. Commercial aircraft manufacturing is also different from many other industries, where China has achieved success via enormous amounts of scale. The result is that while China has had some success with the China cycle playbook in commercial aircraft, it’s nothing like what we’ve seen in other industries. It’s taken far longer, and cost far more, for China to develop commercial aircraft manufacturing capabilities, and at best it will be years before China is capable of even supplying its own internal market for narrowbody twin jets, much less building other categories of aircraft, competing in the international market, or replacing foreign-made components with Chinese ones. But struggles so far doesn’t mean that China will never be successful. It’s clearly possible for a country to establish a successful commercial aircraft company (witness the relatively recent success of While some experts have historically been skeptical of Chinese efforts, others think that they’ll probably succeed eventually. In the early 2000s, a former Boeing CEO stated that “the risk-averse Japanese culture will discourage the temptation. But the Chinese will eventually be there.” A vice chairman of GE justified its sales to China on the grounds that the Chinese would inevitably be a major aircraft manufacturer, stating, “They are committed for the long term and they have every probability of being successful. We can participate in that or sit on the sidelines. We're not about sitting on the sidelines.” The C919 might not be the aircraft that breaks into the international market; rather, it might be an aircraft that follows it. That, of course, depends on whether China continues to pump money into commercial aircraft development, and continues to work on developing and improving its own aircraft capabilities. Evidence so far suggests that it will. Thanks to Ashwin Varma and Claire Larkin for reading a draft of this. All errors are my own. If you’re interested in reading more about Chinese commercial aircraft manufacturing, a reading list of the best sources I found on the topic is 1 Noah isn’t the first to 2 The Y-10 program was championed by 3 SAIC is “Shanghai Aircraft Industry Corporation," which 4 There are some discrepancies in the literature here: other sources say Chinese components were never substantially used due to quality problems. 5 AVIC was actually split into two companies, AVIC I and AVIC II, in the late 1990s, then recombined as one company in 2008 when COMAC was spun off. 6 On the other hand, there have been initial reports that the C919 appears to be Construction Physics articles will always remain free, but if you find this work valuable, I encourage you to Construction Physics is produced in partnership with the Institute for Progress, a Washington, DC-based think tank. You can learn more about their work by visiting their You can also contact me on |