---
subject: "What to Watch in AI"
from: "The Generalist <thegeneralist@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-03-26 16:42:26
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Generalist"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8815311452832858585"]
---
👋 Tiny but impactful: If this email showed up in your “Promotions” tab, please pull it over to “Primary.” It takes ~1 second and helps ensure The Generalist doesn’t get stuck in the email dungeon. Friends, Another week, another leap forward in the world of artificial intelligence. After launching GPT-4 earlier this month, OpenAI released plugins on Thursday. Users can now interact with Instacart, Expedia, OpenTable, and several other platforms, all from within the ChatGPT interface. You can, quite literally, order your groceries, book a table at a restaurant, or plan your next vacation with AI assistance. It’s the kind of upgrade that might sound small, but that, I suspect, will end up being significant: ChatGPT now directly touches the internet and its many-dimensioned array of apps and services. Suddenly, the realm of possible actions has increased exponentially. As the AI revolution continues apace, it’s becoming increasingly tricky to know where to look. Which new product should you use at your company? Which innovation should you start playing with? Which startup may someday change the fabric of our lives? To try and answer these questions, I’m excited to share another edition of “What to Watch in AI.” We’ve asked investors from Sequoia, Thrive, Bessemer, Lux, Dimension, and Footwork to share the companies and trends they find most promising. This time we’ve added founders to the mix: you’ll hear which peer businesses the leaders of Synthesia, Enveda, Valence, and Athenian are most excited about. To discover ten companies at the vanguard of AI, jump in. A quick request: If you liked this piece, consider giving it a ❤️ at the top of the email! It helps us know what’s resonating, and supports our growth. Thank you! Brought to you by A.TeamThe world’s best product builders are not for hire. The most important resource in an advanced economy is talent. But great talent is hard to find. Increasingly, the world’s top product builders are no longer looking for full-time jobs. If you want to build great things without increasing full-time headcount, use A.Team. The company’s platform has brought together some of the world’s most talented engineers, designers, and product managers as cohesive teams. Post a summary of your business's most pressing problem and get matched with an exceptional team in days. Once your team is deployed, the A.Team platform makes it easy to manage contracts, payment, and scale resources up or down. As Mario wrote of A.Team: “The company has created a platform powerful enough to solve the difficult problems McKinsey advises on but is equipped to build solutions. It makes the best of Silicon Valley – the energy, experimentation, iteration, and invention – accessible to the rest of the corporate world.”
What to Watch in AIActionable insightsIf you only have a few minutes to spare, here’s what investors, operators, and founders should know about the most exciting AI startups. Predict the future. We all enjoy playing Nostradamus every once in a while. But what if you could forecast the future with a good chance of being right? One contributor suggests AI is making this increasingly possible thanks to companies like Kumo. The predictive intelligence platform allows users to “query the future,” forecasting how customers may react to new products or business changes. The augmented expert. Marketers already leverage large language models (LLMs) to create copy, blog posts, and more. But how can we ensure AI’s power reaches the domains of law and medicine? Two submissions highlight companies making inroads, helping doctors and lawyers operate more efficiently and effectively. Cloud studios. Once upon a time, if you wanted to capture 3D footage, you needed bespoke, expensive hardware. Recent innovations mean that’s no longer the case. With nothing more than a smartphone, users can now capture photorealistic 3D imagery that can be used for gaming assets, e-commerce product shots, or creative projects. Increasingly, the power of a megastudio is accessible from anywhere. The power of product savvy. Simply leveraging AI is not enough; you must also wrap the technology in a compelling product. One company highlighted for this ability is Sana, an enterprise knowledge management platform. According to one contributor, Sana leverages AI subtly but effectively, demonstrating how it can be woven into a cohesive product. Science speaks. The world is full of vernaculars humans have not been able to decipher. That includes the “languages” of life sciences like biology and chemistry. Companies like Enveda translate the scientific realm's vocabulary, grammar, and semantics – and allow humans to “speak back” by developing novel chemistries.
The artificial intelligence renaissance has officially hit warp speed. It has not even been five months since our last Increasingly, this is how our world seems to work: in fits and starts, in spurts of mind-torching acceleration and gorgeous contraptions, in obsolescences that occur over a long lunch break. Our “What to Watch” series attempts to stay on top of technology’s rapidly advancing sectors. While no one can hope to know every innovation in AI (this is an energetic organism, moving in a hundred directions at once), we hope that this surfaces compelling companies and trends before the broader market has noticed. To do that, we’ve asked some of AI’s most impressive investors and founders to select the companies and trends they’re monitoring closely. (In a fun coincidence, one investor independently picked a contributing founder’s company.) These are their picks. Note: Long-time readers Harvey: Your legal assistantThere is enormous innovation at multiple layers of the AI stack. For example, various people are building interesting new bespoke models for coding ( Common characteristics of applications that are seeing fast adoption include: Focusing on what’s new. Apps that leverage the unique advantages of LLMs or other models often see strong uptake. Builders are asking themselves: What can this technology uniquely do that prior tech can not? Reducing drudgery. Applications that replace repetitive human labor or core workflows with light machine intelligence are compelling. Reducing or eliminating painful manual work holds obvious attraction. Augmenting the human. Full automation may not be possible in many instances. As a result, some applications have taken a “human in the loop” approach, focusing on augmenting user capability rather than taking it over completely. Humans are used to correct hallucinations or provide a qualitative view on accuracy or wording.
Like GitHub’s Amidst a sea of AI startups, Harvey stands out for a few key reasons: The right team. Harvey’s founders understand the problem from both a use case and technology perspective. Co-founder Winston Weinberg practiced antitrust litigation at O’Melveny, while CEO Gabriel Pereyra worked as a research scientist at Deepmind. A thoughtful approach. Harvey has taken a differentiated approach to assessing what legal teams need. Weinberg and Pereyra focused on a few key early problems in due diligence, seeing strong customer feedback. With iteration, they’ve achieved deep user engagement. Speed and focus. After choosing their problem set, Harvey’s founders have built rapidly to serve a specific customer need and use case. Harvey engaged tightly with specific customers like Allen & Overy to ensure it was building against real customer pain. This uncovered more use cases to deepen their workflows.
The legal and compliance world is a great example of one that will be remade with AI – for everything from litigation to drafting insurance claims to filing with the courts on behalf of human clients. And it won’t stop there. Specialized AI assistants – and applications that can synthesize data and provide answers – have considerable potential in medicine (see: – PuzzlerAll guesses welcome and clues given to anyone that would like one. Just respond to this email for a hint.
MJFM was first to unscramble last week’s unusual puzzler. Nik R, Upendra S, and Krishna N joined him. All figured out which big tech CEO’s name was hidden in this anagram:
The answer? Uber czar, Dara Khosrowshahi. Well played to all. Until next time, Mario |