---
subject: "Mass Incarceration and Mass Crime"
from: "Marginal REVOLUTION <donotreply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-12-11 12:22:34
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tyler Cowen", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2466199532210586699", "UNREAD"]
---
In our [Marginal Revolution Podcast](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=6ed9e291f56bc9ef02b29aa619121276815f1f53fc054bf7fbcb2bddf398f820&blog_id=42693868&post_id=92035&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=4f08fb2c5b87cb3344e509bfc9d9b86b&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cubWVyY2F0dXMub3JnL21hcmdpbmFsLXJldm9sdXRpb24tcG9kY2FzdA=&email_id=3c6f826f61ed165f6f3bcdfd908d77ac) on [Crime in the 1970s](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=6e50d8bd448f8bfd529dc28bf72716e13f97548dc2f0481759a22135ce0a903a&blog_id=42693868&post_id=92035&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=8949888d00b78c4c6d2bb862d9a5f441&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cubWVyY2F0dXMub3JnL21hcmdpbmFsLXJldm9sdXRpb24tcG9kY2FzdC8xOTcwcy1jcmltZS13YXZl&email_id=3c6f826f61ed165f6f3bcdfd908d77ac), I pointed out that blacks were often strongly in favor of tough on crime laws:
Tabarrok: [P]eople think that mass incarceration is a peculiarly American phenomena, or that it came out of nowhere, or was due solely to racism. Michelle Alexander’s,
[The New Jim Crow], takes this view....[But] back then, the criminal justice system was also called racist, but the racism that people were pointing to was that black criminals were let back on the streets to terrorize black victims, and that black criminals were given sentences which were too light. That was the criticism back then. It was black and white victims together who drove the punishment of criminals. I think this actually tells you about two falsehoods. First, the primary driver of mass imprisonment was not racism. It was violent crime.
Second, this also puts the lie, sometimes you hear from conservatives, to this idea that black leaders don’t care about black-on-black crime. That’s a lie. Many Black leaders have been, and were, and are tough on crime. Now, it’s true, as crime began to fall in the 1990s, many blacks and whites began to have misgivings about mass incarceration. Crime was a huge problem in the 1970s and 1980s, and it hit the United States like a brick. It seemed to come out of nowhere. You can’t blame people for seeking solutions, even if the solutions come with their own problems.
A new paper [The Racial Politics of Mass Incarceration](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=5a546b58eb9d4366e77cdb640a1bdebd5f56201ac3b9e2f3404e1c62ae90186a&blog_id=42693868&post_id=92035&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=9e342d047884d00ece6cad1eee3080f0&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuY2FtYnJpZGdlLm9yZy9jb3JlL2pvdXJuYWxzL3BlcnNwZWN0aXZlcy1vbi1wb2xpdGljcy9hcnRpY2xlL3JhY2lhbC1wb2xpdGljcy1vZi1tYXNzLWluY2FyY2VyYXRpb24vQUZBQ0Q5OTYxQzAzMzI3OEU0MENBNUUyM0EzMEQ3MTc&email_id=3c6f826f61ed165f6f3bcdfd908d77ac) by Clegg and Usmani offer more evidence challenging the now conventional Michelle Alexander view:
Public opinion data show that not just the white but also the black public became more punitive after the 1960s. Voting data from the House show that most black politicians voted punitively at the height of concern about crime. In addition, an analysis of federally mandated redistricting suggests that in the early 1990s, black political representation had a punitive impact at the state level. Together, our evidence suggests that crime had a profound effect on black politics. It also casts some doubt on the conventional view of the origins of mass incarceration.
As the authors note, the fact that blacks supported tough-on-crime laws doesn't mean racism was absent. Racial overtones surely influenced the specific ways fear of crime was translated into policy. But the primary driver of mass incarceration wasn't racism—it was mass crime.