---
subject: "The Monday Media Diet with Priyanka Mattoo"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-06-17 20:57:12
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
I was browsing a bookstore in Venice last weekend, when I saw Priyanka’s new book. I emailed her and evidently they had put it out before the pub date. I now have a cool rare signed copy, and also asked her to do round 2 of MMD. Tell us about yourself. I am a screenwriter/filmmaker and I was born in Kashmir, and raised in England and Saudi Arabia before moving to the U.S. in high school, then studied Italian and Law at the University of Michigan. I now live in Venice (California) with my husband and our kids. Describe your media diet. Well - since the last time I wrote one of these, Twitter imploded, and the internet in general has become such a deeply unpleasant place to hang out. It’s driven me into a slower-paced reading life, and one lined with newsletters. My brain is much happier and healthier for this, to be honest. I start the day with the actual news. NYT, WaPo, LA Times, Guardian, BBC, Indian papers. Then my newsletters: WITI, of course. Jami Attenberg’s
A large chunk of my interests are food-related, and I tire of what the internet has done to food coverage. It simply doesn’t pay for sites to do anything other than heat maps or listicles, and in my opinion it’s turned much of their public into anxious automatons who run from one hotspot to another like it’s a race. I wrote about slowing down and re-developing our sense of food discovery recently for Taste, in a piece called
In the newsy/Politics area, I subscribe to Heather Cox Richardson’s And I still love my print magazines, which I read cover-to-cover: The Atlantic, The New Yorker, New York Magazine, Food & Wine, Milk Street, Bon Appetit. The kids get Highlights, The Week Junior - and the most amazing find, the Week Junior Science and Nature, which comes from the UK and is incredible. Podcasts: As a former podcast executive (yet another career!) I’m allowed to say there are too many podcasts. I’m loving Jane Marie’s I’ve spent two decades working in comedy, and two of the funniest women in the whole world are my former podcasting partners Amanda Lund and Maria Blasucci, who do their pod What’s the last great book you read? I loved What are you reading now? A terrific book called What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication? I used to read a few pages here and there where I could find time between kid stuff, but the kids are now 10 and 5, so now I announce I’m going to sit down and read a magazine, and then I do, with my earplugs in. It’s a process, but we are getting there. Who should everyone be reading that they’re not? People are definitely reading them, but even more should: What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone? Forever: Paprika! My favorite recipe organizing app. You can put any link in the browser and it will download the recipe at the end of a chatty monologue. Even I, a writer of Plane or train? Plane travel has become so horrible, hasn’t it? It’s only just starting to find its post-pandemic footing, but I’m not sure we’ll ever claw our way back from feeling like we’re packed onto a bus. Even so, I still feel a thrill every time I see a plane take off. I am, however, always dreaming of a long train trip - I find them so soothing. Maybe once both kids can read. What is one place everyone should visit? We spent a chunk of last summer on Whidbey Island, off the coast of Washington. The Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into. I fell down so many rabbit holes while writing my memoir, and I’ve come to realize it’s part of my process - becoming bizarrely interested in something and figuring out why. One recent one is the origin story and international expansion of -Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Priyanka (PM)
Invite your friends and earn rewardsIf you enjoy Why is this interesting?, share it with your friends and earn rewards when they subscribe. |