---
subject: "Cosmic Propaganda"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-05-04 13:02:43
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
On July 21, 1969, astronauts Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin prepared to lift off from Tranquility Base on the surface of the Moon. Their journey was the culmination of years of work and billions of dollars in spending. The astronauts’ journey had captivated the world and would be trumpeted as a triumph of American ingenuity, capitalism, and democracy. It was the climax of the Space Race, a blow from which the Soviet space program would never recover and a feat that NASA would never be able to match. I’m sure you knew all that. But did you know that, at the very moment Aldrin and Armstrong were preparing for liftoff, Luna 15 had been launched ahead of Apollo 11 in an attempt to bring material back from the Moon before the Americans could, although even the leaders of the Soviet space program would have to admit that collecting some dirt would pale in comparison to humans walking on the Moon. Sadly, the probe didn’t even achieve its goals. Meanwhile, Buzz Aldrin and Neil Armstrong lifted off, their names secure in the history books. The Soviet attempt to reach the Moon seemed cursed at times. Its rocket designers got into a The loss of Luna 15 seems almost too on-the-nose to be true, a damp squib of a finale of the Soviet bid for the moon. It, combined with the success of Apollo 11, was a terrible disappointment for the Soviet leadership, especially since they had reached almost every other space milestone before the Americans. Soviets had launched the first satellites, put the first living beings into orbit, sent the first man (and woman) into space, landed the first probe on the Moon, and conducted the first spacewalk. The Soviet space program was the pride of the nation until it wasn’t. And when the Soviets were proud of something, they put it on a stamp. Here, for example, is the stamp set commemorating Luna 16 — a probe similar to Luna 15 that, unlike its predecessor, actually succeeded in bringing back samples from the Moon: Though the Soviet space program eventually fizzled, the country’s stamp game remained strong. Each achievement was commemorated with beautiful postage stamps that reflected the spirit of the times. Thanks for reading! If you’re enjoying this post, you should subscribe to the newsletter. If you are really enjoying it, please consider purchasing a paid subscription. Paid subscribers — it’s only about 75 cents a week! — get access to the archives, the satisfaction of supporting work they enjoy, and my undying gratitude. To support my work, please click the button below: The humble postage stamp used to be a simple thing, a little square that showed that you’d paid for the right to send a letter. The first postage stamp with a picture — Queen Victoria’s — came out in 1840, more as a way to prevent counterfeiting than to glorify the monarch. As time went on, postal systems realized that, as long as they were putting pictures on the stamps, they might as well have a little fun. By the late 1800s, the commemorative stamp was commonplace, usually honoring a leader or a significant event. The political struggles of the twentieth century created a new demand for commemorative stamps as governments realized that they could be used to shape the opinions of people at home and abroad. Nobody was as aggressive in using stamps for propaganda as the Soviets. Their postage trumpeted their industrial progress, their bountiful harvests, their sporting achievements, their leadership, and, especially, their accomplishments in space. Soviet space stamps usually fell into several categories. First, there were stamps glorifying the overall space program, like this one celebrating Soviet technical achievements: Or this Cosmonauts’ Day stamp from 1963: Or this one on the 100th birthday of Lenin, claiming that only socialism could have created something like the Soviet space program: Next, as you might expect, a series of stamps commemorated various Space Race victories or firsts. They covered the biggest accomplishments, like the launch of Sputnik: And the first manned space flight, seen here soaring over the Kremlin: But they also celebrated, well, everything else. If you can think of a Soviet space feat, there’s a stamp for it. The second manned orbital flight got a stamp: So did the launch of a probe to Venus: And probes to Mars: Along with the first spacewalk: And the first multi-person flight: You could even collect a set of stamps commemorating each milestone: The Soviet leadership also worked hard to create Yuri Gagarin, the first man in space, was a common subject, always gazing out placidly from his helmet. Along with Valentina Tereshkova, the first woman in space: Occasionally, the stamps show a little personality. I really like Boris Yegorov’s hair in this one: Stamps also honored the scientists who put the cosmonauts into space, like rocket scientist Konstantin Tsiolkovsky: After the firsts and the victories over the Americans started to slow down, Soviet stamp designers began to emphasize other virtues of the space program. One common theme was how the space program tied the Communist bloc together. The Soviets conducted launches involving cosmonauts from other countries, and the stampmakers used these as an opportunity to portray the Communist world as happily united. A joint Czech-Soviet mission got a stamp in 1978: As did the arrival of Hungarians on the Salyut space station (looks like they brought gifts): And the awesome-looking Soyuz rocket that took a joint Polish-Soviet mission into orbit: Even more far-flung cosmonauts got a shout-out, as the Soviets tried to emphasize the global reach of Communism. Here’s one from a joint Vietnam-USSR mission: And another featuring Mongolian participation: Even as the communist bloc fractured, the stampmakers were hard at work trying to make it look like there was one big, happy socialist family in space. This one from 1988 commemorates Bulgarian cosmonauts. And this one from 1990 is a sign of the changing times. It celebrates the fact that the Soviets were collaborating with Japan in space rather than one of the dwindling number of communist states: These stamps tell the story of the Soviet space program’s trajectory — and perhaps the trajectory of manned space flight overall. The examples from the 1960s are grand and exciting, exulting in the thrill of historic firsts and new frontiers. But, over time, the horizons contracted a bit. By the 1980s, they were commemorating medical checkups: And the ability to exercise and shower in space: Once space travel became more commonplace — and once it was clear that the Soviet Union had come out second-best in the Space Race — the claims got much less grand. But they still represent a hopeful vision of what humanity can achieve in space, as well as a sometimes misleading image of the success of Soviet society and science. Take the case of Vladimir Komarov, who burned up on re-entry in 1967 while " You won’t find a stamp of that event, nor will you find one commemorating the Luna 15 probe slamming into a mountain while the Americans set foot on the Moon and walked away with victory in the Space Race. This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are three ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: You can share the newsletter with others: You can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week! You're currently a free subscriber to |