---
subject: "Fear + Creativity: A road trip"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-08-13 03:33:51
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
I love writing but despise sharing it. Quite ironic, considering you are reading this right now. Let me explain. Writing, like all other creative endeavours, carries emotional risks and heaps of fear. The fear of judgment, failure, ridicule, and, worst of all, indifference. As someone who writes for a living, I am always looking for remedies for this.
An analogy I share with friends and colleagues, drawn from Elizabeth Gilbert’s book Big Magic, is particularly helpful. She suggests thinking of a creative pursuit as a road trip with creativity. She asks not to exclude fear from the trip itinerary. Instead, invite it to come along. After all, it’s a well-meaning friend just trying to help.
So, give fear a seat and a voice. It can tag along everywhere but can’t give directions, meddle with temperature, or choose the music. Fear can have a voice but not a vote. And it is definitely forbidden to drive. Gilbert says unless you master the art of travelling alongside fear, you won’t be able to go on interesting journeys or do interesting things.
So, each time I go on my ambitious road trip with creativity, start a new project, or even do anything mildly interesting, I remind myself that fear must never take control of the wheel.
Gilbert’s counterintuitive analogy stuck with me because it defies the clichés of “fight your fears” or “be fearless”.
Last week, The Ken’s stories delved into businesses driven by big bets and unconventional approaches.
Take a look at Monday’s story, where Anushka and Shaswata talked about the contrasting strategies of [Ola Electric and Bajaj Auto](https://the-ken.com/story/ola-chose-selling-over-servicing-evs-bajaj-disagrees/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) regarding electric vehicles. While Ola’s focus on selling is upsetting customers, Bajaj’s servicing priority isn’t going down well with dealers.
Another company experimenting with its business strategy is [Fino Payments Bank](https://the-ken.com/story/a-payments-bank-wants-to-be-a-lender-that-doesnt-lend/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter). In Tuesday’s story, Rounak dissected why the lender is not rushing to extend loans and is working on expanding its subscriptions business.
The Wednesday story was about how the Indian government courted the US chip giant [Micron](https://the-ken.com/story/how-india-bent-over-backwards-to-clear-microns-2-7b-chip-facility/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) to push it closer to realising its dream of semiconductor-fabrication plants. Pratap unpacked why it was important for India to woo the silicon giant and the incentives at play.
On Thursday, Vanita delved into the relatively undiscussed consequence of the funding winter in the startup scene right now. What happens to the entry-level, analyst roles in large VC firms when there are fewer deals to make? With salary cuts and reduced demand for these roles, analysts are [facing the heat](https://the-ken.com/story/what-vc-analysts-do-when-there-are-few-deals-to-make/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) of this ongoing slump.
Shivani, on Friday, discussed the emergence of [“de-influencers”](https://the-ken.com/story/whats-in-it-for-influencers-when-they-choose-to-fight-the-hype/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) on platforms like Youtube and Instagram. These experts, including doctors and nutritionists, combat misinformation about food and health. Yet, breaking this cycle remains daunting. But is altruism the sole driver of their content?
If you are trying your hand at something new this weekend or in the coming weeks, I hope you remember what Liz Gilbert said. Have a great Sunday.
Regards,
Akshaya
[akshaya@the-ken.com](mailto:akshaya@the-ken.com)
What you just read is the personalised daily introduction to The Ken's story. Written by a different person each day. Often insightful, sometimes witty, and very rarely boring. Someone sent this to you? [Sign up for free](https://the-ken.com/?modal=register&utm_source=footer&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=morning_email_ind_recap). [Dont like these? You can unsubscribe](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/unsubscribe/?user_id=2349339&data=P9Qy6tm515xYE9s9Ur6xylNs2rlvyaRnq5GqXBHxZeJoMDAwdTAwMB_tDpwDjDpYFoTmJoahLmJwijH0yMEDTLH-itu6ZMRJWBDYO7gqDYJ9NYReeaHwkSMs7WJ-YYWUDVO9zSxJ6rHjKkKoSmlCTkXjHkq2wmC0-vie6A3e48u7xzUWs549C0w2e_GvD9F7gBCixaDA-A2S6ObjjY7bRgZFg1PZKonFwo24VOomRecAhGoLY2tRoaQpCk4ckM0ubx0CLe9cxvl4Nx6t1CZTbyZBWdYve-STmcOsgcQ1BvDMydFRFlMmI-e6x5mGKtDbYdCXdBSYYyosUXZmJYHsf5rI_OM8McnVLvJfDvLEYykPwNm-Qt8sha8hPcNDpknXQnWND-76PGL1kPTthWGlpfQwJYcNfJhga8bFu4cs3UibM7VdqTkypdjZi0xiiMeraQmYZ4ujB9u7x9CSCzpV40d-KZfarvLokT2OCeeGmgbpP7bLZUieLoTpN3DhsA3ucsYyG9HCS8cijbY_H5m0g-G7sB__bgoX_xAj5-SdNZMjX4S_cQ_xjTZblJ6KwiifL7RCFtmp8Wg=) Dont want to hear from us again? [ Unsubscribe from our emails here](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/?user_id=2349339&data=A7a5yUOnK_rsA-qvt2UCQTuY_EGh_6TWy13uTrWtspxoMDAwdTAwMPVtFyo6xBw2UcEempS1eq_Bz_euVA5yWD0JEpiNASRm216VBTqd28ODw3yLngjbRJL63g9d4n8tuvlZHDAXqoGPQdP28tFhrHEh_zmpTsc1zLjDYPw0HuTxJMbrA5uEyyEOla0HAfRj3Z4XgfcZXNT59tA_zlafnqs8kf71X5uZ5tYcnpqx-VbYDM8pb5DsXsUZ1o4F6O2HBNukuHKjTXogYy2sTSzvimubMhOGYLYrRPOoPN1MJZaLoUvQK06mnQixmYdYZThr6GqMVP1Pw2PMJdt8CHyyY2vKko105dk9X95Vt07zcbAcFkFi18bBIYocKDydoPIjWAs57sM_1Mt-rFC43tAl6O-bFeN4TMheGZQ68RPNzyEmDXzNS2IxsoDLNb7wUrJitWiPAMqLi66GNB-_GIXXglP2nif0r_tcxwx_1WAPh5OPHcz5M9KQrn0F81IUEyZ3bc_3xfPa8syy9kXWq6czrvlN2rYvCMe1NQLwyQZi3Pvi09Vpk4CYXw==).
Something wrong? Tell us at [support@the-ken.com](mailto:support@the-ken.com)