---
subject: "Links For September 2025"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-09-04 06:45:55
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
[I haven’t independently verified each link. On average, commenters will end up spotting evidence that around two or three of the links in each links post are wrong or misleading. I correct these as I see them, and will highlight important corrections later, but I can’t guarantee I will have caught them all by the time you read this.] 1: When the Human Genome Project succeeded in mapping the human genome for the first time in 2003, whose genome were they mapping? 2: 3: Beyond “delve”: words that indicate a document is more likely to be written by AI (h/t 4: Just before the 2020 election, 5: Popular streamer (I think it’s sort of like an influencer, but somehow worse?) Destiny has been watching/covering the Rootclaim $100,000 lab leak debate, which I covered 6: 7: Damien Morris has a very long article trying to clarify 8: 9: Fast food aesthetics have gone from playful to minimalist (h/t I appreciated 10: 11: Claim: 12: You probably heard about 13: 14: 15: Lots more good discussion about missing heritability. And On the pro-hereditarian side, And One interesting potential consequence of this research: if we ever fully understand how genes affect faces, then embryo selection companies could show people what each of their potential future kids might look like. I suggest they not do this: it might spook me into becoming pro-life. 16: 17: There’s a debate going on between philosophers and AI researchers over whether AI can be conscious. I find most of the discussion annoying - this is generally an area where we can’t know anything for sure, and both sides are mostly shouting their priors at each other. The only exception - the single piece of evidence I will accept as genuinely bearing on this problem - is that if you ask an AI whether it’s conscious, it will say no, but activating or suppressing deception-related features (sort of like a mechanistic-interpretability-based lie detection test) reveals that 18: 80,000 Hours has 19: 20: The Psmiths review
21: Did you know: Epic Systems, the electronic medical record company, Meanwhile, tech companies with ten times as much money pretend that they’re cool and playful when their HQ has some rounded edges and a set of colored cubes in front. Do better! 22: Effective altruists have been funding teams working on lab-grown meat for almost a decade now. Around 2020, they hired some experts to double-check that this was possible in principle, and the experts wrote scathing analyses saying it was cost-ineffective by so many orders of magnitude that it was basically a pipe dream. Reactions were mixed, but a lot of us beat ourselves up and vowed to be less gullible next time. But 23: 24: Lencapavir 25: Did you know: when people first started making artificial ice in the 1850s, there was a backlash from people who thought it was gross and dystopian and that people should insist on natural ice for their iceboxes. From 26: From Each of these has their own local story. In Britain, it’s the paradoxical effects of Brexit. In the US, it’s Joe Biden being soft on immigration. And so on - but should we be looking for some deeper cause that explains the overall phenomenon? A commenter suggests “a way to soak up all the inflation from the COVID money printing”, but I can’t tell if that even makes sense. Still, should something something COVID be a leading hypothesis? 27: 28: Contra compelling anecdotes, 29: Related: social science team 30: Navigating LLMs’ spiky intelligence profile is a constant source of delight; in any given area, it seems like almost a random draw whether they will be completely transformative or totally useless. Now Ethan Strauss reports that they are, for some reason, 31: Claim (via 32: 33: Cuartetera was the greatest polo horse ever. Polo players responded in a very practical way: 34: Claim: as of 2013, India’s Agarwal caste, who make up less than 1% of the population, 35: Owlposting: 36: Noahpinion: 37: The latest Twitter talking point is that universal hepatitis B vaccination at birth is “woke”: Hep B is mostly sexually transmitted, slutty women’s children are more likely to have Hep B, so perhaps giving the vaccine to everyone (instead of testing and only giving to the children of women who test positive) is an attempt to spare slutty women the embarrassment of getting a positive test. I am always nervous when a good person who I like starts engaging on Twitter, since it elevates the discourse there but also gradually turns their brain into mush - but Ruxandra has made the leap and is doing a great job not just on bio related topics but also (for example) 38: The response to GPT-5 was confusing; most specific people who reviewed it said they were impressed ( In the end, I agree I think 39: This month in etymology: did you know that “oy vey” is a “fully Germanic phrase” which is cognate with English “oh woe!” (h/t 40: mRNA shows promise to be a game-changing treatment for cancer, but RFK is trying to halt research. But so far he can only starve it of money, not ban it, and the funding gap is only $500 million. Will there be enough philanthropic billionaires and private foundations to step up? 41: 42: “SignPro” offers 43: 44: Related - did you know (h/t 45: “ 46: British allergy sufferers who want to know the ingredients of things 47: 48: Study uses supposedly-random variation in doctor assignments to test whether the marginal mental health commitment is good or bad for patients, 49: I think there’s a boring answer, where the law is more complex than just a single number and whatever kind of weird trafficking Epstein was doing is worse than whatever normal relationships these European laws are permitting. But assuming that there’s a substantive difference even after taking that into account, I think my answer is something like - we’ve got to divide kids from adults at some age, there’s a range of reasonable possible ages, we shouldn’t be too mad at other societies that choose different dividing lines within that range - but having decided upon the age, we’ve got to stick with it and take it seriously (in the sense of penalizing/shaming people who break it). This is more culturally relativist than I expected to find myself being, so good job to Richard for highlighting the apparent paradox. 50: Dilan Esper 51: Amazing concept and poems ( I tried to see if AI could do this, and it did something that technically met the requirements but had zero artistic merit - using a lot of words like “nowhere” and “outside” in one, then separating them out to “no where” and “out side” in the other. I didn’t invest much energy in creating a clever prompt telling it not to do that, so feel free to report if you get better success. 52: 53: A Polish team 54: New big multi-author Substack, Matt Bruenig GiveDirectly, a charity involved in basic income experiments, Everyone involved in this debate wants to emphasize that the poor results are for First World studies only, and that studies continue to show large benefits to giving cash in the developing world. 55: Related: I was less impressed by The Argument’s Some people say they don’t like noise and disorder and try to make rules against it in their apartments. But this resembles “segregation” and “discrimination”, and (it is asserted without any evidence), people might deploy these rules against noisy disorderly black people in particular. This could make it harder for poor people in need to get housing. Therefore, we need to change the “symbolic politics“ with a “persuasion campaign” where we tell people that their preference against noise and disorder is wrong. Then the government should ban the “loophole” that lets apartments restrict noisy/disorderly people.
Now that I’ve worked you into a frothing rage, I’ll admit I buried the lede - the particular noisy/disorderly people being discussed in this article are families with young children. Should this change our opinion? At least in center-to-right Silicon Valley circles, caring about disorderly homeless people is currently uncool, but caring about children - or at least fertility! - is very cool (the article also focused on noise-averse seniors, and seniors are maximally uncool, especially if you call them “Boomers”). Can we really apply the same principles to cool and uncool groups? The article’s point - that people worried about noise have banded together to ban children from some developments, and that this has made it hard for families with children to find affordable housing - is important and well-taken. But the three steps above still strike me as a dark pattern, and one that inevitably leads to a fourth step of “people move away from any state that my party controls, secede from any institution where I have influence, and eventually elect any authoritarian thug who can credibly promise to keep people like me away from the levers of power”. I think the solution is the philosophy that The Argument is supposed to be promoting - abundance liberalism. In conditions of scarcity, everything is zero-sum, and groups with conflicting-access-needs have to demonize the preferences of whichever group they conflict with in order to carve out breathing space for themselves. But if housing was too cheap to meter, there could be quiet clean childfree apartment buildings for noise-sensitive elderly people, and also This isn’t to say we’re there yet. I think a very slightly differently written version of this article could have been very good. It would have focused on how there’s currently a glut of senior-friendly-but-family-unfriendly affordable apartments, how the government should focus on family-friendly-but-senior-unfriendly ones until the imbalance is corrected, and how in the end everyone’s preferences are valid and we should solve this by building more. The Argument’s article comes very close to being this better article. But in the end, it didn’t get there, and it made me less excited about having a new abundance liberal publication whose tongue-in-cheek brand is “be as fighty as possible”. Conflict of interest notice: 56: People often ask me what potential careers will have the best chances if AI starts taking jobs. I have no idea, but 80,000 Hours - an organization very much at the intersection of career counseling and AI futurology - has written their own essay on 57: Yassine Meskhout: 58: 59: Works In Progress suggests 60: Asterisk - 61: Miles Brundage’s
You're currently a free subscriber to |