---
subject: "State of Crypto 2024: all-time highs, stablecoins fit, swing states, more"
from: "web3 letter from a16zcrypto <a16zcrypto@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-10-19 16:01:56
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "a16zcrypto"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_2535365729249697677"]
---
Our latest State of Crypto reportThe world looked a lot different when we published our first annual digs into key applications like stablecoins — one of crypto’s “killer apps”; explores the intersection of crypto and other tech trends like AI, social networks, and games; shares trends on crypto interest in swing states ahead of the U.S. election; reveals all-time highs in crypto activity; shows maturing blockchain infrastructure, from L2s (and their impact on transaction costs) to continuing breakthroughs in zero-knowledge proofs.
Introducing the interactive “Builder Energy” dashboard: Where do builders spend their time?Each year, we try to evolve the State of Crypto analysis by adding new tools and views: Last year, we released an interactive For the first time ever, we’re sharing proprietary data based on our unique view of the crypto landscape — and are sharing the blockchains, technologies, categories, and geographies where builders are focusing their efforts (aka “builder energy”). The dashboard incorporates thousands of data points — aggregated and anonymized — drawn from investment team research, our Which blockchains and technologies are people building on/ with? What types of applications are people developing? Where are all the builders based? …more resources on the State of Crypto:📊 🎧 📺 -- a16z crypto editorial & engineering teams You’re receiving this newsletter because you signed up for it on our websites, at an event, or elsewhere (you can opt out any time using the ‘unsubscribe’ link below). This newsletter is provided for informational purposes only, and should NOT be relied upon as legal, business, investment, or tax advice. Furthermore, the content is not directed at nor intended for use by any investors or prospective investors in any a16z funds. Please see a16z.com/disclosures for additional important details, including link to list of investments. subscribe to our podcast ' |