---
subject: "The Future of 007 Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-03-06 12:01:43
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Chris Papasadero (CP) is a screenwriter, consultant, and a former Green Beret in the U.S. Army’s Special Forces. Chris here. There was much Why is this interesting? For several years now, the Bond franchise has been in limbo, caught in a Here’s how I see it: James Bond should be reinvented in the same way men ought to reinvent themselves; the ruthless trimming of fat, the packing-on of muscle, the acquisition of new and deadly skills. Following are my suggestions for a Bond reboot that would preserve his legacy while expanding the universe: Women and children are supposed to be happy, men are supposed to die. This message couldn’t have been clearer than in No Time To Die, in which Bond’s remarkably coherent moral framework—replacing the parents he never had with institutional loyalty—was embodied in his sacrifice. [One hell of an arc](https://substack.com/redirect/92538350-bbb5-44e7-8988-cd5666c18567?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). As our institutions crumble around us, we need heroes to defend them, or upon whose shoulders new ones may be built.The Global War on Terror is over, because terrorists are far more useful as [proxies](https://substack.com/redirect/3585e935-837f-4682-bc50-1546d606ce52?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). What once was uncontrolled can now be directed using misinformation, targeted at partisan divides, and concealed with[hybrid warfare](https://substack.com/redirect/06e38588-7258-43c6-8288-b08c7e426464?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)– all from the comfort of a laptop in Lubyanka Square. Modern conflict operates in the grey zone between war and peace, where mercenaries provide military deniability, economic pressure replaces overt invasion, and manufactured civil unrest destabilizes from within. The battlefield still exists, but it's deliberately blurred to paralyze conventional responses – while the enemy advances through the fog.A grittier gritty reboot. We’re in Apocalypse Now territory, and if you’re reading the news, things are gonna get worse before they get worse. There’s a growing need for Europe to [gun up](https://substack.com/redirect/be632b9f-db3c-4c28-8975-6f6a8c457bb2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), and the Taiwan Strait may soon run red. Who in MI6 will be fighting these shadowy conflicts, with Bond at the ready for more ‘point’ solutions? What Q Branch operative will infiltrate supply chains, what[NOC](https://substack.com/redirect/8a7733ec-c413-4d83-9c00-34360d54873a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)will be dealing with[BRICS](https://substack.com/redirect/520d0cdb-1cd1-40fa-917c-563af026e8ac?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), what team of specialists – and idealists – will stand tall on the battlefield of[multipolar conflict](https://substack.com/redirect/78168800-7485-4e56-a48f-264438e613d9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)?Respect the tentpoles until the expansion IP is dialed. Disney pulled it off [eventually](https://substack.com/redirect/45703f7e-e29f-45fa-bb5b-fa5502642077?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)with The Mandalorian and Andor, but fumbled the features. Honor and respect Bond lore, while using the peripheral properties to hone-in on tone and appeal. Why do orphans make the best recruits? What new tragedy might have befallen Alec Trevelyan? Was Felix Leiter a guerilla, mercenary, or a Green Beret before he landed at CIA?We're coming off two generations of warfighters who have fired an actual gun in combat. Hire military and intelligence veterans as more than just tech consultants: they've navigated the transition to [hybrid conflict](https://substack.com/redirect/3a578749-ef4d-4a98-a124-e661062752cc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)in real time, giving them unique insight into how modern battles will be fought and won.
In our fractured world, we still need stories of heroes standing steadfast against chaos. Amazon Studios faces a formidable task, with an even greater purpose – preserving Bond as an institution that remains worth aspiring to. (CP) You're currently a free subscriber to |