---
subject: "Only to the White Man Was Nature a Wilderness"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-11-23 12:00:52
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
This post is the third in a series on the making of our ideas about the American West. You can check out earlier posts here: Few ideas are more central to America’s self-mythology — and especially our mythology around the West — than wilderness. We think of the West as a rugged frontier, full of pristine natural landscapes that must be either preserved or exploited, depending on your ideology. Our national parks, in particular, are exemplars of the American idea of wilderness. Nothing symbolizes the vastness and wildness of the West like the Grand Canyon or Yosemite. At least in the popular imagination, these are places where the natural treasures of the country are preserved for the enjoyment of the American people. But wilderness has always been a tricky concept. Colonial settlers like William Bradford were horrified by the wilderness. In 1620, he
For much of American history, the default American attitude toward nature mirrored Bradford’s. It was there to be tamed, not enjoyed or protected. Bradford’s wilderness, it’s important to note, was full of people. Yes, he thought them “wild men” who deserved subjugation, but at least he acknowledged that the American landscape was full of human beings. The idea of wilderness as something to be used persists (Ronald Reagan famously In the 19th-and 20th-century conception, nature was purest and most meaningful when it was completely free of human interference. The
But, as environmental historian
The Western national parks, which mostly took shape in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, mirrored the ideas about nature that existed at the time. This means that they were envisioned as exemplars of a wilderness free of people. Inconveniently for the people who thought this way, most of the parks had people inside their borders when they were founded. So what was it like for the people who lived in these “wildernesses,” what happened to them, and what evidence is left of their lives? George Catlin was one of the artists who shaped the mythology of the West. He spent time among several Native American communities and became famous for paintings like this “Buffalo Hunt,” portraying the West and its people as wild and free: Catlin Though Catlin wanted to include native people in the parks, he wanted them to serve as an attraction. They’d be there to be gawked at like the bison or elk. By the time Catlin’s idea of the national parks took shape, however, the people in charge of the parks preferred their wilderness free of people, even if that meant making the landscape less “authentic” by removing people who had been there for a long time. Sometimes, park planners told the public — and themselves — convenient lies. It was said that native people stayed away from Yellowstone, the first national park, because of the noise from its geysers. This idea dates back before the establishment of the park in 1872 — one of the first documents about the area, a note in the journal of William Clark (of Lewis and Clark),
This idea was amplified by the founders of the park, who, like the Northern Pacific Railroad’s marketers, wanted to advertise Yellowstone as a pristine natural area, free of human interference (and, in the early days of the park, perceived danger from violence between white people and Native Americans). But the stories Furthermore, these stories ignored visual evidence. Thomas Moran, one of the most influential artists to paint the area, acknowledged the presence of the Crow people in “The Yellowstone Range, Near the Crow Mission:” And photographs existed, too, including this one of the Tukudika, or Sheepeater, branch of the Shoshone people in Yellowstone: White people told themselves that the Sheepeaters were “ In order to maintain the fiction of a landscape free of humans, the federal government Now, all that remains of them in the park is a sign: In Yosemite, which was first protected by the government in 1864, the presence of Native Americans had been even more established before the land was designated a park. The Ahwahnechee and other groups had lived there for some time. White tourists did not understand that the stunning meadows of Yosemite Valley were the result of intentional burning by the people who lived there. Yosemite was “discovered” by the larger United States during the 1851 Mariposa War, an attempt by white settlers to clear Native Americans out of the area so that they could search for gold. Though the Ahwahnechee were forced out of the valley and into a reservation, they were eventually able to make their way back into Yosemite. They tried to Because Yosemite was partially managed by the state of California until 1906, the federal government could not immediately expel Native Americans. For a while, their presence was considered part of the charm of the area. They featured as part of the landscape in paintings like this one by Thomas Hill: And this painting by Albert Bierstadt: Some of the early photos of the area also featured Native Americans, like this one by Carleton Watkins: Over time, though, the U.S. government restricted the range of the Ahwahnechee people, as champions of the park pushed for it to be a place of “pure” nature. For a while, the park officials tried to use the people who lived in Yosemite as a Officials organized “Indian Field Days” in which park officials paid Native Americans for their participation in semi-authentic competitions and displays: But, in the end, the National Park Service decided to push people out of the park. To avoid criticism, it did so slowly, evicting them from the “Indian Village” a few at a time for unemployment or “immoral” behavior. Though a few dozen people hung on for a few decades, the Park Service evicted the final families in 1969, There are similar stories about other groups of people pushed out of the national parks. The Havasupai people had been in the Grand Canyon for a long time. This photo from the early 1900s shows Havasupai pictographs there: In the late 1800s, the Havasupai were driven by cattle ranchers and miners deeper into the territory that would become Grand Canyon National Park. Ben Wittick took photos of them in the canyonlands: Theodore Roosevelt met with the tribal leader Yavñmi’ Gswedva (who the white people called “Big Jim” and told him he would have to leave so that the new national park could be established: Once the park was established, the Havasupai were treated as unwelcome invaders, even though park literature drew on the “Romantic Indian Legend” to entice visitors: And photos like this were used to illustrate the magic of the Grand Canyon: A tiny Havasupai reservation was established — less than a square mile in area — to keep them out of the tourist areas. The final Havasupai resident, who park officials called “ In contrast to the examples above, there were some parks where the native presence was tolerated and even promoted. In Glacier National Park — some of whose lands were Though members of the Blackfeet continued to work in the parks, they were In the pursuit of “wilderness” and “pure nature,” white Americans removed the people who lived in the lands that would become the national parks. In recent years, the government has tried to make things right by renaming areas, putting up monuments, and allowing the But that doesn’t really change the way most Americans think of the national parks. Despite the fact that Perhaps it’s best to leave you with this quote from Luther Standing Bear, a member of the Oglala Lakota tribe, who was born in the Dakota Agency in 1868, before the establishment of the first national park, and died in California in 1939 while working on one of the many movies (The Santa Fe Trail, Massacre, The Conquering Horde, Fighting Pioneers) in which he was asked to act out a Hollywood version of Native American history. In between, he authored books about his culture and advocated for an “Indian New Deal.” He
This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are three ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: You can share the newsletter with others: You can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading! You're currently a free subscriber to |