---
subject: "3 Strategies to Make Stress Work for You"
from: "\"Sahil Bloom's Curiosity Chronicle\" <sahil@sahilbloom.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-08-23 09:04:54
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Sahil Bloom", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_1989028747625928812", "UNREAD"]
---
Strategies for Mastering Stressread and listen on read time 7 minutes Welcome to The Curiosity Chronicle, a weekly newsletter where I provide actionable ideas to help you build a high-performing, healthy, wealthy life. Today at a Glance:- While we all want to live in a state of low stress, during certain moments, we need to learn to optimize our stress response—we need to learn to harness stress to our benefit rather than allowing it to derail us.
- The Yerkes-Dodson Law says that stress and performance are positively correlated, but only up to a certain point, after which more stress reduces performance.
- 3 strategies for mastering stress: (1) Reframe threat into challenge; (2) Use science-backed breathing techniques to pull back from the edge; and (3) Place yourself in controlled stressful environments to train your stress response.
When it comes to reading non-fiction, I’m a big believer in being strategic about how you consume the book. I used to slog through an entire 200 page book to get a few chapters of applicable insight, until I found today's sponsor, Shortform. I started using Shortform during my own book research process, as it provides the key points and insights from each section of a non-fiction book, which allowed me to dive deep where I needed to and stay at the surface everywhere else. Shortform’s comprehensive guides are like superpowered book summaries, providing clear and simple explanations of books’ key ideas alongside smart commentary and analysis. And now that they’ve added Shortform AI as a browser plugin, I can get summaries of anything in real time. Whether I’m reading an article, email, or watching a YouTube video, it’s all broken down to bite sized pieces. Our time is our most precious asset, and Shortform enables you to use it well. Shortform has 1000+ nonfiction titles across multiple topics. Get a free trial of Shortform plus a special 20% off discount for Curiosity Chronicle subscribers!
Strategies for Mastering StressThe word "stress" carries a very negative connotation. Even reading it right now might bring up memories of stressful encounters, or remind you of some stressful event on the near-term horizon. But in reality, stress is not black and white—like most things, it exists on a spectrum. In fact, when it comes to our performance in important moments, too little stress is just as bad as too much stress. While we all want to live in a state of low stress, during certain moments, we need to learn to optimize our stress response—we need to learn to harness stress to our benefit rather than allowing it to derail us. Let's discuss three strategies for exactly how to do that... The Stress x Performance CurveThe Yerkes-Dodson Law is a simple model of the relationship between performance and stress. It was created in 1908 by psychologists Robert Yerkes and John Dodson, who formulated their conclusions on the basis of the study of Japanese dancing mice. In simple terms, the Yerkes-Dodson Law says that stress and performance are positively correlated, but only up to a certain point, after which more stress reduces performance. There are three states to be aware of: - Low Stress: This is a state of low arousal. This state is necessary for recovery (most of your living hours), but it is generally not conducive to performance.
- Optimal Stress: This is the optimal state of arousal. It's the "Goldilocks" level—not too hot, not too cold, just right. When you're in this state, you are well-positioned to execute important tasks (our modern day version of the hunt).
- High Stress: This is a state of high arousal. This is the over-stressed position we so often find ourselves in. It may lead to a complete shutdown from system overload. Again, working on important tasks while in this state is not ideal.
As you think about optimizing your own performance, mapping your Stress x Performance Curve is an important first step: For a week, log your levels of stress while completing various activities through an average day, and then log your relative performance on these activities. Look for trends in activities, stress levels, and performance outcomes: - What are the typical activities that send you over the edge into high stress land?
- Are there activities where you'd like to experience more optimal stress but have trouble "turning on" for them?
Create a mental map of your curve—develop an awareness of where you are on the curve at any point in time. 3 Strategies for Mastering StressStrategy 1: Mental Reframe: Challenge vs. ThreatIn a book entitled, Both animals are experiencing stress, but differently: - The gazelle is having a threat response: "She is full of fear, coursing with adrenaline. Her blood flow is constricted because her vessels have narrowed (vasoconstriction) to prevent excessive bleeding. Less oxygen makes it to the brain as physiological resources are directed to the limbs."
- The lion is having a challenge response: "Her heart is pumping volumes of blood efficiently, allowing her maximal speed and anticipating the meal she’s about to have. She is focused and driven. She seems to have unlimited reserves of energy."
Most of us don't have to face this type of life-or-death encounter on a regular basis (I hope!), but this difference, between viewing an event as threat or challenge is critical to our performance. I often find myself facing an opportunity and my internal reaction usually goes something like this: - My imposter syndrome yells at me that this is the opportunity where I will finally be exposed as a fraud. I'm going to fail and everyone is going to know that I was a fraud. This is my version of the threat response.
- My confident reframe mind kicks in and reminds me that this is an opportunity to rise to the occasion and show everyone what I am capable of. It is an opportunity to learn and get better, even through stumbles and failure. This is my version of the challenge response.
What I've found: When I let the imposter syndrome threat response win out, I always underperform. When I confidently reframe to a challenge response, push back, and remind myself to embrace the growth opportunity, I always perform at my best. Stress Strategy #1: When you encounter an opportunity and start to feel a threat response dialogue settling in, reframe the conversation to focus on the growth opportunity. Let your challenge response guide you. Strategy 2: Breathing: Physiological Sigh or Lion's BreathWhen you do find yourself tipping over the edge, there are specific, science-backed breathing techniques that are proven to immediately reduce stress and get you back into optimal territory. The Physiological Sigh is a remarkably effective approach that was - Double-inhale through your nose
- Long exhale through your mouth
- Repeat 2-3x
The Lion's Breath is another effective approach that is derived from ancient breathing practices originating from yogic traditions in India. - Sit in a comfortable position with a slight forward lean and your hands on the floor
- Focus your gaze on the tip of your nose
- Inhale deeply through your nose
- Open your mouth, stick your tongue out and down to your chin
- Exhale forcefully with a "HA!" sound. Note: Limit the forcefulness of the exhale if you're a beginner.
- Repeat 2-3x
Both of these techniques will work to reduce your stress response and hopefully bring you back into optimal range. Stress Strategy #2: If you tip over the stress edge, use science-backed breathing techniques like the Physiological Sigh and Lion's Breath to bring you back down to an optimal zone. Strategy 3: Preparation: Train Your Stress MuscleJust as an athlete can train to handle increasing weight or intensity loads, you can train yourself to handle and manage stress more efficiently and effectively. To do this, place yourself into controlled stressful environments and work on managing your mental and physical faculties. Example: Get into a cold shower and see if you can focus and perform a simple mental task (basic math, reciting a poem, etc.) for a fixed period of time. By engaging in voluntary stress training, you may improve your ability to handle the involuntary stress that inevitably enters your life. Stress Strategy #3: Train yourself to handle stress more effectively by placing yourself into controlled stressful environments. Making Stress Your FriendSorry, but there is no such thing as the stress free life. The best we can hope for is to If you follow these three strategies, you'll be well on your way to turning stress from your sworn enemy into your good friend (or at least your acquaintance!).
Sahil's Recommendation ZonePerfect your morning routine with I get asked about my morning routine all the time. It changes from time to time, but It replaced an entire cabinet of supplements for me in one daily scoop—seriously, its latest iteration covers a multivitamin, multi-mineral, prebiotics, probiotics, adaptogens, greens, and more. It keeps me feeling healthy and strong throughout the year, even when I'm traveling (thanks to the travel packs). Athletic Greens is offering Curiosity Chronicle subscribers an exclusive deal:
Refer Friends, Earn Rewards!
|