---
subject: "The Monday Media Diet with Philip Sherburne"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-08-07 10:10:56
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Philip Sherburne (PS) is a longtime friend of WITI and one of America’s best music writers. He’s covered a lot of musical ground, but his strike zone is often the interesting periphery of electronic music, which he covers with depth and nuance. Tell us about yourself. I write about music—these days, mostly for I also co-run a record label, I grew up in Portland, Oregon, and spent my young adulthood in a handful of different places—Poughkeepsie, Providence, San Francisco—before making my way to Europe in 2005, in large part drawn by my interest in electronic music. I was in Barcelona for a few years, went to Berlin for another four, and then returned to Barcelona. Five years ago my wife and I moved to Menorca, a small island in the Baleares. Our daughter was almost three years old, and we were getting a little fed up with city living. Plus Barcelona was getting awfully expensive, rents were skyrocketing, and the city had changed considerably over the past decade—gentrifying, touristifying, turning into an Airbnb playground. An island with a population of 100,000 with no record stores and virtually zero nightlife might seem like an odd place for an electronic-music specialist to live, and I’d be lying if I said I didn’t have some trepidations when we came here. But Barcelona’s about a 30-minute flight away, should I want or need to see a show or a festival or interview someone. And the benefits of life on the island—fresh air, green nature, wildlife, local produce, being able to see stars in the night sky—more than outweigh whatever fleeting (and I mean fleeting) FOMO I might feel about missing out on seeing some DJ somewhere. Our front door opens onto a town plaza and our back yard looks out on farmland; we feed our neighbor’s donkey banana peels over the fence. It doesn’t suck. (We do have a shockingly high number of scorpions, though, which is of some small concern.) Describe your media diet. The one word that best describes my media diet would have to be “chaotic.” I blame social media. I use Twitter as a kind of RSS feed, and while that casts a nice, wide yet, it also results in an infinitude of open tabs that often don’t get read, and a Pocket list so long it’ll probably crash the company’s servers at some point. I subscribe to the digital editions of the New York Times, the New Yorker, and the Washington Post, all of which I read pretty extensively. I also subscribe digitally to El País, ARA Balears, New York Magazine, The New York Review of Books, the UK experimental music-magazine The Wire, UK music website The Quietus, and probably some others I’m forgetting right now. Since launching my Substack, I’ve become a paying subscriber to quite a few. Off the top of my head: Shawn Reynaldo’s My day wouldn’t be complete without reading What’s the last great book you read? Temporada de Huracanes (Hurricane Season), by the Mexican novelist Fernanda Melchor. I don’t actually remember where I heard about her—I don’t think it was the New Yorker piece last year. Word of mouth? In any case I bought it from a bookstore in Barcelona, in Spanish—the first Spanish-language novel I have read in ages. Like, years. Cracked it open and was faced with the page-long paragraphs, and the regional slang, and thought: What have I gotten myself into? But I devoured the thing, never mind that I had to consult spanishdict.com about five times per page. (Sometimes I would give up, and just let the unfamiliar words wash over me, figuring that I’d catch them on a later page, or another read.) It’s a grim kaleidoscope of a novel, cycling through numerous perspectives, each one gradually filling the outline of a world marked by hardship and violence, painting a truly terrible picture of the misogyny (and classism, and racism, but especially misogyny, intertwined with homophobia) at the heart of contemporary Mexican culture. It can be tough, tough going—there were times I found myself physically flinching, or crying out at some monstrosity on the page. It’s not entirely surprising—in fact, it’s almost a relief—to Bonus round: Joel Chadabe’s What are you reading now? I’m about halfway through Cormac McCarthy’s Blood Meridian. He was (and remains) a blind spot, really—I’d only read The Road previously. I tried Blood Meridian last year, but I was traveling with my wife and daughter, and trying to read that on the plane where you’re having to break concentration every few minutes was pointless. But I picked it up again recently and it clicked with me this time. In some ways I can see certain similarities with Melchor—not just the violence and amorality of the characters, the panorama of endless brutality, but also the language. There’s a real ambient quality to McCarthy’s prose here. Again, sometimes I just let it wash over me, the umpteenth description of a mountain range purpling in the distance. The landscape takes on the feel of a kind of trance state. What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication? It has been ages since I have routinely read print publications, to be honest. Part of that is living in Europe, and postage rates from the U.S. being so expensive. (I realize that there are European print magazines I could read, I suppose, but I don’t.) But recently I subscribed to the New York Review of Books, and since the print edition isn’t that much more expensive than the digital, I decided to spring for it. I’ve really enjoyed just picking it up and reading through it, cover to cover. Obviously I skip some stories. But I don’t even bother with the table of contents. Just: What’s on this page? Does the headline appeal? Does the first paragraph hook me? Let’s see where this goes, then. It’s a refreshing change from online reading, which doesn’t have that aleatory sensibility. When I’m scrolling the New Yorker’s homepage, for instance, I’m a lot less likely to click on something I have no idea about. I miss that about reading, say, the New York Times, which I subscribed to in print for years, probably from when I graduated college until I left the U.S. in 2005. You’d read things you had no idea you might be interested in, simply because it was on the page in front of you. Who should everyone be reading that they’re not? Obviously I’m biased, and this might not sound like a very original answer, but Pitchfork’s reviews section. Recently, there have been a handful of episodes where a musician got mad online about a review, triggering a chorus of fans to declare the irrelevance of criticism. I’m not going to get into the finer points of that argument here, but I think it’s notable that we’re one of the last publications that dedicates significant space and editorial resources to publishing record reviews. A lot of them, about a wide, wide swath of music. Pop, rap, commercial dance music, underground dance music, jazz, classical, weirdo experimental stuff, indie rock, music from all over the globe. And while you can tell from their comments on Twitter and Instagram that many people sniping at us don’t look beyond the numerical score, we put a lot of time and care into engaging with these albums—thinking about them, unpacking them, considering where they succeed and where they fail, asking where they fit into their genres or historical contexts. Reviewing records is probably my favorite part of my job—I’m far more a critic than a journalist—and at best I find it to be an incredibly intense, even empathetic activity. I’d like more readers to be reminded of the spirit in which reviews—the best ones, anyway—can be written. What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone?
Plane or train? Given that I live on an island, I’m afraid there’s really only one possible answer for me here. (I suppose I could swap in “ferry,” but getting to Barcelona from Menorca is an eight-hour all-nighter versus a 30-minute jump, so again, the answer is pretty easy.) I did get the chance to take the train recently between Paris and Brittany when I went to What is one place everyone should visit? The easy answer is Menorca, because A) I live here, B) I love it, and C) it really is all that. It’s the smallest (save for Formentera) of the Balearic islands, flat and largely rural, peppered with neolithic ruins, ringed by a horse/hiking trail that extends around the entire island (you can hike it in three days), and surprisingly green in winter and spring. I wrote about it recently for I realize that might not be a terribly original answer. The island has experienced a major boom over the past five years; it’s difficult to pick up a glossy magazine without finding an article extolling its virtues (even if most of them fall into cliches of “turquoise coves,” “whitewashed villages,” “boutique hotels,” etc.). If anything, I should probably steer people away, if only because Menorca’s newfound popularity is causing all the problems you might expect: more congested roads, more polluted beaches, rising home prices, rising rents, Airbnbs cannibalizing the property market. We’re an island that depends on tourism for our livelihood, and has for many years, but striking the right balance, particularly in boom times, is proving tricky. Still, it truly is a gorgeous place, and every day I feel fortunate to live here. Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into. My father served in the Canadian RAF in World War II, though he never saw combat. (He was born in 1919; he was in his fifties when he had me.) His best friend, a young man named — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Philip (PS) —
You're currently a free subscriber to |