---
subject: "On the Latest TikTok Bill"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-03-13 18:46:16
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
TikTok Might Get Banned Soon
The bill now goes on to the Senate. I see about The main purpose of this post is to go over arguments for and against the bill, and also what the bill actually would and would not do. I have long been in favor on principle of banning or forcing divestiture of TikTok. My view of the current bill, after a close reading, is that it is vastly better, and about as good as we could reasonably expect. It seems positive and I hope it passes, whether or not ByteDance folds and agrees to divest. I expect it to pass constitutional muster, although one cannot be sure. To make them easy to find: I go over various arguments for and against the bill, and for and against forcing divestiture of or banning TikTok in general, as well, as well as other related developments. The good argument against the bill is the libertarian concern about expansion of government powers, and what else the government might do. I do not believe it should carry the day on this bill, but I definitely get why one might think so. Execution is EverythingI continue to strongly be in favor, in principle, of banning or forcing divestiture of TikTok, if we could do exactly that and only that, without otherwise attacking free speech and free enterprise or expanding the power of the state.
It continues to promote unhealthy patterns of use. All the dynamics around this round of the fight make me more confident that it is important to get this done. So yes, if there was a clean way to get rid of it or force divestiture, great. However, as I said a year ago in So for me, ultimately, it comes down to the bill. Is it a good bill, or a bad bill? More precisely, is this a bill we can live with?
Is this bill a ban on TikTok, or merely a forced divestiture? A forced divestiture can still deny quite a lot of value, you were not previously planning to sell and now buyers have you over a barrel, but they are still very different things. TikTok has been vehiment that this is an outright ban. They both keep calling it an outright ban, including when telling their users to call Congress, and also say that they would rather shut the app down than attempt to sell it.
Preventing China from buying farmland is supremely bonkers. The concern is actively backwards. You love it when your foreign adversaries buy your farmland. Yes, please purchase physical land in our country that we could and would confiscate without incident if you start a fight.
I would still be very surprised, although not utterly stunned, if the Supreme Court, which would inevitably rule on the matter, failed to uphold this law. These seem like obstacles that the government can comfortably clear.
I am sympathetic to ‘rushed’ objections when bills are so long there is no time to read and understand them. This does not seem to be one of those cases. The next two grounds, antitrust and privacy, seem odd. If anything TikTok is clearly putting privacy at risk, and if this is a forced sale I do not see large antitrust concerns. I am sympathetic to the argument on national security, I would love to make everything they know public, but I presume that they are not doing so on national security grounds. It seems like a reasonable equilibrium for there to be some votes on Congress that you lose when you don’t do that. This creates good incentives. But I am going to go ahead and believe that there are important such concerns in play. But the bottom line is, who is right? So yes, it’s that time.
|