---
subject: "A Tale of Two Deep Cuts Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-10-25 15:12:20
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Colin here. I’ve been out of NYC for awhile, yet I still cherish memories of my walkable Manhattan commutes. There’s a charm in strolling. The early morning city offered a variety of adventures and detours: new coffee spots, routes, people-watching opportunities, and an array of stimuli to absorb. Most days, my journey led me across the south side of Houston, past a Subway shop emitting its synthetic bread aroma. On my route, I passed two NYC classics, though I didn’t fully grasp their significance at the time. First was Emilio’s Ballato, a discreet, club-like Italian spot, that was walk-in only. No reservations. I’d peer through its windows, curious about its history. It had a layout, and a vibe that conveyed confidence and purpose. Yet, I never dined there, always swept up in the whirlwind of chasing the new and now. Right next door was Milano’s, a narrow, beloved dive bar serving the night shift and opening at 8 AM. I had spent many nights at Botanica with the NYC tech and media crowd, but Milano’s, just steps away, seemed a bit too intense for us back then. It was the kind of place where you might feel out of your element among seasoned drinkers. Why is this interesting? Today, spots with this kind of patina are revered in New York, as the city constantly reinvents itself and sloughs off its old skin—fueled by revenge travel, global capital, and ceaseless motion. Emilio’s and Milano’s might not have been “cool” back in my morning walk to work era, but they had a unique gravitas forged over years by their regulars and dedication to their craft. It’s fascinating to see how these places, rich in history, are rediscovered and embraced by new generations. I was stunned to find Bemelman’s overrun by a Gen Z, TikTok crowd during COVID. Now, Emilio’s is a hit with the cool kids, and I’d bet Milano’s crowd isn’t just the blue-collar regulars anymore. I’ve always been fond of the saying, “Things of quality have no fear of time.” It rings true when timeless spots, with unwavering identities, find a new life and appreciation across generations. (CJN) - Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) —
Invite your friends and earn rewardsIf you enjoy Why is this interesting?, share it with your friends and earn rewards when they subscribe. |