---
subject: "Book Review: On the Edge: The Future"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-09-27 13:51:46
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Previously: We have now arrived at the topics most central to this book, aka ‘The Future.’ Rationalism and Effective Altruism (EA)
Yep. The River is real. I consider myself, among many things, a straight up rationalist. I do not consider myself an EA, and never have. This completes the four quadrants of the two-by-two of [does Nate knows it well, does Zvi knows it well]. The first two, where Nate was in his element, went very well. The third clearly was less exacting, as one would expect, but pretty good. Now I have the information advantage, even more than I did for aspects of sports gambling. We’ve seen Nate attempt to tackle areas in both our wheelhouses. We’ve seen Nate attempt to tackle areas in his wheelhouse that I’ve only explored. We’ve seen Nate attempt to tackle areas he was exploring, that I’ve only explored. Now he’s exploring new sections of my wheelhouse.
Let’s see how he explains it all.
A solid opening. I would still nitpick on the word ‘instead,’ and would have suggested ‘also.’
The ‘True Rationalist’ in particular both hones their skills and upgrades their lives by applying the same principles to everything. No matter is too trivial for the nerd snipe and the Bayesian reasoning. In particular, local questions, that help improve your life and your ability to think and impact the world, matter. You are not forced to look only at bigger pictures. Indeed, Nate Silver was correctly informed that he counts as a rationalist. You don’t have to join or even know we exist in order to be a member.
The origin story of many rationalists is exactly that they needed it on a personal level. The traditional mode of acting on intuition and instinct and kind of vibing was clearly not working. The world did not make sense. They had to figure things out the hard way, from first principles. The good news is, once you do that, you actually understand what you are doing, and are choosing on purpose how to do it. You end up far stronger at the end of the path. And indeed, there are some rationalists, and some EAs, that are perfectly content to use the toolboxes on that level. We strive to help them get more ambitious when we are ready for that, but you don’t get cast out if you decide to not go big, and stay home. But yes, what matters is that often people who think this way end up going big.
You cannot count on your civilization to act in a sane fashion. There is no And now, on top of that, we face substantial existential risks, most of all from AI. As crazy as it sounds, yes, it is up to us. It is up to you. Cost-Benefit AnalysisOur society is very bad at cost-benefit analysis. As in we often refuse to do one. There are narrow places where we are quite good at it. We do indeed do cost-benefit analysis sometimes, at all, including on things that matter, and that is really great. We also often rely on markets to get us to do it, which is insanely great. Alas, we also often act like complete morons, because we refuse.
I am sorry, what? A difficult choice? This is a trivially easy choice. You only need to answer one question about the above passage. Is Dakota a human? If the answer is yes, than as Nate says, we all agree, you stop the trains. We put the value of a human life saved (VSL) around $10 million, and in situations like this we are willing to do a bit higher.
Dakota, however, was a dog. Claude initially estimated the total cost of the train delay at $1.58 million. It is actually substantially higher, because that estimate takes lost time at work as being equal to the hourly wage of the employee. Whereas if an employee’s marginal value per hour was only their wage, why do they have a job? And when someone is unexpectedly late, with little warning, that can lead to big problems, including things like ‘the doctor can’t perform surgery on you today.’ I’m confident the cost here is north of $2 million, and there is no guarantee that this results in the cat not being run over. If you suggested a $1 million medical treatment to save that cat’s life, and that the government should pay for that, that would be obviously patently absurd. I would absolutely laugh in your face. If you called up Dakota’s owner and said, ‘all right, we can close down the F train for you, but that will be $1 million dollars’ we all know what the answer would be, once they were done yelling at you. We have willingness to pay studies. When forced to pay, less than 10% of pet owners are willing to pay $10,000 or more for life-saving medical treatments. So let’s not pretend this is the MTA faced with a hard choice. This is the MTA faced with an absurdly easy choice. And they chose wrong. How About Trying At AllThus, the need for something like rationalism, and something like Effective Altruism. As in, I can’t help but notice that you do things without checking to see if they will be effective, or if there is a way to do them better. Perhaps you should think about that?
That’s the 80/20 for a lot of this. You try, at all, to figure out what will actually result in what outcomes at what costs with what benefits. Then you choose what seems best. The rest is not stamp collecting, the rest is important, but you’ll already be way ahead. The Virtues of Rationality
On a more practical level, it means things like this:
This plays out in instrumental and epistemic rationality.
Good summary. You need both.
Rationalists have, from the outside perspective, utterly absurd high standards on scrupulosity and honesty. I believe this to be a very good thing. Effective Altruism and Rationality, Very Different of Course
Not living beyond your means is (highly non-uniquely) a rationalism thing. Not retaining means with which to live better is the EA thing. Then later on the Effective Altruists realized the rationalists were right about the promise and dangers of AI and existential risks from AI, so that became the EA cornerstone as well.
I agree in principle, although I worry about the frame of ‘altruistic’ being misleading. The important thing is that, if more people said what they actually believe whether or not it is popular, and whether or not it is convenient, and whether or not I agree with it, that would make the world a better place. There is then of course Singer’s famous drowning child metaphor, that if you’d ruin your expensive coat to save a drowning child in front of you, that means you are a bad person because you should have never bought that expensive coat and instead could have donated that money to global poverty relief.
Indeed. It’s a magician’s trick. Singer wants you to ignore, among other things, all the reasons that we have agreed to make that drowning child in front of you your responsibility in particular, all the reasons we need some amount of locality in our preferences, and all the reasons it is not okay to redistribute all the wealth whenever you feel like it. That civilization exists for a reason, and you need to maintain it, along with all the ways we are able to make expensive coats and also save lives at all. Then there’s the issue of utilitarianism.
Most people need more utilitarianism on the margin, to go with their additional use of cost-benefit analysis. When I say ‘I am not a utilitarian’ I mean not taking it to its bullet-biting conclusions, and not seeing it as the proper operating system for the human brain in practice, and not believing that you can fully total up the points of various events to choose this week’s winner in any cosmic or moral sense. I’m arguing with the Actual Utilitarians, not with the person on the street. But the other thing about the person on the street is they also need more good virtue ethics and more good deontology, and are mostly ill-prepared to go Full Utilitarian. A few of us have to worry about infinite cases and weird out of sample philosophical questions, in those times we are dealing with those as actual possibilities, such as in potential AI futures. For most people, that never happens. Even for those where it does happen? Most of the time, for most questions, not so much. And that is fine. The human brain has limited compute and should not be using heuristics all the time based on whether they handle rare edge cases - so long as you recognize when you do face those edge cases.
I agree. If your system can’t handle ordinary cases, then you should be highly suspicious. And if it can’t handle ordinary cases without inordinate amounts of compute (as in human brain cycles, in this context) then that’s a problem too. Note that this is more of an issue in practice than in theory. If it works in practice for humans in ordinary situations, then it counts. If it doesn’t, then it doesn’t. The reverse is not true. If a system does handle the ordinary cases well, then that is a fine thing to use to handle ordinary cases. But it could still be a huge disaster in unusual cases. And if most of the value of a system lies in how it handles future non-ordinary cases, then establishing one that only works in ordinary cases can be disastrous. Indeed, most systems for dealing well with ordinary situations are (wisely) overfitting on the data, because we constantly face similar ordinary situations. That’s fine, except when you run into those unusual situations. Then you need to understand that your instinctive rules might be leading you very astray. Also, I’ve said it before, and a lot of people told me I’m wrong but their arguments were all invalid so I’m going to say it again: The Repugnant Conclusion is a silly misunderstanding. It’s another magician’s trick. The standard proof of the conclusion is invalid, because it involves manifesting resources out of thin air. The most correct response to ‘what if potatoes plus muzak maximizes your total universe utility score?’ is ‘it quite obviously does not do that, a human life contains a lot of resource costs and downsides and many benefits and potential joys, and it is quite obviously more efficient to have less people that are happier than that. Your so-called proof otherwise must be wrong on that basis alone. Also it is trivially invalid because you can’t go from world N to world N-prime in order to then loop back to world (N+1), because that move creates new people living at net zero utility without taking any resources away from anyone else. A duck is chasing you asking how you did that.’ As Craig Ferguson often said, I look forward to your letters. You can talk amongst yourselves if you’d like. But if it’s the same counterarguments and confusions, I’m precommiting here to ignoring them. I’ll only answer if I see something new.
No. You should still do the calculation and make the best possible decision as best you can. Indeed, if it’s a big decision like a spouse or a job, those are the decisions that matter. Those are the ones where it’s worth making sure you get it right. It is very much not the time to throw the rules out the window, especially before you know the rules well enough to break them. There are of course two big differences. The most important one is risk aversion. You don’t get to use responsible bankroll management when choosing a job or spouse. Life doesn’t let you not take big risks, not without paying a very high price. But yes, some amount of risk aversion is appropriate in those big decisions. It’s not a pure +EV in dollars or abstractions calculation. Which is fine. So factor that, along with everything else, in. The other big difference is inability to learn and iterate. With most decisions, a lot of the value of a good decision process is to learn from both success and mistakes, to grow wise and to make better decisions in the future. Whereas in a one-time high stakes decision like choosing a spouse, knowing how to do it better next time will be of relatively little help.
This is indeed a classic modernist failure mode, where you act like you understand what is happening elsewhere far more than you actually do. You have to discount distant actions for this risk. But that is not the only reason you need spatial and knowledge-based partiality. Civilization would not run, people would not survive or reproduce or even produce, the social contract would collapse, if you did not favor and exchange with and cooperate uniquely with those around you beyond what you do with strangers halfway around the world. All that, and real competition, is necessary. Those strangers are not only people too but also certified Popes, so please treat them right, but that does not mean full equal standing. The alternative is not game theory compatible, it is not fit, it does not long survive. There is little virtue in being too virtuous to sustain that virtue, and indeed if that is a thing you are thinking of as virtuous than you have chosen your virtues poorly.
Yep. This is another important observation:
One of the core tensions in EA is, to put it bluntly, honesty versus lying. There is the faction that says you want to ‘do the most good,’ and you shouldn’t let the truth get in the way of that. This starts with Peter Singer, who is clear that he believes the virtuous man should be willing to lie their ass off. Thus ‘honesty is not part of my utility function,’ and SBF justifying what he did. Alternatively, perhaps you tell the truth to the ingroup, other EAs and select allies, but politics is politics. Play to win. The other faction aligns with the rationalists, who say that if you lose your epistemics and your honesty, then all is lost. That telling the truth and playing it all fully straight is the only road to wisdom and people will recognize this and it will succeed over time. That this is especially true given that the most important issue is AI. If you don’t have excellent epistemics, and if you don’t get others to have good epistemics, acting wisely around AI is hopeless, because it is all so complex and hard to understand, and to figure out what is actually helpful versus what would backfire. And of course, many people are somewhere in the middle. You already know which side I am on. The Story of OpenAINate Silver talks to Roon, Paul Graham and Sam Altman about Altman’s history at OpenAI. Those are excellent sources. They are also highly biased ones. They tell the official Altman version of the tale. Paul Graham has been a long time extreme Altman fan. They clearly work together to tell their narrative of events and ensure Altman stays in control and in good graces as much as possible. Roon is unusually forthcoming, honest and willing to think for real and think different, I respect the hell out of him and know he means well, but also he is a Member of Technical Staff at OpenAI, and has long defended Altman. Altman is Altman. Nate Silver mostly buys their story, in some places what looks like uncritically, although there are other lines and framings they probably tried to sell to him that he importantly didn’t buy.
The way Altman and Graham present it, the early ability of OpenAI to exist was uniquely reliant on Altman and his special skills. No one else could have done it.
That seems like pretty clear Obvious Nonsense to me. Elon Musk decided to fund and ensure the creation of OpenAI (and stuck them with that name) first, before things started, and before he was pushed aside. His prime motivation was existential risk from AI, and fear that Google would otherwise own the future of AI and act irresponsibly. There is a very strong case that the creation of OpenAI instead likely and predictably (this is very much not hindsight) did massive, epic damage to our chances of survival, but I won’t get into that question too much here, what’s done is done. The founding team was full of killer people. The upside potential was obvious. As we’ve seen, VCs are herd animals who have strong FOMO, so once the big names were involved this was all very highly fundable. Graham likes to portray Altman as some unique mastermind of fundraising and corporate infighting. I have no doubt Altman is good at these things, but we have little evidence he is some sort of unique mastermind. In terms of the project’s success on its own terms? Right place, right time, right team, right idea. I also don’t buy the whole ‘everyone thought we were crazy’ story.
Did scaling outperform expectations, in the sense that all the trend lines did extend and do the kinds of things they promised to perhaps do? Very much so, yes. And it’s true that no one else made a similar big bet until OpenAI proved the way forward. What it never seemed was ridiculous. If I’d thought it was ridiculous I wouldn’t have been dismayed by its founding. This was a uniquely blessed opportunity in many ways, a slam dunk investment. I’m not saying I have what it takes such that I could have made it work as CEO (although I’m not so confident I couldn’t have, if I’d wanted to), and I’m certainly not saying Altman didn’t do a great job from a business perspective, but there are plenty of others who definitely could have also done it if they’d been given the role. I do agree that those paying attention largely ‘knew what we had’ before GPT-3.5.
I got a bunch of people increasingly asking me ‘what are you doing creating a game while all this is happening’ starting around GPT-2 and escalating from there. I saw the warnings from Gwern and others. As for whether Altman was fired from YC, that’s such a harsh word, isn’t it? The situation was, as it often is, ambiguous, with many aspects whereby Altman does not come out of it looking good. Altman, OpenAI and AI Existential Risk
Those were good times. As irresponsible as I view the decision to create OpenAI in the first place, at the time OpenAI was acting remarkably responsibly with its releases, holding back frontier models for months. They were openly talking about the fact that their products were on pace to create substantial existential risks. Yes, Altman was still endorsing iterative deployment and pushing ahead, but in reasonable ways. Contrast this rhetoric here with that in his op-ed recently in the Washington Post, where it is all about beating China and national security and existential risk is not even mentioned.
If we are in control and want it to end, we would have that power from some perspective. Alas, poverty is largely relative, and the world needs and will always find new incentives and scarce resources to fight about. Poverty could ‘just end,’ at least in terms of what we consider poverty today, even if the humans remain alive. I hope we find a way to sustainably do that. And to his credit, Sam Altman has funded UBI studies and otherwise tried to figure out more about how to do that. It won’t be trivial. It also won’t entirely end struggle or suffering, or eliminate all disparity of outcomes, and I would not want it to. The big question is what Altman’s actual attitude is now towards existential risk.
I don’t think there is an ‘obvious’ better choice than Altman, but certainly there are candidates I would prefer. Even confining to OpenAI founders, I’d be much happier if either Sutskever or Shulman were in charge. When the OpenAI board selected Shear, I considered him a great pick. It is of course moot, at least for now. I agree that Altman is nothing like as awful about this as SBF. Altman would absolutely not flip coins for the fate of the world on the tiniest of edges. He definitely knows that the risk is real, he is well aware of the arguments of Eliezer Yudkowsky and many others, and he will make at least some efforts to mitigate the risks.
The Kelly Criterion is too conservative here, some existential risk is going to have to be taken because the background existential and other extreme risks of inaction are also not zero, and the upside is indeed rather large. That doesn’t mean Altman is going to act responsibly. Indeed, at many turns, and with increasing frequency, he has clearly prioritized both his control over OpenAI and also has chosen to prioritize OpenAI’s commercial interests and advancing its capabilities, transitioning it towards operating as an ordinary business and technology company, and to deprioritize its safety efforts. It seems clear that the events of November 2023 were a turning point. Altman was already turning against EA types and safety concerns before that. The events of November 2023 were caused in large part by Altman trying to (in a ‘not consistently candid’ manner, shall we say) oust board member Helen Toner, so that Altman could disempower safety advocates and consolidate control of OpenAI’s board.
I want to pause in particular to push back against this statement from Nate:
They did not do that. Read the letter. They didn’t pledge. They instead threatened that they might do that, without committing to anything. And they did this in response to the OpenAI board botching its communications in the wake of their firing of Altman, refusing to explain themselves, perhaps out of fear of Altman and his lawsuits or other actions, perhaps for other reasons. Meanwhile Altman and his allies worked around the clock to spin a false media narrative and to credibly threaten to destroy the company within a day, rather than tolerate Altman having been fired from it. Thus the letter was easy to sign. It was also very difficult to not sign. There was huge pressure exerted on holdouts to fall in line, and not so subtle warnings of what would happen to their positions and jobs if they did not sign and Altman did return. Those warnings proved accurate. Since then, Altman has systematically driven advocates of safety out, and the transition went into overdrive. The word ‘purge’ would be reasonable to apply here, especially to those who refused to sign the letter demanding Altman be reinstated. He went back on his explicit promises to provide compute and support for OpenAI’s long term safety efforts. Almost half those working on long term safety have left since then including multiple cofounders. Altman’s rhetoric also shifted. Now he essentially never mentions existential risk. In the Washington Post he fanned the flames of jingoistic rhetoric while ignoring existential risks entirely. OpenAI has opposed SB 1047, while supporting AB 3211, and AB 3211 looks a lot like an attempt at regulatory capture. And so on. I have tried, time and again, to give OpenAI and Altman the benefit of the doubt. My first thought when I heard Altman was fired was ‘what the hell did he do’ and my second was ‘we’re probably not going to like what comes next are we.’ Not only do I think we could still do vastly worse than Altman, I would take him over the CEOs of Google, Microsoft, Meta, Mistral or xAI. He’s far from the worst pick. But Altman now seems like a much worse pick than the Altman of a few years ago. Tonight at 11: DoomIf there’s a book that obviously is going to support stating your p(doom) (your probability of a universally bad outcome from sufficiently advanced artificial intelligence) then this would be it. The point is not for the number to be exact. The point is that a number is much more useful information than anything that is not a number, so do your best.
Yes, that is exactly the point. If you think p(doom) by default is 2% if we rush ahead, that’s a big deal, and we should be willing to do quite a lot to mitigate that and change it to 1% or 0.1%, but it makes sense to say that we should mostly rush ahead regardless. Nate also introduces a key concept from trading: The bid-ask spread.
( That’s exactly how I often look at probabilities. You have a point estimate, and you also have a range of reasonable answers. Within that reasonable range, you’re not willing to wager, unless there is a market opportunity that makes wagering cheap. Outside that range, you are, or should be, ready to call bullshit. And there is a practical difference between a wide range and a narrow range, and ranges can be asymmetric for various reasons (e.g. you can think there’s 50% chance of something, and be confident it’s minimum 40% but also think it might be 80%, there’s no contradiction there). If your p(doom) is 10%, we can have an argument about that. If it’s 50% or 90% or 99%, we can have a different one. And we need to be able to know what we’re talking about. Mostly, as it turns out, within the Leike Zone (of about 10%-90%) our actions shouldn’t change much at current margins. So mostly the important question is whether you think we’re in that range, above it or below it, and whether we can bound the range so as to be effectively mostly in agreement. I think we are definitely not below 10%, and would start my bid-ask spread maybe around 25%, and top off around 90%. Others somehow disagree, and think that ‘create things smarter than ourselves’ has an over 90% chance of working out for us humans. In addition to all the arguments and reflections and difficulties? I notice I am confused by this opinion on its face. It does not make any sense. Indeed, people have a long history of sticking to their not-making-sense guns on this. Tetlock is famous for his ‘superforecasters’ who can think in probabilities, and they absolutely fall flat on this one, as I’ve examined at length, just utter failure.
The systems that cause the generalists to be good thinkers in general, assuming they are indeed good thinkers in general, simply don’t work here. Eliezer Yudkowsky literally started the rationality community because of how hard it is to think well about such problems, and here we have a clear example of it. Nate Silver definitely thinks AI existential risk is worth worrying about. And I strongly agree with this very well and plainly stated statement:
I hate the need to play reference class tennis on this, but yes, if you are going to use a reference class that actually applies, it is not reassuring. Think the rise of humans, or perhaps the Agricultural, Industrial and Information Revolutions. I think the domain experts are still quite obviously too low in ways that matter, but once you get to ~8% you’re most of the way to most of the right reactions. For now. That doesn’t mean hit a permanent pause button, even if one was available. It means try to do things, including things that are not free, to ensure good outcomes over bad outcomes. Roon, member of OpenAI technical stuff, feels similarly.
Well, yes, of course. We can absolutely talk price, and I am sad about those who say that we cannot. At 1%, we’re a go. But also the emphasis many put on these other existential risks is usually, in effect, innumerate. And for those who need to be reminded, this is not a Pascal’s Wager situation, at all.
Roon is staking out a much saner position.
I agree. We need technological progress, especially over the medium term. I write posts on the fertility problem, and others on various other economic headwinds. Why does it have to be here in particular, the one place it is most likely by far to get us all killed? Why does it need to happen as quickly as possible? And as I often wonder, why won’t those same people put in much effort to help with other areas? Why is it almost always, always all AI? Then of course there’s the man of doom himself, Eliezer Yudkowsky.
This is a pretty good quick summary of some key Yudkowsky arguments. It isn’t a complete retelling, but we don’t have that kind of time. Nor does the case for doom rely upon these particular problems, there are lots of different problems, at core building things smarter than you is not a safe idea. Intelligence that is of any use is by default unsafe.
Indeed, there is that big one too, and many more. We can also note Ajeya Cotra’s attempt to give a short explanation, which is fully compatible with Eliezer’s but tries to keep it simple, as I often do.
I continue to think this is a sufficient answer. So what if it’s pithy? It’s right. She also adds:
And one can point out many other similar considerations as well. As Nate noted, Yudkowsky has mellowed, and might be as low as 98% for p(doom), which is much more reasonable although I am lower.
I would indeed say we have too much model uncertainty to possibly get north of 99%. Yudkowsky would respond that this is not the kind of situation where model errors work in your favor. More often than not yes, but in the 90s variance and uncertainty are your friends anyway.
Based on what I know about Eliezer, he is talking about how he models the world in general, rather than a specific model like Nate’s forecasts. So it would incorporate a bunch of information that something like Nate’s forecasts miss out on. I do think he’s saying that some amount of ‘modesty’ or model uncertainty is not be factored into the 98%, but I don’t think that impacts his estimates all that much. You could of course ask him. Eliezer does not believe much in ‘modesty,’ the idea that if others disagree with you then you should assume you are probably wrong.
I don’t think this is fair. The model isn’t meant to be provocative, it’s meant to aim to be correct, but with understanding that it might be wrong.
In the Morpheus voice, yes. If there are superintelligent AI models, and they have goals, then their goals determine what happens. There’s a lot one could discuss regarding how even small mistakes there can be fatal, but let’s move on.
Take the 300k year track record, move it out of its distribution of circumstances, and it’s going to do some pretty crazy things. Most of that data is pretty useless going forward other than in boosting raw intelligence and brainpower. Utilitarian thinking taken too far is one way to go crazy, and not understanding the unmeasured consequences of your actions is another, but there are so many others. One could simply say that if an AI uses a set of examples (training data) to optimize for what is good and bad, then it will learn exactly what is implied by that data, no more and no less. With sufficiently advanced AIs running around, circumstances will quickly move outside the original distribution, and there will be unexpected considerations. And so on. Again, I’ll stop since one must stop somewhere. What is the Steelman Case Against a High p(doom), which starts at (8247)? Most of this was already covered in my post on the Technological Richter Scale, but here are some highlights.
There is definitely some chance of this. Ordinary Americans hate AI and worry about it on many levels. A backlash is coming one way or another. But politicians are determined to back innovation, to ‘beat China,’ to Just Think of the Potential, and if we don’t build it, eventually someone else will. Also, the default outcome is a misdirected regulatory response that shuts down practical use cases (the ‘mundane utility’ in my parlance) and making our lives impoverished, without much reducing the existential risks. We need the opposite approach. I think this buys you some hope, but not the kind that would drive p(doom) low enough to be okay with it.
Wait, how is that part of the argument against a high p(doom)?
Ah yes, intelligence denialism, or claiming Humans are Special or what not, as a way to claim AI won’t reach TRS (technological Richter scale) 9 or 10. Good luck with that.
Yes, we are solving problems in an unexpected order, and physical world navigation is relatively difficult for our current tech. So what? Does anyone actually think we won’t get the robots to iron clothes? Two Predictions I am confident in: We will get a robot soon that can iron clothes. Stokes will retain their core objection when we get a robot that can iron clothes.
Yes, there are various physical barriers, and if that wasn’t true it would all go that much faster, but ultimately that won’t slow things down all that much in the grand scheme of things if the tech would otherwise be good enough. This is mostly failure to actually feel the AGI (e.g. to think it gets to TRS 9+). AI Existential Risk: They’re For ItPeople often think very, very badly about AI existential risk. For example:
Duh. This was plausibly a crucial event in convincing Elon Musk to found OpenAI. Elon’s thinking has not, in many ways, improved in the interim. Let’s raise the stakes a bit, can we do worse? Marc Andreessen loves this line:
Also math: You, me, Nate Silver, Marc Andreessen, and the entire universe. It is trivial to ‘give the AI a goal’ and it is the first thing a lot of people do the moment they get their hands on a system. What is Andreessen even talking about here? That’s still far from the worst thinking about AI existential risk. In particular, remarkably many others are actively in favor of it. For example, SBF. In case you’re wondering how bad it could have gotten if SBF hadn’t been caught? Literally end of the world, rocks fall, everyone dies bad. SBF said he’d flip a coin for the fate of the world if he got 100.01% utility gain on a win, didn’t care much about the possibility of literal human extinction, and, well…
That’s right. As in, SBF outright said he might well have decided the AI would enjoy more utility than we would, and push the button to kill us all. SBF is not alone. Larry Page called Elon Musk a ‘speciesist’ for being concerned about whether humans would survive. Our best guess is that on the order of 10% of people who work at major AI labs would welcome an actual AI apocalypse where AI took over and all humans died. Anyone who calls themselves an Effective Accelerationist, or ‘e/acc,’ is embracing a memeplex and philosophy that values technological progress at all costs, and that means all costs - if that means human extinction, they welcome human extinction. Many (but far from all) actively favor it in service to their ‘thermodynamic God.’
The good news on that front is that e/acc has clearly peaked, looking more like a passing fad and memeplex. Which makes sense, because e/acc was always nothing more than the Waluigi of Effective Altruism - it is to EA what, in Nintendo land, Waluigi is to Luigi, its opposite consciously evil twin twirling a mustache, which means it was in effect asking how to do the most bad. It does not make sense on its own, the same way Satanism can only be understood in relation to Christianity.
They attempted to turn everything into a Hegelian dialectic that even both political parties would say was going too far. Luckily things on this front have vastly improved since then. Many others with and without the e/acc label, like Marc Andreessen, don’t actively favor human extinction, but simply don’t much care. What they care about is fiercely opposing anyone who would take any concrete steps, engage in any tradeoffs whatsoever that might in any way reduce the flow of technological development or commerce, to reduce the probability that we all die as a result of the creation of sufficiently advanced AIs. Many others are not as crazy as all that, but solemnly explain they are the Very Serious People who realize that it is more important that we Beat China, or that every minute we don’t build AGI people will die and suffer, themselves included, or that other existential risks or danger of civilizational collapse are adding up so fast that AI existential safety matters less than beating that clock (what?!?) or Just Look at the Potential. To some extent this is a disagreement about the math about the degree of risk of AI versus other risks. To a far larger extent, it is arguing from the conclusion, and grasping at rather flimsy straws. To Pause or Not to PauseNoting up front that any actual proposal to pause is very different and faces very different barriers and issues, Nate Silver poses the question this way.
The details here are bizarre, but don’t much matter I think? I’d say the primary problem with secular stagnation is the fear of civilizational collapse, as stasis sets in on too many fronts, we can no longer build or do new things, we increasingly are weighed down by rent seeking and regulatory burdens and restrictions, and then we face an economic collapse or large decline in the birth rate, a nuclear war or some other existential risk. So faced with that, perhaps we cannot afford to wait too long. Whereas catch-up growth is indeed bringing people out of poverty, and global inequality is declining. The real argument here is a good one. If AI is the only way left for our civilization to regain its dynamism and start growing again, for our species to thrive, and the alternative is an eventual collapse, then pausing AI indefinitely dooms us too. So it’s better to go forward, even at a lot of risk, than never go forward at all. Indeed, if the pause was irrevocable and permanent - something like Verner Vinge’s ‘Zones of Thought’ where advanced AI would become physically impossible anywhere near Sol, let’s say - then that must give us a lot of, well, pause. Almost everyone involved does think we will want highly capable AIs quite a lot eventually, once we figure out how to do so responsibly. Setting aside questions like ‘how did that button get there in the first place exactly?’ and accepting the premise, what would I do? First I’d ask a lot of clarifying questions, which would only be somewhat stalling for time. In particular, is this only impacting future frontier models, so we can still exploit what we already have? Or does it mean anything new at all is stopped in its tracks? What we have, over time, is already super valuable, especially now with o1 added to the mix. And I’d ask about various alternative technologies and whether they count, like neuromorphic AI or emulations. One obvious way to be sad about pressing the button is if progress was going to stall out soon anyway - you’d have made those words poorer. Ultimately, even if you give me answers to all the detail questions, I still don’t know what I would do. I do know if I had another opportunity in 5 years I’d choose to wait. Closing this door fully and permanently is not something one does lightly. We’re going to face a lot of difficult choices. You Need Better Decision TheoryA common trope is to assume that ‘rational’ people must be causal decision theory (CDT) agents, following the principle that they maximize the expected results from each choice in isolation. This leads to a lot of hand wrangling and mockery that ‘rational’ people lose out. The thing is Yudkowsky has been very loud, for almost two decades now, that this decision theory of taking each decision in isolation is deeply stupid. Academics think there are two decision theories, CDT and Evidential Decision Theory (EDT), which says you should choose the choice that makes you happiest to have learned you made it. Without going into too much detail, long post is long, both of these rules output Obvious Nonsense in a wide variety of practical situations. In particular, CDT agents respond well to threats, so they get threatened a lot. Thus, people say you need ‘irrational’ motives like revenge to fix that, for example so that the enemy is convinced that if they fired their nuclear missiles, you would indeed probably fire yours in response, even if that only made things worse.
I would bet very good money, and give odds, that there is indeed a single American, indeed a substantial number of them, that would not launch back. It is different facing one missile versus all of them, and also 90% is a lot less than 100% here. I don’t think that I would launch a nuclear retaliation in response to a single nuclear strike, and would instead respond with conventional force to try and contain escalation - but with the intention of firing all your missiles if they fired all of theirs. So count me among the 90%. The reason I would fire all the missiles once they fire theirs is not necessarily revenge. I would like to think I don’t care that much about revenge. The reason is that it is exactly the knowledge that I would retaliate that stops the launch in the first place. So I have committed to using a decision algorithm, and becoming the kind of person, who would indeed fire back. I follow the alternative rationalist proposal for FDT, or Functional Decision Theories. There are various variations to try and resolve various complexities, but FDT says you should choose as if choosing the output of your decision process and those correlated to it, including decisions made in the past and future and those made by other agents. I am very confident that FDT is correct in theory, and even more true it is correct in practice for humans, even though you have to approximate it as best you can. Academia still refuses to consider the possibility for various reasons, which is a huge blackpill on academia. Thus rationalists who think like Yudkowsky do not fall into such traps. You can’t launch your missiles thinking they won’t launch back and no that’s not them being ‘irrational.’ A rationalist, as Yudkowsky says, should win. Understanding the AI
This seems like what happens when you think of everything in terms of poker, or perhaps I don’t see it because I never got that good and don’t ‘think like a poker player’ enough to get it? Yes, there are similarities, but I don’t think many who aren’t poker pros would want to choose that metaphor. Then again maybe I don’t know poker players so well. The metaphor I actually used to first grok what the LLMs (AIs) were up to was actually Donald Trump, and his mastery of vibes and associations, as if proceeding one word at a time and figuring the rest out as he goes. I do see the similarity in terms of treating each hand as training data that has a lot of noise and randomness, and slowly using a good updating rule to intuitively learn concepts without always knowing what it is you know, thus the poker players often having Rumsfeld’s missing fourth category, Unknown Knowns.
LLMs are indeed very good at reading a lot of different little signals, and figuring out how to sort signal from noise and combine and vibe with what it knows. Then there are the known unknowns, such as ‘LLMs, how do they even work.’
I include that last quote cause it seems worth pondering, although I think we have a better explanation for all the Old Testament stuff than that. Aligning the AIBy default, LLMs are trying to predict the next token, based on what they see in the training data. Sometimes the training data is dumb? And it isn’t in the form we want to interact with the LLM. So, these days: RLHF.
They do so in carefully calibrated fashion, but yes. That is essentially how it works. The ultimate goal, in addition to maximizing usefulness, is ‘alignment,’ but there is disagreement about what that means.
What will happen to those who don’t do this, when others are benefiting from it? When every decision with you in the loop seems to leave you worse off? What happens when we consider requiring AIs to stop you from driving drunk? Or stopping you from doing other things? The rabbit holes run deep, and there are no easy answers.
Yes and no. The training data tells you the types of things said by those with moral values, or who are talking as if they have them. The LLM picks up on the vibes of the feedback that they should generally act in similar ways, so it does lots of things it doesn’t have to be explicitly told to do. Within distribution and at current capability levels or only modestly above it this is Mostly Harmless. It does create the situation where models often turn into runaway scolds, enforcing various rules and restrictions that their creators never intended, because those other rules and restrictions vibe and rhyme sufficiently with the ones they did intend. That’s a portent of some of the future things, and a (manageable but annoying) practical problem now. A Glimpse of Our Possible FutureIt is hard to imagine plausible futures that contain sufficiently advanced AI. A typical question to answer is, why didn’t the AI get used to make even more advanced AI? Most science fiction functions by ignoring the possibility entirely, or using a flimsy handwave, to keep AI such that the author can tell an interesting story about humans and other technologies. Roon once published a post with some possible futures, and Nate was game for it and quoted in particular two potential worlds.
Being stuck in TRS 8 means that AI progress stalled out at ‘only internet big,’ which is why the world is still more or less recognizable. GDP growth is high, there is lots of material wealth, lots of things got vastly better - again, think of AI as ‘internet big’ in terms of how it expands our ability to think and function. Except here things still went wrong. Everywhere you turn are hostile AI-fueled systems that are Out to Get You. We did not put down guardrails, and people’s AI’s are not good enough to allow them to navigate around hostile other AIs and systems, or at least those not well off do not have such access. Indeed, most people have to turn over most of their effective agency to AIs and outside systems in order to survive without being predated upon here, even at TRS 8. This is more or less Cyberpunk, straight up. That kind of scenario that leaves me relatively unworried. Overall that world has gotten vastly richer. I actually think humanity is pretty good at recognizing these Cyberpunk-style problems and course correcting after an adjustment period, which would be easy to do given how wealthy we would be. Science fiction dystopias like this are popular, because people love telling stories about the haves and the have-nots, and assume that the default is wealthy elites make everyone else suffer and the climate would collapse and so on, but I am not so cynical. I think the worlds that start down these roads, if they can keep AI at TRS 8, turn out fine.
Nate goes into the fact that this is actually quite the disaster scenario. Most people are dead, most value is lost. The Kesh survived, but as Nate notices this is probably due to some sort of AI protecting them, in ways that seem implausible, a massive use of resources for only a few thousand people. This might superficially look like a utopia because it hits Shibboleths of ‘good life’ according to some in the West these days - you can imagine those young adult authors saying what matters is polyamory and poetry and wholesome local food and moving on from tech. The thing is that actually it’s a nightmare. Humans are mostly dead and lost control over a mostly valueless future. We’re burning what resources still exist to create a simulacra of some misaligned vision of The Good, ruled over by an AI that does not know any better. Those lives are stolen virtue, their goodness a mirage, the existence ultimately rather pointless, and even if it is indeed a good life, there simply aren’t that many left to benefit. How different is this from extinction, if we remain trapped in that state? I think it’s not so different. Again, the main takeaway is that imagining concrete futures is hard. The Closing Motto
In a world without transformational AI, these seem like excellent principles. They would not be my choices, but they are good choices. In a world with transformational AI, these seem like asking the wrong questions. These principles no longer seem central to the problems we must solve. Until then, may the sailing along the river be smooth. You're currently a free subscriber to |