---
subject: "The Nutgraf: Bhavish Aggarwal is finally India’s Elon Musk"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-06-07 04:34:18
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
I guess the biggest story of the week is the whole Trump-Musk fallout. I didn’t get much time to read the details, but I did find some time to think about it.
Then I discovered that if you really step back and zoom out, you can clearly see the series of events that got us here:
1. A slightly unconventional billionaire—and seasoned entrepreneur—launches an electric vehicle company at a time when EVs were far from mainstream.
2. The EV company becomes quite successful, and quickly becomes the market leader. It goes public, and becomes a stock market darling.
3. The billionaire gets a bit bored of this EV company, and decides to use his shares to finance another company, through a series of complicated loans. Nobody quite understands how this works, or what this new company does.
4. The EV company’s stock has dropped by double digits this year and its market share is shrinking—a decline driven partly by the founder’s erratic behavior, and partly by rivals launching superior products.
5. The billionaire founder engages in a public and messy feud on X (previously Twitter) with another influential and equally eccentric figure.
6. Now the billionaire finds himself in a bind—the once-thriving EV company appears to be faltering, and the flashy new venture he funded by pledging its shares is neither generating revenue nor showing signs of a sustainable business model.
But enough about Bhavish Aggarwal.
It’s almost a clichè these days to call Aggarwal as the Indian Elon Musk, particularly because it’s no longer evident if the comparison is meant to be complimentary or derogatory. However, it’s one thing if India’s business media or anonymous internet users do this. But increasingly, it appears as though Aggarwal himself seems to be actively fanning these flames by [adopting](https://www.hindustantimes.com/trending/olas-bhavish-aggarwal-asks-employees-to-submit-weekly-reports-under-kya-chal-raha-hai-initiative-101741075315119.html) whatever Elon Musk seems to be doing. Fortunately, thus far, Aggarwal seems to be copying the least crazy thing that Musk is up to, instead of, say, [injecting](https://www.nytimes.com/2025/05/30/us/elon-musk-drugs-children-trump.html) himself with ketamine, or [asking](https://futurism.com/elon-musk-dms-women-have-his-babies) strangers on the internet to have his babies. So I guess it could be worse.
The Ken’s premium audio experience is here!
From original podcasts to writer-narrated versions of our subscriber newsletters, you can now listen to The Ken each day. Discover them all at [the-ken.com/podcasts](http://the-ken.com/podcasts).
Existing Premium subscribers? You already have FULL access to ALL of our premium audio. They are available exclusively via our subscriber apps. If you don’t have them, just download one and log in to unlock everything. Premium subscribers on the app can listen to this edition of The Nutgraf [here](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/the-nutgraf/bhavish-aggarwal-is-finally-indias-elon-musk/).
Not a Premium subscriber? You can subscribe to [The Ken Premium](https://podcasts.apple.com/in/channel/the-ken-premium/id6744577070) on Apple Podcasts for an easy monthly price (Rs 299 in India). The channel will include ALL our premium podcasts and audio.
Anyway, my point is that while these parallels started off in a somewhat lazy fashion, I think they have converged to an interesting place eerily at the same time—notably, over the past week. Of course, there are some significant differences that set them apart, and some of them are quite pivotal and will decide their respective futures.
I’ll start with their respective EV companies. It’s easy to make the argument that both Tesla and Ola Electric seem to have followed somewhat similar journeys—they are EV companies that hit the market ahead of their time, got a significant market share, and went public. However, the companies diverge at this point. Tesla, despite losing sales to upstarts like BYD, is still relatively overperforming as a stock. A lot of this has to do less with Tesla’s business performance and more with the halo that Elon Musk gives the company. In fact, Tesla’s stock price seems to be more closely [correlated](https://www.cnbc.com/2025/06/05/tesla-shares-musk-trump.html) with what its founder is doing that day than how many cars it sold.
Ola Electric, on the other hand, seems to be a much more conventional company. Over the last few quarters, it has lost market share to competitors. Its revenue has declined. Its losses have steeply grown. And its stock price has also fallen in lockstep. I’m not sure how many of Ola Electric’s investors look at Bhavesh Aggarwal’s behaviour to decide whether they feel like buying or selling the stock on any given day.
But the one thing that Tesla and Ola Electric have in common is that both these brands seem to have been impacted and are less desirable in the minds of their consumers. Apart from concerns about poor service for Ola Electric’s scooters, both companies’ founders had a role to play in this on X… each in their own way. One of them picked a fight with the President of the United States and the other decided to have a go at a stand-up comedian.
I have a point of view about which of these was more stupid, but I’ll let you decide for yourselves.
The parallels don’t just extend to their EV companies, but go beyond that… to their other companies.
When Elon Musk bought Twitter for around $44 billion, the general consensus was that he was significantly overpaying for a social media company that had a long history of not making money. Depending on how credulous you are about Musk’s acumen, you can either believe that this was part of a long game to choose who would become the next President of the United States… or that it was simply an egotistical, bored billionaire who wanted a toy to play with, regretted making a commitment, tried to get out of the deal, and was eventually forced to buy it. Anyway, Musk had bought Twitter partly by selling his Tesla shares, partly by finding other equity investors, and (this is important) by raising nearly $13 billion in debt financing from multiple banks.
Aggarwal, thankfully, didn’t follow suit and acquire a social network. Instead, he founded Krutrim, an AI company, and injected funds into it. One could argue about his motivations for starting Krutrim (I shared [my theory](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/krutrim-is-whatever-ola-wants-it-to-be/) last year). Of course, Aggarwal has made it clear that he’s doing it for nationalistic reasons—which may or may not sound similar to what Elon Musk [did](https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2025/jan/04/elon-musk-x-trump-far-right) after he acquired Twitter.
However, both Krutrim and X (Twitter) have one thing in common—both have been financed by big banks, who have extended debt. Debt that is directly… and indirectly collateralised by the founders’ stakes in their EV companies.
And right now, the banks are getting a bit nervous.
I’ll start with Krutrim. As per [Bloomberg](https://www.cnbctv18.com/market/ola-electric-founder-bhavish-aggarwal-topped-up-collateral-as-shares-tumbled-19616109.htm), “Aggarwal has pledged or encumbered about 8% of his 30% Ola Electric stake, according to exchange data. Avendus Group, InCred Alternative Investments Pvt. and Modulus Alternatives Investment Managers had lent him the money in exchange for bonds issued by Krutrim, carrying coupon rates of around 14.9%-15.9% and backed by Ola Electric shares.”
Elon Musk, on the other hand, has somewhat bigger problems. He needs to pay billions just in interest to these banks, and this debt is recorded on X’s balance sheet, which makes it a big liability that’s nearly impossible to reduce. So Musk did a Krutrim—he created an AI company called xAI, gave it an absurd valuation after raising some money from friendly investors, and then used that company to acquire the social media platform. Now the debt is on the AI company’s balance sheet… but as we know, it’s much easier for an AI company to raise capital than a social network.
For a while, this plan seemed to work.
Then, a few months ago, coincidentally on the same day, two news reports emerged about both these AI companies.
A CNBC [report](https://www.cnbc.com/2025/04/21/sources-musk-xai-funding-raise-startup.html) about xAI claimed that the company was about to raise capital, financed through equity. On the same day, Mint [reported](https://www.livemint.com/companies/ola-bhavish-aggarwal-ai-venture-krutrim-funding-round-investment-investors-11745151929400.html) that Krutrim was also looking to raise $300 million dollars from investors. It quoted anonymous sources who said that Krutrim, led by its founder Bhavish Aggarwal, is “confident of bringing multiple big-ticket investors to the cap-table” in the coming months.
Back in April, both Krutrim and xAI signalled that they were looking to raise money through equity.
By June, both of them independently realised that this was impossible.
Nearly all of Krutrim’s capital has been funded by Aggarwal, who in turn has taken loans from banks by pledging his shares.
Last week, after watching Ola Electric’s stock price slide, the banks got nervous. Bhavish Aggarwal [reportedly](https://www.cnbctv18.com/market/ola-electric-founder-bhavish-aggarwal-topped-up-collateral-as-shares-tumbled-19616109.htm) had to pay about Rs 20 crore in cash to top up his existing collateral to assuage them. He’ll probably have to do it again unless Ola Electric’s position as a business improves. To be clear, I don’t want to overstate this as some kind of a crisis—Aggarwal has pledged a small chunk of his shares. Founders do this all the time. It’s not out of the ordinary. The real story is that Krutrim still does not have any major investor who has pumped in money in exchange for equity.
xAI, on the other hand, also took the scenic route and got to the same destination.
Here’s the news from earlier this week.
Days after announcing his departure from the Donald Trump administration and as chief of the Department of Government Efficiency (DOGE), billionaire Elon Musk has refocused his efforts towards raising funds for his companies, according to a Bloomberg report.
Elon Musk is selling $5 billion in debt for his artificial intelligence company xAI Corp, with Morgan Stanley as the banker, for a double-digit interest rate, the report said citing sources. The move likely comes as the AI startup looks to fund its expansive infrastructure with a massive date centre in Memphis, Tennessee.
The report added that a spokesperson for xAI declined to comment, while the Morgan Stanley representative did not immediately respond to queries.
Musk Taps Investors for Billions Days After Washington Exit, [Mint](https://www.livemint.com/companies/people/elon-musk-5-billion-debt-funding-xai-morgan-stanley-ai-deal-650-million-invest-neuralink-exit-us-politics-business-news-11748920562430.html)
In a sense, both Krutrim and xAI are at the same place. Both of them are AI companies with strange, wildly [optimistic](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/tech/technology/morgan-stanley-opens-xai-books-with-musk-in-trump-crosshairs/articleshow/121673364.cms?from=mdr) growth projections, but with little to show for the [present](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/tech/artificial-intelligence/krutrims-ai-products-not-seeing-enough-takers-say-some-experts/articleshow/121576245.cms?from=mdr). They do not have much of a product, revenue, or even customers. Also, despite the halos of the founders, they do not seem to be able to raise capital through equity, but banks are perfectly happy to give them money… tied to the performance of the other company they run.
Put another way, there are enough people who believe the founders are creditworthy… much fewer people believe in their businesses enough to directly put money into them.
Last week, more than anytime in the past, Bhavish Aggarwal and Elon Musk looked much more similar to each other.
Regards,
Praveen Gopal Krishnan