---
subject: "Who Owns Beauty?"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-03-12 13:19:26
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
In 2017, a painting most people had never seen or heard of sold for almost half a billion dollars. Salvator Mundi, an image of Jesus likely painted by Leonardo da Vinci, was purchased by the Saudi royal family for $450 million, making it comfortably the most expensive artwork ever. The painting’s path to prominence was a confusing one. Art historians had long known that Leonardo had painted a salvator mundi — a common bit of Christian iconography featuring Jesus blessing the world with his right hand and holding a globe in his left. Others had written about Leonardo’s original and several artists had made their own copies of it. The painting had featured in the collection of some English kings and nobles in the 1600s, but, somewhere along the way, people lost track of it. Multiple attempts at restoration had altered the painting, and the painting’s owners thought they owned a copy, not the original. It sold in 1958 for £45. By the 21st century, the painting was a mess; it had been painted over and looked terrible. But the painting’s owners — a group that had bought it for just over $1000 — thought they might have something. They hired Dianne Dwyer Modestini, a prominent NYU art scholar, to restore it. She discovered that under the centuries of clumsy attempts to improve or restore the image, there was something that seemed like a) an original painting rather than a copy and b) the work of Leonardo da Vinci himself. The restoration process was But none of that dampened the hype around this painting, and the valuation kept climbing. After restoration, Salvator Mundi sold for $75 million, then for $125 million, and finally ended up in the hands of the Saudis for a cool $450 million. Thanks for reading! To support my work, please click the button below: If you want to help keep this project going, please consider purchasing a paid subscription. Paid subscribers — it’s only about 75 cents a week! — get access to the archives, the satisfaction of supporting work they enjoy, and my undying gratitude. Congratulations, Mohammad bin Salman, you own the most expensive piece of art in history. What do you do with it? After suddenly becoming famous after centuries in obscurity, the painting once again This has provoked bafflement and anger — shouldn’t people be able to see one of the most famous paintings in the world? Why isn’t the painting in a museum? The painting’s restorer, Dianne Dwyer Modestini, has Salvator Mundi is not unusual. Of the seven most expensive paintings in history, only one — Cezanne’s The Card Players — is on display in a museum. The rest hang the walls of some rich guys or, worse, sit in darkened A few hundred years ago, this state of affairs would not have seemed problematic or even notable. Art belonged to its owners, and it was for their private consumption. We should be aware of another difference, too — there was nothing like today’s level of attention to individual works of art before the 20th century. The household-name paintings that we all know today would have just been something to take up blank space on a wall in some royal home. The So where did the idea that great art should be public come from? In Europe, at least, it seems to stem from the discovery in 1506 of an ancient Roman sculpture of the very fit Trojan priest Laocoön and His Sons fighting some snakes. After a farmer discovered the statue, Pope Julius (who was very interested in ancient Rome) purchased it and, rather than squirreling it away for his own private enjoyment, placed it in a publicly accessible location on the Vatican grounds. This was the beginning of the Vatican Museum. It makes sense that the Popes would be among the first to allow the public to view art in a museum setting. After all, the great cathedrals of the church served as a type of museum, as well, where worshipers could gaze at remarkable works of art. Over time, some monarchs began to occasionally allow the public into certain areas of their palaces to view their art collections. Rulers seem to have done this to curry favor with their subjects, call attention to their generous patronage of the arts, and The spirit of the Enlightenment drove these changes. Philosophers like Immanuel Kant
This attitude extended to art, as well. Enlightenment thinkers held that people should view great art with their own eyes, and that kings should not hoard beautiful things. The world’s greatest art museum, the Louvre, emerged during the defining moment of the Enlightenment: the French Revolution. When revolutionaries took political power away from King Louis XVI, they found themselves in possession of all of his art, as well. Though the royal family had previously After the National Assembly threw Louis XVI in prison in 1792, it moved quickly to establish a museum in the Louvre, partially out of revolutionary fervor and partially out of fear that mob actions against symbols of the monarchy would destroy the art that the French kings had acquired. One year after Louis’ downfall, the museum — officially called Muséum central des Arts de la République — opened, displaying to the public hundreds of artworks that had previously sat in church and royal storehouses. The king’s art collections (including the Mona Lisa) were now considered biens nationaux — national goods. The galleries would be open to artists for study on some days, and the general public on others. The revolutionary Abbe Gregoire
Historian Andrew McClellan
As French armies conquered much of the European continent, the same logic justified the French looting the artistic treasures of other countries and hauling them back to Paris. The painter Luc Barbier
By the nineteenth century, every major city in Europe featured a public art museum, many of which occupied the former homes of the nobility. The great paintings and sculptures were now accessible by anyone with a few hours to spare rather than being hoarded by the wealthy (it should be noted that part of this process was the theft of art from around the globe as victorious armies and ambitious archaeologists piled the world’s treasures into the capitals of Europe). Now, things seem to be headed backward. In today’s overheated art market, paintings serve as status symbols and stores of wealth — not that different, I suppose, from their purpose back in the 1500s. That’s why so many of them aren’t in museums; their owners don’t think these paintings are “the property of the people.” As for Salvator Mundi, it appears the Saudi royal family plans to install its $450 million painting in a fancy new This way, the owners of Salvator Mundi will get to have their cake and eat it too. The art will be available to the people, but it sure won’t belong to them. This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: Or you can share the newsletter with others: Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week! This essay was also published You're currently a free subscriber to |