---
subject: "Cava: One Brand, Many Channels"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <byrne@thediff.co>"
to: ""
date: 2023-05-22 12:54:36
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
|
In this issue: - Cava: One Brand, Many Channels
- AI and Incumbents
- Buying Reputation
- Restaurant Pricing
- Debt, Prices, and the Pull-Forward Effect
- Assets and Distribution
Cava: One Brand, Many ChannelsIt's been a slow year for IPOs. Cava's S-1 opens with a visual acknowledgement that Instagram has replaced Most retailers have come through the pandemic a lot less focused on single channels than they were when they started. App-based ordering has made brick-and-mortar at least partly digital, and also means that pure-play e-commerce companies face competition on convenience and lack-of-friction; waiting for home delivery can be less convenient and more uncertain than just swinging by a store to do a curbside pickup as part of some other errand, for example. Cava was multi-channel almost from the beginning: they were founded as a full-service restaurant, started selling some of their ingredients through grocery stores in 2008, and hired a new CEO to accelerate that process. In 2011, they expanded into a fast casual format, which is their main style today. In 2018, they bought out Zoe's Kitchen, which had 263 units at the time of the sale; the Cava brand's total restaurant count now is... also 263, as they've been opening up new branded restaurants and slowly converting Zoe's locations into Cava stores. Like many organizations, they've tried out several models and found the one that works best for them: last year, restaurant sales were 98.7% of revenue, with grocery store sales of their hummus and sauces making up the rest. But that business does have some perks: getting their products at eye level in Whole Foods means running an ad for their restaurant to exactly Cava's target demographic, so the wholesale business is still worth running even if it's not necessarily profitable. There are many habits a tech-focused investor has to break when looking at other industries, but conveniently for them, restaurant concept IPOs do follow at least one broad rule of tech investing: at IPO time, the company will typically exhibit impressive growth, good - Because of the Zoe's acquisition and the gradual rebranding of these locations, Cava can play some games with their growth metrics. Total revenue has compounded at 52% annualized since 2016, from $45m that year to $546m last year. But the compound growth rate since the first full year of the Zoe's deal, 2019, is just 5%. A lot happened in that period: they've converted most of the Zoe's stores, and closed the remainder, so that recent growth rate is artificially low.
[[2]](#fn2)They claim an addressable market of 1,000 potential locations by 2032, which would allow them to grow store count by 16% annualized over that period. - On the unit economics side: Cava's locations do $2.5m in annualized revenue as of the first quarter of this year. It's a solid number in context; mature chains competing in the same general category do slightly better (Chipotle's at $2.6m, Panera $2.7m).
[[3]](#fn3)Same-store sales are up 28% from the comparable period in 2019 (the cadence of this growth is basically unreadable because of the impact of Covid, but current trends are a decent indicator of the equilibrium). Meanwhile, their restaurant-level margins—i.e. margins excluding corporate costs—are running about 20%. This compares to Chipotle at 24% and Wendy's at 14%. (Notably, Cava's ingredient and packaging costs as a share of revenue are close to Chipotle's, at 31.9% compared to 30.1%. Labor is a bit higher, but the biggest cost gap is occupancy. And occupancy costs as a share of revenue are partly a proxy for how mature a restaurant is: get more foot traffic or more online orders, and labor and ingredient costs will rise at almost the pace of revenue—but this doesn't have any impact on local real estate prices, so margins go up. - The Cava story has many parts. First, there's the cuisine: there are big concept chains for Mexican food, Italian, pizza, burgers, American Chinese, and Southern food. The market for mediterranean food is more fragmented. Some markets stay fragmented, though: Thai is,
[according to this Google Trends analysis](https://www.thediff.co/r/1b0c01d6?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99), the fourth most popular ethnic cuisine in the US, and there are over 5,000 Thai restaurants. US Thai chains are tiny so far. Meanwhile, for Cava, targeting a kind of food that's also[literally its own subcategory of health food cookbooks](https://www.thediff.co/r/6503de81?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)is a nice automatic tailwind, at least until the “Burgers, Fries, and a Large Soda” diet gets big. Another component of the Cava story is a decent offering to employees, with benefits that range from free food each shift to subsidized pet insurance. The company also has a decent narrative around loyalty, mobile ordering, and customer-driven R&D: their loyalty program has 3.7m members, grew 56% last year, and constitutes 25% of sales. Plus, 35% of their orders are app-based already, and their menu is combinatorial so there are technically 17.4bn menu options (Cava suggests a few standard orders, of course). Combine all of these realities, and it's possible to a) suggest new toppings or meal tweaks to individual users based on their behavior, and b) to identify combinations that customers are ordering on their own and turn them into standard menu items.
And then you get to the dreary part we’ve all been waiting for: Cava isn’t profitable, and their net margins worsened in 2022 to -10.5% from -7.5% in 2021. In fairness, losses peaked in 2020, and 2019's numbers were also much worse (a -27% margin). And in the last quarter, their loss compressed to a -1% margin. So they're on track to celebrate a profitable quarter soon after IPO, at least as long as they don't insist on stepping up growth too much. At one level, restaurants are straightforward to analyze; decades ago, Peter Lynch rhapsodized about how obvious it was that if Taco Bell could saturate California, it could go nationwide, and that Dunkin could run a similar expansion campaign from the opposite coast. Taste buds are pretty similar across the country, and once a chain reaches sufficient scale, national advertising, and more recently app penetration, will make the rest of the growth happen faster. On the other hand, Zoe's got acquired at about a third of its IPO valuation. Execution is hard, and a not-uncommon story is that chains expand their store count a bit faster than they learn how to expand their roster of experienced and competent managers; it's entirely possible that the most valuable publicly-traded for-profit education play is whatever share of McDonalds' value comes from This has interesting implications for consumer packaged goods companies and grocery stores more generally. Grocers [have been improving their data collection over time, in part through better collection and in part through M&A](https://www.thediff.co/r/61476e9b?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)($), and they're increasingly selling white-label products instead of external brands. If there are external brands that can tolerate low margins and that have an incentive to market their brand name in order to benefit the restaurant piece of their business, that's one more source of pressure for the pure consumer packaged goods companies. No wonder they're[looking at alternative distribution models](https://www.thediff.co/r/64c8f07c?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)—perhaps share-of-counter will be the next share-of-shelf-space.[↩︎](#fnref1)For the detail-oriented: Zoe's had 263 locations, they've converted 145 and have eight more in progress, so they've closed a total of 110. If we make the arbitrary assumption that these Zoe's stores had performance in line with the Zoe's corporate average—$1.2m annualized over the last period where Zoe's was public—and we assume the same same-store-sales cadence at Zoe's as at Cava, we get a ~$170m headwind from closing stores. Add that back and the adjusted annualized growth since 2019 is 15%. Of course, the stores that got shut down were probably underperforming, and given that Zoes' revenue per store was so much lower than Cava's, some of that same-store performance they've talked about probably comes from the converted stores ramping up. So 5% might be a lower bound while 15% is an upper bound on organic revenue growth since 2019. [↩︎](#fnref2)In general the higher-end and concept-focused ones put up the best numbers, and more generic and lower-priced stores do worse. But it's hard to generalize: Chick-fil-a's revenue per store is apparently $6.1m. All of these numbers are via [the fast food trade magazine's QSR 50 report](https://www.thediff.co/r/b3eb45f4?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99).[↩︎](#fnref3)
You're on the free list for The Diff. Coming attractions in the next few weeks include a high-friction model for virality, a social network that found a unique kind of status to bootstrap from, and more. A Word From Our SponsorsHire a Superteam to Build Products Leveraging AI The hard truth is: if your team isn’t already using AI, you’re probably falling behind. Finding individuals proficient in AI is toughhh. That's why founders choose AE Studio. Unlike most consultants, they know their stuff when it comes to creating machine learning solutions in business. Their product studio offers: · Software developers that build tech-heavy web & mobile apps. · PhDs that know how cutting-edge tech will solve your business problems. · Product designers that’ll make your product look way better (sorry)! Here’s what one cofounder said about AE: “Our app has received internal and external praise for its speed, efficiency, cleanliness of code, QA, and aesthetic. AE’s dedication and efficient project management has led our app to a 46% retention rate with consumers….”
ElsewhereAI and IncumbentsExpense management company Ramp recently launched a sort of (Via Buying ReputationAfter hiring its new CEO, Linda Yaccarino, Twitter Disclosure: Long META. Restaurant PricingThe WSJ has a Debt, Prices, and the Pull-Forward EffectUS bond issuance so far in May is Assets and DistributionFidelity's S&P 500 index fund Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. A sampling of current open roles: - A well funded seed stage startup founded by former SpaceX engineers is building software tools for hardware engineering. They're looking for a data engineer interested in developing highly scalable mission-critical tools for satellites, rockets, and other complex machines. (Los Angeles)
- A new service that's trolling the dating market with a better product and better monetization is looking for a full-stack founding engineer. (Los Angeles)
- A startup that connects companies' sources of financial data across different systems, helping engineers build workflows and offering a no-code interface for finance teams, is looking for a new team member to focus on growth and operations. (Bay Area, hybrid)
- A new health startup that gives customers affordable access to preventative care and lifestyle interventions seeks a founding engineer. 7+ years of JavaScript experience preferred (TypeScript is ideal), and payments experience is a plus. A great opportunity for anyone excited to make healthcare better by treating problems cost-effectively before they're catastrophic. (US, remote; Austin preferred)
- A company using Web3 to decentralize customer loyalty programs is looking for a founding senior engineer with Solidity experience and an interest in brands and the arts. (Brooklyn)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. |
||
|
|
|
|||
|