---
subject: "A Bull Market in Facts; A Bear Market in Narratives"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <byrne@thediff.co>"
to: ""
date: 2023-10-16 13:49:46
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
|
In this issue: - A Bull Market in Facts; A Bear Market in Narratives
- The Decline of Meme Stocks
- Volatility
- Lobbying as a Competitive Advantage
- Goldman
- "Name and Shame"
- Diff Jobs
This week's free issue of The Diff is brought to you by our sponsor, A Bull Market in Facts; A Bear Market in NarrativesLast week, a distributed machine learning project delivered its first big success. Some models come up with predictions of consumer behavior, or stock prices, or the weather. It's an exciting time for ancient history nerds ( This raises all sorts of interesting questions. For example: suppose we find a lost dialogue of Plato. It's interesting, but is it part of the Western canon? In one sense, surely it has to be: Plato had interesting thoughts that were immensely influential. On the other hand, part of the way the canon works is that the reader is in dialogue with whoever they're reading at that moment, but is also accepting an invitation to a party attended by everyone else who has read them and had comments. You can Another question it raises: emerging technologies often go through a period where they're obscure and there's lots of room to quickly make progress, but quickly reach some kind of talent/capital bottleneck that makes the companies involved more institutional. It's harder for someone to come out of nowhere and immediately make big contributions to machine learning, because there's so much context for them to catch up on and the cost of acquiring the relevant data or compute has gone up. Which makes this papyri discovery a good indicator of a useful mental model going forward: there's probably more upside and less competition in fields downstream of AI. If you want to be a 99th percentile in a field that's changing fast, maybe instead of learning Pytorch you should learn ancient Greek. But perhaps the most important takeaway from this is that facts, and narratives that tie them together, are getting continuously cheaper to manufacture. - Trusting major media outlets, and assuming that they wouldn't outright lie though they might shade the truth. (A notorious way to do this is a close-up shot of a protest or celebration, which can make it look a lot bigger than it is.
[The toppling of a statue of Saddam Hussein in 2003](https://www.thediff.co/r/423b0d45?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)is probably the example, but just about any political rally organizer will make sure there's a shot that makes it look much more crowded and enthusiastic than it really is. - Trusting confirmation bias.
These are both pretty unavoidable. Most news organizations will not knowingly run doctored images, but journalists are human, too, and if there's a picture that captures how they felt, but doesn't give a completely unbiased look at what's going on, that's the photo they'll run with. It's akin to any other judgment call; if the subject of a given article gives terse answers and doesn't offer the writer much time, whether that's described as evidence for focus or rudeness comes down to how the writer feels. And sometimes key facts emerge only well after they're useful. The US overestimated the size of the Soviet economy for decades, for example, but didn't get accurate estimates until well after war was a likely prospect (i.e. well after the US was making any big decisions that hinged on Russian manufacturing capacity and the like). The US had an incentive to be accurate, but Russia had an incentive to exaggerate; the size of the US consumer economy and the US's freer media environment meant that American manufacturing capacity was an open secret. (And the Second World War demonstrated that the US's manufacturing capacity for civilian goods could be repurposed for military ones—especially since plenty of those factories had been acquired from the government after the war. History is like many other domains where there’s a tradeoff between accumulating facts and assembling them into coherent narratives. So, on one hand, we're in an increasingly hostile information environment specifically because it's easier to assemble enough verifiable, factual claims to support any arbitrary narrative behind them. That should be worrisome: no level of fact-checking can protect against it, and "narrative-checking" is either a redundant description of what people do all the time, or a product for which there's no demand. But that also means we live in a relatively better world for people who care about dead issues rather than live ones. Very few people particularly care if the Battle of Kadesh in 1,274 BC was a victory for the Egyptians or the Hittites ( One way to view teaching the humanities is that it's an effort to make the books as life-changing today as they were when they were first written. But that also means readers can't evaluate the book independently; books get referenced in other works, or recommended by people, so you're almost always going into a book with the sense that there's a flesh-and-blood person who you'll understand better once you've read them. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/6a3be4a7?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)Another surprising AI impact is that [it makes written tests harder to administer, and makes oral exams relatively easier](https://www.thediff.co/r/a9f4a4d9?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99). It's entirely possible that someone in the near future will get an educational credential by demonstrating their ability to master a dead language based on getting quizzed one-on-one by their teacher; a direct result of AI is that at least some kinds of education will look a lot more like they did in the 16th century.[↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/376c8021?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)One subtle version of this, which shows up from time to time, is whether linguistic filler gets removed from quotes. Most people say "um," "like," "well," etc., while they're talking, or will start a sentence and then verbally backtrack. Keeping the former in the quote makes them sound dumber, and keeping the latter in makes them sound dishonest. Which may be true! A good writer isn't going to come out and tell the reader "I think my interviewee was lying to me," but will try to make it clear from the narrative. It's often a good thought experiment to think about what an article with the opposite mood affiliation would sound like if it were written from the same set of notes. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/c4fbdee0?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)It's frustratingly hard to find out how big this phenomenon was, but [eyeballing table 3 here](https://www.thediff.co/r/6920f617?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)implies that the total was about 10% of US manufacturing capacity.[↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/71dad1da?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)You can even see this in some of the oldest documents we have that combine a story with a recitation of facts: the Iliad's [Catalog of Ships](https://www.thediff.co/r/235a7c78?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99), the[recitations of family trees in the book of Genesis](https://www.thediff.co/r/723e132a?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99), the genealogical tables in the[Records of the Grand Historian](https://www.thediff.co/r/aa8064b9?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99), etc. In a way these feel like a primitive example of pre-literate recordkeeping, but they're also quite modern: "What's up everyone? It's your boy Homer back with another episode of The Iliad, but before we get rolling just wanted to give a shoutout to my top-tier supporters, the Phocians and Bœotians. Love you guys."[↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/3f5d8f60?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
This is the free list for The Diff. Paying subscribers get access to much more—this week, they read about A Word From Our SponsorsAt For July, ElsewhereThe Decline of Meme StocksEven though But another reason is more prosaic: one driver of meme stock mania was the distinct sense of not having a plausible path to affording a home, or, more generally, to accumulating some money that could compound nicely over time. The increase in interest rates has suddenly made grade school illustrations of the power of interest meaningful again, because money in a high-yield savings account really does compound at an appreciable rate. When there's no chance of earning what looks like baseline middle-class wealth (i.e. enough money to make a downpayment on a house similar to the one you grew up in), people gamble. When cash yields more than 5%, they don't. VolatilityOne other effect of higher short-term rates: Lobbying as a Competitive AdvantageThe FT has a Disclosure: Long MSFT. GoldmanA few years ago, Goldman Sachs made the strategic decision to shift away from lumpy and unreliable revenue from trading and transaction fees, and towards reliable funding and steady income from consumer banking. They are now "Name and Shame"Japanese business and policy elites are continuing their campaign to pressure companies into increasing their stock market valuation. The latest move, from Japan's stock exchange, is to The Diff has Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. A sampling of current open roles: - A private credit fund denominated in Bitcoin needs a credit analyst that can negotiate derivatives pricing. Experience with low-risk crypto lending preferred (i.e. to large miners, prop-trading firms in safe jurisdictions). (Remote)
- A new fintech startup wants to bring cross-border open banking to LATAM, and is looking for a founding engineer. (NYC)
- A company building the new pension of the 21st century and building universal basic capital is looking for a product manager with fintech experience. (NYC)
- A systematic hedge fund is looking for researchers and portfolio managers who have experience using alternative data (NYC).
- A proprietary trading firm is seeking systematic-oriented traders with ML experience—ideally someone who has displayed excellence in DS and ML, like a Kaggle Master. (Montreal)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. |
||
|
|
|
|||
|