---
subject: "The Balk-anization Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-07-04 12:01:46
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Chris Erickson (CE) is a friend of WITI and media director in Texas. He's a military veteran that used to specialize in advanced logistics and now convinces people they want to buy stuff from his clients. I recently watched According to Why is this interesting? Because this already extremely subjective rule has layers that make things even more complicated. In fact, there may be no rule in any sport more complicated than the balk. I’ve been watching baseball for almost four decades (during which there have been at least two rule changes around the balk) and I still have a hard time wrapping my head around it. But recently, I’ve been determined to understand all of the nuances. Here's where it starts to get tricky: if a balk is called, but the batter has already reached first base safely and all other runners have advanced at least one base, the balk is ignored. It's as if the rule has its own “undo” button. However, if any part of this doesn't happen naturally, the balk penalty kicks in: all runners advance one base, and the batter goes back to the plate to try again. This rule essentially says, “If the outcome is what we wanted anyway, let's pretend the balk never happened.” Of course, this also creates some fun scenarios to imagine. What if the batter attempts to make it to first base, misses that base, and is called out? Under an appeal for the balk, they are considered to have advanced to that base despite not reaching first base safely. Wait, what? So now the undo is undone. In a bases-loaded situation with a full count of 3 balls and two strikes, a pitcher could balk while also throwing a fourth ball. In this situation, the batter is entitled to take his base, but because a balk was called, runners on base could start a chain reaction of taking the base they’re allowed. The runner on third is going to score by default because of the walk, but at this point, just as they would if the batter had been walked, the other runners will just fill the remaining bases. That is unless they throw the aforementioned caution to the wind and try to capture some extra bases. Say the pitcher isn’t paying attention or in a fit of rage threw the ball into the outfield, the runners already on second and third can attempt to take more bases. The ball isn’t dead, because the play isn’t over, because of the actions the base runners are now taking. If you’ve made it this far into this article and you’re not a baseball fan, let me just emphasize how insane of a decision this would be. However, you now have runners in play that are taking additional bases and the defending team needs to take action. As soon as they do, the batter who has now reached first on the balking walk (a new term I am coining just for this) is dealing with a live ball that is still in play. Is he going to just stand there? Chaos has erupted on the field. Now he is running, too. Poor fielding and errors may be happening as his teammates decide they’re going for it. Now they’re all getting the go-ahead wave from the third base coach. With a little bit of luck, these hypothetical players are about to make theoretical history.
|