---
subject: "Optimal vs. Beneficial, Memory Dividends, & More"
from: "\"Sahil Bloom's Curiosity Chronicle\" <sahil@sahilbloom.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-06-09 13:07:44
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Sahil Bloom"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_1989028747625928812"]
---
Memory Dividends, Optimal vs. Beneficial, & Moreread on read time 3 minutes Here are 5 interesting ideas to spark your curiosity heading into the weekend. Today at a Glance:- Question: Optimal vs. beneficial.
- Quote: You vs. You from yesterday.
- Framework: Memory Dividends.
- Tweet: Where you are now.
- Article: Resentment relationship killer.
Looking for an easy and delicious way to power up your workouts and take your fitness game to the next level? Look no further than today’s sponsor, Create’s delicious Creatine Monohydrate Gummies. I’ve personally used creatine as part of my health and fitness routine since 2007. It is the most studied supplement on the market and has been shown to increase strength by 10-15% in less than a month, while also improving cognitive function. These gummies are made with naturally produced creatine, and with meat-eaters already consuming 1-2 grams of creatine in their diet, they’re perfect for those looking to increase their intake and experience even greater results. Plus, they’re vegan, non-GMO, and low in sugar, making them a healthy option for both men and women. So why settle for subpar supplements when you can enjoy the benefits of creatine in a convenient and delicious gummy? Get 20% off your order by clicking the link below.
One Question:Where is the optimal getting in the way of the beneficial? The ambitious mind can view progress in very binary terms: - If I don't work out for an hour, I'm not going to make any health progress.
- If I don't have a four hour deep focus block, I'm not going to make any professional progress.
- If I don't have an hour of time with my partner, I'm not going to make any relationship progress.
In other words, the ambitious mind views the optimal as the standard. Anything short of optimal is a failure. This is (mostly) a good thing, as you hold yourself to a high standard and find the energy to push for growth and progress. But it also sets a trap that many ambitious people fall into: Letting the optimal get in the way of the beneficial. Here's the thought process (that may feel familiar): - I don't have an hour to go to the gym, so I shouldn't go at all.
- I don't have four hours for my deep focus work, so I shouldn't work at all.
- I don't have an hour to spend with my partner, so I shouldn't spend any time with them.
Atomic Habits author James Clear once wrote, "Just because it's not optimal, doesn't mean it's not beneficial." He is correct. To fight back against this tendency, ask yourself this question: Where is the optimal getting in the way of the beneficial? Where are you allowing your high standards to (paradoxically) hold you back? Once you identify the areas where you are most prone to this cognitive discrepancy, you can get out of your own way. Remember: When in doubt, move. Anything above zero compounds. One Quote:"Tomorrow is the most important thing in life. Comes into us at midnight very clean. It's perfect when it arrives and it puts itself in our hands. It hopes we've learned something from yesterday." - John Wayne The only competition: You vs. You from yesterday. One Framework:Memory DividendsMemory Dividends are the continued tail of "payouts" you receive from re-experiencing an experience in the future. For example, your group of friends decides to book that last minute flight to go see your favorite band perform at an incredible venue. The cost of the flight, concert ticket, and hotel stay is steep, but you decide to do it anyway. The experience is incredible and you have a blast. But it doesn't end when the experience ends—you and your friends reminisce about the evening for years to come. Every single time you get together, you talk about the amazing night and feel those same sensations as though you were there. Those are Memory Dividends. The concept of Memory Dividends comes from Bill Perkins' The central point here is that material purchases are really only happiness-inducing in their initial acquisition, whereas experiences can induce happiness for years and years to come. I find this framing very helpful, as it connects to my concept of Experiences can be thought of as an investment, as they pay out a dividend in the future, while most material purchases are just spent. To live a long, wealthy life, we should all consider investing in more of the experiences that pay us a robust Memory Dividend yield. One Tweet:I loved the message behind this tweet. We burn a lot of energy thinking about where we think we should be, where others think we should be, and where we've been. Focus on where you are: Make one good decision, then another one, then another one.
P.S. I really enjoyed One Article: This is a great piece on resentment and how it can slowly creep into an otherwise healthy relationship (especially after the arrival of kids). The whole article is worth a read. This chart was shocking... Sahil's Recommendation ZoneFollow my morning routine with I get asked about my morning routine all the time. It has changed over the years, but It replaced an entire cabinet of supplements for me in one daily scoop—seriously, its latest iteration covers a multivitamin, multi-mineral, prebiotics, probiotics, adaptogens, greens, and more. It keeps me feeling healthy and strong throughout the year, even when I'm traveling (thanks to the travel packs). Today, Athletic Greens is offering Curiosity Chronicle subscribers an exclusive deal: Refer Friends, Earn Rewards!
If you enjoyed today's newsletter, please share it with your friends and family! If this email was forwarded to you, consider |