---
subject: "The Second Gemini"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-12-17 15:48:34
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Table of ContentsTrust the ChefGoogle has been cooking lately.
But there’s also Deep Research, where you can ask Gemini to take several minutes, check dozens of websites and compile a report for you. Think of it as a harder to direct, slower but vastly more robust version of Perplexity, that will improve with time and as we figure out how to use and prompt it. NotebookLM added
They claim people in a survey
There’s a new And they’re introducing
For developers, One big thing we do not know yet is the price. You can use a free preview, and that’s it. If you want to join all the waitlists, and why wouldn’t you, Do Not Trust the Marketing DepartmentI mean, obviously, you never want to ‘trust the marketing department.’ But in this case, I mean something else: Do not trust them to do their jobs. Google has been bizarrely bad about explaining all of this and what it can do. I very much do not want to hear excuses about ‘the Kleenex effect’ (especially since you could also call this ‘the Google effect’) or ‘first mover advantage.’ This is full-on not telling us what they are actually offering or giving us any reasonable way to find out beyond the ‘f*** around’ plan. Even when I seek out their copy, it is awful. For example, CEO Mark that BenchOn at least some benchmarks, That chart only compares to Gemini Pro 1.5, and only on their selection of benchmarks. But based on other reports, it seems likely that yes, this is an overall intelligence upgrade over Pro 1.5 while also being a lot faster and cheaper. It tops something called the ‘Hallucination leaderboard’ along with Zhipu.
Claude is at 4.6%, and its hallucinations don’t bother me, but I do presume this is measuring something useful. The performance on Arena is super impressive for a model of this size and speed, and a large improvement over the old Flash, which was already doing great for its size. Going MultimodalGemini 2.0 is sufficiently lightweight, fast and capable that Google says it enables real time multimodal agentic output. It can remember, analyze and respond accordingly. It also has
Currently Astra and Mariner, and also their coding agent Jules, are in the experimental stage. This is very good. Projects like this should absolutely have extensive experimental stages first. It is relatively fine to rush Flash 2.0 into Search, but agents require a bit more caution, if only for not-shooting-self-in-foot practical purposes. Project Astra now is fully multilingual including within a conversation, and has 10 minutes of in-session memory plus memory of earlier conversations, and less latency. There’s a waiting list for Astra, but right now, you can use Google Studio to click Stream Realtime on your screen, which seems to be at least close to the same thing if you do it on mobile? There’s a button to use your webcam, another to talk to it. On a computer you can then use a voice interface, and it will analyze things in real time, If we can bring this together with the rest of the IDE and the abilities of a Cursor, watch out, cause it would solve some of the bottlenecks. The Art of Deep Research
You type in your question, you tab out somewhere else for a while, then you check back later and presto, there’s a full report based on dozens of websites. Brilliant! It is indeed a great modality and interface. But it has to work in practice. In practice, well, there are some problems. As always, there’s basic accuracy, such as this output - I had it flat out copy benchmark numbers wrong, claim 40.4% was a higher score than 62.1% on GPQA (rather persistently, even!) and so on. I also didn’t feel like the ‘research plan’ corresponded that well to the results. The bigger issue is that it will give you ‘the report you vaguely asked for.’ It doesn’t, at least in my attempts so far, do the precision thing. Ask it a particular question, get a generic vaguely related answer. And if you try to challenge its mistakes, weird mostly unhelpful things happen. That doesn’t mean it is useless. If what you want matches Gemini’s inclinations about what a vaguely related report would look like, you’re golden. If what you want is a subset of that but will be included in the report, you can, as someone suggested to me on Twitter, take the report, click a button to make it a Google Doc, then feed the Google Doc to Claude (or Gemini!) and have it pick out the information you want. These were by far the most gung-ho review I’ve seen so far:
On reflection, Dean Ball’s use cases are a great fit for Deep Research. I still don’t see how he came away so enthused. Sid Bharath again seems like he has a good use case with generating a list of contacts. I’m a lot more suspicious about some of the other tasks here, where I’d expect to have a bigger slop problem. You can also view DR as a kind of ‘free action.’ You get a bunch of Deep Research reports on a wide variety of subjects. The ones that don’t help, you quickly discard. So it’s fine if the hit rate is not so high. Another potential good use is to use this as a search engine for the sources, looking either at the ones in the final data set or the list of researched websites. It will take time to figure out the right ways to take advantage of this, and doubtless Google can improve this experience a lot if it keeps cooking.
I don’t think it is true they get no benefit. I have clicked on a number of Deep Research’s sources and looked at them myself, and I doubt I am alone in this. I encourage you to share your experiences. Project Mariner the Web AgentProject Mariner scores The research prototype can only use the active tab, stopping you from doing other things in the meantime. Might need multiple computers?
It is however still in early access, so we can’t try it out yet. Project Astra the Universal Assistant
I was excited when I first saw the announcements for One tester points to the long-term memory as a key feature. That was one of the ones that made sense to me, along with translation and object identification. Some of the other ways the early testers used Astra, and their joy in some of the responses, seemed so weird to me. It’s cool that Astra can do these things, but why are these things you want Astra to be doing? That shows how far we’ve come. I’ve stopped being impressed that it can do a thing, and started instead asking if I would want to do the thing in practice. Astra will have at least some tool use, 10 minutes of in-context memory, a long-term memory for past conversations and real time voice interaction. The prototype glasses, they are also coming.
My favorite use case so far is Project Jules the Code Agent
How good is it? Impossible to know. All we know is Google’s getting into the game. There’s also Gemini Will Aid You on Your QuestWith the multimodal Live API, Gemini 2.0 can be your assistant while playing games. It understand your screen, help you strategize in games, remember tasks, and search the web for background information, An excellent question:
That’s always the question, isn’t it? Are the suggestions any good? I notice that if Gemini could put an arrow icon or even better pathways onto the screen, it would be that much more helpful here. So we all know what that means. We already know that no, What is the right way to use this new power while gaming? When do you look at the tier list, versus very carefully not looking at the tier list? Now more than ever, you need to cultivate the gaming experience that you want. You want a challenge that is right for you, of the type that you enjoy. Sometimes you want the joy of organic discovery and exploration, and other times you want key information in advance, especially to avoid making large mistakes.
Reactions to Gemini Flash 2.0
What is my take so far? Veo 2 seems great, but it’s not my area, and I notice I don’t care. Deep Research is a great idea, and it has a place in your workflow even with all the frustrations, but it’s early days and it needs more time to cook. It’s probably a good idea to keep a few Gemini windows open for this, occasionally put in questions where it might do something interesting, and then quickly scan the results. Gemini-1206 seems solid from what I can tell but I don’t notice any temptation to explore it more, or any use case where I expect it to be a superior tool to some combination of o1, GPT-4o with web search, Perplexity and Claude Sonnet. Gemini Flash 2.0 seems like it is doing a remarkably good impression of models that are much larger and more expensive. I’d clearly never use it over Claude Sonnet where I had both options, but Flash opens up a bunch of new use cases, and I’m excited to see where those go. Project Astra (or ‘streaming realtime’) in particular continues to seem fascinating, both the PC version with a shared screen and the camera version with your phone. I’m eager to put both to proper tests, even in their early forms, but have not yet found the time. Maybe I should just turn it on during my work at some point and see what happens. Project Mariner I don’t have access to, so it’s impossible to know if it is anything yet. For now I notice that I’m acting like most people who bounce off AI, and don’t properly explore it, and miss out. On a less dumb level, but I need to snap out of it. The future is going to get increasingly AI, and increasingly weird. Let’s get that first uneven distribution. You're currently a free subscriber to |