---
subject: "First Principles: Six degrees of ergonomics"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-03-09 05:42:07
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
First Principles
Sun, 09 Mar 25
A community-powered Sunday newsletter on mental models, self-reflection, learning, growth, photos, books, and more.
Good morning Ishan, are you fixing anything this Sunday?
Aren’t Sundays the days when we fix and tweak things around the house? It sure is for me. In fact, it is one the ways I wind down and take it easy. I have not been the sleep-it-off type for decades, but instead, my best Sundays are the ones with chores or tasks that needed completion. Sure, I’ll read a book or listen to music or watch a movie, but I love the hazy, absent-minded soft-focus mode that accompanies Sunday chores and tinkering.
A perennial source of such joy has been our home network. Like those classic motorcycle owners who took pride in maintaining their machines in peak form, my zen space is our home network. Like the proverbial Ship of Theseus, my home network has been continually upgraded and tweaked for at least a decade and a half. Not one component must be the same in it now. I can easily say it’s more resilient, capable, and secure than most office networks.
It’s hard to explain the joy of a well-designed network to someone who doesn’t care, because when it works, it feels no different from a run-of-the-mill one. Earlier this week, our Internet went down when I was driving to office, but I was able to remotely check on it and figure out that our ISP wasn’t at fault. Instead, it was the UPS that had tripped into some strange low-voltage mode after a few outages. A simple reboot restored things.
But I will say there is something that’s been gnawing at me for the last week. Every day at 8.05 am, a set of Apple Homepods in our house start playing the same Carnatic Classic radio station. I can’t for the life of me figure out what is triggering it. I’ve re-checked all existing Apple Home automations, rebooted devices, checked available logs, but nothing.
I guess the scourge of modern tech life will be us humans figuring out how to deal with hallucinating AIs and ghost radio stations. Sigh.
Before we move on to today’s edition, here’s a photo of my favourite Bengaluru avenue tree, the Pongamia. Now that its iridescent spring foliage has settled down to a darker green, it’s flowering time.
In a few weeks, each of these trees will shed these blossoms copiously, turning the area under their canopies into a carpet of dropped flowers.
For now, here’s everything we have for you this week.
1. Six degrees of ergonomics
2. “Density of Excellence”—Community Views 💭
3. Reading to indulge, imagine, and learn 📚
4. Spires & Stone: Cambodia and Vietnam 📸
[Pro tip: This email is a highly abbreviated version, since many email clients impose restrictions on the amount of material we can publish in a single email before intervention. In fact, it’s likely some email clients may even clip this truncated email.
The best way to experience this edition is to read it on our [website or app](https://the-ken.com/newsletter/first-principles/six-degrees-of-ergonomics/), where all sections are featured in full and unabridged form.
Also, if your default setting is to not show images within emails, please consider turning it off for this newsletter. Or else, you’ll miss many of the interesting images and photos we carry each Sunday.]
Ergonomics used to be one of those things “for old people” back when I was younger. For instance, our 15-year-old thinks most ergonomically designed products are just “scams” to hoodwink more money from older consumers. In his favour, there are a lot of products that do exactly that and not much else.
But the thing is, our bodies cross over from young to old much faster than our minds do. Thus, by the time we realize ergonomic products weren’t a scam, we’re already suffering from some second- or third-order effect of a poorly designed chair, car seat, keyboard, or mouse.
We’ve talked about fitness and health a few times in earlier editions, so I thought why don’t we try to collectively harness our personal experiences around ergonomics?
Allow me to explain my own evolution of daily computer usage over roughly the last decade. With the benefit of hindsight, I now see them as a “chain” of connected events, each choice and decision leading into another.
It starts with me realizing, like most of you, that hunching over a laptop screen is bad for your neck and shoulders.
Solution? Let’s get a standing desk, so we can stand instead of sit all day.
First-order effect: Okay now you’re standing, but still hunching over your laptop.
Solution? Let’s get an external monitor, so we can keep our head straight.
Second-order effect: Well, your head is straight, but you need an external keyboard and mouse so that your arms and body are neutrally positioned too.
Solution? Since I love Apple’s wonderful Macbook keyboards, let’s get the same style Apple keyboard and mouse too. Things are great for many years.
Third-order effect: Turns out, years of typing on Apple’s flat keyboards can be bad for your wrists and thumb. I started to develop early signs of repetitive stress pain on my left wrist and thumb.
Solution? Let’s dump Apple and change to Logitech’s ergonomic and curved “Wave” keyboard. Also change my mouse to a Logitech one. In just two months, my wrist and thumb pain was down by at least 80%.
Fourth-order effect: Alas, this aggravates my right bicep, because I’ve been recovering from a mild injury. What am I using with the right hand? The mouse! That must be it.
Solution: Replace it with a “vertical” mouse, one that keeps your arm in neutral position while using it (normal mouses force us to keep our forearms twisted inwards in the pronated position).
Fifth-order effect: My right bicep still hurts. If anything, my right shoulder does too. Turns out, it’s because the Logitech Wave keyboard is much wider than the Apple one I replaced it with (because it has an extra number pad) and I was forced to keep my mouse further away. This caused me to constantly keep my arm extended away from my body, thus adding pressure to the shoulder. Apparently, it’s even called “Mouse shoulder”. The ideal mouse position, I learn, is when your forearm is neutral and in line, straight with your shoulder at a 90-degree angle.
Solution: I need to get rid of the ergonomic keyboard because it’s too wide. Instead, I get a more minimal “tenkeyless” (because it does not include the numerical keypad with “ten keys”) one from Logitech.
Current order: Things are stabilising. My right arm and shoulder are now at least 50% better in just a month.
I got a bunch of interesting observations, personal experiences, and questions in response to [last week’s edition](https://the-ken.com/newsletter/first-principles/densities-of-excellence). My favourite was this piece on “[Scenius](https://thecreativelife.net/scenius/)”, via Gautam John, CEO, Nilekani Philanthropies.
Scenius: why creatives are stronger together
Brian Eno is a musician and producer who launched his career in Roxy Music, invented the whole genre of ambient electronic music, then went on to produce artists like U2 and Coldplay. A product of the innovative British art school scene in the late 60s/early 70s, Eno coined a new word to describe creatives working together to form a scene.
“Like all art students, I was encouraged to believe that there were a few great figures like Picasso and Kandinsky, Rembrandt and Giotto and so on who sort-of appeared out of nowhere and produced artistic revolution,” he explains.
“As I looked at art more and more, I discovered that that wasn’t really a true picture. What really happened was that there were sometimes very fertile scenes involving lots and lots of people – some of them artists, some of them collectors, some of them curators, thinkers, theorists, people who were fashionable and knew what the hip things were – all sorts of people who created a kind of ecology of talent. And out of that ecology arose some wonderful work.
“So I came up with this word ‘scenius’ – the intelligence of a whole operation or group of people. I think that’s a more useful way to think about culture. Let’s forget the idea of ‘genius’ for a little while, let’s think about the whole ecology of ideas that give rise to good new thoughts and good new work.”
Observations and experiences
“The most excellent people I have met and also I (although I am far from being excellent) never have the intention to work for 10-15 years, earn a boatload of money, and then quit. It was always to work until our body and mind supports us, because that’s one of the integral parts of our lives. To make that happen, work-life needs to be sustainable. And I very thoughtfully observed the most important thing that makes me go to work every single morning is not the money/compensation, or even the purpose of the work; it’s mostly our interactions with our colleagues—how we collaborate, understand a problem statement, challenge each other. It’s the very idea of working alongside such talented people that gives me the morning energy. I guess it’s very similar to what the Harvard long study found out about human happiness, the answer is always people and relationships.”—Swastik Acharyya, Investment Advisor, Delhi
“The past fortnight, I’ve read two interesting pieces: A paper titled ‘Mundanity of excellence’ and a book ‘Beneath the surface: autobiography of Micheal Phelps’ and in both cases a common (/relatable) conclusion is that excellence in sports is generally contagious. Phelps admits that it was his sister who was so good at swimming that all his early life he would’ve been grateful if he was half as good as her. (She later gave up due to injuries and didn’t compete at top level). Even Andre Agassi, the tennis legend, was trained by a father who represented their country at the Olympics in boxing. The pattern repeats. Excellence, therefore, is almost always contagious and density is an eventuality.”—Suvigna Shour, Cofounder & CEO, ofScale, Bengaluru
“At Citi US, there was a phase of ‘de novo’ expansion where we opened new branches in new markets such as Philadelphia and Boston, as well as existing markets, especially New York, where there were more than 100 branches already. We discovered that the new branches in New York broke even and generated higher revenue than the ones in Philadelphia and Boston. Lesson learnt: In retail, a dense network is more valuable than a wide network.”—Vijay Kumar, Hyderabad
“It confirms what I’ve suspected to be true in deciding whether I feel like I belong at an org or not (in my case, a non-profit)—is everyone equally motivated and respectively skilled to solve the complex social challenge at hand? Some time back, I left a full-time role to work in a part-time consulting/freelance capacity. It gives me the freedom to choose like-minded partners—a more freeing way of experiencing talent density than in strictly full-time roles. Perhaps that is what has driven many skilled people to choose freelancing, despite its uncertainty.”—Aishwarya, Longform writer and content strategist, Delhi
“The few affect the many and move the world forward. It is on those few to keep pushing and the many to play the supporting roles to the best of their ability. Countries, organisations, and team sports should allow these few to rise to the position of having maximum impact. When they don’t, stagnation follows.”—Kuldeep Sikarwar, Founder, Palette Wealth, Mumbai
“As someone currently searching for a job, I find this to be true as I look for opportunities that require me to outperform myself.”—Tanim Mozumder, Independent researcher, Guwahati
“Very thought-provoking article; it made me share the Netflix example with my P&O head. The tricky bit is creating a succinct description of the purpose which is understood top-down and bottom-up, both!”—Rishi Tiwari, CIO, Bangalore
“As someone who has worked in startups which had high densities of excellence, I really enjoyed reading this edition. One thought which I want to share is, every individual goes through phases of high efficiency and mediocrity. To give a naive analogy, it’s like a Sachin or Kohli going through their lean patches. The same individual who was once a 5-star performer can go through a rough patch for many reasons. Now, when companies only focus on retaining 5 stars, they will overlook or overthrow such employees. Would it not be a good strategy to back your 5 stars when they are running through lean patches? What happens to the concept of “Density of Excellence” then?”—Kausik Ramakrishnan, Searching for That perfect work, Chennai
“In the 1st century, Tamil poet Avvaiyar also had similar views: ‘Katraarai katraare kaamuruvar…’ Indeed, there is a lot of relief when someone understands us faster and alignment is easier. There is also some responsibility on oneself to have the “less talented “ to slowly up their curves as well—though they have lesser skill and will, they get inspired by the talented ones and the greatness gets passed on rather than getting concentrated to a few. Just another argument, I guess, worth debating.”—Ganesh Jatadharan, Mumbai
“Absolutely right with the recognition of the joy of working with talented people. The reality is that in terms of good qualities, it is ‘Winner Takes All’, which means the people who are very intelligent are also one of the kindest and fun individuals to be around. This is also the prime reason MBAs are so successful, because those one or two years spent closely with awesome people brings immense joy and is an emotional rollercoaster ride.”—Nishant Jain, Procurement Manager, Toronto, Canada
“This is the first that I have heard the term ‘density of excellence’. Thank you. It kind of clicked why there are 400+ restaurants in Koramangala and most do well. Or clusters of different retail stores all in one area. There is competition, but it is healthy and not aimed to come out on top by running others into the ground.”—Lakshmi Raman, Development consultant, Bengaluru
“Hires are additive, multiplicative, and also subtractive. While Ballmer was a multiplicative hire, several organisations run into challenges because of a subtractive hire, i.e., someone who comes on board and takes away by virtue of not fitting in. The damage is not limited only to the individual, but also to colleagues and pockets of the organisation. The John Sculley replacement of Steve Jobs at Apple is perhaps the most well-known example.”—Rohan Jaikishen, Mumbai
“My comments on the Netflix Culture: I think the statement, ‘The days of overstaffed companies, frequent job hopping, and talent shortages are over’ is quite sweeping and idealistic. For any new hire to succeed, it is very crucial that the hire is a culture fit for the organisation; meaning that the hire’s work ethics and motivators are in alignment with the company’s work culture and value system. Secondly, ambition and success metrics for each individual are different—some value learning and growth, others value monetary benefits, yet others may value stability and a non-challenging environment.”—Kishore Khaitan, Managing Director, Jaipur
“I agreed with you all the way until you said days of job hopping are over. Sadly, for that to happen, companies have to remunerate “excellence” in annual appraisals the same way that a job jump would do. HR also needs to be less pedantic about paperwork for PIPs (at least in large corporates). Densities of excellence sounds wonderful for startups and that is where the concept will boom—I think it’ll take a while for corporates to catch up, where mediocrity and “average-ness” thrive longer than excellence does.”—Aparna, Senior Manager
“For the sake of completion though, I wonder whether excellence in a work context needs optimisation too like everything else. Bohr, Einstein, and Heinsenberg may not have made a good team together. Also, in my experience, I have seen that excellence of colleagues can cancel out, if not skillfully handled.”—Parag Jain, Regulatory Affairs Consultant, Mumbai
“The Netflix culture seems to imply hiring the very best people available in the market and laying off mediocre talent to make an organisation dense in quality talent. This isn’t as easy as it sounds with real-world constraints like restrictions on capital allocation and investor expectations. Moreover, in a country like India where high unemployment is already a problem and a retirement crisis is already looming once we exhaust our ‘demographic benefit’ there is a need to improve talent density from within the organisation. The desire for growth is not limited to folks living in metros and most people in tier-2 and -3 cities want to move up the ladder of life and as more such folks enter the workforce, coming from humbler and less privileged backgrounds, the need for strengthening their capability only increases. Without this, there can only be higher degrees of unrest as more people feel shortchanged while looking up at the success of the fortunate few (relatively).”—Ray George Stephanos, Director-Transaction Services at Deloitte, Bengaluru
“Corporate Politicking and Bureaucracy at the top level is a big impediment to building talent density”—Sushil Patel, Head of Talent & Culture at Zupee, Delhi
“Talent density and job hopping are more connected than we think. Organisations often start lean, grow bloated, and then, through experience, pivot to a high-talent, streamlined structure. Meanwhile, job hoppers chasing better pay or roles leave companies with either the least effective or the most-driven employees. In the end, the most successful organizations—and individuals—are those that embrace lean, high-performance environments.”—Ramchander Raman, Founder, Bangalore
“Couldn’t read the paywalled Financial Times article. Yet, IMO it’s uni-dimensional insight. Restaurant—runs on recipe+skill. And in business no recipe can guarantee success. Talent, without a great environment and leader and timing (Story of Pixar or Xerox or MIT Media Lab) is difficult. As Jobs famously said, we are connecting dots looking backward. We know Parisian restaurants will be around 10 years from now. Not so with certainty about Netflix. Despite it having density of excellence. Why? Because you can foster it in a small setup (Netflix circa 2000) and not so much in the giant elephant it has become now. To sum up: These principles apply in a small group, not so much when bureaucracy takes over.”—Anonymous
*******
Questions
“Small teams doing high impact work are powerful. I am curious, how do you define Talent Density as a metric? Is it based on outcomes delivered? Is it based on the skills of the team? I would love to define this further as a builder of teams. Hiring right is one, but certainly, the right environment helps.”—Parveen Sharma, Director Product, Bengaluru
“How to identify organisations or startups where high-agency people work? Is there an equivalent of Netflix or Microsoft within corporate/startup India?”—M. Manickasundaram, Head-Digital & AI, Chennai
“It’s an insightful piece, quite an eye-opener. The only missing piece, I thought, was how do you continue to motivate so many high performers over a period of time, with opportunities for advancement being limited by the very structure of an organisation. What does that do for the continued motivation of those who are left behind on the corporate ladder?”—Kaiyomarz Marfatia, Retired, Mumbai
“It is a very interesting hypothesis and I would like to know what happens to the culture in a company of high-density talent? What happens specifically to collaboration and teamwork?”—Sivaraman Natarajan, Account Technology Strategist, Bengaluru
“How does this work vis-a-vis the bell curve system, where every year, organisations cull the bottom 10-15%. Should that not lead to this talent density over a period of time? Given most organisations claim to follow the bell curve, why do you think they are not talent dense? Or are they?”—Anonymous
Hello, it’s Hari here. Today’s weekly book collection is the most unlikely one that I have put together in a while—a graphic novel (from me), a memoir, a self-help book, and a poetry collection (following up on [last week’s edition](https://the-ken.com/newsletter/first-principles/densities-of-excellence/)).
Usually, I like it when we have a couple of books that can be clubbed together, not a perfect fit perhaps, but still, if I were to put all the books I’ve picked on a Venn diagram, I prefer for at least some to converge at some point. Today, I’m mixing it up.
For next week though, I want to get back to more focused collections—so, if you have come across great biographical and/or autobiographical books you think our community would enjoy reading, please [share them with us here](https://theken.typeform.com/FPBooks?typeform-source=the-ken.com).
I came across Sarnath Banerjee’s work for the first time last year and immediately fell in love with it. The central story is always entertaining and keeps ticking along without a pause, but the real magic is happening in his panels. Mini stories and political commentary are everywhere even as the main story moves forward without a hitch. I have to constantly remind myself not to rush through the pages but slow down, or even rewind, to allow myself to take in the book fully.
The best version of this experience has to be [All Quiet in Vikaspuri](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/28231535-all-quiet-in-vikaspuri), one of his two graphic novels that I’ve read.
Regular contributor Kirti Manian has yet another wonderful recommendation—a heartfelt memoir called [Gweilo](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/719600.Gweilo). Sagar Keswani says readers of First Principles would really find popular internet blogger Tim Urban’s book—[What’s Our Problem?](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/102146148-what-s-our-problem)—very valuable, while Vijay Kumar recommends a collection of poetry from one of Hindi literature’s most famous poets—Harivansh Rai Bachchan’s [Madhushala](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/792429._).
Gweilo: Memories of a Hong Kong Childhood by Martin Booth
“Brilliant read about Hong Kong, set in the 1950’s. Peak colonial rule, and amidst all this land, a 7-year-old British boy from England has his eyes opened to a very different world. The author paints details so vividly it’s impossible not to see them in your mind’s eye. For me, having lived in HK for close to a decade, it was a delight to read this book.”—Kirti Manian
******
What’s Our Problem?: A Self-Help Book for Societies by Tim Urban
“The book uses a few very simple and effective frameworks to explain how we behave as individuals and communities and what has led to the current wave of polarisation among the people of the world. For FP readers, concepts like “Echo chambers” vs “Idea labs” would be super interesting as readers may have noticed these at their workplace or other groups they’re part of.”—Sagar Keswani
******
Madhushala by Harivansh Rai Bachchan
“Simple, catchy rhythm, and a great many home truths beautifully captured in verse. It lends itself to being memorised even without effort, and then remembering the specific couplet applicable to the life situation you are in.”—Vijay Kumar
We’ll be back next week with another set of wonderful and maybe not-so-wildly different book recommendations. If you haven’t submitted your recommendations yet, you can do so using [this link](https://theken.typeform.com/FPBooks?typeform-source=the-ken.com).
Hello and welcome to another edition of First Principles Silent Sunday everyone. It’s Jonathan here.
Our album today is a little off the beat for us, in the sense that, unlike most of our weekly volumes, the photos in this one are from a single contributor. But over just these past handful of days, Saahir Ebrahim has sent in such a voluminous corpus of submissions—many of which are truly handsome photographs—that I felt I couldn’t just hang around and publish them in little, weekly doses.
Saahir is, in his own words, “a sports enthusiast, boyhood Arsenal fan, pseudo foodie, amateur photographer, and badminton player who lives to travel and experience the world”. Unfortunately, we aren’t able to publish every picture that Saahir sent in, but here are quite a few of my favourities.
If you’d like to send in your own Silent Sunday photographs to be featured in First Principles, please send them to us [using this link here](https://theken.typeform.com/fpsilentsundays).
******
Cambodia and Vietnam—by Saahir Ebrahim
“The stunning view from aboard one of Asia’s highest cable car rides—Ba Na Hills, Vietnam, covered in misty clouds.”
| Ba Na Hills, Da Nang, Vietnam (Saahir Ebrahim) |
“The gateway to the Vietnamese Sea—I came across these marvellous stone-crafted steps and gate while enjoying a lovely summer morning’s trek in Da Nang, Vietnam.”
| Da Nang City, Vietnam (Saahir Ebrahim) |
“The ancient East Mebon temple, built in the 10th century in Angkor during the reign of King Rajendravarman, stands on what was an artificial island at the center of the now dry East Baray reservoir. This magnificent structure has been preserved and still stands tall today.”
| Angkor Wat, Siem Reap, Cambodia (Saahir Ebrahim) |
“Ta Som is a captivating and charming temple, built in the 1100s. It was built in the Bayon style and has been well restored. Built as part of the vast construction program led by King Jayavarman VII, this Buddhist temple looks similar to many temples built at that time.”
| Angkor Wat, Siem Reap, Cambodia (Saahir Ebrahim) |
“The Preah Khan temple complex was massive, with around 1,000 officials, priests, and monks living and working within its walls. It’s often said that Preah Khan was more than just a religious center; it was a hub for education and administration. The site has over 70 satellite temples, and it contained inscriptions that provided valuable insight into the Khmer Empire’s administration and the royal family’s history.”
| Preah Khan Temple, Angkor Wat, Siem Reap, Cambodia (Saahir Ebrahim) |
“Despite the incredible preservation of the Preah Khan Temple, with some parts restored, many areas remain in their original state. This gives visitors a unique opportunity to experience what it might have been like to explore the site centuries ago.”
| Preah Khan Temple, Angkor Wat, Siem Reap, Cambodia (Saahir Ebrahim) |
“The ancient wonder of Angkor Wat…”
| Angkor Wat, Cambodia (Saahir Ebrahim) |
“Angkor Wat has many entrances, with the monumental structure facing every direction…”
| Angkor Wat, Cambodia (Saahir Ebrahim) |
“Intricate stone carvings tell many a story of ancient mythology inside the walls of Angkor Wat”
| Angkor Wat, Cambodia (Saahir Ebrahim) |
“The Bayon Temple is known for having a very large number of stone faces. There are many varying numbers given, but it is known that there are over 100 of them.”
| Bayon Temple, Siem Reap, Cambodia (Saahir Ebrahim) |
You can send your own photos for First Principles Silent Sunday [using this link](https://theken.typeform.com/fpsilentsundays).
That’s a wrap for this week. Before you go, if you know someone who might like this newsletter, forward us to them!
Please write to fp@the-ken.com if there’s anything you’d like to share with us. Or leave a comment on our on-site edition. See you next Sunday!
Regards,
Rohin Dharmakumar