---
subject: "The Best General View of Yosemite"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-11-16 12:02:53
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
This is the second installment in a series on the making of our ideas about the American West. You can check out the first post here: As always, if you enjoy these posts, sign up to receive them in your inbox. And if you think they’re worth a few bucks a month, consider becoming a paid subscriber: It’s hard to get a bad view of Yosemite. It’s one of the most beautiful places in the world, visited by over Yosemite is also one of the most-photographed locations on planet Earth. There are probably billions of photos of the park’s most iconic locations. In places like Yosemite, I always feel contrasting urges. On the one hand, I want to photograph everything to commemorate my experience. On the other, maybe I should spend my time looking at the real thing rather than peering through a camera lens. After all, I know that millions of photos of, say, Half Dome exist on the internet that are better than anything I’d take. Why bother when someone already took a photograph of Yosemite from the “best general view” way back in 1866? Carleton Watkins took this photo in very different circumstances from those in which you take your vacation pictures. He transported Inside his darkroom tent in the wilderness, Watkins had to treat the 18”x22” plates with the chemicals while preventing them from getting dirty. Then he’d insert the plate into his camera, expose the image, and whisk the negative back to the darkroom and coat it with another set of chemicals to set the image. And then he would somehow have to transport his glass negatives back out of the mountains. The stakes were high. He could only bring about a hundred negatives with him on each expedition. Getting a shot wrong or messing up a glass negative would mean that days of work might be for naught. To improve his chances of success, Watkins sometimes combined the best features of his photos into one shot. The Watkins wasn’t the first person to photograph Yosemite, but his photos made the place internationally famous. His images captured the size and beauty of Yosemite and much of the West. In the Watkins, born in New York, first traveled to Yosemite in 1861. He couldn’t have gotten much farther away from the chaos that was enveloping the nation while remaining within its borders. As his country devolved into civil war, he trundled up the Mariposa Trail in search of the best views of the natural wonders there. Why did Watkins trek into the wilderness? He had previously worked on more commercial photography projects, taking pictures of mines and ranches to help their owners document claims and attract investment. His 1861 Yosemite expedition was funded by When Watkins returned from Yosemite, King sent his photos to friends like Ralph Waldo Emerson (some are still displayed in Emerson’s house). These luminaries built hype for the images. When exhibited, the Yosemite photos — many times larger than any photograph that had previously been taken of the valley — captivated audiences. Oliver Wendell Holmes Watkins became a celebrity and published his pictures in books. Some of these books made their way to Washington, DC, where members of Congress and President I can imagine Lincoln taking a break from the bloody business of the war to page through a book of photos that California Senator John Conness had thrust into his hands. Perhaps the stunning imagery — so unlike any place Lincoln had ever seen with his own eyes — provided the president with a brief respite from the nonstop stress of holding the nation together. It’s hard to know which photos Lincoln actually saw, but among them were these images of Vernal Falls captured by Watkins in 1861: Yosemite Falls: Bridal Veil Falls: Cathedral Rock: And the sequoia known as the “Grizzly Giant:” Watkins’ photos helped inspire Congress to create the Yosemite Grant, a law that protected the area and presaged the development of the national park system. Watkins went back to Yosemite once the war was over and took more pictures. These were equally famous, and even more widely distributed. These included images of El Capitan: Mirror Lake: And Mt. Starr King, named for his transcendentalist friend: Despite his fame and influence, things didn’t go well for Watkins. He built a beautiful The 1870s were difficult for Watkins, but he kept taking pictures. In his later career (after marrying his assistant, who was less than half his age), he once again went out into the world and captured remarkable scenes. He took photos around San Francisco, including this one of Chinatown: And this one of Montgomery Street: But he also went to Arizona in search of “ancient ruins:” And showed his mastery of composition at the Columbia River in Oregon: And looking out past a cypress tree at the ocean near Monterey: It didn’t end well for Carleton Watkins. He started to go blind in the 1890s and eventually became homeless, Blind, broke, and broken, Watkins spiraled into insanity. His family committed him to the Napa State Hospital for the Insane, and his wife started calling herself a widow. His last six years were spent in the institution; he finally died at age 86, interred in a pauper’s grave. As much as anyone else, Carleton Watkins helped to define the American West for the world. It was, through his lens, a place of sublime natural beauty, a remote and rugged wilderness. But as much as Watkins’ photos captured the American West, they also shaped it. Watkins’ photos mostly excluded the people who had This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are three ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: You can share the newsletter with others: You can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading! You're currently a free subscriber to |