---
subject: "Our Rationality Future : Quit, All-in, or Bust"
from: "Robin Hanson from Overcoming Bias <overcomingbias@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-12-27 15:01:21
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Overcoming Bias", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8616244883382228708", "UNREAD"]
---
Animal brains compute DNA-encoded behavioral strategies, using DNA chosen by simple natural selection. Such brains can “reason”, but not very abstractly, and mostly about how to execute their DNA-given instincts. Animals don’t reason about where such strategies came from. In humans, DNA encodes sufficiently-sophisticated brains to let us copy others’ behaviors. As a result, in humans a cultural form of natural selection allows us to evolve behaviors far faster than do other animals. This is humanity’s superpower. It induces us to reason more, about how best to generalize from the behaviors we see, and also about which humans to copy which behaviors from. The invention of language let humans more easily transfer many things between our brains, to do so more abstractly, and to reason more easily about it all. We humans thus became more ambitious about the scope and abstraction of our reasoning. We humans eventually came to realize that we could try to reason critically about the behaviors which we have inherited via cultural evolution. But as natural selection didn’t document its code, we mostly made up plausible-sounding reasons for such behaviors. While some of us were sometimes willing to change behavior based on such reasoning, this typically went badly, as we didn’t understand why evolution had made its choices. Thankfully, most others didn’t much respect or heed such reasoning. During the Industrial Revolution, humanity saw many big fast changes to tech and social practices, and initially tried to preserve prior cultural values, norms, and status markers in the face of such changes. But then around roughly 1900, elites suddenly began a big new “ The one thing such elites now agreed most on was that they no longer wanted to respected inherited traditions. Young adults kept together in schools Though abstract reason has As a result, fast cultural change largely uncorrelated with adaptiveness has been a key driver of our cultures drifting into maladaption. That and fast tech/social change, the huge fall in deep cultural variety due to increasing ease of travel, travel, and talk, and the fall in selection pressures due to increased wealth, peace, and health. This drift will plausibly cause our civilization to fall, and likely be replaced by now insular fertile religious cultures. More similar rises and falls may follow. Our choices are stark. Either 1) do nothing and slowly go bust, 2) quit embracing abstract reason so much, returning to a world of tradition, ignorance, war, poverty, and strong selection pressures, or 3) find and adopt ways to go all-in on using abstract reason to choose adaptive cultural elements. Or maybe do this indirectly Alas going bust seems by far our most likely outcome. If so, our current industrial will be remembered a unique dreamtime, with horror by descendants see us as having indulged a great excess of reason, and with a wistful sense of loss by descendants who try to recreate and improve on it many centuries later. You're currently a free subscriber to |