---
subject: "Nights of Misery"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-01-22 14:02:02
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Thanks for reading! To support my work, please click the button below: If you want to help keep this project going, please consider purchasing a paid subscription. Paid subscribers — it’s only about 75 cents a week! — get access to the archives, the satisfaction of supporting work they enjoy, and my undying gratitude. The Book of Job starts with an argument between God and Satan. God brags that Job is one of his most devoted servants. Satan counters with the idea that Job is only loyal to God because God has provided him with a happy and satisfying life. So God tells Satan to go ahead and ruin Job’s life to test his loyalty. Satan proceeds to kill Job’s livestock and children and plagues him with boils and worms. On top of that, Job doesn’t get to sleep. Job
Job’s immense suffering is compounded by the fact that Satan won’t let him escape from his misery into the silence of sleep. Job is forced to lie awake all night, contemplating his misfortune. I hope you are not covered in boils and have not had your family killed by God, but I bet you’ve experienced the agony of insomnia. Most people do, at some point in their lives. We think our beds will comfort us but, instead, the night drags on and, like Job, we despise our lives. The torture of insomnia was a common problem 2,500 years ago, when the Book of Job was written, and it remains one today. Humans have interpreted and treated insomnia in all sorts of different ways throughout our history. But I don’t know if we’re any closer to conquering it. Wouldn’t it be great if you didn’t have to sleep? You’d reclaim a third of your life; you’d get so much more done! Some superhuman people seem to have needed less sleep than others. The idea that the most impressive people can go without sleep goes all the way back to humanity’s oldest story, the Epic of Gilgamesh. In the story, a “wild man” named Enkidu is also positively transformed by sleeplessness — he is kept awake for seven days and nights of sex (!), at the end of which he becomes a civilized man. A woman tells him that this week of sleeplessness has But, even 4,000 years ago, Mesopotamians knew that sleeplessness was a double-edged sword. Later in the epic, Gilgamesh starts losing sleep to nightmares and, after Enkidu dies (sorry, no spoiler alerts for a book that’s been out for millennia), Gilgamesh enters a state of wild-eyed insomnia, looking frantically for a way to ward off the inevitability of death. Finally, a god challenges Gilgamesh to stay awake for seven nights to see if he’s worthy of immortality. The exhausted king immediately drifts off to sleep, telling the reader that death — like sleep — can’t be avoided forever. The ancient Greeks, too, combined their understanding of sleep’s medical effects with mythology. They believed that the god Hypnos — a brother of Thanatos, or death — personified sleep. To be denied sleep was literally to be abandoned by a god. Hippocrates, the father of medicine, identified sleep as a crucial component of health. He encouraged his patients to sleep a The Romans, like the Mesopotamians, made a One of my least favorite flavors of insomnia is when I burst, wide awake, out of a dream only to look over at my clock and see that it’s 2:00 AM. If I’m unlucky, this means that I’ll be cursed to lie there, sleepless, until morning. Though ancient and medieval people understood insomnia to be a curse, they didn’t necessarily fear lying awake at night like we do. Sleep historian Roger Ekirch finds that, in premodern times, sleep was “ This “biphasic” sleep was so common that people didn’t talk about it explicitly. It was just something that everyone did. Once Ekirch got an inkling about the practice from some early modern court transcripts, he started What did people do during their period of Ekirch and his devotees have If this theory is right, and many of our modern problems with insomnia are the product of the fact that we are stupidly trying to force our minds and bodies to do something they’re not meant to do, how did we get on the wrong track? The modern concept of insomnia
How did industrialization break our sleep? In a lot of ways, actually: Workers lost control over when they rose and went to bed. Rather than rising with the sun (or the noises of farm animals), people had to go to work at times that didn’t sync much with natural rhythms. People’s sleep cycles started to track the factory whistle rather than the rooster’s crowing. Cities were bright all the time. In the late 1700s, cities started to line their streets with [coal-gas lamps](https://substack.com/redirect/90979e8a-ce22-4b99-86f1-c77f68bd4171?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). By the next century, big cities like London and Paris were lit well beyond sunset, meaning that they were both safer at night and able to offer genuine nightlife. The lighting of cities, combined with the increased availability of[stimulants](https://substack.com/redirect/8fffd62d-c9cd-462e-9a31-f399e62e7075?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)like coffee and tea, meant that people no longer had to follow their bodies’ natural rhythms. It was now much more fun and much less scary to stay up late. People stopped going to bed early and then waking in the middle of the night.At the time, observers blamed the hectic pace of modern life. In 1894, the British Medical Journal [observed](https://substack.com/redirect/f95bd58b-adb8-41da-8926-d3312431dfae?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)that “The subject of sleeplessness is once more under public discussion… The hurry and excitement of modern life is quite correctly held to be responsible for much of the insomnia of which we hear.”
With the rise of insomnia came an industry promising to cure it, drawing on the latest ideas in medical science and psychology. Some companies advertised drugs that would cure sleeplessness. In Australia, advertisements pushed “
There were other, less scientific theories in the early twentieth century, as well. One home encyclopedia
Psychologists and neurologists diagnosed people with
Other scientists spoke of the “neurotic insomniac,” who seemed to be more common among the middle class than the working class. People who worked hard all day with their bodies were expected to sleep well, while those who worked hard with their minds were doomed to lie awake at night. Sometimes, it seemed like nobody could sleep. A New York Times article
Over the course of the twentieth century, science found new drugs and new techniques. Now, instead of popping a Veronal you might take an Ambien. Instead of being diagnosed with nervous exhaustion, you might be told that you have ADHD or an anxiety disorder. We worry more about sleep hygiene and screens now than the impact of the telegraph. I’d love to say that, after writing this piece, I’ve seen the metaphorical light and gotten back in touch with my natural rhythms. That I hit the hay at 9 pm, wake up for an hour or two, and then slumber until sunrise. But, to be honest, I have my alarm set for 5:45 every weekday, and, in the winter months at least, I have to be at work before the sun comes up. I think I have decent sleep habits, but, especially during the long nights of winter, I find myself lying awake at night, wishing I could find a way to get a little more rest. The insomnia problem seems largely unsolved — the Cleveland Clinic This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: Or you can share the newsletter with others: Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week! Originally published You're currently a free subscriber to |