---
subject: "Q&A on Proposed SB 1047"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-05-02 15:05:27
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Previously:
This is written as an FAQ, tackling all questions or points I saw raised.
Why Are We Here Again?There have been many highly vocal and forceful objections to SB 1047 this week, in reaction to a (
The purpose of this post is to gather and analyze all of them that came to my attention in any way, including all responses to Some are helpful critiques pointing to potential problems, or good questions where we should ensure that my current understanding is correct. In several cases, I suggest concrete changes to the bill as a result. Two are important to fix weaknesses, one is a clear improvement, the others are free actions for clarity. Some are based on what I strongly believe is a failure to understand how the law works, both in theory and in practice, or a failure to carefully read the bill, or both. Some are pointing out a fundamental conflict. They want people to have the ability to freely train and release the weights of highly capable future models. Then they notice that it will become impossible to do this while adhering to ordinary safety requirements. They seem to therefore propose to not have safety requirements. Some are alarmist rhetoric that has little tether to what is in the bill, or how any of this works. I am deeply disappointed in some of those using or sharing such rhetoric.
Throughout such objections, there is little or no acknowledgement of the risks that the bill attempts to mitigate, suggestions of alternative ways to do that, or reasons to believe that such risks are insubstantial even absent required mitigation. To be fair to such objectors, many of them have previously stated that they believe that future more capable AI poses little catastrophic risk. I get making mistakes. Understanding even a relatively short bill like SB 1047 requires close reading. If you thoughtlessly forward anything that sounds bad (or good) about such a bill, you are going to make mistakes, some of which are going to look dumb. What is the Story So Far?If you have not previously done so, I recommend reading In first half of that post, I did an RTFB (Read the Bill). I read it again for this post. The core bill mechanism is that if you want to train a ‘covered model,’ meaning training on 10^26 flops or getting performance similar or greater to what that would buy you in 2024, then you have various safety requirements that attach. If you fail in your duties you can be fined, if you lie about it then that is under penalty of perjury. I concluded this was a good faith effort to put forth a helpful bill. As the bill deals with complex issues, it contains both potential loopholes on the safety side, and potential issues of inadvertent overreach, unexpected consequences or misinterpretation on the restriction side. In the second half, I responded to In the section [What Is a Covered Model](https://substack.com/redirect/c19378a2-7440-410c-9f90-14fe1c4b3379?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), I contend that zero current open models would count as covered models, and most future open models would not count, in contrast to Bell’s claim that this bill would ‘outlaw open models.’In the section [Precautionary Principle and Covered Guidance](https://substack.com/redirect/d4c1665d-9af6-459d-8138-daf701f06432?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), I notice that what Bell calls ‘precautionary principle’ is an escape clause to avoid requirements, whereas the default requirement is to secure the model during training and then demonstrate safety after training is complete.On covered guidance, I notice that I expect the standards there to be an extension of those of NIST, along with applicable ‘industry best practices,’ as indicated in the text. In the section [Non-Derivative](https://substack.com/redirect/fb61a047-7ec2-4a4e-9bff-6456df48565e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), I notice that most open models are derivative models, upon which there are no requirements at all. As in, if you start with Llama-3 400B, the safety question is Meta’s issue and not yours.In the section [So What Would the Law Actually Do](https://substack.com/redirect/8475dbbc-f2cd-4511-b0f4-7332688cbb80?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), I summarize my practical understanding of the law. I will now reproduce that below, with modifications for the changes to the bill and my updated understandings based on further analysis ([the original version is here](https://substack.com/redirect/8475dbbc-f2cd-4511-b0f4-7332688cbb80?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)).In [Crying Wolf,](https://substack.com/redirect/f85fcb25-e318-4426-8433-6f732bf8c6e9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)I point out that if critics respond with similar rhetoric regardless of the actual text of the bill offered, as has been the pattern, and do not help improve any bill details, then they are not helping us to choose a better bill. And that the objection to all bills seems motivated by a fundamental inability of their preferred business model to address the underlying risk concerns.
What Do I Think the Law Would Actually Do?This is an updated version of In particular, this reflects that they have introduced a ‘limited duty exemption,’ which I think mostly mirrors previous functionality but improves clarity. This is a summary, but I attempted to be expansive on meaningful details. Let’s say you want to train a model. You follow this flow chart, with ‘hazardous capabilities’ meaning roughly ‘can cause 500 million or more in damage in especially worrisome ways, or a similarly worrying threat in other ways’ but clarification would be appreciated there. If your model is not projected to be at least 2024 state of the art and it is not over the 10^26 flops limit? Then you do trivial paperwork, and you are done. Not a covered model. Every other business in America and especially California is jealous. Where the 10^26 threshold is above the estimated compute cost of GPT-4 or the current versions of Google Gemini, and no open model is anywhere near it other than Meta’s prospective Llama-3 400B, which may or may not hit it.
If your model is a derivative of an existing model? You have no requirements. All requirements instead fall on the original developer. Derivative in practice probably means ‘most of the compute was spent elsewhere’ but this would ideally be clarified further as noted below. Most open models are derivative in this sense, often of e.g. Llama-N.
If your model is projected to have lower benchmarks and not have greater capabilities than an existing non-covered model, or one with a limited duty exemption, then your model also qualifies for a limited duty exemption. If your model qualifies for a limited duty exemption? You certify that this is the case under penalty of perjury. Your job now is to monitor events in case you were mistaken. If it turns out you were wrong in good faith about the model’s benchmarks or capabilities, you have 30 days to report this and cease operations until you are in compliance as if you lacked the exemption. Then you are fully in the clear. If you are judged not in good faith, then it is not going to go well for you.
If you do not yet qualify for the limited duty exemption, and you are a covered model? What do you have to do in order to train the model? Implement cybersecurity protections to secure access and the weights. Implement a shutdown capability during training. Implement all covered guidance. Implement a written and separate safety and security protocol. The protocol needs to ensure the model either lacks hazardous capability or has safeguards that prevent exercise of hazardous capabilities. The protocol must include a testing procedure to identify potential hazardous capabilities, and what you would do if you found them. The protocol must say what would trigger a shutdown procedure.
Once training is complete: Can you make a ‘positive safety determination’? This is done pursuant to your own previously recorded protocol. If yes, you file a certification of compliance. You then have a limited duty exemption. Once again, judged good faith gives you a free pass on consequences, if something were to go wrong. To be unreasonable, the assessment also has to fail to take into account ‘reasonably foreseeable’ risks, which effectively means either (1) another similar developer, (2) NIST or (3) The Frontier Model Division already visibly foresaw them.
What if you do not qualify for a positive safety determination, if you want to release your model without a limited duty exemption? You must implement ‘reasonable safeguards and requirements’ to prevent: An individual from being able to use the hazardous capabilities of the model. An individual from creating a derivative model that was used to cause a critical harm.
You must ensure that anything the model does is attributed to the model. It does not say that this includes derivative models, but I assume it does. Implement any other measures that are reasonably necessary to prevent or manage the risks from existing or potential hazardous capabilities. This includes a shutdown procedure for all copies within your custody only. You can instead not deploy the model, if you can’t or won’t do the above.
After deployment, you need to periodically reevaluate your safety protocols, and file an annual report. If something goes wrong you have 72 hours to file an incident report.
Also, there are: Some requirements on computing clusters big enough to train a covered model. Essentially do KYC, record payments and check for covered model training. Also they are required to use transparent pricing. Some ‘pro-innovation’ stuff of unknown size and importance, like CalCompute. An open source advisory council is formed, for what that’s worth.
What are the Biggest Misconceptions?That this matters to most AI developers. It doesn’t, and it won’t. Right now it matters at most to the very biggest handful of labs. It only matters later if you are developing a non-derivative model using 10^26 or more flops, or one that will likely exhibit 2024-levels of capability for a model trained with that level of compute.
That this is an existential threat to California’s AI industry. Again, this has zero or minimal impact on most of California’s AI industry. This is unlikely to change for years. Few companies will want covered models that are attempting to compete with Google, Anthropic and OpenAI. For those who do want covered models short of that, there will be increasing ability to get limited duty exemptions that make the requirements trivial.
There are even claims this bill is aimed at destroying the AI industry, or destroying anyone who would ‘challenge OpenAI.’ Seriously, no, stop it. This bill is designed to address real safety and misuse concerns. That does not mean the bill is perfect, or even good. It has costs and benefits.
That the requirements here impose huge costs that would sink companies. The paperwork costs are trivial versus the compute costs of the model. If you can’t do the paperwork, then you can’t afford to train the model either. The real costs are the actual safety protocols, which you should be doing anyway, and the inability to release if you cannot provide reasonable assurance of lack of hazardous capability or otherwise get a limited duty exemption. Especially with the proposed fixes, this should only happen for a reason.
That this bill targets open weights or open source. It does the opposite in two ways. It excludes shutdown of copies of the model outside your control from the shutdown requirement, and it creates an advisory committee for open source with the explicit goal of helping them. When people say this will kill open source, what they mostly mean is that open weights are unsafe and nothing can fix this, and they want a free pass on this. So from their perspective, any requirement that the models not be unsafe is functionally a ban on open weight models. Open model weights advocates want to say that they should only be responsible for the model as they release it, not for what happens if any modifications are made later, even if those modifications are trivial in cost relative to the released model. That’s not on us, they say. That’s unreasonable. There is one real issue. The derivative model clause is currently worded poorly, without a cost threshold, such that it is possible to try to hold an open weights developer responsible in an unreasonable way. I do not think this ever would happen in practice for multiple reasons, but we should fix the language to ensure that. Many of the issues raised as targeting ‘open source’ apply to all models.
That developers risk going to jail for making a mistake on a form. This (almost) never happens. Seriously, this (almost) never happens. People almost never get prosecuted for perjury, period. A few hundred a year. When they do, it is not for mistakes, it is for blatant lying caught red handed. And mostly that gets ignored too. The prosecutor needs to be really pissed off.
Hazardous capability means any harms anywhere that add up to $500 million. That is not what the bill says. The bill says the $500 million must be due to cyberattacks on critical infrastructure, autonomous illegal-for-a-human activity by an AI, or something else of similar severity. This very clearly does not apply to ‘$500 million in diffused harms like medical errors or someone using its writing capabilities for phishing emails.’ I suggest changes to make this clearer, but it should be clear already.
That the people advocating for this and similar laws are statists that love regulation. Seriously. no. It is remarkable the extent to which the opposite is true.
What are the Real Problems?I see two big implementation problems with the bill as written. In both cases I believe a flexible good regulator plus a legal realist response should address the issue, but it would be far better to address them now: Derivative models can include unlimited additional training, thus allowing you to pass off your liability to any existing open model, in a way clearly not intended. This should be fixed by my first change below. The comparison rule for hazardous capabilities risks incorporating models that advance mundane utility or are otherwise themselves safe, where the additional general productivity enables harm, or the functionality used would otherwise be available in other models we consider safe, but the criminal happened to choose yours. We should fix this with my second change below. In addition to those large problems, a relatively small issue is that the catastrophic threshold is not indexed for inflation. It should be.
Then there are problems or downsides that are not due to flaws in the bill’s construction, but rather are inherent in trying to do what the bill is doing or not doing. First, the danger that this law might impose practical costs. This imposes costs on those who would train covered models. Most of that cost, I expect in practice, is in forcing them to actually implement and document their security practices that they damn well should have done anyway. But although I do not expect it to be large compared to overall costs, since you need to be training a rather large non-derivative model for this law to apply to you, there will be some amount of regulatory ass covering, and there will be real costs to filing the paperwork properly and hiring lawyers and ensuring compliance and all that. It is possible that there will be models where we cannot have reasonable assurance of their lacking hazardous capabilities, or even that we knew have such capabilities, but which it would pass a cost-benefit test to make available, either via closed access or release of weights. Because even a closed weights model can be jailbroken reliably, if a solution to that and similar issues cannot be found, alignment continues to be unsolved and capabilities continue to improve, and when this becomes sufficiently hazardous and risky, and our safety plans seem inadequate, this could in the future impose a de facto cap on the general capabilities of AI models, at some unknown level above GPT-4. If you think that AI development should proceed regardless in that scenario, that there is nothing to worry about, then you should oppose this bill. Because open weights are unsafe and nothing can fix this, if a solution to that cannot be found and capabilities continue to improve, then holding the open weights developer responsible for the consequences of their actions may in the future impose a de facto cap on the general capabilities of open weight models, at some unknown level above GPT-4, that might not de facto apply to closed models capable of implementing various safety protocols unavailable to open models. If you instead want open weights to be a free legal pass to not consider the possibility of enabling catastrophic harms and to not take safety precautions, you might not like this. It is possible that there will be increasing regulatory capture, or that the requirements will otherwise be expanded in ways that are unwise. It is possible that rhetorical hysteria in response to the bill will be harmful. If people alter their behavior in response, that is a real effect. This bill could preclude a different, better bill.
There are also the risks that this bill will fail to address the safety concerns it targets, by being insufficiently strong, insufficiently enforced and motivating, or by containing loopholes. In particular, the fact that open weights models need not have the (impossible to get) ability to shutdown copies not in the developer’s possession enables the potential release of such weights at all, but also renders the potential shutdown not so useful for safety. Also, the liability here is difficult to attach, can only be invoked by the Attorney General, the damages relatively bounded unless violations are repeated and flagrant and are not tied to the amount of harm caused, and while perjury is technically involved if you lie on your government forms (same as other government forms) that is almost never prosecuted, so it is mostly meaningless. Indeed, the liability could work in reverse, effectively granting model developers safe harbor. Industry often welcomes regulations that spell out their obligations to avoid liability for exactly this reason. So that too could be a problem or advantage to this bill. What the the Changes That Would Improve the Bill?There are two important changes. We should change the definition of derivative model by adding an 22606(i)(3) to make clear that if a sufficiently large amount of compute (I suggest 25% of original training compute or 10^26 flops, whichever is lower) is spent on additional training and fine-tuning of an existing model, then the resulting model is now non-derivative. The new developer has all the responsibilities of a covered model, and the old developer is no longer responsible. We should change the comparison baseline om 22602(n)(1) when evaluating difficulty of causing catastrophic harm, inserting words to the effect of adding ‘other than access to other covered models that are known to be safe.’ Instead of comparing to causing the harm without use of any covered model, we should compare to causing the harm without use of any safe covered model that lacks hazardous capability. You then cannot be blamed because a criminal happened to use your model in place of GPT-N, as part of a larger package or for otherwise safe dual use actions like making payroll or scheduling meetings, and other issues like that. In that case, either GPT-N and your model therefore both hazardous capability, or neither does.
In addition: The threshold of $500 million in (n)(1)(B) and (n)(1)(C) should add ‘in 2024 dollars’ or otherwise be indexed for inflation. I would clear up the language in 22606(f)(2) to make unambiguous that this refers to the either what one could reasonably have expected to accomplish with that many flops in 2024, rather than being as good as the weakest model trained on such compute, and if desired that it should also refer to the strongest model available in 2024. The more I look at the current wording the more clear is the intent, but let’s make it a lot easier to see that. After consulting legal experts to get the best wording, and mostly to reassure people, I would add 22602(n)(3) to clarify that to qualify under (n)(1)(D) requires that the damage caused be acute and concentrated, and that it not be the diffuse downside of a dual use capability that is net beneficial, such as occasional medical mistakes resulting from sharing mostly useful information. After consulting legal experts to get the best wording, and mostly to reassure people, I would consider adding 22602 (n)(4) to clarify that the use of a generically productivity enhancing dual use capability, where that general increase in productivity is then used to facilitate hazardous activities without directly enabling the hazardous capabilities themselves, such as better managing employee hiring or email management, does not constitute hazardous capabilities. If it tells you how to build a nuclear bomb and this facilitates building one, that is bad. If it manages your payroll taxes better and this lets you hire someone who then makes a nuclear bomb, we should not blame the model. I do not believe we would anyway, but we can clear that up. It would perhaps be good to waive levies (user fees) for sufficiently small businesses, at least for when they are asking for limited duty exceptions, despite the incentive concerns, since we like small business and this is a talking point that can be cheaply diffused.
What is the Definition of Derivative Model? Is it Clear Enough?There is a loophole that needs to be addressed. The problem is, what would happen if you were to start with (for example) Llama-3 400B, but then train it using an additional 10^27 flops in compute to create Acme-5, enhancing its capabilities to the GPT-5 level? Or if you otherwise used an existing model as your starting point, but mostly used that as an excuse or small cost savings, and did most of the work yourself? This is a problem both ways. The original non-derivative model and developer, here Llama-3 and Meta, should not be responsible for the hazardous capabilities that result. On the other hand, Acme Corporation, the developers of Acme-5, clearly should be responsible for Acme-5 as if it were a non-derivative model.
I presume the regulators and courts would not allow such absurdities, but why take that chance or give people that worry? My proposed new definition extension to fix this issue, for section 3 22602 (i)(3): If training compute to further train another developer’s model is expended or is planned to be expended that is greater than [10% / 25% / 50%] of the training compute used to train a model originally, or involves more than 10^26 flops, then the resulting new model is no longer considered a derivative model. It is now a non-derivative model for all purposes. Nick Moran suggests the derivative model requirement I think that is an excellent example of a situation in which this is ‘a you problem’ for the model creator. Here, it sounds like it took only a very small fine tune, costing very little, to enable the hazardous capability. You have made the activity of ‘get a model to help you do chemical weapons’ much, much easier to accomplish than it would have been counterfactually. So then the question is, did the ability to use the fine-tuned model help you substantially more than only having access to the manuals. Whereas most of the cost of a book that describes how to do something is in choosing the words and writing them down, not in creating a blank book to print upon, and there are already lots of ways to get blank books. If the fine-tune was similar in magnitude of cost to the original training run, then I would say it is similar to a blank book, instead.
This issue is why I also propose modifying the alternative capabilities rule. See that section for more details. My proposal is to change from comparing to using no covered models, to comparing to using no unsafe models. Thus, you have to be enabling over and above what could have been done with for example GPT-N. If Developer B releases a distinct unsafe covered model, which combined with Developer A’s model is unsafe, then I note that Developer B’s model is in this example non-derivative, so the modification clarifies that the issue is not on A merely because C chose to use A’s model over GPT-N for complementary activities. If necessary, we could add an additional clarifying clause here. The bottom line, as I see it is: We should define derivative models such that it requires the original developer to have borne most of the cost and done most of the work, such that it is only derivative if you are severely discounting the cost of creating the new system. If you are severely discounting the cost of creating an unsafe system, and we can talk price about what the rule should be here, then that does not sound safe to me. If it is impossible to create a highly capable open model weights system that cannot be made unsafe at nominal time and money cost, then why do you think I should allow you to release such a model? We should identify cases where our rules would lead to unreasonable assignments of fault, and modify the rules to fix them.
Should the $500 Million Threshold Should be Indexed for Inflation?Yes. This is an easy fix, change Sec. 3 22602 (n)(B) and (C) to index to 2024 dollars. There is no reason this threshold should decline in real terms over time. What Constitutes Hazardous Capability?Here is the current text.
I will address the harm counterfactual of ‘significantly more difficult to cause without access to a covered model’ in the next section. I presume that everyone is onboard with (A) counting as hazardous. We could more precisely define ‘mass’ casualties, but it does not seem important. Notice the construction of (B). The damage must explicitly be damage to critical infrastructure. This is not $500 million from a phishing scam, let alone $500 from each of a million scams. Similarly, notice (C). The violation of the penal code must be autonomous. Both are important aggravating factors. A core principle of law is that if you specify X+Y as needed to count as Z, then X or Y alone is not a Z. So when (D) says ‘comparable severity’ this cannot purely mean ‘causes $500 million in damages.’ In that case, there is no need for (B) or (C), one can simply say ‘causes $500 million in cumulative damages in some related category of harms.’ My interpretation of (D) is that the damages need to be sufficiently acute and severe, or sufficiently larger than this, as to be of comparable severity with only a similar level of overall damages. So something like causing a very large riot, perhaps. You could do it via a lot of smaller incidents with less worrisome details, such as a lot of medical errors or malware emails, but we are then talking at least billions of dollars of counterfactual harm. This seems like a highly reasonable rule. However,
My suggestion is that the language be expanded for clarity and reassurance, and to guard against potential overreach. So I would move (n)(2) to (n)(3) and add a new (n)(2), or I would add additional language to (D), whichever seems more appropriate. The additional language would clarify that the harm needs to be acute and not as a downside of beneficial usage, and this would not apply if the model contributed to examples such as Quintin’s. We should be able to find good wording here. I would also add language clarifying that general ‘dual use’ capabilities that are net beneficial, such as helping people sort their emails, cannot constitute hazardous capability. This is something a lot of people are getting wrong, so let’s make it airtight. Does the Alternative Capabilities Rule Make Sense?To count as hazardous capability, this law requires that the harm be ‘significantly more difficult to cause without access to a covered model,’ not without access to this particular model, which we will return to later. This is considerably stronger than ‘this was used as part of the process’ and considerably weaker than ‘required this particular covered model in particular.’ The obvious problem scenario, why you can’t use a weaker clause, is what if: Acme issues a model that can help with cyberattacks on critical infrastructure. Zenith issues a similar model that does all the same things. Both are used to do crime that triggers (B) that required Acme or Zenith. Acme says the criminals would have used Zenith. Zenith says the criminals would have used Acme.
You need to be able to hold at least one of them liable. The potential flaw in the other direction is, what if covered models simply greatly enhance all forms of productivity? What if it is ‘more difficult without access’ because your company uses covered models to do ordinary business things? Clearly that is not intended to count. A potential solution might be to say something that is effectively ‘without access to a covered model that itself has hazardous capabilities’? Acme is a covered model. Zenith is a covered model. Zenith is used to substantially enable cyberattacks that trigger (B). If this could have also been done with Acme with similar difficulty, then either both Zenith and Acme have hazardous capabilities, or neither of them do.
I am open to other suggestions to get the right counterfactual in a robust way. None of this has anything to do with open model weights. The problem does not differentiate. If we get this wrong and cumulative damages or other mundane issues constitute hazardous capabilities, it will not be an open weights problem. It will be a problem for all models. Indeed, in order for open models to be in trouble relative to closed models, we need a reasonably bespoke definition of what counts here, that properly identifies the harms we want to avoid. And then the open models would need to be unable to prevent that harm. As an example of this and other confusions being widespread: The post was deleted so I won’t name them, but two prominent VCs posted and retweeted that ‘under this bill, open source devs could be held liable for an LLM outputting ‘contraband knowledge’ that you could get access to easily via Google otherwise.’ Which is clearly not the case. Is Providing Reasonable Assurance of a Lack of Hazardous Capability Realistic?It seems hard. The key term of art here is ‘reasonable assurance.’ That gives you some wiggle room. Jessica points out that jailbreaks are an unsolved problem. This is very true. If you are proposing a protocol for a closed model, you should assume that your model can and will be fully jailbroken, unless you can figure out a way to make that not true. Right now, we do not know of a way to do that. This could involve something like ‘probabilistically detect and cut off the jailbreak sufficiently well that the harm ends up not being easier to cause than using another method’ but right now we do not have a method for that, either. So the solution for now seems obvious. You assume that the user will jailbreak the model, and assess it accordingly. Similarly, for an open weights model, you should assume the first thing the malicious user does is strip out your safety protocols, either with fine tuning As a practical matter, I believe that I could give reasonable assurance, right now, that all of the publically available models ( including GPT-4, Claude 3, and Gemini Advanced 1.0 and Pro 1.5) lack hazardous capability, if we were to lower the covered model threshold to 10^25 and included them. If I was going to test GPT-5 or Claude-4 or Gemini-2 for this, how would I do that? There’s a METR for that, along with the start of robust internal procedures. I’ve commented extensively on what I think a One key this emphasizes is that such tests need to give the domain experts jailbroken access, rather than only default access. Perhaps this will indeed prove impractical in the future for what would otherwise be highly capable models if access is given widely. In that case, we can debate whether that should be sufficient to justify not deploying, or deploying in more controlled fashion. I do think that is part of the point. At some point, this will no longer be possible. At that point, you should actually adjust what you do. Is Reasonable Assurance Tantamount |