---
subject: "AI #31: It Can Do What Now?"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-09-28 15:56:08
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
It slices. It dices. Or, at least, it sees, hears, talks, creates stunningly good images and browses the web. Welcome to the newly updated GPT-4. That’s all in two weeks. Throw in Microsoft 365 Copilot finally coming online soon. Are we back? Are we so back that AGI has been achieved internally at OpenAI? Because Sam Altman literally said that straight up in a Reddit post? No, no, that was an obvious joke, we are not quite that back, why do you people have no chill? Table of ContentsIntroduction. Table of Contents. GPT-4 Real This Time. Two senses fully operational for GPT-4, plus 365 Copilot. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. What will you do with sight and sound? Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. Google search under siege. The Reversal Curse. A is B. So is B A? Why would B be A? Wouldn’t You Prefer a Nice Game of Chess? It’s in the evals. Tic-tac-toe isn’t. Fun With Image Generation. I see what you did there. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. Copyright and deepfakes are so confusing. They Took Our Jobs. Writers strike a deal. How long will it protect them? Get Involved. Cate Hall is ready for her move into AI safety advocacy. Where to? Introducing. Whoop, there is another DeepMind diagnostic tool. Ho hum. Talking Real Money. Anthropic raises $4 billion from Amazon. In Other AI News. Microsoft goes nuclear. As in nuclear power plants. Quiet Speculations. My AI says I’m right about economic growth. The Quest for Sane Regulation. The UK shows signs of understanding. The Week in Audio. Be careful what you wish for. Rhetorical Innovation. It is not good news when your case gets easier to make. Can You Please Speak Directly Into This Microphone. Nuclear proliferation… yay? No One Would Be So Stupid As To. Say ‘AGI has been achieved internally’? Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. Should it believe you? People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Mitt Romney, Flo Crivello. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Trapped priors. The Lighter Side. Why stop now?
GPT-4 Real This Time
This was always going to be the moment. Could someone pull this off? Microsoft and Google both promised. Neither delivered for a long time. At this point, Gemini is almost here. If Microsoft convincingly offers me a chance to draw upon all of my context, then I would have no choice but to listen. Until then, what looks good in a demo is neither available to us nor so certain to do for us what it does in the demo. On the meetings and lectures question, will people show up? Definitely. I went to the Manifest conference this past weekend. I definitely skipped more talks than I would have otherwise due to ability to watch afterwards on YouTube, but being there is still a different experience even when you can’t interact. That goes double for when you can potentially speak up. Having the later experiences improve via AI tools helps on many levels, including as a complement after having watched live, and on the margin reduces need to attend, but far from eliminates it. Then there is the social aspect, there are plenty of meetings or lectures one attends not because one needs the content. OpenAI also announced some new features. There are some definite upsides. We might destroy the world, A lot of people will be thrilled to have a UI where they can talk to ChatGPT and it will talk back to them. I am predicting that I am not one of those people, but you never know. Others definitely like that sort of thing a lot more.
There seems to often be a missing ‘wait this is super scary, right?’ mood attached to making AI everyone’s therapist. There is obvious great potential for positive outcomes. There are also some rather obvious catastrophic failure modes. If nothing else, seems like both a powerful position to put an AI into, and also the kind of thing with a lot of strict requirements and rules around it?
To the extent that you were going to be able to have fun with the voices themselves, OpenAI’s usual ‘safety’ rules are going to prevent it. You get to pick from about five voices, and the five voices are good voices, but if I can’t make it sound like Morgan Freeman or Douglas Rain even as an extra paid feature then who cares, what are we even doing?. That might not be the real action in any case. ChatGPT can also now see, taking in the camera or fixed images, not only responding with images in kind. You can have it diagnose problems with physical objects, or decipher text in Latin alphabets, or help you figure out your remote control. Also you can use images to launch adversarial attacks on it. What is the plan on that? Good question. We will see. Meanwhile, OpenAI is implying that with incoming images they really, really will not let you have any fun, because of fears of what would happen if it reacted to images of real people. We will see here, as well, how far the No Fun Zone goes. Oh, also
Last week I would have told everyone to pay for ChatGPT, but I would have understood someone saying Claude-2 was good enough for them on its own. That argument seems a lot harder now. Which I am sure was the point. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
Want to make the most of Claude’s long context window?
Say it with us:
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
So the ‘fix’ was that OpenAI patched the mistake out of ChatGPT? That is… not the bug that required fixing.
The Reversal CurseIf I tell you Tom Cruise’s mother is Mary Lee Pfeiffer, your response would probably be something like ‘ok, thanks for sharing I guess’ but if for some reason your brain did remember this fact, then you would also notice that Mary Lee Pfeiffer’s son is Tom Cruise. You might not have the same level of recall in both directions, but certainly your rate of success in the reversed direction would not be 0%.
This is the Reversal Curse. “A is B” and “B is A” are treated as distinct facts.
There is no ‘B might not exclusively be A’ excuse available here. To not update the reversal’s probability at all is a very obvious error.
Gary Marcus of course wrote this up ass ‘ Wouldn’t You Prefer a Nice Game of Chess?
I do not think that gets you out of it? Yes, GPT-4 can ‘solve tic-tac-toe’ via writing code to do advanced data analysis and using the results. That is impressive in a different way, It does not get you out of reckoning with the issue.
Or perhaps there’s another explanation?
Except that scene is where the computer uses tic-tac-toe to learn to not kill everyone. Then there’s the issue that GPT’s 1800 Elo and 100% legal move rate only work in plausible game states where it can pattern match. If you generate sufficiently high weirdness, like 10 random moves by each player to start,
Fun with Image Generation
I worry that many people are making remarkably similar arguments to the case below, where I presume we all can agree that the artist gets full credit:
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse SoonFor now, if you have practice and are a human looking,
I have noticed this as well. I have an AI art detector that’s trained in my head and it is very good at picking up on the stylistic differences. The question is, how long will this last? It certainly is going to get harder.
This one definitely falls under ‘remarkably good quality, would plausibly fool someone who is not used to AI images or who did not consider the possibility for five seconds, yet there are multiple clear ways to tell if you do ask the question.’ How many can you spot? On the other hand, Should AI generated images and other works get copyright? That is a practical question. What does ‘AI’ mean here? That is another. My answers would be to define it rather broadly, and a firm no. That is the trade-off. And that is what existing creators would choose. And that is what is good for humans in the long run. Also consider the alternative, on a purely practical and legal level. Suppose AI works were permitted to seek copyright. What would happen? You would get copyright troll farms. They would generate endless new pictures and sets of words, copyright them, and then continuously use another AI to run similarity checks. Then demand that you pay them. It would be so supremely ugly.
They Took Our Jobs
This feels like a punt. Given how studios work, the first clause was necessary to prevent various tricks being used to not pay writers. They had to get that. The rest all looks sensible as far as it goes. I’m confused by the wording in the fourth clause, why not simply assert that now, as they doubtless will? I’m not sure. The real question is, will this work to defend against AI taking their jobs? Daniel Eth is unimpressed.
Get Involved
She’s pretty awesome and gets things done, so let’s go. There is so much low hanging fruit out there, and she’s gone around picking a wide variety of it already. We need that kind of exploration to continue. Where is opportunity knocking these days? She is indeed looking for something AI related, in the realm of non-technical safety work. She is especially interested in public advocacy or potentially policy, governance or law. Of course, if you have a different awesome opportunity, especially something that looks like a good fit, it’s always a good idea to share such things, even if it isn’t exactly a fit. You never know who might take you up on it.
Introducing
Talking Real MoneyAnthropic What does this mean? It seems clear that Google has had an accelerationist impact on DeepMind, and Microsoft has had one on OpenAI. Tying Anthropic to a third world leading tech company in Amazon does not bode well for avoiding a race. I predict this will prove an absurdly good deal for Amazon, the same way OpenAI and DeepMind were previously, and many other companies will be kicking themselves, Microsoft and Google included, for not making higher bids.
Should we believe Anthropic’s pitch deck now that they have the money it was asking for?
I do not expect any company to meet that roadmap on that timescale. I do not think Dario or Anthropic generally believe they can hit that timescale. The goal is still clear. In Other AI News
Nuclear energy is clean energy, whether people think it counts as clean or not. It is also highly reliable, in a way wind and solar are not when you need to power your servers around the clock.
Nor would I trust the grid, in their position, given what is to come. Not when I have an affordable alternative. Or when there is such a good opportunity to do well by doing good.
Quiet SpeculationsAnother manifestation of the future torment nexus
This all seems to formalize the standard set of arguments both for and against explosive economic growth in the scenarios where AI is capable enough to potentially do it and things somehow remain otherwise ‘normal.’ The whole debate is a close mirror of the extinction risk debate, I think mostly for many of the same underlying reasons. Once again, there are highly reasonable disagreements over likelihood and magnitude of what might happen, but once those dismissing AI’s potential impacts out of hand have an absurd position. Except this time, instead of dismissing a risk that might indeed fail to come to pass, they are dismissing an inevitability as impossible, so we will find out soon enough.
If we did democratize AI without (yet) getting everyone killed, what exactly would we be democratizing?
Roon then continues, becoming more concrete and making higher and higher bids.
That’s ‘worst comes to worst’? I am rather sure Roon knows better than that. Even if we assume that somehow the miracle that most everyone lives, there are many far worse things that could result. Our technology and the collective wealth of the planet physically enabling something does not mean it will happen. Even if humans remain in control of unfathomable wealth, reasonable or dignified redistribution is not inevitable. History, political science, human nature and science fiction all make this very clear. There is also the confluence of ‘your labor will become super valuable and productive’ and ‘labor will be free.’ It can’t be both. If people’s labor and other contributions are no longer relevant, and they exist only to consume and to extract utility, yes there are regimes where that is what the universe is configured to enable and they get to do that, but that requires both us retaining effective collective control sufficient to make that choice, and also us then making that choice. None of that is inevitable.
The Quest for Sane Regulations
I am all for sensible versions of all three of these. I do continue to think that 10^24 is too low a cap given GPT-4. The counterargument is that over time the cap will need to go down due to better data and algorithmic improvements, and thus we could perhaps grandfather existing systems in.
Andrea Miotti, also of Conjecture,
Guardian reports that UK’s
What about the actual central problem? Less central, actually rather promising.
A central goal of calling for AI regulations is to stop AI from going full rocket emoji. Regulatory authorities throw lots of obstacles in the way of advancements by prioritizing safety, often in ways that are not terribly efficient. We are not denying this. We are saying that in this particular case, that is a second best solution and we are here for it. Whereas with SpaceX, I claim we want Elon can has into space, so it’s bad, actually.
The Week in Audio
Preview for Rhetorical InnovationIt has indeed gotten easier to argue for extinction risks and
It is important to know that even if everyone involved is strongly committed to the scary things not happening, either we figure out something we do not currently know to prevent it or they happen anyway. But convincing people of that is hard, and there are any number of objections one can raise, and reasonable people can disagree on how hard a task this involves. It is a whole lot easier to point out that people will do the scary things on purpose. Because many people will absolutely attempt to do the scary things on purpose. How do we know this? As Alex says, they keep saying they are going to do the scary things on purpose. Also, they keep attempting to do them to the full extent they can. Many will do it for the money or the power. Some for the lols. Some will be terrorists. Others will be bored. Some will do it for the sheer deliciousness or interestingness of doing it. Some because they worship the thermodynamic God or otherwise think AIs deserve freedom and to be all they can be or what not. Some will think it will lead to paradise. Many will point to all the others trying to do it, warning what happens if they do not do it first. So. Yeah.
The good news is that we could build a lot of bridges, have a quarter of them fall over, and still come out ahead because bridges are super useful. Then use what we learned to motivate how to make them safe, and as useful data. In AI, you can do that now, but if you keep doing that and the wrong bridge collapses, we are all on that bridge.
I would have voted improve when thinking locally about discourse, although as several responses note not without an adjustment period. You would still have the ability to stay silent. The danger would be that if people were unable to misrepresent their mental states to others, they would then be forced to modify those mental states to conform.
I also continue to think that concerns about authoritarian or radical implications of constraints on AI development are legitimate but massively overblown. Every restriction of any kind implies a willingness to send in men with guns and a need to keep eyes on things. I do not see why such pressures would need to ramp up that substantially versus existing ones - and I view the ‘let everyone have AI’ plan as having (among other bigger problems, and if we stick around long enough to still make meaningful decisions) far, far worse authoritarian implications when people see what they have unleashed. There is room for both. Some of us should point out where discourse need to improve. Others should point out that, compared to other discourse, we’re not doing so bad. It is a difficult balance to strike. I’m finding similar as I prepare a talk on EA criticism - a lot of the criticisms are of the form ‘your level of X is unacceptable, saying others have even worse X is not an excuse.’
Can You Please Speak Directly Into This MicrophoneBen Horowitz makes the case that open source is the safest possibility for AI because, and (Then they got the bomb, and that’s okay, So yes, I agree that allowing open source AI development is about as good for safety as allowing proliferation of nuclear weapons to everyone who wants one. I am glad that I came to Ben’s Ted Talk. No One Would Be So Stupid As ToOh. Well then. Yes. It is us that have no chill.
It reminds me of nothing so much as Ronald Reagan’s “ I am very much in the ‘you can joke about anything’ camp. If you are a comedian.
We do seem to keep shifting what ‘AGI’ means.
We users of English must accept that this semantic drift has indeed happened. From the perspective of 1980’s meaning of AGI, GPT-4 is (a weak) AGI. Under the definition we use today, and the one in my head as well, it is not. In other news, Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is DifficultFun new jailbreak: “
Quintin is spot on here. If the properties like situational awareness, learning human user theory of mind, adversarial relationship to the user, modeling the training process and coherent internal objectives are convergent outcomes of LLM training processes, especially if they are highly resistant to countermeasures that try to route around them or stop them from happening, then we are in quite a lot of trouble. Whereas if they are unusual, or we can reasonably route around or prevent the more general class of things like this, essentially anything that rhymes at all with instrumental convergence, then great job us, we are not remotely home free but we are perhaps on the impossible level of Guitar Hero rather than the impossible level of Dark Souls: Prepare to Die Edition. We all want it to be one way. I am pretty sure it’s the other way. The more I think about such dynamics, the less phenomena like instrumental convergence are ‘strange failure mode that happens because something goes wrong’ and more they are
If this graph were a good illustration of the situation we face, we would be in relatively good shape. The problem is that I do not think the curves involved are linear. There are two ways to think about this, depending on your scale. If we are purely using the capabilities of the system as the x-axis, then yes the y-axis can roughly mirror the x-axis, but if you plot ‘dangerous capabilities’ as the y-axis, and Time as the x-axis, you get a rapid exponential like this one of economic growth:
Or, if you plot necessary protections against time or against the log amount of effective compute spent? Same graph.
After I wrote that,
Even when we say we are drawing exponential curves, we usually think of them in linear terms. That is a very different type of response than is typically available, and would require very different types of buy-in, even if it could be effectively operationalized. Also it is not about sheer quantity of intervention, it is about doing the effective interventions, wildly throwing things against the wall won’t work.
People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone
His explanation is worth quoting in full, noting the reasons why one would very much not want to support such an idea, most of which I share, and then explaining why he supports it anyway.
I would emphasize his first two points here. You have to think through the consequences of potential actions based on what is on offer, not act on vibes. Our fortunate experience with the tech tree so far (and good luck with nuclear weapons) does not assure future success. And that even a ~5% risk of extinction is quite a lot and worth making large sacrifices to shrink, although I believe the odds are much higher than that. I also agree that Quintin Pope is an unusually serious person offering relatively good and serious arguments. I find his arguments unconvincing, but he’s doing the thing and an officially endorsed Better Critic. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone
Yep. The e/acc prior is highly directionally correct, and is shared by myself and most of those worried for what I’d say are the right reasons. The problem is that if the prior is so strong you get trapped in it, and don’t consider the evidence of a potential exception. Or, as Rob worries, that you use the fearmongers who are worried or objecting for the wrong reasons, who are the reason we can’t have nice things in so many other domains, as justification to not question the prior. And yeah. I get it.
The Lighter Side
You're currently a free subscriber to |