---
subject: "The [Tuesday Evening] Media Diet with Brian Sholis"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-12-27 00:24:55
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
We’re taking the week off this week to rest + share some cuts from the archives, but we do have a fresh new MMD from Brian Sholis. He’s been an avid reader and supporter of WITI since the start and I thought this was great. Be sure to go subscribe to his excellent Tell us about yourself. I’m a Chicagoan in Toronto, a husband and father, and an autodidact. John McPhee once said everything he’s written has descended from his teenage fascinations; I trace most everything back to my simultaneous discovery, circa 1993, of punk rock music and online bulletin boards. It’s been independent culture and community for me ever since. I spent Ask my wife or my onetime doctoral advisor: I’m better suited to making lateral connections than to diving deep on any one topic. So I’m lucky to have just about always had “editor” or “curator” on my business card. Describe your media diet. Gluttonous, and the feeding tube is RSS: I keep up with hundreds (thousands?) of publications, blogs, email newsletters, and museum and gallery mailing lists in Everything that doesn’t have I follow so many things because I’m serially obsessive—my euphemism for ADD—and once I develop a fascination or a hobby I don’t let it go. I just stack ‘em up. So even though I gave up Premier League soccer when my second son was born (and my weekend mornings were shot), I still follow Arsenal. Add to that baking, landscape history, What’s the last great book you read? Deb Chachra’s What are you reading now? I’m really enjoying Kate Briggs’s What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication? In my twenties, I read issues cover-to-cover; in my thirties, I looked first for pieces written by or about people I knew; at about forty, I began the sacrilegious practice of cutting the few articles I wanted to read out of periodicals and saving them in a little pile near my desk, to be read as a little treat. Thanks to exorbitant international-shipping rates, since moving to Canada nearly all my non-comped subscriptions have shifted from print to digital. I miss print. Who should everyone be reading that they’re not? Arthur Krystal, whose new collection What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone? The deepest cut—both because it’s no longer available and because it pains me not being able to share—is Plane or train? I’m now firmly on Team Train. Watching my wife and friends get COVID and get jerked around on nearly every trip by weather delays, technical issues, and other interruptions these past few years means I’m in no hurry to return to the skies. What is one place everyone should visit? Since visiting a few times in the 2000s, I’ve described Bergen, Norway, as a meteorological expression of my soul. Imagine the Pacific Northwest with even more rain (!), quaint, narrow streets, a few hundred more years of history, and a cable car that takes you up a mountain to visit a large sculpture of a troll. Barring that, visit and support your nearest public library branch. Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into. Earlier this year, I traveled to Philadelphia with friends to see the 1990s post-hardcore band — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) —
You're currently a free subscriber to |