---
subject: "the state of crypto 2023; plus, resources on the latest trends"
from: "web3 weekly from a16z crypto <a16zcrypto@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-04-16 23:35:08
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "a16zcrypto"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_2535365729249697677"]
---
We’re back with all new editions of this newsletter, beginning with our just-released 2023 1. Data & pulse checks: On the State of Crypto 2023Daren Matsuoka, Eddy Lazzarin, Robert Hackett and Stephanie Zinn It’s easy for a casual observer to overlook rapid progress in the crypto industry, especially given the noise of media headlines and fleeting price movements. But our State of Crypto report 2023 tracks the data, indicators, and signals that matter — revealing a steady cycle of development, product launches, and ongoing innovation. And this year, we also introduced the State of Crypto Index, a tool to track the health of the crypto industry from a technological, rather than financial, perspective. The index represents the weighted average monthly growth of 14 industry metrics — also displaying, in a single chart, the rate of “innovation” and “adoption” of web3 — that offers a more nuanced measure for the state of crypto. The tool is also interactive, so anyone can tweak the parameters to form their own data views. …share on 2. Latest trends: applying zero knowledge to machine learning; minting NFTs in ‘waves’ to better build communityElena Burger; Scott Duke Kominers and 1337 Skulls Sers In past editions, we’ve shared a lot about
In an NFT project, the mint largely determines who the community is and how they (and the broader market) view the project going forward. Since brands and projects need a secure mechanism that draws participation from the people they initially want, we review a new minting strategy called a “wave mint”, in which members of different NFT communities are invited to mint in a series of waves gradually expanding outwards. The wave mint design leverages people’s on-chain data and reputation to select for holders who are well matched to a project’s culture and goals; drives attention and energy to the project; and avoids common problems with “free” mints, like 3. Resources & education: What marketers can learn from (or for) web3… and beyondAmanda Cassatt, Kim Milosevich, and Sonal Chokshi Whether you’re a marketer, community manager, or in developer relations — and are already in web3, OR are in traditional marketing simply seeking to learn the latest trends and tactics — this conversation is for you. In it, the author (who, among other things, was the first CMO at ConsenSys, helping bring Ethereum to market) of the If you enjoy reading --Sonal Chokshi and a16z crypto team You’re receiving this newsletter because you signed up for it on our websites, at an event, or elsewhere (you can opt out any time using the ‘unsubscribe’ link below). This newsletter is provided for informational purposes only, and should NOT be relied upon as legal, business, investment, or tax advice. Furthermore, the content is not directed at nor intended for use by any investors or prospective investors in any a16z funds. Also, please note that any charts, data, or projections discussed are subject to change without notice, may differ from opinions expressed by others, and are for informational purposes only -- again, they should not be relied upon when making any investment decision. The content speaks only as of the date indicated; a16z has not independently verified third party links or sources, nor makes representations about the enduring accuracy of such information. Please see a16z.com/disclosures for additional important details, including link to list of investments. subscribe to our podcast ' |