---
subject: "Supersonics Takeoff!"
from: "Marginal REVOLUTION <donotreply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-06-08 11:23:36
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tyler Cowen", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2466199532210586699", "UNREAD"]
---
In [Lift the Ban on Supersonics](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=d2089c1808f08ef33f6c05172ed9b82f94845f0f4dc21e8e7bf857d9f2d421b5&blog_id=42693868&post_id=90830&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=3630e0068656747f54b84806f09d3c7b&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly9tYXJnaW5hbHJldm9sdXRpb24uY29tL21hcmdpbmFscmV2b2x1dGlvbi8yMDI1LzAyL25vLWJvb20uaHRtbA=&email_id=baaf57a17b912d86b4389f25f968595e) I wrote:
Civilian supersonic aircraft have been
[banned in the United States]for over 50 years! In case that wasn’t clear, we didn’t ban noisy aircraft we banned supersonic aircraft. Thus, even quiet supersonic aircraft are banned today. This was a serious mistake. Aside from the fact that the noise was[exaggerated], technological development is endogenous.If you ban supersonic aircraft, the money, experience and learning by doing needed to develop quieter supersonic aircraft won’t exist. A ban will make technological developments in the industry much slower and dependent upon exogeneous progress in other industries.
When we ban a new technology we have to think not just about the costs and benefits of a ban today but about the costs and benefits on the entire glide path of the technology
In short,
[we must build to build better]. We stopped building and so it has taken more than 50 years to get better. Not learning, by not doing.... I’d like to see the new administration move forthwith to lift the ban on supersonic aircraft. We have been moving too slow.
Thus, I am pleased to note that President Trump has issued an [executive order](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=f0fc6a5a5ee0d5b2fca1872f4a686745c781c507e76f02187db7144cae862db0&blog_id=42693868&post_id=90830&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=b583640c7a40179a2cd4beea178744a2&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cud2hpdGVob3VzZS5nb3YvcHJlc2lkZW50aWFsLWFjdGlvbnMvMjAyNS8wNi9sZWFkaW5nLXRoZS13b3JsZC1pbi1zdXBlcnNvbmljLWZsaWdodC8&email_id=baaf57a17b912d86b4389f25f968595e) to lift the ban on supersonics!
The United States stands at the threshold of a bold new chapter in aerospace innovation. For more than 50 years, outdated and overly restrictive regulations have grounded the promise of supersonic flight over land, stifling American ingenuity, weakening our global competitiveness, and ceding leadership to foreign adversaries. Advances in aerospace engineering, materials science, and noise reduction now make supersonic flight not just possible, but safe, sustainable, and commercially viable. This order begins a historic national effort to reestablish the United States as the undisputed leader in high-speed aviation. By updating obsolete standards and embracing the technologies of today and tomorrow, we will empower our engineers, entrepreneurs, and visionaries to deliver the next generation of air travel, which will be faster, quieter, safer, and more efficient than ever before.
...The Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) shall take the necessary steps, including through rulemaking, to repeal the prohibition on overland supersonic flight in 14 CFR 91.817 within 180 days of the date of this order and establish an interim noise-based certification standard, making any modifications to 14 CFR 91.818 as necessary, as consistent with applicable law. The Administrator of the FAA shall also take immediate steps to repeal
[14 CFR 91.819]and 91.821, which will remove additional regulatory barriers that hinder the advancement of supersonic aviation technology in the United States.
Congratulations to Eli Dourado who has been pushing this issue [for more than a decade](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=6d9be1b6f30a3d15a64c08c4f41b7375f203638d8529ee8ad65fb1f7873742fd&blog_id=42693868&post_id=90830&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=6f611bb1a33fd863d9f4fa53f7c5349a&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly9tYXJnaW5hbHJldm9sdXRpb24uY29tL21hcmdpbmFscmV2b2x1dGlvbi8yMDE2LzA2LzY4NjExLmh0bWw&email_id=baaf57a17b912d86b4389f25f968595e).