---
subject: "Stephen Kotkin — How Do We Explain Stalin?"
from: "Dwarkesh Patel <dwarkesh@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-07-10 16:48:05
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Dwarkesh Patel", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_1252705944156122219", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
The Stephen Kotkin episode. Kotkin is arguably the world’s foremost expert on Joseph Stalin and has written a massive 2-volume biography of Stalin (with a 3rd volume in the works). No other individual had more of a profound impact on the 20th century than Stalin. He held the power of life and death over every single person across 11 time zones, and he killed tens of millions of people, utterly consumed by an ideology aimed at building paradise on Earth. And he was one half of the biggest and most consequential military confrontation in history (even if Hitler didn’t prove to be his match). Watch on Sponsors[Lighthouse](https://substack.com/redirect/b4095dae-e106-4a6c-ab83-8007e5cf0e5a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)is THE fastest immigration solution for the technology industry. All they need is your resume or LinkedIn profile to tell you which visas you’re most eligible for, and they’ll send you this eligibility document for free, no commitment required. Get started today at[https://www.lighthousehq.com/ref/Dwarkesh](https://substack.com/redirect/3417f309-3d45-443c-8af3-0ae6117c3fef?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).
To sponsor a future episode, visit Timestamps(00:00:00) – Was the tsarist regime the lesser of 2 evils? (00:23:45) – The peasants brought Lenin to power, then he enslaved them (00:37:38) – Why did so many go along with enforced famine and the Great Terror? (01:02:26) – Today’s leftist civil war (01:13:01) – Doesn’t CCP deserve credit for China's growth? (01:35:13) – Why didn't somebody just kill Stalin? (01:52:45) – Overcoming the pathologies of communism with tech: USSR vs China Transcript00:00:00 – Was the tsarist regime the lesser of 2 evils?Dwarkesh Patel 00:00:00 My guest today is Stephen Kotkin 00:00:14 Thank you for the honor of the invitation. Dwarkesh Patel 00:00:16 Let's begin with the Stephen Kotkin 00:00:50 You have to put yourself back in the time period to judge the level of repression based upon what norms were, what other regimes did, rather than take the 20th-century regimes as the guide and go back. We need to widen the aperture a little bit here. This is the tsarist regime's problem. It needs to be able to compete in the international system. That means it needs a modern military and modern industry to underwrite that modern military. So it needs armaments, it needs steel, it needs chemicals. For that, you need workers. So you want the workers only to work in the industry. You don't want them, for example, to have a labor movement or to go on strike, or to have ideas about how politics should be organized. Similarly, with the intellectual side, you need the engineers. You need the engineers in order to design and build the modern attributes that you need to compete as a global power. But you don't want those educated people to have their own ideas and values about politics, about whether you'd want an autocratic government like the Russian regime has, or whether you'd want some other type of government. So all of these countries in the modern period have this dilemma: importing modernization but keeping out the political side, the value side that goes along with that. They need to have some way to repress and control the working-class organization, movement stuff, and the university-educated intellectuals. That's a problem we still have today. The How do you bring in modernity—meaning you have tanks, you have airplanes, or you have AI—but keep out, for example, separation of powers, freedom, property rights, all the things that undermine your dictatorial rule. The tsarist regime was a quintessential example of this fundamental dilemma. Modernization is not a sociological process that kind of just happens. It's a geopolitical process. You modernize because you need to compete in the international system. If somebody has ships made out of steel, either you also have ships made out of steel or they're going to show up at your door, Dwarkesh Patel 00:03:45 This was one of the most interesting takes in your first volume, that modernization is not this inevitable process but is instigated by ruthless geopolitical competition. Do you think that that still applies in today's world? Yes, there are pockets of conflict in the Middle East or in Ukraine, which would motivate the key powers there to want to have modern militaries and modern technologies. But through most of the world… For example, the odds that if France falls behind technologically if their AI is worse, Germany is going to take over, is just sort of unthinkable. This dynamic where in order to ward off colonization or other great powers, you need to stay at the cutting edge of technology and also have up-to-date political processes. Is that still a drive that moves countries forward? Stephen Kotkin 00:04:31 If you have an You have this dilemma for the authoritarians. Think about That's the stuff that persists today for Iran, Russia, China, North Korea. They have to get very good at holding at bay those attributes of modernity that threaten their political regime while importing as much as they can of the attributes… It's two sides of the same coin. The thing that gets you the engineers also gets you the possible political ideas. So the tsarist regime begins to repress the very thing it needs to compete in the international system. It represses the working class and it represses the engineers and the intellectuals, without which it can't be a great power, without which it can't compete, but with which its political system is threatened. So the amount of repression is an important question. We would call this a vegetarian regime compared to the carnivores, like Stalin's regime or Dwarkesh Patel 00:07:03 Is one of the key lessons from your volumes that you should be tripping over yourself in order to embrace a lesser of two evils? Does that apply to all the examples you give? This is maybe a general question about how much you can actually learn from history. For every seeming lesson, there's an equal and opposite lesson that you can also learn. During the tsarist regime, in retrospect, we can say that the But then there's all these other examples. In Germany, the conservative Stephen Kotkin 00:08:03 The Tsarist regime is undertaking this repression of people who have legitimate claims. That repression is quite severe by the standards of the day. It's not going to be everybody murdered or everybody deported to the wastes of Siberia, which we're going to see in the 20th century when we have a different level of communications and transport, different technology, when we have a different level of ideological commitment. Still, it's highly repressive. It's totally unjust and the claims of the people protesting are legitimate. Stalin goes into the underground, not because he's looking for power. It's because he's dedicated to fighting the injustices of the tsarist regime. A lot of young people like him do the same. He's in the seminary. He's highly successful, unbelievably successful. He's great at school. That's been true for many years now, since he was in elementary school. He sang in the choir, got good grades, and did his homework. He's on track to be successful in society. He gives it all up. He starts reading forbidden, otherwise censored underground literature and books. He learns about social injustice, not just through firsthand experience, but analytically. He never graduated from the seminary, which is the highest level of education that was available to somebody in the Caucasus. They don't have a university, because the Tsarist regime is afraid to allow a university. They need the university graduates, but again, they're afraid of the politics of it. Universities elsewhere, including in the capital, St. Petersburg, are constantly being shut down through these revolutionary episodes. He goes into the underground and for 20 years of his life he's got no job, no profession, no source of income. He's in and out of prison, in and out of Siberian exile, constantly harassed by the police. If he escapes, they find him, they put him back. From the ages of about 17-18 to his late 30s, he's a penniless, jobless revolutionary, dedicated to fighting the genuine injustices of the Tsarist regime. What he'll produce is a much more unjust regime than the one he's fighting against. This is known as perverse and unintended consequences. He's legitimately dedicated to revolution as he understands it in his day, and it's fighting against legitimate injustices. But the way he does that—the revolutionary methods that he uses and then the regime that he ends up building—turns out to be worse than the problem that he was addressing. This is a perverse and unintended consequence. Your question is about whether revolution is a good thing ultimately, even if the injustices are there, and whether there could have been some solution that was more evolutionary that could get you to a better place. The constitutionalists, otherwise known as the Here's your problem. This was foreseen by the Interior Minister who put down the Durnovo is proved right. He's proved right not just in Russia, by the way. In many places in the world at the time, between like 1905 and 1925 or so, It had to have happened beforehand, before the modern era. Why? Because when you institute constitutional order, like in You have this order that has all of these birth defects. It's very restrictive in the franchise. Some people are slaves, not even considered people. Yet over time you can get that right because the category of citizenship and the constitutional order are already embedded. When you have the constitutional revolution in the mass age—when you have the peasants and the workers and those for national self determination participating in the constitutional revolution—constitutional order and rule of law isn't enough for a lot of them. Dwarkesh Patel 00:15:38 It worked in Stephen Kotkin 00:15:48 There are these exceptions which have turned out to be false normative, or guiding, stars for us in every case. It happened in Dwarkesh Patel 00:16:48 But there's a paradox here. If you institute this sort of revolution, or changing of the guard, during the mass age, then you're going to get this sort of leftist revolution which is very antithetical to future prosperity and rule of law. On the other hand, if you don't change the regime, you will fail to… It's been pointed out that You talk about how Stolypin, after the 1905 attempted revolution, attempted to put in this sort of agricultural reforms. But their success was mixed because the Stephen Kotkin 00:17:35 How do you bring the whole society, what we would call the masses or what used to be called the masses… How do you bring all levels of society into a political system as citizens? How do you build a polity which is inclusive of people regardless of how much property they have? How do you then provide opportunity to them so that they can rise up the ladder? That's the secret of success in the modern world, which a handful of countries have done from a non-democratic starting point. Other countries have done it by democratizing a liberal constitutional order. Go back to the tsarist regime. What were the options for the tsarist regime? You have this very heavy absolutist regime. Autocracy is even a more absolutist version of what we had, for example in the French case, when the Again, in the French case it took more than a century to get this right. The So we're not saying that it's simple and easy and that Tsarist Russia could have gone down this path. A lot of people say, if it hadn't been for the war, Tsarist Russia was on an evolutionary path. It was modernizing economically, so it might have been a kind of The problem with that is that Once the lid was put back on because of So you have the leftist version of overthrow, where you end up with a radicalization in the leftist direction, and you have a rightist version of overthrow, where you end up with, “Oh, we're not going to have The traditional right is wrong. The radical right, once it's invited to power, This is the 20th-century version. The irony here is that you got the radical right, the fascist solution in the German case, and you got the radical left, the socialist solution in the tsarist case. The tsarist regime had Russia has the fascism before Germany. Germany has the largest socialist party in its parliament, in the sense that it's not a majority, but it's a plurality. The 00:23:45 – The peasants brought Lenin to power, then he enslaved themDwarkesh Patel 00:23:45 You say that in 1917 a leftist revolution of some kind was inevitable, but that it didn't have to be the Stephen Kotkin 00:23:55 You put your finger on a big part of it when you talked about Chiang Kai-shek and land reform. You have this peasant land hunger. The peasants are often without their own holdings. They work on someone else's property, or their holdings are so small that if there's a little bit of bad weather let alone a massive drought, they're on the verge of starvation. Subsistence level agriculture is not politically stable. You want a class of people, a kind of You need to deal with the peasant land hunger so that it becomes a stabilizing political force. You have the peasants get the land and then they have a piece of the status quo and want to retain the system, versus the peasants not having the land and they want to overthrow the system to get the land. In the Russian case there is the So the peasants don't really get the land as they could have in the 1860s. It became a problem that's not resolved right through 1917, 1918. So the peasants had their own revolution in 1917 and 1918, which was not about the socialist parties. It's not about the Bolsheviks, it's not about Lenin, it's about the You don't have that in the German case. In the German case, you have strikes and seizures of power in a few places, like Bavaria for example. You have a In the One case you don't have this is in the Russian case. Then you're going to get to the The peasants are ready to destroy the existing order, not to bring communists to power, but to seize the land themselves. In the 1920s, the peasants were de facto, not de jure, landowners. They don't own the property in law, they own it in fact. But then Stalin's going to reverse the peasant revolution violently and Again there's this irony of history: perverse and unintended consequences. Stalin is fighting against tsarist injustice only to impose worse injustice and worse bloodshed and worse repression. The peasants are fighting on behalf of obtaining the land, only to then be expropriated and In central Europe—the southern German case, the northern Italian case, the Hungarian case—you don't have the endurance of the leftists in power. They're all thrown out. They're thrown out by the forces of order. They're thrown out by the right. So the traditionalism of the peasants—where they believe in God, they believe in law and order—is overriding because they already have a lot of the land in comparison to their Russian or Chinese counterparts. They can be part of the forces of order. So you can get fascism in Central Europe. You can get the right wing dictatorships in Central Europe, the forces of order destroying the left. Whereas you get the leftist dictatorships in the giant peasant societies where you don't quite have the distribution of land. Now the peasants are complaining about land distribution in Italy and Germany, don't get me wrong, but relative to Russia and China they're doing well. So then you think about the Mexican case, the Iranian case, the Portuguese case, all of which are peasant societies as well. There's how you integrate farmers. The whole world order rests on the backs of farmers. How much farmers till means how rich or poor your country is. Whether you have a surplus, as we call it, that the farmers can sell on the market after they consume what they need for their family's purposes or not, tells you how much wealth you have to then build an army, build modern industry, et cetera. The world order rests on these hardworking, predominant in the population, peasantries. In some ways, the political system doesn't derive in deterministic fashion from them. Politics still matters and politics is never reducible to social relations. But failure to master, or mastery of the social relations of, the peasant land question is fundamental in some of the political outcomes. The politicians have to be good at managing the peasantry's integration into that society, where you're trying to get an order in the mass age. You're beyond just the court society at Versailles, the Dwarkesh Patel 00:32:19 This answers one of the other questions I had for you. Why did we see these communist revolutions in peasant countries? It’s the opposite of the This raises another question. If it's the case that all of this unrest is caused by the mistreatment of peasants in China and in Russia, you have the mistreatment of them to an extent unimaginable after the Stephen Kotkin 00:33:24 Terrific question again. You have a multi-pronged answer. Let’s do it this way. On the one hand, you have a much bigger repressive apparatus, a much, much bigger repressive apparatus. The tsarist regime has a Dwarkesh Patel 00:34:09 Even there though, Lenin, Stephen Kotkin 00:34:25 The sense of repression is more about following what they do rather than arresting them on a pretext and putting a bullet in the back of their neck. You have this tsarist secret police, the So you have a small police that's dedicated to surveillance and infiltration. You're reading their mail, which is something that's invented in France. The In fact, the So you have surveillance and infiltration on a lower level. The main force of repression in Tsarist Russia is the That's built under Stalin in order to enact the re-enserfment, the enslavement of the hundred million peasants. It's that act. It's a kind of chicken and egg thing. How do you enslave the peasants without the gigantic secret police? But then when you enslave the peasants, the result is you have this gigantic secret police now that can do everything and anything. It's a process where the chicken and egg are happening simultaneously and they're building the secret police capacity, while enslaving the peasants, that they didn't have before. 00:37:38 – Why did so many go along with enforced famine and the Great Terror?Dwarkesh Patel 00:37:38 How do we explain this surplus of sadism during this period in Russia? Stalin recruits the It wasn't just Stalin doing all these things. There were hundreds of thousands, maybe millions of people if you include informants, who are implicated in this whole ghoulish regime. Is this just a latent thing that is true in any society and Stalin was able to exploit it, or with some circumstance created this level of sadism? Stephen Kotkin 00:38:29 Again, a fantastic question. We get this from Here's your answer. On the one hand, there's ideology and the importance of ideology. We may think that no one really believes the ideology. The ideology is too ridiculous. It's too disproven by facts in life. We're too smart and they couldn't have been as stupid. They had to be smart like us and not believe these crazy fairy tales about it. In fact, it's wrong. They do believe the ideology and they're young. They're young people. A story of the evil of capitalism… You have So there's a way in which life experience, as well as the fervor of youth, leads to, “let's build a new world today rather than wait for tomorrow. Let's be impatient, let's eradicate capitalism, let's bring about socialism. Let's bring about socialism, meaning we end war and imperialism. Achieve abundance for everybody, so that it's not just the haves and the have nots, but everybody's got something. In the process, let's make my little life world historical.” So here I am, just a little activist with a red star on my cap and my life means nothing. Except I'm a participant in building a new world, in a world historical process that's going to end exploitation, that's going to end haves and have nots. Dwarkesh Patel 00:40:50 I get it if you're a middle bureaucrat in the Communist Party, sure. Do you think that explains the motivation of an interrogator in a Stephen Kotkin 00:41:04 There's a big story here, which is about how we're building a new world. There are people against that because they're the Dwarkesh Patel 00:41:22 But in many of these cases, they know that they're the ones orchestrating this show trial, this cynical game. They know that they just picked up a random person in the dead of night. Stephen Kotkin 00:41:30 They know that there are enemies out there. They know that this process has people who are against it. That's a given. Who are the people who are against it? They're masking their true feelings. They're hiding behind professions of loyalty. When in fact, when the hour of crisis comes and there's a war, they will be the saboteurs behind the lines, the It might be that some of them are innocent that you're arresting, but some of them are clearly going to be guilty as well. To get the guilty, you have to somehow manage to deal with victimizing people who are likely innocent and you may know are innocent. But you also know to your bone marrow that some people out there are enemies. It's hard to identify and find them. So you're overcompensating a little bit to make sure that you get every last enemy. Again, it's a crazy idea to us. It makes no sense to us, but a lot of things make no sense that people believe in. There's this If supply massively increases and it exceeds demand, the price has to go down. It's proven again and again and again. What rent control does, or freezing of rent, it inhibits the building of new housing. Because who's going to build new housing when you can't make money off of it? So rent control is what produces the lack of affordable housing in the first place. He sees what's the problem as the solution now. Now, is he a fool? No, he's a really bright guy. He's very well-educated. He's read everything and anything. He's been to university. He's talked to a lot of really smart people. You'd say, “how could he be so foolish to believe an idea that's obviously falsified by empirical reality?” But again, it's an ideological belief. He wants to allow people who can't afford Manhattan to live there. That's a good idea. Life should be more affordable. There should be more places like Queens, where you can come in as immigrants or you can come in as lower class, front end of the social ladder, like my family did for example. My father worked in a factory. You should be able to get some housing for your family, work hard, and rise up. I agree with that 100%. But he's got an ideological approach to how to achieve that, which to me is completely foolish. If I were as smart as him… how could he possibly hold that idea in his head? But ideology is pervasive. It's pervasive, flying in the face of empirical reality. We could give many examples. I'm not picking on this guy in New York. It's just a recent example. I don't know him. I've never met him. Whatever. Maybe there's a more complicated story there. I'm just saying that we have to take ideology seriously because it's deep and it can be enduring even in the face of empirical reality. Dwarkesh Patel 00:45:18 There's ideology, but there's a very specific thing to these So there's not only the sense where Stephen Kotkin 00:46:28 Why is Here's part of the answer. Young people are attracted to impatient, quick, total transformation of the world, eradication of war, eradication of social injustice. There's a simplicity to the ideology. It's a total package. It gets rid of everything bad if you just follow the precepts. Sure, things happen that shouldn't have happened. There are some surprises, there are some downsides. But are you pro-capitalism? Are you pro-imperialist war? Are you pro-landowners having all the land and the have-nots having nothing? There's this constant threat where if you contravene the ideology, you're in bed with the very evils that the ideology is trying to overcome. You become an accomplice in the persistence of the things that you're dedicated to overthrowing. It's not just that you're loyal to the party. You're loyal to the outcome that the party is dedicated to achieving. You know that there are going to be mistakes and costs and bad things will happen along the way, but is imperialist war better than that? No, the answer is imperialist war has got to be worse. The other reason, which is even deeper than that, is that Marxism-Leninism empowers the intellectual class and the In these kinds of systems, it's the intellectuals and the lumpen-intellectuals who make those decisions. They use the state as an instrument to overcome the injustices of the existing society. Again, the injustices are real. But that empowers them to be in charge. The beauty of Marxism-Leninism, and why what we used to call the What we see again and again is young people being impatient for evil to end, but also empowering themselves to be in charge. They love the state. They love the state as an instrument for social justice, social engineering. They love to empower themselves as the decision-makers because, after all, they're the intellectuals. They've studied the theory. They know better than others. Workers and peasants and the downtrodden, the lower classes, sometimes have false consciousness. They don't understand why, for example, we have an imperialist war. They get sucked in. Even along the way, bad things are going to happen. Some people who are innocent are going to die or be arrested. But this is the march of history. This march of history is to peace and justice. Who is going to stand in the way of that? Especially when it empowers you personally so that… You could never do this in the private sector. Nobody could afford you this kind of power in the private sector and in a decentralized political system, in a Dwarkesh Patel 00:51:36 All the anti-Marxism, I totally agree with. But still, just purely analyzing the system there's still something to be explained. There are many ideologies. You have this line that you can't explain Stalin by saying that he was beaten as a kid or he's a Georgian or whatever, because many other people are Georgians or beaten as a kid and they turn out not this way. There's many different kinds of ideologies, and very few of them end up as amenable to dictatorship as Marxism. Another thing that's really confusing here is that all of these At the same time, you might think they might just go along with Stalin's doings because this serves what they think is the end goal of communism. But we know that after Stalin died, In many of these cases, there's this period in between when they're a dead man walking—because Stalin has started putting the feelers out that this person is a It's mysterious why these people who were able to… They're not cowards, they were able to organize a revolution against the Tsar. But they are not using this period that’s like a chicken with its head cut off in order to organize some sort of defense of themselves. Maybe the next time they have the Party Plenum, instead of just confessing or giving the obligatory speech where you're castigating yourself, you just say, “No, I think Stalin's leading the revolution wrong. I'm going to die either way, but I might as well say this.” The same thing happened in China. Stephen Kotkin 00:53:57 There are very few, but there are some people like that. They're arrested and executed, all of them. Very few of those kinds of people are going to survive. The ones who publicly decry the failures of the system and its perverse and unintended consequences, the ones who decry the dictatorship as opposed to the freedom that But again, you're creating a new world. It's going to be messy because it's about Dwarkesh Patel 00:55:08 But what about the cases where they're implicating themselves? They know they're not an enemy. Stephen Kotkin 00:55:12 Again, the party is a larger cause than they are. You're building a new world. Your life can contribute to that or not, and it's insignificant. Dwarkesh Patel 00:55:23 What fraction of confessions by high-level party members do you think were not coerced out of a sense of fear of their own lives or their family's lives? I guess they knew they were going to be executed. So it would have to be for their family's life or to avoid torture vs. a very sort of Stephen Kotkin 00:55:44 We're in the realm of psychology here, DK. Human psychology is a complex subject. Figuring out human psychology is a big challenge, even with everything we know now, let alone what we knew then. So it's simultaneously everything and anything. We have to get rid of the binaries. They didn't believe, they were cynical, and they sacrificed themselves because they were cowards. Or because they knew that, they were forced to make that sacrifice to preserve some of their family members or whatever. There are elements of belief and elements of, let's say, suspension of disbelief, and elements of cynicism and knowledge and understanding simultaneously in almost everybody. They coexist. We think of them as contradictory, but humans can hold contradictory thoughts simultaneously without too much trouble. We could give many examples. You've had people like that on your show, for example. So the psychology is not as surprising in some ways. What's surprising is that this whole thing succeeds. It doesn't collapse of its own internal contradictions. It doesn't undermine itself. If you're murdering a high percentage of your upper officer corps… If you're murdering your intellectuals, your scientists, your cultural figures… If you're murdering your loyal party elites centrally and in the provinces… And if you're murdering the police who are carrying out all of these murders… The thing about The fact that the system is able to undergo this level of self-disruption and come out the other side, that's pretty astonishing. Hitler does not murder his upper officer corps. He doesn't like them, he retires them, and they get a pension. He doesn't murder the But for the most part, Hitler is attacking what we would call his real enemies, that is to say, people who are opposed to his regime, either in thought or in action or both. Stalin is attacking those people, but he's also attacking loyalists. He's taking down, in really big numbers, system loyalists, people who would walk through fire for him. One of the things they do is to walk through the fire of their self-immolation on behalf of the cause. This belief in the new world, in the better world, in transcending We often talk about The answer is, “Yes, he was a Nazi.” These people were communists and he was a Nazi. And there were a lot of them, and they had doubts. They suffered bouts of doubt. A lot of events contradicted the official ideology. Innocent people, innocent family members, themselves innocent, went to the gallows, got the bullet in the back of the neck. So you say, God, the belief. They couldn't have believed this stuff. And yet they did. The main thing that we know from the archives that were formerly secret, that we get into when they're declassified, is that the Nazis were Nazis and the communists were communists. So here we have this problem with socialism. Socialism means many different things. A communist party is building socialism. Why? Because So let's destroy capitalism. That will be the step to get us to socialism. Capitalism has markets, we'll have planning. Capitalism has private property, we'll have state property or collective property. Capitalism has bourgeois parliaments where they vote and they claim it's democracy, but it's only for the property-holding bourgeoisie. So we will have a Dwarkesh Patel 01:02:23 And real slavery. 01:02:26 – Today's leftist civil warStephen Kotkin 01:02:26 Exactly. Everything is to eradicate capitalism to get you to socialism. It turns out that doesn't deliver freedom, it doesn't deliver prosperity, and it doesn't deliver peace. It delivers massive state-ization. Because once you eliminate private property and individual choice, the state is now responsible for everything. It delivers ration tickets and the Gulag. You get a bunch of socialists that break from this. They say Lenin is wrong. Eradicating private property, markets, civil liberties, and parliament is a mistake. We have to accept private property, markets, capitalism, and parliaments because that's the only way to get to freedom. Otherwise, you get to the Leninist dictatorship, total state-ization, Gulag, and ration tickets. These people are denounced as There's this huge break in the socialist movement between those who are real revolutionaries and want to overthrow, eradicate capitalism to get to the just and prosperous and peaceful future, and those who want to use the existing system and evolve, embrace, and accept it. The left has a civil war, a civil war on the left which is still going on. It’s between those who say capitalism is evil and must go vs. capitalism has a lot of problems, but we need it in order to have peace and prosperity, in order to have freedom. We need to manage it better, redistribute. This civil war on the left, which arises in real time, the critics of Lenin's revolution, the What happens is that some of the people who are in the revisionist camp begin to flirt with the “capitalism is evil” analysis. They begin to truck with the communists that they've broken from and are in civil war with. You get left-wing social democrats who are closer to Lenin than they are to right-wing social democrats like Bernstein and the rest who are pro-capitalism but pro-redistribution. This is confusing to people because not everybody is a communist. Some people, like in Sweden, accept private property and markets. But some of the people in Sweden seem to go back on that promise of accepting it, and argue that if we don't get rid of capitalism we're still going to end up with an evil system. This civil war on the left never gets resolved, it's ongoing, and the right uses this confusion to paint everybody as anti-capitalism. The left gives them ammunition by talking about the evils of capitalism, even when they've come along to accept private property and markets. You have this deep and fundamental problem for the left. The tragedy of the left that it's never able to overcome, even to this day, where it comes out and says, “No more anti-capitalism ever, that is over. That leads to death, bloodshed, Gulag, ration tickets, war that actually is worse than the original problem it diagnosed.” Think about Marx. Marx says that you get rid of private property, markets, capitalism, and you're going to get freedom, you're going to get abundance. You don't get that. People say, “Marx wanted freedom, he didn't want Stalin's dictatorship. It's not Marx who's the problem, it's Stalin who deformed Marx.” We see this argument all the time. Stalin is a deformity, whereas Marx was about freedom. Think about a nuclear bomb. You're going to do a nuclear bomb. You're going to nuke a population, but you don't want to kill any people. Your goal is to nuke them, but nobody dies. That's what you say. You're going to get rid of capitalism, you're going to nuke them, but instead everybody's going to live. You give that order to your generals. You say, “Nuke them, but everybody lives, nobody dies.” They nuke them, and everybody dies instead of everybody living. You say, “I never said to kill the people, I said that they should live.” But once you nuke capitalism, you're going to lose freedom, you're going to lose the ability to have politics, you're going to end up with some version of a Leninist system. The ideology is going to drive that to the doubters. You're going to get a second wind where you get Khrushchev, as you said. He comes into power, he denounces Stalin's crimes. He doesn't praise capitalism, private property, and markets. He doesn't undo collective farms. He doesn't undo state ownership of property. He doesn't undo the planning system. He just undoes So here we have the experience of going through the horrors, then having those horrors publicly denounced within the party. The Secret Speech is not published in Soviet newspapers, but it's discussed at party meetings in all locales. Within the Instead of saying, this system is evil, we made a big mistake, we have to undo state ownership of property, we have to undo collective farms, we have to undo the dictatorship… Instead of saying that, they say, “We get a chance to do it right this time without the evil Stalin who messed it all up.” The Khrushchev thing, the revelation of the horrors, the denunciation of the horrors, ironically gives you the second wind of belief in the system that's going to last right through We have this with That to us looks like the problem, and it wreaked havoc in their lives, in their family's life, but to them, that's the solution. This is a paradoxical element of communism where its failures don't become discrediting for so many of the people. They instead become a kind of second wind once you acknowledge and denounce them. It's never the system at fault, it's Stalin at fault. It's never the system at fault, it's Mao's mistakes or excesses as they're called, that are at fault. 01:13:01 – Doesn’t CCP deserve credit for China's growth?Dwarkesh Patel 01:13:01 I guess in China's case, they actually did reform the system and they didn't just discredit the Cultural Revolution. They said no, much of the Stephen Kotkin 01:13:14 Wait, that's not exactly the way you described it. You have a point. You're onto something, DK. But it needs to be qualified. What happens in Dwarkesh Patel 01:13:57 But if that's the reason why they weren't able to do planning, shouldn't Stalin's purges and then Stephen Kotkin 01:14:06 Not the political system. Deng Xiaoping never takes down the political system or the ideology. So you still have today the communist monopoly. Communism can fail at everything. It can starve the people, it can kill the people. It only has to do one thing to survive: suppress political alternatives. So during that peasant resistance to Stalin in the collectivization episode that you referenced earlier, there's no political alternative. There's no other place for them to go and say, "We don't like the injustices of the tsarist regime and we don't like what communism is doing. Therefore, there's something else that we can go to that's an alternative." Communism has suppressed all the alternatives. It's either return to tsarism or keep communism. In the Chinese case, you have something quite similar. They It turns out that you get to Instead of the party being against capitalists, the capitalists are gonna join the party, and this is gonna somehow increase the party's leverage and control and transform the psychology and behavior of the capital. Of course, it fails. Instead, the party members are in cahoots with the millionaires. They begin to form their own businesses by expropriating other people's property. The party begins to go dissolute in an anti-Marxist fashion in terms of private property, wealth accumulation. So Xi Jinping comes along, predictably. He looks at Jiang Zemin's solution, co-opt the millionaires into the party, and sees that it failed. Not only did it fail to transform the behavior of the private sector people, it infected the behavior of the party people. Instead of bringing the capitalists into the party, he's going to force the party back into capitalism. He's going to push the party into the private sector more strongly than it was before. Board directors, party officials. CEO, party official. Private sector people who don't cooperate? Destroy them, make examples of them, You have a kind of natural progression where you open up the system economically in order to drive jobs, prosperity, wealth, because you've destroyed. People say the Communist Party brought 700-800 million people out of poverty. No, the Communist Party put those people into poverty. Why are a billion plus people in poverty? Because of the party's rule. It's the people themselves, they lift themselves out of poverty. The Communists have to reassert their control, their Leninist monopoly on power, because the very thing that has rescued them—the diligence, entrepreneurialism, ingenuity of the amazing Chinese people and of that society—is now a threat to Communist rule. Dwarkesh Patel 01:18:35 I agree with the mechanism by which the growth happened, but I don't think it's the case that it was their inability to have true Marxist communism which led to liberalization. If you look at the creation of these Stephen Kotkin 01:19:20 Policy driven, that’s true. Dwarkesh Patel 01:19:23 It's a special effort you have to make towards economic liberalization. It didn't just happen by default. People really had to push for it. The alternative story, which it seems you're saying, is “No, it was just that they physically could not enforce communism anymore.” Stephen Kotkin 01:19:36 That's how it started, DK. Let's go look at the facts. Why do you have a Special Economic Zone? Why can't every zone have market relations? Dwarkesh Patel 01:19:47 Agreed, but then the creation of that zone had to be a proactive action. Stephen Kotkin 01:19:49 You’re doing this grudgingly. This is a grudging allowance of certain behavior. You look at the decrees. You can trade onions, but you can't trade potatoes. Okay, you can trade potatoes, but you can trade only on Tuesdays and Thursdays, not Monday, Wednesday and Friday. Dwarkesh Patel 01:20:07 You can only have three employees per corporation. Stephen Kotkin 01:20:10 Right, so the decrees are all grudging with very few exceptions. The society is forcing more and more concessions onto the ideologues in the Marxist-Leninist system. At the beginning, it's launched by the party's grudging acceptance that the society is gonna rebuild and not starve, through its own hard work. They've been through a couple of famines here, They don't have the state capacity to reimpose the system immediately in the economic sphere, so they grudgingly make concessions, very few but some, in the market sphere. Gradually, that expands over time as more and more people push against the system's restrictions. It's a policy-driven story in part, but not as the lead. It's a policy-driven story as the following of the entrepreneurialism and the hard work of the society. Dwarkesh Patel 01:21:15 But that pushback is coming from within. This is your thesis in Stephen Kotkin 01:21:19 Yes. Dwarkesh Patel 01:21:20 It is coming from within the system. Because they could have… In 1976, they're like North Korea, literally. North Korea still exists. There's no reason… Stephen Kotkin 01:21:29 North Korea doesn't have the Cultural Revolution where it annihilates its state capacity in a Maoist frenzy in order for Mao to, in his mind, undo his rivals, unbalance and destabilize them. Dwarkesh Patel 01:21:44 But they have famines. Stephen Kotkin 01:21:47 Yes, they do. But they still have the mechanisms of economic control and they have You get a massive black market in the system, not just at the level of little people in the village, but at the top level of the military-industrial complex to make the system work. So when market behavior is grudgingly accepted, what that does is it brings market behavior out of the shadows into a legal or quasi-legal realm. You're not inventing market behavior from scratch. You're surfacing it in some ways. So party officials and industrial officials have market behavior in their firms to grease the system and to meet their output quotas. Dwarkesh Patel 01:23:16 I agree with your general point that how any nation gets wealthy is not by the government but because of the thrift and entrepreneurialism and hard work of individuals. But that's also true in Western capitalist countries. In those countries, we also have a lot of stupid policies… Stephen Kotkin 01:23:32 Yes, as we sit here and speak. Dwarkesh Patel 01:23:33 When we say America is a capitalist country, what we could say is the government or all the bureaucrats, they'll try to put in all these regulations. It's only grudgingly that they will accede to… We could point to a bunch of stupid policies in America that are equivalent to where they try to outlaw the potatoes and the onions, but they could only outlaw the potatoes. So any “capitalist society”, is just a case where the government had to cede some amount of control. We give credit to capitalist countries in the West for saying, at least the government wasn't maximally stupid. Stephen Kotkin 01:24:07 Fair point, DK. We often exaggerate the role of policy in all realms because we do policy ourselves or we talk to policymakers. We have a bias towards the causality of policy. America has been 25% of the global economy since 1880. We've had no income tax, That doesn't mean that policy is inconsequential. It matters for a lot of players in the system. It matters for those who get the policy turned in their direction, the subsidies or the tax breaks, or the taxes on their competitors or whatever it might be. There's a lot of gaming of the system and it does matter. But in the larger picture of things, you can't create the wealth of the United States over those 150 years, that global economic dominance, and you can't strangle it, in the policy realm. You can affect it, but you can neither create nor strangle it. We have to understand in the communist sense that incentives matter. When you create incentives for officials to increase GDP and to increase job creation, and that's how they get rewarded, you're going to get a lot of that behavior. The Party will do that, not immediately. Remember, immediately they're kind of flat on their back. They've had this They're a little bit flat on their back, which creates an opening. It creates this grudging dynamic of “we're going to hold power and we're going to allow economic entrepreneurialism to take place, but we're gonna control it. We’re going to control it with special economic zones…” Dwarkesh Patel 01:26:44 In any country in the world today where there's a lot of poverty, the reason the poverty exists is also because of policy. To the extent that poverty has been removed, it is because of some combination of human capital and policy got less stupid. If we're going to complain about a country like Bangladesh being poor—and there are many poor countries in the world… Maybe we're going in circles here. A different question I wanna ask is… Stephen Kotkin 01:27:14 No, you have a point. We're not disagreeing. I’m just trying to say that we give too much credit to the Communist Party for what's happened in China and not enough blame for what's happened in China. This is part of the dynamic of us seeing communism as potentially successful. We criticize these fools who thought that the Stalin regime was not going to kill them, and was not going to produce famine. Yet we have this narrative that the Communist Party produced an economic miracle in China. I’m sorry, the Communist Party took advantage of the economic miracle in China. It played a part in it, expropriated the hard work of many people, and stole the businesses. A lot of those local officials just stole the land and stole the businesses from people who'd created a success. This is the thing that the Party did that's really important. Deng Xiaoping first He goes to Japan. You're looking at Japan, DK, and it lost the war. It was literally incinerated in the American use of atomic weapons. It was destroyed, it lost the war, and it's rising to be the second-largest economy in the world. What happened? How was that possible? How could Japan rise from the ashes, literally, when China won the war? It was on the winning side and it has a $200 per capita GDP. Deng Xiaoping looks this over, and he says the answer is that Japan is partners with America, not with the Soviet Union. Deng Xiaoping is going to The secret sauce is, you have to manufacture and export to the American domestic market because the American middle class is insatiable. They will buy anything as long as the quality is high and the price is low. Japan did this. Japan's two former colonies, Taiwan and South Korea, followed in Japan's footsteps. China's going to do this too. We're going to use this Japanese model and the American middle class, and their insatiable overconsumption, is going to create the Chinese middle class. So this is what the party does, this geopolitical reorientation from a Soviet economic model to a Japan-style They have a couple of tricks that are really important. They have Hong Kong. Hong Kong is a British-controlled, rule of law, international financial order that allocates capital based upon risk and return, not Communist Party dictates. Gorbachev's Soviet Union, they have nothing like Hong Kong. The only reason China has Hong Kong is because after World War II—when Truman announced that Chiang Kai-shek and the The other thing they have is Furthermore, they have the Japanese war guilt because the Japanese committed those The point being is that Deng Xiaoping did that. That was intentional. That's the credit that the party deserves and the party never gets because it's a story not of the party's rule alone, but of British Hong Kong, Taiwan, Japan, United States domestic market, etc. So how do you get rich in the modern world? You sell to America. Those countries that are partners with America and that are able to compete. The Chinese deserve credit. They can manufacture higher-quality, lower-cost products that American consumers will buy. American consumers are not forced to buy Chinese products. They're just better, and they're cheaper. So they buy them because it's a market and there's competition. My point being is that the 01:35:13 – Why didn't somebody just kill Stalin?Dwarkesh Patel 01:35:12 Suppose Stalin had lost the Stephen Kotkin 01:35:39 Counterfactuals are really critical for historical thought. A lot of historians are pedantic about this. They say we're against counterfactuals, it's just speculation. But every single one of them is a practitioner. Why? If you say that Stalin caused collectivization, that means without Stalin there's no collectivization. If you say Hitler caused World War II, you're doing the counterfactual. You're saying no Hitler, no World War II. Dwarkesh Patel 01:36:12 Just to put a finer point on my question, I mean it not just in the sense of whether collectivization would have happened, but more in the sense of, how would he personally have avoided the fate of Stephen Kotkin 01:36:39 This is a question about how do you become Stalin? Could there have been another Stalin besides Stalin? A lot of people will argue that you have this formative period when you're growing up, your parents, your schooling, the influences of your peers, and you become a certain personality. Part of it is genetic, and then a lot of it is the environment, and you have this then personality. So you have to understand how the person formed, whether it's Picasso as a painter or Stalin as a dictator. Then if you understand their personality, you'll understand what they do in power. The problem with that analysis is that Stalin is not Stalin when he first gets into power. It's the experience of being in power that makes Stalin, Stalin. It's the building of the dictatorship within the dictatorship, and it's the enacting of that kind of power that makes Stalin who he is. It's sitting in that chair. It's being in the People say about Xi Jinping now, “You know, Xi Jinping has made a lot of mistakes. If he had just kept to Deng Xiaoping's policies, China would be much better off. We'd still be in a kind of In other words, how much is the personality and how much is the system? How much is formation before you get into the position of power, and how much is the circumstances and responding to those circumstances and the exigencies of the moment and the way the system operates and the place the system is and what the larger context in the world looks like? Here you have a Communist party that seizes power. As I said, unlike the case of Bavaria, southern Germany, northern Italy, Hungary, it holds power. It doesn't just seize power. The Paris Commune, 1870-71, they seized power in Paris. Then they were destroyed, put up against the wall and shot. They seize and they hold power. But they're in this peasant country, and the peasant has the land de facto and they're Marxists. They believe that the base, the socioeconomic base, the class relations, determine the superstructure or the politics. In Marxism, the base, the socioeconomic base, gives you the superstructure. Politics depends on it, it's an outcome of what the base is. So you have a de facto capitalist base. Dwarkesh Patel 01:39:57 I don't mean whether they would have done collectivization. I mean how would he personally… Because he wants power. Stephen Kotkin 01:40:02 I get that. He makes this decision. All of them want to get rid of capitalist relations in the countryside. Every single one of them wants to do that. They're all communists, they're all Marxist Leninists. But they don't think it can be done. They think if you try it, you'll fail. He goes and tries it. He creates even more destabilization than they had predicted. But he just powers through and gets there to the end and succeeds. Most of them are grateful that he's pulled this off because they thought it couldn't be done. Your question is, “who else could have become Stalin in that position?” Who else among the Marxist-Leninists could have been the guy who says, “Whether we can do this or not, we have to do this because we can't have a socioeconomic base that's capitalist and have the communist regime survive.” They were all ready to say that, but they weren't all ready to do that. Moreover, after he did it, they had criticized him during the process while he was doing it. He was the only one in his mind who was Marxist-Leninist enough to get it done, and they were all carping at him. This is where you begin to see the paranoia, suspicion being magnified, where he then, in a few years after collectivization is more or less finished, he's going to go after them. So you needed a person who could have felt in their head that this was not only necessary, but doable. Someone who would undertake those risks, power through no matter how much famine and resistance and upheaval and criticism there was. Someone who would then come out the other side of that as the victor with this gigantic So you would need a person who was capable of being Stalin in that group, not from outside that group but inside that group. Then that person would either not use that power to destroy everybody else—not yearn for despotism but be satisfied with dictatorship where others exercised power and their domains—and yet still be able to hold on to the system. Was there such a person in the circle? If the answer is no, could that person have emerged in the process of doing it? Dwarkesh Patel 01:42:53 I guess my question is slightly different. Even if such a person did not exist, suppose Stalin already exists, he did all the stuff, and it's 1934. It seems like Stalin's starting to go a little Is Stalin, being the power player that he was and knowing how to align factions against each other to his own advantage in the very end, if somebody like him was in the Politburo, what would they have done? Or were they already there and there was nothing they could do by this point? Stephen Kotkin 01:43:39 This is a question for every single dictatorship. Why didn't somebody just kill Stalin? He was gonna kill them, kill them all. Why didn't they just kill him and save themselves? During the 1920s, Stalin resigned six times, three times in writing and three times orally, between 1923 and 1928. Every time those guys around him beg him to stay. Not only do they fail to try to push him out, but when he himself volunteers to go out, they beg him to stay. Then he kills all of them within 10 years. Every one of them, just with a few exceptions, is dead. Jeez, so what were those guys thinking? It's clear that Stalin was not Stalin yet. If they knew in the 20s that in the 30s he was gonna murder them all, maybe they would have acted the way you said. He becomes Stalin in this process. He's not Stalin yet. That's a really important argument that I make in the book. Today you look at Around Putin, the Dwarkesh Patel 01:45:34 Sorry, why doesn't this prevent… People are trying to kill the Tsar constantly. They're killing Russian ministers in the tsarist regime. Stephen Kotkin 01:45:44 There are more Dwarkesh Patel 01:45:49 Also, Mussollini, but never against Stalin. Why is that? Stephen Kotkin 01:45:52 Stalin is the guy who is building and personifying the system. The people around Stalin can see that he is unusually good at dictatorship. He is just carrying this entire system on his back through thick and thin, killing enemies, liquidating the So there is a way in which they're pygmies and he's Stalin. Of course, they know that they can't do what he does. If they tried to unseat him, they might save their lives but they might lose the revolution, the system and the radiant future, the overthrow of capitalism, the abundance, peace, paradise on earth. That's a big move to lose if you believe in that, if your life is about that and you're dedicated to that. But in addition, you have a collective action problem that's really important. Let's suppose that I'm in a Stalinist regime with you. You're a functionary and I'm a functionary. Stalin's collectivizing agriculture, which means he's destroying productivity, and we're going to be poor. All the way through the You agree with me, but instead of saying yes, let's do it, immediately you run to Stalin and you say that this Kotkin guy is talking behind your back about how we need to take you down. It’s self-preservation, you're going to preserve yourself because you don't trust. There's a lack of trust inside these dictatorships. If you knew that Stalin hadn't sent me for sure 100%, you would say, “You know, you're right. You got a point there. What can we do about this?” But you know that Stalin is constantly doing these provocations, or you suspect he is. You know that he's got people, provocateurs who are around the system doing things like this. The secret police are listening in on your phone conversations. The driver of your car works for Stalin, doesn't work for you, and is reporting any overheard conversations in the car. And the maid in your apartment is also working for the secret police and reporting up the chain of command. So the system that you're in enmeshes you in this distrust, in this surveillance and distrust. So what looks like, “Geez, let's just take him down and save our own life, let alone save the country.” Yes, it's logical, but that's not the kind of life that they led. We would think that based upon the kind of lives and the system that we live in. Dwarkesh Patel 01:49:37 But there's a bunch of revolutionaries who try to kill the Tsar and sometimes succeed. They're just random people. They're not people in the regime, they're just random people. Stephen Kotkin 01:49:45 Yes. Dwarkesh Patel 01:49:46 Why doesn't a kulak, one of the hundred million enslaved people, go out and… Stephen Kotkin 01:49:51 The Tsar has less security than Stalin does. Dwarkesh Patel 01:49:53 Didn't you say that in 1928 he had like one bodyguard when he would go to his Stephen Kotkin 01:49:58 The bodyguard stuff increases over time, but the regime is walled off from the people. Stalin doesn't go out in public. He's not one of these populist types in public who's bathing in the adulation of the crowd. He's in the office, he's at the dacha, he's at the party meeting, he's at the party congress. He's not putting himself at risk. Even so, it is paradoxical because when Hitler goes to make a speech, every year Hitler makes a speech in Munich. It's known when he's going to make the speech. It's announced in the paper. There are a couple of assassination attempts on Hitler, one of which takes place in the hall where he's going to do, where someone plants a bomb. It's There are military officials who tried to kill Hitler, Stalin doesn't have this. In fact, the people inside the regime are killing themselves. When they see that Stalin is leading them down a blind alley of murder and ration tickets in Gulag. They kill themselves rather than kill Stalin. Again, there's something special about the mentality of these communists. There's also something about Stalin's success as well as the threat that he represents to these individuals. Still, it is mysterious because there were opportunities and people didn't take up the opportunities. Very few… There was no serious assassination attempt on Stalin. The very few times when they accused somebody of doing an assassination… There were shots fired at a boat when Stalin was on holiday in the south. It was not because Stalin was in the boat. It was because the boat was not in the system as marked as allowed to use that waterway. They were just performing their duties as border guards shooting at the boat. It got dressed up as an assassination attempt and people were arrested and executed and it was publicized as such. They didn't know that Stalin was in the boat. 01:52:45 – Overcoming the pathologies of communism with tech: USSR vs ChinaDwarkesh Patel 01:52:46 You've written How similar is that, in your opinion, to what's happening in China? The dissimilarity is that while Eastern Europe was struggling to export and they had a trade deficit, China, many people argue, is exporting too much. Do you see any similarity between where Eastern Europe was in 1989 versus where China is today? Or are you not as concerned about China right now? Stephen Kotkin 01:53:25 It's a very difficult question to answer very briefly, but it's a really important question. There are tremendous differences, of course, civilizational differences let alone system differences. We wouldn't want to elide those differences. What's similar is the Marxist-Leninist monopoly on power. People ask me, is China a Marxist-Leninist regime? I usually say it's a Leninist regime because that's undisputable. Do they believe in Marxism or not? People disagree on this. How many true believers are there? Is Xi Jinping a true believer? That's a difficult argument to win because the evidence is contradictory and because we don't know the inside of the system. It's still in power, it hasn't fallen. But it's clearly a Leninist system. A Leninist system can't be half-pregnant. You can't be half-communist. You either have a communist monopoly or you don't. What happens in communist political reform, not economic reform where they allow some market behavior, but where you liberalize the system and you open it up politically… You say, DK, let's have debate inside the party. Let's allow pluralism inside the party's rule, meaning we're going to keep the party but we're going to allow different tendencies in the party. The problem with that is some wiseacre raises their hand and says, “I don't want the party. I want another party. I don't want the Communist Party. I want a Social Democratic party, or I want a right-wing party, or I want a centrist party.” And you say, “No, no, no, that's not the rules here. The rule is only debate within the party's monopoly, not that you can have another party.” What happens is there's no way for them to open debate and then to put a lid on the debate. It becomes a They're not going to do political reform because they know from studying the Gorbachev case, which everybody studies in party school where all the cadres have to go to be trained. They're not going to open up the system politically because that's suicide. They're not going to commit suicide like what happened with Gorbachev. This means their policy options, their menu of policy options, is limited. They can open up the economy, but if it gets too open and too liberalized, too many people with independent sources of power and wealth, too many They can open up the system economically, but then they have to somehow reimpose controls. But if they reimpose too many controls, the GDP goes down and they don't have the job creation. You have this constant back and forth of how much economic liberalization you can have before it becomes a threat, or how little economic liberalization you can have before it becomes a threat to your ability to create jobs and wealth. That's the dilemma they're in. The Soviets in the '70s and '80s were looking at the system. They didn't want to change the system Gorbachev-style. They didn't want to liberalize it politically. They were willing to introduce some market economic liberalization, some market incentives.
We know how that worked. It didn't work. Now you're looking at China today. You have a Communist Party monopoly. You can't be half-pregnant. You can't open up politically. How are you going to reintroduce dynamism? How are you going to get the GDP growth? How are you going to get job creation? How are you going to get societal buy-in? If you go too far in that direction, that could threaten the regime. If you don't go far enough… So we got tech. The tech can make our dictatorship function better. Not just our economy, our productivity, our job creation, managing through the demographic crisis, not just the economic and social benefits from tech that tech could deliver…Tech could maybe make our communist dictatorship immune from challenges because surveillance is all-encompassing, because of our ability to spot things before they happen. So you can see where they would be so seduced, so tempted to believe that tech is the solution. Here's the problem with that argument. First, it didn't work the last time. That doesn't mean it won't work this time, but the track record, even though it's a small number of cases, is not good. But the other problem is Dwarkesh Patel 02:00:23 But do you need it? Stalin didn't have strong growth in the '20s and '30s, and it seems like you just double down on repression. If you double down on the NKVD… The Tsar actually had 2% growth up until 1917. Stephen Kotkin 02:00:39 They're dead, and their system is gone. It's fundamentally a deficit of political legitimacy. We talk about Iran today and how There's a deeper problem there. What the Iranian regime needs is political legitimacy. That's what it doesn't have. It's not just a failure economically. It's not just a failure in security. In its foreign policy terms. It's hated by its own people. It's got maybe 20% support in the population. A lot of people are indifferent but a majority of the people despise this regime and want to see it go. They're patriots for Iran, but they detest the Neither Russia nor China can give political legitimacy to Iran. They can give Dwarkesh Patel 02:02:24 I guess we'd like to think that's what matters. But historically it just seems like when authoritarians crack down really hard, it kind of just works. Right? Stephen Kotkin 02:02:33 That's why they have gigantic repressive apparatuses. People talk about a bargain. The Chinese made a bargain or the Russians made a bargain. The people gave up their freedom and the regime provides a higher standard of living. So there's this bargain. There is no bargain. Because if the regime fails to raise the standard of living, the people can't sue them in court. They can't say, "You didn't live up to your end of the bargain. We gave away our freedom, but you didn't deliver on your part of the bargain, so the deal is over. You're out of power now because you didn't live up to your bargain." Instead, they repress. They bring out the batons. They bring out the water cannon. They bring out the disappearances where people are arrested in cause. They're not even indicted, they just disappear them. You have this huge repressive apparatus, and it seems to work, especially when you have this moment where you fail to live up to some of the promises that you made. The challenge for them is that somebody has to do the repression. The repressive apparatus is not a machine. It's not AI. It's not something which is mechanical. It's people. It's people who grow up in neighborhoods, come from villages, and went to schools with other people. This brings us back to the tsarist regime where we started. The tsarist secret police wasn't big enough to keep the lid on, so they had to use the military. The military was a peasant army. They were peasants in uniform. The working class, including women, was striking for bread in the capital and There came a point where the regime called out the repression, and the repressors had agency and didn't repress. That's what happens in these cases. You never know when it's going to happen. It's very hard to predict beforehand. But there comes a That's where the political legitimacy variable is ultimately decisive. Because those people who were killing under communism and collectivizing those villages and When they don't enact, your power evaporates. It's like a You can have a political bank run in the repressive apparatus. They cease thinking that they should kill people like themselves on behalf of a system that they are no longer loyal to, no longer adhering to. That can happen in the forces of order, as we call them, in the repressive apparatus. It can happen inside the elite. Because when the leader gives the order, it's got to go through the whole chain of command. The leader doesn't give the order to the soldier. It goes to the one boss, the subordinate to that boss, the subordinate… Anywhere along the chain of command, there can be disloyalty and revolt. There can be what we call political defection. What motivates, what triggers, political defection? The lack of legitimacy, political illegitimacy. People are not going to die for something that they no longer believe in. So that's a really big problem that the communist regime can't solve with tech. You say, “Well, the tech could produce power and prosperity and China could relegitimize its rule just like it did with economic growth. The economic growth did it for 30-40 years and that's how the regime legitimated itself. The tech will do that for the next 30-40 years.” The answer is, that hasn't happened yet. Maybe it can do that and maybe it can't, but it's never permanent. What's permanent is power rooted in the people. What's permanent is their real citizens. They have real freedoms. They have the right to vote. Now, they can't get what they want. They go to the polls and they see bad candidate, worse candidate, even worse candidate. But they can punish what they don't like. They can exercise that agency. They can be citizens. They can realize their citizenship, just like we do as consumers in the marketplace, consumers of podcasts. That's where you get legitimacy from, where the system enables people, opportunity at home, opportunity for people who otherwise don't have opportunity. That's legitimacy. That's priceless. China doesn't have that. Russia doesn't have that. Stalin had that legitimacy for a time based upon the idea that he was building a new world and overcoming the horrors of capitalism and imperialism and world war. Khrushchev gave a second wind to that, even as he was revealing more of the horrors. Then that just ran out, and they unwittingly destroyed the system trying to give it a third wind under Gorbachev. So they have no way forward. They're stuck. They can't do structural reform and maintain their power, but without structural reform, without a legitimate system, they also can't maintain their power forever. It's really interesting. In the short run, we're all dead because there could be a World War III. But in the long run, we're all good because our system is better. So we have to elongate the short run. No world war between the US and China. Get to the long run, get to the competition, get to the cold war instead of hot war, where we're not having a hot war. That's the beauty of cold war. It's not hot war. You can compete, you can have tensions, you can have rivalries, but you don't have hot war. So in the short run, potentially, we're all dead, because a world war with great powers… It was 55 million in World War II, the low estimate of deaths. That was a multiple of World War I, and World War III would be a multiple of World War II. If we can avoid that, in the long run, we're good. It's the opposite of what Dwarkesh Patel 02:11:28 All right, great note to close on. Thank you so much for coming on the podcast. It was a real pleasure to talk to you. Stephen Kotkin 02:11:34 My pleasure. I apologize for not being succinct in my answers, but if you've read some of my books, not all of them, some of them go on at length. A few of them are short, though. I have to master the answers to questions on podcasts in order to be able to get through your whole magnificent list. Maybe next time we'll do better. Dwarkesh Patel 02:11:55 The long drawdown is why I want you on the podcast. A lot of these issues are complicated, so I appreciate you doing it. You're currently a free subscriber to |