---
subject: "The beauty of intricacies"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-07-23 03:32:47
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
This Sunday, I have some facts for you. They involve yarn and some pretty path-breaking geometry.
I picked up crochet last year. It’s a craft that uses yarn, like knitting, but requires one thin needle with a hook instead of two long knitting needles.
My mother was amazed that I, an extremely lazy person, was investing time in a laborious hobby. I was surprised, too, but for a different reason—the level of mathematics involved in designing the patterns. This was fascinating because crochet is generally perceived as a homely pastime. But it turns out, for as long as people—largely women—have been knitting and crocheting, they have been intuitively using basic mathematics.
Then, in 1997, Latvian mathematician Daina Taimina took it up a notch by using a crochet pattern to teach the subject. She crafted a beautiful, swirly piece that represented a hyperbolic plane whose existence disproves a very revered mathematical postulate laid down by Euclid, who is considered to be the father of geometry.
I spent the year trying to understand everything that lies beneath the surface of a simple crochet piece: the mathematics of it, the patience it needs, and the way one stitch can change the whole thing.
The stories that we publish at The Ken are quite similar. Speaking with my colleagues always makes me realise how much goes into each story. What I read is a clean, careful product of painstaking research, reporting, and editing. There is a lot underneath. Take last week’s articles, for example:
On Monday, the story by Seema and Anand began with a thought-provoking sentence: “Capital is a liability”. It’s about [Pharmeasy](https://the-ken.com/story/thyrocare-saved-pharmeasy-once-will-it-save-it-again/), India’s most-valued healthtech startup and—you guessed it—the 90% plunge in valuation that could come with the rights issue. And how will their funding exercise unfold? Hints lie in the overlaps of significant shareholders of Pharmeasy and Manipal Hospitals.
Tata Motors is winning the race to supply electric vehicles (EVs) for cab fleets. Uber, Blusmart and Everest are lining up at Tata’s doors for their EV needs. But this isn’t the complete picture, showed the story by Shaswata on Tuesday. The automaker is downplaying this success, and it has something to do with the accidental [branding](https://the-ken.com/story/tata-motors-makes-fleet-comeback-with-evs-now-it-has-to-avoid-cab-car-tag/) hit it took years ago.
The next story, too, is about good news that should be welcomed with caution. On Wednesday, Isa explained how the Philippines’ decision to forgive over a billion dollars in agricultural debt doesn’t address the sector’s real [ailments](https://the-ken.com/story/top-agri-exporter-forgives-us1b-farm-debt-but-farmers-dont-owe-banks/). How beneficial is this decision, and what is it leaving out?
On Thursday, Alifiya wrote about [Coursera’s](https://the-ken.com/story/iit-without-jee-coursera-gets-top-colleges-to-not-be-very-choosy/) strategy of tying up with top Indian educational institutes, including the prestigious Indian Institutes of Technology, to offer degree courses online. It appears to be a win-win situation for all: students, universities, the government, and the company. But it may play out differently than expected.
The government has big plans for the international electronics industry. And these plans would be fulfilled by the domestic [repair-service](https://the-ken.com/story/indias-plan-to-be-global-electronics-repair-hub-is-ready-but-indian-firms-arent/) providers, which can create a $20-billion sector if the regulations are eased. So, what’s the holdup? Anushka wrote about it in detail on Friday.
If you’re thinking about picking up crochet and want to know where to start, please write back.
Have a great Sunday.
Regards,
Anushka M
[anushkam@the-ken.com](mailto:anushkam@the-ken.com)
What you just read is the personalised daily introduction to The Ken's story. Written by a different person each day. Often insightful, sometimes witty, and very rarely boring. Someone sent this to you? [Sign up for free](https://the-ken.com/?modal=register&utm_source=footer&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=morning_email_ind_recap). [Dont like these? You can unsubscribe](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/unsubscribe/?user_id=2349339&data=wQ09fKvznNv_ZfK52LY5xGBNpHycFp_W8NvcAhSGXHJoMDAwdTAwMN6191yc8dkNXez6sfXqPMcFh4fqCkG16VKLVZrjJ5cihFsHiqLU7xhWLjq20QCAuzB8UimJyWFNQLZAckKLcouBF5Zc9IVQ9c_hT9Fv5NxrXxcJCxeScKZm1V6sjWBaIGMvbhhIdyfPqI4XbBiWCpd56ul6gh83cyqEgOz8ZkbnSDPCK7ta_B7-_d-nRZIQBpUAod8EtqlHebwMPdDmmpJAwzqSlXPl1RpEUy_PkKKMxvwJ43Yi6cVTjqwupZYOiw2MDWMW3ctRAiqBSVUb1JWGJ-Q-j-50cSmOht9mjNrbgfP-bFDMK365MMTsFwS6g-kgarzaaO5XHgNuzmWRsvPa1A3OrJV4XT6o2qcye5ESvsMfRKFPWWEXGM12G2VjuKU8OS9SKqql7nUak0N6w-MblM3vv636mlcfDBWm-z_nxfoP8IDaLkW8ahJD40cLIsyGqCvnnzuzCSOgele8pd31e3wQKIJHBvHf-UTJW6-n9NnS07ElV2pi2UOKsNQoYKFd9Igay7xk3mIQKuAHz_k=) Dont want to hear from us again? [ Unsubscribe from our emails here](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/?user_id=2349339&data=OJc0Iw0LYuXcqItI1JAtahmDdRjU9emm5Q_6R79QxrVoMDAwdTAwMGuq-ZAAVqPjDL4PJI3rNxkHfZ706LINSQOnBI4eeCtyXBz6St2d8uOA4eKHUTzoKQMxuNLA7Vj4s9olobkw7aqaNHZC5SHpSzBFB4sTS1qwhjiUQmIEXB0jN3-LrEqxCS8RQ650--FdFB3THm4Qr5PnSXvuy7LkUPcP5rWPsBLRrYRJeHvn_pKoRqMidzXPv8EImdwYFdbmOTSOPL16V7JRBDVrCQKgLdOvDgKJWmgQBLbfQaKhHkGH_hyFw3Z5WDzOIjYTQhcqcFR3LeOtWV9Lkurv5JchYEWqaz7k2hT6Ot2GQXiwNqgVbqn2TxJjp3oojUVdzN2lF3SQD9kA9XH0cAJcdL9hZwdbF0ewRj-64aG0_qMTMDAz5P-484CMPHt4vZkRb3qwIkMAhdJUyaXygF7smkKuZfjSX48g6cNU8R-dJZ3EvhcayMv_FaJfa7AItJJ_JjKBLIuoWLXwTLJhA8zgiHp6LFlWN6Wt5a56bVe-LFoS0i1hSvlAIytAPg==).
Something wrong? Tell us at [support@the-ken.com](mailto:support@the-ken.com)