---
subject: "OpenAI's GPT-OSS Is Already Old News"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-08-08 12:18:33
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
That’s on OpenAI. I don’t schedule their product releases. Since it takes several days to gather my reports on new models, we are doing our coverage of the OpenAI open weights models, GPT-OSS-20b and GPT-OSS-120b, today, after the release of GPT-5. The bottom line is that they seem like clearly good models in their targeted reasoning domains. There are many reports of them struggling in other domains, including with tool use, and they have very little inherent world knowledge, and the safety mechanisms appear obtrusive enough that many are complaining. It’s not clear what they will be used for other than distillation into Chinese models. It is hard to tell, because open weight models need to be configured properly, and there are reports that many are doing this wrong, which could lead to clouded impressions. We will want to check back in a bit. In the Substack version of this post I am going to create a master thread for GPT-5 reactions, which I will consider for the reactions section of that coverage, which I’m hoping to get out on or starting Monday. Moderately Sized ModelsFor a while OpenAI has promised it is going to release a state of the art open model. They delayed for a bit, but they delivered. We now have GPT-OSS 20b and 120b. I was hoping for smaller, ideally something that could run on a standard phone. That’s a compelling use case where you need an open model, and the smaller the model the less risk you are running of both malicious use and also distillation. I am glad they capped out at 120b. Introducing GPT-OSSThe headline claim is bold: Performance similar to o4-mini.
Here are links to The Model Card
The historical way to deal with these challenges is to ignore them. What would happen if someone engaged in malicious fine tuning of the model? What does the threat model look like in the real world? Are you seriously pretending that any of this safety work will hold up to two days of the internet working to remove it? When Meta or DeepSeek release a new open weights model, they don’t stop to ask in any way visible to us. At best we get quick evaluation of what the model can do in its current form after minimal effort. Then they irrevocably ship and see what happens. OpenAI long ago realized that, despite their name, doing that seemed rather deeply irresponsible and foolish, and stopped releasing open weights models. That’s effective. Now they have caved under various pressures and released open weights models. They do recognize that this is an inherently dangerous thing to do on various levels.
If you must go down this road, this seems like the right rule, if getting different answers would have meant not releasing. You have: An absolute threshold, High capability, beyond which this is not okay. A relative threshold, where you’re not willing to substantially make things worse.
And [You do all of this with the adversarially fine-tuned version](https://substack.com/redirect/d75b1daa-d986-4a77-bc4b-daf739ffb071?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), trying your best to mimic actual conditions, as per OpenAI’s stated approach to open weights.
This does mean that as irresponsible actors ratchet up their capabilities, you get to do so as well, and one has to worry about the functional definition of ‘substantially.’ It still seems reasonable to say that once someone else has made the situation [X] dangerous, matching them doesn’t make it that much worse. Our Price CheapThese models are very small and cheap. If these are 20b and 120b, r1 is 671b. By contrast, r1 has 37b active parameters, versus 5.1b and 3.6b. These are playing in a much lighter class and they’re quantized to 4.25 bits per parameter boot.
How much did this cost to train? If you count only the training itself, not much.
Calling it ‘o3-level’ is quite the stretch but the broader point is valid. o3 estimates this translates to a total cost of $1.4 million for 20b and $13 million for 120b as all-in costs. But if you use only the compute costs using cloud cost estimates, which is the way we all talked about the cost to train v3 and r1 (e.g. ‘The Six Million Dollar Model’) we get $4.2m-$8.4m for GPT-OSS-120b and $420k-$840k for GPT-OSS-20b. The real cost is collecting the data and figuring out how to train it. Actually training models of this size, given that data and the right methods, costs very little. Yes, we have tool use.
The core safety approach is
On Your MarksThe STEM scores are excellent. They also give us HealthBench. Multilingual performance is okay but not as good as OpenAI’s larger models. Mundane Safety EvaluationsAn open model means you have more distinct scenarios to consider. You both want to know how well your safety measures hold up under more ‘normal’ conditions, especially when someone serves up your model to users. Then you also want to check what happens if a malicious actor is trying to fine tune and otherwise maximize how much the model can get up to no good, including the potential of them to lose control of that situation. Those are great numbers for ‘standard’ refusals and production benchmarks. That makes sense. If you’re going to be facing a larger attack surface, and you want to actually survive the attacks, you need to bias the starting configuration to be safer. On maintaining the instruction hierarchy, also known as safety for those deploying the model, the 120B version does okay, but the 20B does poorly. Note that it seems fine to test for this as-is, if you modify the system to make this stop working that is your own damn fault. The performance on hallucinations seems not great. Preparedness Framework EvaluationsFinally, someone is at least attempting to take this seriously.
So what was found?
Their answer was that as of right now the answer is no.
I dunno, man: This sure looks to me like a potentially substantial jump? There were other tests where the jump was less prominent. I would also note that OpenAI’s models are going to be a lot faster and cheaper and easier to run than Kimi K2. Kimi K2 has a trillion parameters. The Qwen 3 they tested is presumably the largest one, with 235 billion total and 22 billion active, versus 120 billion total and a little over 5 billion active for ChatGPT-OSS. It’s not clear this matters in a malicious use context. I also don’t know how substantial the net effect is here of the gain in capabilities. What I do know is it looks like they made a smaller, cheaper and more effective model, and released it because it was more effective but insufficiently more effective than what was already out there, To be fair to them, if Meta, Qwen, DeepSeek and Kimi et al are all going to go ‘lol who cares release the hounds’ then the marginal difference here doesn’t matter, since it doesn’t cause a cascade of counterfactual marginal differences. If you want the rule to be ‘no better at all’ then that needs to be a norm. For cybersecurity, they once again cite Qwen 3 Thinking and Kimi K2 as comparable models, and also find the threats here to be less worrisome overall. The other positive note is that OpenAI consulted outside experts throughout. You can read OpenAI technical staff offering their own threads on this process:
Good HabitsDoing the fine-tuning as part of open model safety testing is mandatory. If you don’t do it, did you even safety test?
I wouldn’t say ‘as responsibly as possible,’ but I would say ‘as responsibly as one could in practice expect.’ Fine-tuning also seems very worth doing on closed models. If we can make testing on similarly fine-tuned versions the gold standard for safety testing, even of closed models, that would be amazing.
DistillationThe danger that is not mentioned by OpenAI in the model card is distillation, and the ability to reverse engineer OpenAI’s training methods and ‘secret sauce.’ They provide raw, unfiltered reasoning traces of varying sizes, and models that for many purposes are clearly superior to previous open alternatives especially given their size. The cost of very good synthetic data just plummeted, and also the Chinese will build directly on top of OSS, either alone or as part of hybrids.
The best counterargument to this is that if the models are not good enough, then no one is going to want to use them. I worry we might be in a spot where the models are very good in some places where distillation will be useful, while not being that good in other places and thus not seeing much practical use as part of some ‘tech stack.’
This is what I consider the main practical cost of this release. Indeed, it would be highly unsurprising to see the following happen: OpenAI releases GPT-OSS. Chinese companies rush to distill, build upon and hybridize GPT-OSS, and reverse engineer what OpenAI did in large part, resulting in an explosion of models in the coming months. The gap between Chinese models and American models narrows. These models are cited as evidence that ‘the Chinese are catching up,’ and that ‘our export controls have failed’ and so on.
Also note that OpenAI did a virtuous thing of not training GPT-OSS directly on its reasoning traces, but someone then working with GPT-OSS need not be so virtuous. What happens when these people start using I think that, even if we entirely discount the marginal risk of direct malicious use, which is very much a real tail risk, OpenAI If you are trying to prevent someone from fast following, don’t make it easy to follow. I’d love to be wrong about this, but if it happens, ask yourself now, how would you update? What do you think should be the policy response? Safety FirstA number of people noted that the safety guardrails on GPT-OSS are being annoying.
That makes sense. If you give the user greater affordances to attack your defenses, you’re going to either need defenses that are by default more annoying, or you’re going to prematurely fold the way most open weight models do and not bother trying.
A fun quirk:
Other ReactionsAs with every new model, I gather reactions, and as usual opinions differ. One important note is that it seems possible to set the model up wrong and get much worse performance.
Here is a chart of WeirdML scores, 30% vs. 35% vs. 40% is a big difference. You can see OSS-20b and OSS-120b on the left at ~35% and ~40%, on the cost-performance frontier.
When reports are good they are often very good.
As always, a classic way to get a lot of views is to claim the Next Big Thing is Big. Look at the comments, and you largely see skepticism and pushback.
Here’s another strong review:
A lot of people seem rather disappointed by overall performance.
Then there are ambiguous notes.
One note I’ve seen a bunch of times is that the model knows very little.
Not knowing much is a problem.
Hit Me Up I’m OpenIt feels to me a lot like OpenAI got gaslit into releasing open models. Pressure from various sources added up, Twitter vibes were applied, talk of ‘America needs to lead on open models’ was coming from high places, and they felt like the bad guys for the wrong reasons. And they folded. What happens now? It will take a bit to know exactly how good these models are, both at advancing open models including from China, and at becoming a driver of usage. Given their size, the price and speed should be quite good. The reasoning aspect seems strong. Other aspects seem worse. My guess is that there is not that much that these models will be used for, where we are happy they are being used to do it. If you want to use a reasonably priced good model, sir, you can use Gemini 2.5 Flash or GPT-5. If you want the best, you can choose between Opus 4.1, GPT-5 and Gemini 2.5 Pro. If you have security or customization reasons to need an open weight daily driver, in this weight range, are these going to be your pick? I don’t know. Maybe? We shall see. You're currently a free subscriber to |