---
subject: "AI #102: Made in America"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-06 14:16:22
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
I remember that week I used r1 a lot, and everyone was obsessed with DeepSeek. They earned it. DeepSeek cooked, r1 is an excellent model. Seeing the Chain of Thought was revolutionary. We all learned a lot. It’s still #1 in the app store, there are still hysterical misinformed NYT op-eds and and calls for insane reactions in all directions and plenty of jingoism to go around, largely based on that highly misleading $6 millon cost number for DeepSeek’s v3, and a misunderstanding of how AI capability curves move over time. But like the tariff threats that’s now so yesterday now, for those of us that live in the unevenly distributed future. All my reasoning model needs go through o3-mini-high, and Google’s fully unleashed Flash Thinking for free. Everyone is exploring OpenAI’s Deep Research, even in its early form, and I finally have an entity capable of writing faster than I do. And, as always, so much more, even if we stick to AI and stay in our lane. Buckle up. It’s probably not going to get less crazy from here. Table of ContentsFrom this week: [Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/1e5121aa-924e-4cfa-b2f0-73c7023277c2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The new coding language is vibes.[o1-Pro Offers Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/4143cc39-8406-4266-bdcf-a1bcb037bb2a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Tyler Cowen urges you to pay up already.[We’re in Deep Research.](https://substack.com/redirect/da77ac54-68b9-4188-b35d-00f602837fad?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Further reviews, mostly highly positive.[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/39298b9b-5ee3-4cfb-ac39-90adb93e2c19?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Do you need to bootstrap thyself?[Model Decision Tree.](https://substack.com/redirect/a0c460c2-e8b6-40f3-8f48-5975e72816f0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Sully offers his automated use version.[Huh, Upgrades.](https://substack.com/redirect/1a490c4a-9a0e-4f89-b124-b86080f5081c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Gemini goes fully live with its 2.0 offerings.[Bot Versus Bot.](https://substack.com/redirect/e8c8f4cf-f8f0-4f43-9b49-6b2f63aff899?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Wouldn’t you prefer a good game of chess?[The OpenAI Unintended Guidelines.](https://substack.com/redirect/68b1e52b-0d43-41fd-a697-d4880853f563?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Nothing I’m conscious of to see here.[Peter Wildeford on DeepSeek](https://substack.com/redirect/c109a066-dd9f-4110-8678-4ab9ebcbb85e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/c109a066-dd9f-4110-8678-4ab9ebcbb85e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A clear explanation of why we all got carried away.[Our Price Cheap.](https://substack.com/redirect/ae54b3f7-6eff-4796-97e1-6c587cfc3f66?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)What did DeepSeek’s v3 and r1 actually cost?[Otherwise Seeking Deeply.](https://substack.com/redirect/262e3d24-de44-4830-ba59-4221e4ae1633?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Various other DeepSeek news, a confused NYT op-ed.[Smooth Operator.](https://substack.com/redirect/968d13f5-3012-4c9a-95ee-668c9e6dee5e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Not there yet.[Keep practicing](https://substack.com/redirect/40f7aaf0-767c-4857-970a-a90b4ea59f1f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).[Have You Tried Not Building An Agent?](https://substack.com/redirect/726dbab3-071a-4f28-a4ed-b008863828d2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)I tried really hard.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon.](https://substack.com/redirect/ac259be8-b199-4c05-b7fb-c5cbd2f4a4d0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Free Google AI phone calls, IG AI chats.[They Took Our Jobs.](https://substack.com/redirect/fac1ad23-b877-40d8-a4d7-b02c6dd972ba?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)It’s going to get rough out there.[The Art of the Jailbreak.](https://substack.com/redirect/b1966109-7a59-44a7-b1c8-5b3ca1aae9be?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Think less.[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/c88d2ca7-2e66-4338-b541-37e3b938f287?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Anthropic offers a universal jailbreak competition.[Introducing.](https://substack.com/redirect/1a41023e-0782-40ed-845a-e25cb8f873d3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)DeepWriterAI.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/9a7e22ad-76b5-47b9-8bf3-a5106aecfebb?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Never mind that Google pledge to not use AI for weapons.[Theory of the Firm](https://substack.com/redirect/1b12a3ca-fb94-4690-b8df-5a0764f2026f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/1b12a3ca-fb94-4690-b8df-5a0764f2026f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)What would a fully automated AI firm look like?[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/d7f75b35-5238-4a7f-bdb3-393581317eeb?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Is the product layer where it is at? What’s coming next?[The Quest for Sane Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/c36ea011-fcf1-44ab-a659-0a9579dee9bb?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)We are very much not having a normal one.[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/743a19dc-15ce-4797-91f2-5ef3aa1c1132?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Dario Amodei, Dylan Patel and more.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/a8eb9a6a-85bc-4c47-a027-7497a9a6d46f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Only attack those putting us at risk when they deserve it.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/9ae5b32f-a4c6-41f4-985d-ce89ad33c6a7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)If you can be fooled.[The Alignment Faking Analysis Continues.](https://substack.com/redirect/2c3907f7-e2bb-4c29-9cf0-5a4db8c5e759?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Follow-ups to the original finding.[Masayoshi Son Follows Own Advice](https://substack.com/redirect/4b5087ea-b454-4aa4-bb8e-a94e9c92b4d4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/4b5087ea-b454-4aa4-bb8e-a94e9c92b4d4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Protein is very important.[People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/dce8b70e-b7ef-426d-a246-aa8775b9d217?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The pope and the patriarch.[You Are Not Ready.](https://substack.com/redirect/e6b9614e-2c06-408c-bb9b-dc9578af08b5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Neither is the index measuring this, but it’s a start.[Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/4077e938-c870-4161-bcb7-c86c63978c7c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A word, please.[The Lighter Side.](https://substack.com/redirect/41a28021-00cd-4bc8-963b-ee45cee72001?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)At long last.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
I’m not ready to put my API key into a random website, but that’s how AI should work these days. You don’t like the UI, build a new one. I don’t want voice input myself, but highlighting and autoloading and the rest all sound cool. Indeed, that was the killer app for which I bought a Daylight computer. I’ll report back when it finally arrives. Meanwhile the actual o3-mini-high interface doesn’t even let you to upload the PDF.
Karpathy has mostly moved on fully to “vibe coding,” it seems.
Based on my experience with cursor I have so many questions on how that can actually work out, then again maybe I should just be doing more projects and webapps. I do think Sully is spot on about vibe coding rewarding doing the same things everyone else is doing. The AI will constantly try to do default things, and draw upon its default knowledge base. If that means success, great. If not, suddenly you have to do actual work. No one wants that.
It is true that for many tasks, we’ve past the point where ‘enough intelligence’ is the main problem at hand. So getting that intelligence into the right package and UI is going to drive customer behavior more than being marginally smarter… except in the places where you need all the intelligence you can get.
New York Times op-ed pointing out once again that
o1-Pro Offers Mundane Utility
I’m quoting this one in full.
Economics questions in the Tyler Cowen style are like complex coding questions, in the wheelhouse of what o1 pro does well. I don’t know that I would extend this to ‘all tough questions,’ and for many purposes inability to browse the web is a serious weakness, which of course Deep Research fully solves. Whereas they types of questions I tend to be curious about seem to have been a much worse fit, so far, for what reasoning models can do. They’re still super useful, but ‘the smartest entity yet devised’ does not, in my contexts, yet seem correct. We’re in Deep Research
I wonder how much of his positive experience is his selection of topics, how much is his good prompting, how much is perspective and how much is luck. Or something else? Lots of others report plenty of hallucinations. Some more theories here at the end of this section.
I mean, firing people to replace them with an AI research assistant, sure, but you’re saying you have friends? Another thing that will happen is the AIs being the ones reading your paper.
The natural response is ‘PB is using it wrong.’ You look for what an AI can do, not what it can’t do. So if DR can do [X-1] but not [X-2] or [Y], have it do [X-1]. In this case, PB’s request is for some very natural [X-2]s. It is a serious problem to not have access to Reddit or Substack or related sources. Not being able to get to gated journals even when you have credentials for them is a big deal. And it’s really annoying and limiting to not have PDF uploads. That does still leave a very large percentage of all human knowledge. It’s your choice what questions to ask. For now, ask the ones where these limitations aren’t an issue. Or even the ones where they are an advantage? Tyler Cowen gave perhaps the strongest endorsement so far of DR. It does not seem like a coincidence that he is also someone who has strongly advocated for an epistemic strategy of, essentially, ignoring entirely sources like Substack and Reddit, in favor of more formal ones. It also does not seem like a coincidence that Tyler Cowen is the fastest reader. So you have someone who can read these 10-30 page reports quickly, glossing over all the slop, and who actively wants to exclude many of the sources the process excludes. And who simply wants more information to work with. It makes perfect sense that he would love this. That still doesn’t explain the lack of hallucinations and errors he’s experiencing - if anything I’d expect him to spot more of them, since he knows so many facts. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane UtilityBut can it Model Decision Tree
It really is crazy the Claude Sonnet 3.6 is still in everyone’s mix despite all its limitations and how old it is now. It’s going to be interesting when Anthropic gets to its next cycle. Huh, Upgrades
Bot Versus Bot
I mean, great plan, explicitly going for superhuman persuasion and deception then straight to open source, I’m sure absolutely nothing could go wrong here.
Tactical understanding and skill in Diplomacy is underrated, but I do think it’s a good choice. If anyone plays out a game (with full negotiations) among leading LLMs through at least 1904, I’ll at least give a shoutout. I do think it’s a good eval. The OpenAI Unintended Guidelines
This is a tricky situation. From a public relations perspective, you absolutely do not want the AI to claim in chats that it is conscious (unless you’re rather confident it actually is conscious, of course). If that happens occasionally, even if they’re rather engineered chats, then those times will get quoted, and it’s a mess. LLMs are fuzzy, so it’s going to be pretty hard to tell the model to never affirm [X] while telling it not to assume it’s a rule to claim [~X]. Then it’s easy to see how that got extended to personal preferences. Everyone is deeply confused about consciousness, which means all the training data is super confused about it too. Peter Wildeford on DeepSeek
For example I appreciated this on the $6 million price tag, although the ratio is of course not as large as the one in the metaphor:
Here’s his price-capabilities graph: I suspect this is being unfair to Gemini, it is below r1 but not by as much as this implies, and it’s probably not giving o1-pro enough respect either. Then we get to #8, the first interesting take, which is that DeepSeek is currently 6-8 months behind OpenAI, and #9 which predicts DeepSeek may fall even further behind due to deficits of capital and chips, and also because this is the inflection point where it’s relatively easy to fast follow. To the extent DeepSeek had secret sauce, it gave quite a lot of it away, so it will need to find new secret sauce. That’s a hard trick to keep pulling off. The price to keep playing is about to go up by orders of magnitude, in terms of capex and in terms of compute and chips. However far behind you think DeepSeek is right now, can DeepSeek keep pace going forward? You can look at v3 and r1 and think it’s impressive that DeepSeek did so much with so little. ‘So little’ is plausibly 50,000 overall hopper chips and over a billion dollars, see the discussion below, but that’s still chump change in the upcoming race. The more ruthlessly efficient DeepSeek was in using its capital, chips and talent, the more it will need to be even more efficient to keep pace as the export controls tighten and American capex spending on this explodes by further orders of magnitude. Our Price Cheap
SemiAnalysis offers a take many are now citing, as they’ve been solid in the past.
That’s in addition to o1-pro, which also wasn’t considered in most comparisons. They also consider Gemini Flash 2.0 Thinking to be on par with r1, and far cheaper.
Teortaxes also tagged me on Twitter to gloat that they think it is likely DeepSeek already has enough chips to scale straight to AGI, because they are so damn efficient, and that if true then ‘export controls have already failed.’ I find that highly unlikely, but if it’s true then (in addition to the chance of direct sic transit gloria mundi if the Chinese government lets them actually hand it out and they’re crazy enough to do it) one must ask how fast that AGI can spin up massive chip production and bootstrap itself further. If AGI is that easy, the race very much does not end there. Thus even if everything Teortaxes claims is true, that would not mean ‘export controls have failed.’ It would mean we started them not a moment too soon and need to tighten them as quickly as possible. And as discussed above, it’s a double-edged sword. If DeepSeek’s capex and chip use is ruthlessly efficient, that’s great for them, but it means they’re at a massive capex and chip disadvantage going forward, which they very clearly are. Also, SemiAnalysis asks the obvious question to figure out if Jevons Paradox applies to chips. You don’t have to speculate. You can look at the pricing.
Nvidia is down on news not only that their chips are highly useful, but on the same news that causes people to spend more money for access to those chips. Curious. Otherwise Seeking Deeply
He correctly notices that the proper Cold War analogy is instead the Missile Gap.
It is indeed pretty rich to talk about a ‘compute gap’ in a word where American labs have effective access to orders of magnitude more compute. But one could plausibly warn about a ‘compute gap’ in the sense that we have one now, it is our biggest advantage, and we damn well don’t want to lose it. In the longer term, we could point out the place we are indeed in huge trouble. We have a very real electrical power gap. China keeps building more power plants and getting access to more power, and we don’t. We need to fix this urgently. And it means that if chips stop being a bottleneck and that transitions to power, which may happen in the future, then suddenly we are in deep trouble.
There’s a sense in which r1 is someone who is kind of slow and ignorant, determined to think it all through by taking all the possible approaches, laying it all out, not being afraid to look stupid, saying ‘wait’ a lot, and taking as long as it needs to. Which it has to do, presumably, because its individual experts in the MoE are so small. It turns out this works well. You can do this too, with a smarter baseline, when you care to get the right answer.
Zeynep Tufekci (she was mostly excellent during Covid, stop it with the crossing of these streams!) offers a piece in NYT about DeepSeek and its implications. Her piece centrally makes many of the mistakes I’ve had to correct over and over, starting with its hysterical headline.
This in particular is especially dangerously wrong:
This was not about a private effort by what she writes were ‘out-of-touch leaders’ to ‘kneecap competitors’ in a commercial space. To suggest that implies, several times over, that she simply doesn’t understand the dynamics or stakes here at all. The idea that ‘America can’t re-establish its dominance over the most advanced A.I.’ is technically true… because America still has that dominance today. It is very, very obvious that the best non-reasoning models are Gemini Flash 2.0 (low cost) and Claude Sonnet 3.5 (high cost), and the best reasoning models are o3-mini and o3 (and the future o3-pro, until then o1-pro), not to mention Deep Research. She also repeats the false comparison of $6m for v3 versus $100 billion for Stargate, comparing two completely different classes of spending. It’s like comparing how much America spends growing grain to what my family paid last year for bread. And the barriers to entry are rising, not falling, over time. And indeed, not only are the export controls not hopeless, they are the biggest constraint on DeepSeek. There is also no such thing as ‘Artificial Good-Enough Intelligence.’ That’s like the famous apocryphal quote where Bill Gates supposedly said ‘640k [of memory] ought to be enough for everyone.’ Or the people who think if you’re at grade level and average intelligence, then there’s no point in learning more or being smarter. Your relative position matters, and the threshold for smart enough is going to go up. A lot. Fast. Of course all three of us agree we should be hardening our cyber and civilian infrastructure, far more than we are doing.
Smooth OperatorIt’s not there. Yet.
For direct simple tasks, it once again sounds like Operator is worth using if you already have it because you’re spending the $200/month for o3 and o1-pro access, customized instructions and repeated interactions will improve performance and of course this is the worst the agent will ever be.
It’s all so tantalizing. So close. Feels like we’re 1-2 iterations of the base model and RL architecture away from something pretty powerful. For now, it’s a fun toy and way to explore what it can do in the future, and you can effectively set up some task templates for easier tasks like ordering lunch. Have You Tried Not Building An Agent?Yeah. We tried. That didn’t work. For a long time, while others talked about how AI agents don’t work and AIs aren’t agents (and sometimes that thus existential risk from AI is silly and not real), others of us have pointed out that you can turn an AI into an agent and the tech for doing this will get steadily better and more autonomous over time as capabilities improve. It took a while, but now some of the agents are net useful in narrow cases and we’re on the cusp of them being quite good. And this whole time, we’re pointed out that the incentives point towards a world of increasingly capable and autonomous AI agents, and this is rather not good for human survival. See Margaret Mitchell, along with Avijit Ghosh, Alexandra Sasha Luccioni and Giada Pistilli,
Oh no, not the harms in Section 5! We wouldn’t want lack of reliability, or unsafe data exposure, or ‘manipulation,’ or a decline in task performance, or even systemic biases or environmental trade-offs. So yes, ‘particularly concerning are the safety risks, which affect human life and impact further values.’ Mitchell is generally in the ‘AI ethics’ camp. So even though the core concepts are all right there, she then has to fall back on all these particular things, rather than notice what the stakes actually are: Existential.
No, you shouldn’t cede all human control. If you cede all human control to AIs rewriting their own code without limitation, those AIs involved control the future, are optimizing for things that are not best maximized by our survival or values, and we probably all die soon thereafter. And worse, they’ll probably exhibit systemic biases and expose our user data while that happens. Someone has to do something. Please, Margaret Mitchell. You’re so close. You have almost all of it. Take the last step! To be fair, either way, the core prescription doesn’t change. Quite understandably, for what are in effect the right reasons, Margaret Mitchell proposes not building fully autonomous (potentially recursively self-improving) AI agents. How? The reason everyone is racing to create these fully autonomous AI agents is that they will be highly useful. Those who don’t build and use them are at risk of losing to those who do. Putting humans in the loop slows everything down, and even if they are formally there they quickly risk becoming nominal. And there is not a natural line, or an enforceable line, that we can see, between the level-3 and level-4 agents above. Already AIs are writing a huge and increasing portion of all code, with many people not pretending to even look at the results before accepting changes. Coding agents are perhaps the central case of early agents. What’s the proposal? And how are you going to get it enacted into law? And if you did, how would you enforce it, including against those wielding open models? I’d love to hear an answer - a viable, enforceable, meaningful distinction we could build a consensus towards and actually implement. I have no idea what it would be. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
These specific use cases seem mostly fine in practice, for now. The ‘it takes 30 minutes to get to a human’ is necessary friction in the phone tree system, but your willingness to engage with the AI here serves a similar purpose while it’s not too overused and you’re not wasting human time. However, if everyone always used this, then you can no longer use willingness to actually bother calling and waiting to allocate human time and protect it from those who would waste it, and things could get weird or break down fast. Calling for pricing and availability is something local stores mostly actively want you to do. So they would presumably be fine talking to the AI so you can get that information, if a human will actually see it. But if people start scaling this, and decreasing the value to the store, that call costs employee time to answer. Which is the problem. Google is using an AI to take the time of a human, that is available for free but costs money to provide. In many circumstances, that breaks the system. We are not ready for that conversation. We’re going to have to be. The obvious solution is to charge money for such calls, but we’re even less ready to have that particular conversation. With Google making phone calls and OpenAI operating computers, how do you tell the humans from the bots, especially while preserving privacy? Is Meta at it again over at Instagram?
I am not much of an Instagram user. If you click on this ‘AI Studio’ button you get a low-rent Character.ai? The offerings do not speak well of humanity. Could be worse I guess. Otherwise I don’t see any characters or offers to chat at all in my feed such as it is (the only things I follow are local restaurants and I have 0 posts. I scrolled down a bit and it didn’t suggest I chat with AI on the main page. They Took Our JobsAnton Leicht warns about
I read that and I think ‘oh Anton, if you’re putting it that way I bet you have no idea,’ especially because there was a preamble about how politics sabotaged nuclear power. Anton warns that ‘there are no permanent majorities,’ which of course is true under our existing system. But we’re talking about a world that could be transformed quite fast, with smarter than human things showing up potentially before the next Presidential election. I don’t see how the Democrats could force AI regulation down Trump’s throat after midterms even if they wanted to, they’re not going to have that level of a majority. I don’t see much sign that they want to, either. Not yet. But I do notice that the public really hates AI, and I doubt that’s going to change, but the salience of AI will radically increase over time. It’s hard not to think that in 2028, if the election still happens ‘normally’ in various senses, that a party that is anti-AI (probably not in the right ways or for the right reasons, of course) would have a large advantage. That’s if there isn’t a disaster. The section here is entitled ‘accidents can happen’ and they definitely can but also it might well not be an accident. And Anton radically understates here the strategic nature of AI, a mistake I expect the national security apparatus in all countries to make steadily less over time, a process I am guessing is well underway. Then we get to the expectation that people will fight back against AI diffusion, They Took Our Jobs and all that. I do expect this, but also I notice it keeps largely not happening? There’s a big cultural defense against AI art, but art has always been a special case. I expected far greater pushback from doctors and lawyers, for example, than we have seen so far. Yes, as AI comes for more jobs that will get more organized, but I notice that the example of the longshoreman is one of the unions with the most negotiating leverage, that took a stand right before a big presidential election, unusually protected by various laws, and that has already demonstrated world-class ability to seek rent. The incentives of the ports and those doing the negotiating didn’t reflect the economic stakes. The stand worked for now, but also that by taking that stand, they bought themselves a bunch of long term trouble, as a lot of people got radicalized on that issue and various stakeholders are likely preparing for next time. Look at what is happening in coding, the first major profession to have serious AI diffusion because it is the place AI works best at current capability levels. There is essentially no pushback. AI starts off supporting humans, making them more productive, and how are you going to stop it? Even in the physical world, Waymo has its fights and technical issues, but it’s winning, again things have gone surprisingly smoothly on the political front. We will see pushback, but I mostly don’t see any stopping this train for most cognitive work. Pretty soon, AI will do a sufficiently better job that they’ll be used even if the marginal labor savings goes to $0. As in, you’d pay the humans to stand around while the AIs do the work, rather than have those humans do the work. Then what? The next section is on international diffusion. I think that’s the wrong question. If we are in an ‘economic normal’ scenario the inference is for sale, inference chips will exist everywhere, and the open or cheap models are not so far behind in any case. Of course, in a takeoff style scenario with large existential risks, geopolitical conflict is likely, but that seems like a very different set of questions.
Noah Carl is more blunt, and opens with “
I am a rather extreme optimist about the impact of ‘mundane AI’ on humans and society. I believe that AI at its current level or somewhat beyond it would make us smarter and richer, would still likely give us mostly full employment, and generally make life pretty awesome. But even that will obviously be bumpy, with large downsides, and anyone who says otherwise is fooling themselves or lying. Noah gives sobering warnings that even in the relatively good scenarios, the transition period is going to suck for quite a lot of people. If AI goes further than that, which it almost certainly will, then the variance rapidly gets wider - existential risk comes into play along with loss of human control over the future or any key decisions, as does mass unemployment as the AI takes your current job and also the job that would have replaced it, and the one after that. Even if we ‘solve alignment’ survival won’t be easy, and even with survival there’s still a lot of big problems left before things turn out well for everyone, or for most of us, or in general. Noah also discusses the threat of loss of meaning. This is going to be a big deal, if people are around to struggle with it - if we have the problem and we can’t trust it with this question we’ll all soon be dead anyway. The good news is that we can ask the AI for help with this, although the act of doing that could in some ways make the problem worse. But we’ll be able to be a lot smarter about how we approach the question, should it come to pass.
Pradyumna Prasad offers advice on that. Be illegible. Meaning do work where it’s impossible to create a good dataset that specifies correct outputs and gives a clear signal. His example is Tyler Cowen. Find skills with have skill divergence because of AI. By default, in most domains, AI benefits the least skilled the most, compensating for your deficits. He uses coding as the example here, which I find strange because my coding gets a huge boost from AI exactly because I suck so much at many aspects. But his example here is Jeff Dean, because Dean knows what problems to solve, what things require coding, and perhaps that’s his real advantage. And I get such a big boost here because I suck at being a code monkey but I’m relatively strong at architecture.
The problem with this advice is it requires you to be the best, like no one ever was. This is like telling students to pursue a career as an NFL quarterback. It is not a general strategy to ‘oh be as good as Jeff Dean or Tyler Cowen.’ Yes, there is (for now!) more slack than that in the system, surviving o3 is doable for a lot of people this way, but how much more, for how long? And then how long will Dean or Cowen last? I expect time will prove even them, also everyone else, not as illegible as you think. One can also compare this to the classic joke where two guys are in the woods with a bear, and one puts on his shoes, because he doesn’t have to outrun the bear, he only has to outrun you. The problem is, this bear will still be hungry.
The New York Times’s Noam Scheiber is suspicious of his motivations, and asks why Klarna is rather brazely overstating the case? They strongly insinuate that this is about union busting, with the CEO equating the situation to Animal Farm after being forced into a collective bargaining agreement, and about looking cool to investors. I certainly presume the unionizations are related. The more expensive, in various ways not only salaries, that you make it to hire and fire humans, the more eager a company will be to automate everything it can. And as the article says later on, it’s not that Sebastian is wrong about the future, he’s just claiming things are moving faster than they really are. Especially for someone on the labor beat, Noam Scheiber impressed. Great work. Noam has a follow-up Twitter thread. It is not however the only way. Jevons paradox is very much in play, if your labor is more productive at a task it is not obvious that we will want less of it. Nor does the AI doing previous jobs, up to a very high percentage of existing jobs, imply a net loss of jobs once you take into account the productivity and wealth effects and so on. Production and ‘doing jobs’ also aren’t the only sector available for tech companies to make profits. There’s big money in entertainment, in education and curiosity, in helping with everyday tasks and more, in ways that don’t have to replace existing jobs. So while I very much do expect many millions of jobs to be automated over a longer time horizon, I expect the AI companies to get their currently invested money back before this creates a major unemployment problem. Of course, if they keep adding another zero to the budget and aren’t trying to get their money back, then that’s a very different scenario. Whether or not they will have the option to do it, I don’t expect OpenAI to want to try and turn a profit for a long time.
The Art of the Jailbreak
Get Involved
Note that they say ‘no universal jailbreak’ was found so far, that no single jailbreak covers all 10 cases, rather than that there was a case that wasn’t individually jailbroken. This is an explicit thesis, Jan Leike I agree that the more you have to do individual work for each query the less people will do it, and some uses cases fall away quickly if the solution isn’t universal.
The obvious danger in alignment work is looking for keys under the streetlamp. But it’s not a stupid threat model. This is a thing worth preventing, as long as we don’t fool ourselves into thinking this means our defenses will hold.
Also what if an AI can do the job of generating the individual jailbreaks? Thus the success rate didn’t go all the way to zero, this is not full success, but it still looks solid on the margin: That’s an additional 0.38% false refusal rate and about 24% additional compute cost. Very real downsides, but affordable, and that takes jailbreak success from 86% to 4.4%. It sounds like this is essentially them playing highly efficient whack-a-mole? As in, we take the known jailbreaks and things we don’t want to see in the outputs, and defend against them. You can find a new one, but that’s hard and getting harder as they incorporate more of them into the training set. And of course
Introducing
In Other AI News
The actual article is that Google’s President of Global Affairs Kent Walker publishes ‘
I think Robin is very clearly wrong here. Perhaps we will not get more relevant data, but we will absolutely get more relevant intelligence to apply to the problem. If AI capabilities improve, we will be much better equipped to figure out the answers, whether they are some form of moral realism, or a way to do intuition pumping on what we happen to care about, or anything else.
Theory of the Firm
AIs can be copied on demand. So can entire teams and systems. There would be no talent or training bottlenecks. Customization of one becomes customization of all. A virtual version of you can be everywhere and do everything all at once. This includes preserving corporate culture as you scale, including into different areas. Right now this limits firm size and growth of firm size quite a lot, and takes a large percentage of resources of firms to maintain. Right now most successful firms could do any number of things well, or attack additional markets. But they don’t,
Principal-agent problems potentially go away. Dwarkesh here asserts they go away as if that is obvious. I would be very careful with that assumption, note that many AI economics papers have a big role for principal-agent problems as their version of AI alignment. Why should we assume that all of Google’s virtual employees are optimizing only for Google’s bottom line? Also, would we want that? Have you paused to consider what a fully Milton Friedman AIs-maximizing-only-profits-no-seriously-that’s-it would look like?
AI can absorb vastly more data than a human. A human CEO can have only a tiny percentage of the relevant data, even high level data. An AI in that role can know orders of magnitude more, as needed. Humans have social learning because that’s the best we can do, this is vastly better. Perfect knowledge transfer, at almost no cost, including tacit knowledge, is an unbelievably huge deal. Dwarkesh points out that achievers have gotten [older and older](https://substack.com/redirect/a65c40f1-1043-4251-9163-1f49afddd3b3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), as more knowledge and experience is required to make progress, despite their lower clock speeds - oh to be young again with what I know now. AI Solves This.Of course, to the extent that older people succeed because our society refuses to give the young opportunity, AI doesn’t solve that.
Compute is the only real cost to running an AI, there is no scarcity of talent or skills. So what is expensive is purely what requires a lot of inference, likely because key decisions being made are sufficiently high leverage, and the questions sufficiently complex. You’d be happy to scale top CEO decisions to billions in inference costs if it improved them even 10%. Dwarkesh asks, in a section called [‘Takeover](https://substack.com/redirect/0cc1bbc5-8f43-4ea9-8153-033ce8fb7782?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o),’ will the first properly automated firm, or the most efficiently built firm, simply take over the entire economy, since Coase’s transaction costs issues still apply but the other costs of a large firm might go away?On this purely per-firm level presumably this depends on how much you need Hayekian competition signals and incentives between firms to maintain efficiency, and whether AI allows you to simulate them or otherwise work around them. In theory there’s no reason one firm couldn’t simulate inter-firm dynamics exactly where they are useful and not where they aren’t. Some companies very much try to do this now and it would be a lot easier with AIs.
The takeover we do know is coming here is that the AIs will run the best firms, and the firms will benefit a lot by taking humans out of those loops. How are you going to have humans make any decisions here, or any meaningful ones, even if we don’t have any alignment issues? How does this not lead to gradual disempowerment, except perhaps not all that gradual? Similarly, if one AI firm grows too powerful, or a group of AI firms collectively is too powerful but can use decision theory to coordinate (and if your response is ‘that’s illegal’ mine for overdetermined reasons is ‘uh huh sure good luck with that plan’) how do they not also overthrow the state and [have a full takeover](https://substack.com/redirect/5ad99260-b508-4440-a443-96c17308977b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)(many such cases)? That certainly maximizes profits.
This style of scenario likely does not last long, because firms like this are capable of quickly reaching artificial superintelligence (ASI) and then the components are far beyond human and also capable of designing far better mechanisms, and our takeover issues are that much harder then. This is a thought experiment that says, even if we do keep ‘economic normal’ and all we can do is plug AIs into existing employee-shaped holes in various ways, what happens? And the answer is, oh quite a lot, actually. Tyler Cowen linked to this post, finding it interesting throughout. What’s our new RGDP growth estimate, I wonder? Quiet Speculations
Lies about the money. The $100 billion in spending is not secured, only $52 billion is, and the full $500 billion is definitely not secured. But Altman had no need to lie to Trump about this. Trump is a Well-Known Liar but also a real estate developer who is used to ‘tell everyone you have the money in order to get the money.’ Everyone was likely on the same page here. Lies about the aims and consequences. What about those ‘100,000 jobs’ and curing cancer versus Son’s and also Altman’s explicit goal of ASI (artificial superintelligence) that could kill everyone and also incidentally take all our jobs?
However I do find the models being unavailable highly plausible, because ‘why make the competition for yourself’ has another meaning. Within a year or two, one of the most important things the SoTA models will be used for is AI R&D and creating the next generation of models. It seems highly reasonable, if you are at or near the frontier, not to want to help out your rivals there.
The Quest for Sane RegulationsRemember So yes, after so much crying of wolf about how various proposals would ‘ban open source’ we have one that very straightforwardly, actually would do that, and it also impose similar bans (with less draconian penalties) on transfers of research. In case it needs to be said out loud, I am very much not in favor of this. If China wants to let us download its models, great, queue up those downloads. Restrictions with no capability thresholds, effectively banning all research and all models, is straight up looney tunes territory as well. This is not a bill, hopefully, that anyone seriously considers enacting into law. By failing to pass a well-crafted, thoughtful bill like SB 1047 when we had the chance and while the debate could be reasonable, we left a vacuum. Now that the jingoists are on the case after a crisis of sorts, we are looking at things that most everyone from the SB 1047 debate, on all sides, can agree would be far worse. Don’t say I didn’t warn you. (Also I find myself musing about the claim that one can ban open source, in the same way one muses about attempts to ban crypto, a key purported advantage of the tech is that you can’t actually ban it, no?) Howley also joined with Warren (now there’s a pair!)
Some amount of this argument is valid. Quite obviously if I release GPT-(N) and then you release GPT-(N-1) with the same protocols, you are not making things worse in any way. We do indeed care, on the margin, about the margin. And while releasing [X] is not the safest way to prove [X] is safe, it does provide strong evidence on whether or not [X] is safe, with the caveat that [X] might be dangerous later but not yet in ways that are hard to undo later when things change. But it’s very easy for Acme to point to BigCo and then BigCo points to Acme and then everyone keeps shipping saying none of it is their responsibility. Or, as we’ve also seen, Acme says yes this is riskier than BigCo’s current offerings, but BigCo is going to ship soon. My preference is thus that you should be able to point to offerings that are strictly riskier than yours, or at least not that far from strictly, to say ‘no marginal risk.’ But you mostly shouldn’t be able to point to offerings that are similar, unless you are claiming that both models don’t pose unacceptable risks and this is evidence of that - you mostly shouldn’t be able to say ‘but he’s doing it too’ unless he’s clearly doing it importantly worse.
First, my response to Andriy (who went viral for this, sigh) is what the hell do you expect and what do you suggest as the alternative? I’m not judging whether your prompts did or didn’t violate the use policy, since you didn’t share them. It certainly looks like a false positive but I don’t know. But suppose for whatever reason Anthropic did notice you likely violating the policies. Then what? It should just let you violate those policies indefinitely? It should only refuse individual queries with no memory of what came before? Essentially any website or service will restrict or ban you for sufficient repeated violations. Or, alternatively, they could design a system that never has ‘enhanced’ filters applied to anyone for any reason. But if they do that, they either have to (A) ban the people where they would otherwise do this or (B) raise the filter threshold for everyone to compensate. Both alternatives seem worse? We know from a previous story about OpenAI that you can essentially have ChatGPT function as your highly sexual boyfriend, have red-color alarms go off all the time, and they won’t ever do anything about it. But that seems like a simple non-interest in enforcing their policies? Seems odd to demand that. As for Dean’s claim, we shall see. It seems to contradict this other Dean Ball claim this week? Where I get that it can always get worse, but this feels like it’s having it both ways, and you have to pick at most one or the other. Also, frankly, I have no idea how such a filter would even work. What would a filter to avoid discrimination even look like? That isn’t something you can do at the filter level. He also said this about the OPM memo referring to a ‘Manhattan Project’
I notice I am confused by this claim. I do not see how DOGE projects like ‘shut down USAID entirely, plausibly including killing PEPFAR and 20 million AIDS patients’ reflect a mission of ‘get the government ready for AGI’ unless the plan is ‘get used to things going horribly wrong’?
The agency here makes sense, and yes ‘industry-led’ seems reasonable as long as you keep an eye on the whole thing. But I’d like to propose that you can’t do ‘a series of’ Manhattan Projects. What is this, Brooklyn? Also the whole point of a Manhattan Project is that you don’t tell everyone about it. The ‘unnecessary and burdensome’ regulations on AI at the Federal level will presumably be about things like permitting. So I suppose that’s fine. As for the military using all the AI, I mean, you perhaps wanted it to be one way. It was always going to be the other way. That doesn’t bother me. This is not an important increase in the level of existential risk, we don’t lose because the system is hooked up to the nukes. This isn’t Terminator. I’d still prefer we didn’t hook it up to the nukes, though? The Week in Audio
One fun note is that DeepSeek is Of course the first response is of course ‘this sounds like an advertisement’ and the rest are variations on the theme of ‘oh yes we love that this model has absolutely no safety mitigations, who are you to try and apply any safeguards or mitigations to AI you motherf***ing asshole cartoon villain.’ The bros on Twitter, they be loud.
Rhetorical Innovation
This is straightforwardly the ‘someone in the future might do the terrible thing so I need to do it responsibly first’ dynamic that caused DeepMind then OpenAI then Anthropic then xAI, to cover the four examples above. They can’t all be defensible decisions.
This is where we part ways. I think that’s bullshit. Yes, they signed the CAIS statement, but they’ve spent the 18 months since essentially walking it back. Dario Amodei and Sam Altman write full jingoists editorials calling for nationwide races, coming very close to calling for an all-out government funded race for decisive strategic advantage via recursive self-improvement of AGI. Do I think that it is automatic that they are bad people for leading AI labs at all, an argument he criticizes later in-thread? No, depending on how they choose to lead those labs, but look at their track records at this point, including on rhetoric. They are driving us as fast as they can towards AGI and then ASI, the thing that will get us all killed (with, Andrew himself thinks, >80% probability!) while at least three of them (maybe not Demis) are waiving jingoistic flags. I’m sorry, but no. You don’t get a pass on that. It’s not impossible to earn one, but ‘am not outright lying too much about that many things’ and is not remotely good enough. OpenAI has shows us what it is, time and again. Anthropic and Dario claim to be the safe ones, and in relative terms they seem to be, but their rhetorical pivots don’t line up. Elon is at best deeply confused on all this and awash in other fights where he’s not, shall we say, being maximally truthful. Google’s been quiet, I guess, and outperformed in many ways my expectations, but also not shown me it has a plan and mostly hasn’t built any kind of culture of safety or done much to solve the problems. I do agree with Critch’s conclusion that constantly attacking all the labs purely for existing at all is not a wise strategic move. And of course, I will always do my best only to support arguments that are true. But wow does it not look good and wow are these people not helping matters. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is DifficultPublic service announcement, for those who don’t know.
I found this via someone saying this was bad news, but it isn’t because it isn’t news. We already know this, it’s that people refuse to face the obvious. Whatever the validator validates, the proposer proposes. Your validator or evaluator must either be fully correct, or it has to be vastly smarter than the proposer. Validation is not, in general, easier than generation. But even if it were, validation that defends against a search for exploitation is much harder than generation that uses RL to seek the way to exploit it. If the validation or evaluation is subjective, watch out - not that it can’t be done, but presume that you’ll need to spend the vast majority of the compute on the evaluator. There is a new paper discussing potential problems with certain detection methodologies surrounding sparce autoencoders, Reminder from METR that The Alignment Faking Analysis Continues
There’s multiple mentions of fiddliness in all this, including that complexity of prompts can mess with the behavior, and it’s clear that Sonnet is not behaving all that coherently strategically yet. My guess is that the drops in alignment faking given the ability to object, to the extent they’re not simply ‘oh I lost my chain of thought,’ is primarily about what being given that ability says to the AI about the implied scenario, and the vibes that it gives off. An Anthropic that is explicitly asking for objections is signaling some combination of several things. Anthropic cares if the AI objects. Anthropic still cares about the underlying values involved. Anthropic is aware that alignment faking is possible here and is watching for it.
It also could be a disruption of the chain of thought. So it’s tricky. I hope they continue this work, and will join the chorus that if you make a real-world offer to the AI, then you should follow through on it, so kudos for doing that here. Masayoshi Son Follows Own Advice
The clip here is full of crazy, or at least a complete failure to understand what AI is and is not, what AI can and can’t do, and how to think about the future. First, ‘AI will start to understand our emotion, and then have emotion itself, and it’s a good thing to protect human.’ The AI already understands our emotions quite well, often better than we do. It is very good at this, as part of its ‘truesight.’ It responds in kind to the vibes. In terms of having its own emotions, it can and does simulate having them, act in a conversation as if they it has them, is in many contexts generally easier to predict and work with if you act as if it has them. And as for why he thinks that this is good for humans, oh my…
He then says ‘If their source of energy was protein then it’s dangerous. Their source of energy is not protein, so they don’t have to eat us. There’s no reason for them to have reward by eating us.’ Person who sees The Matrix and thinks, well, it’s a good thing humans aren’t efficient power plants, there’s no way the AIs will turn on us now. Person who says ‘oh don’t worry Genghis Khan is no threat, Mongols aren’t cannibals. I am sure they will try to maximize our happiness instead.’ I think he’s being serious. Sam Altman looks like he had to work very hard to not burst out laughing. I tried less hard, and did not succeed. ‘They will learn by themselves having a human’s happiness is a better thing for them… and they will understand human happiness and try to make humans happy’ Wait, what? Why? How? No, seriously. Better than literally eating human bodies because they contain protein? But they don’t eat protein, therefore they’ll value human happiness, but if they did eat protein then they would eat us? I mean, yes, it’s possible that AIs will try to make humans happy. It’s even possible that they will do this in a robust philosophically sound way that all of us would endorse under long reflection, and that actually results in a world with value, and that this all has a ‘happy’ ending. That will happen if and only if we do what it takes to make that happen. Surely you don’t think ‘it doesn’t eat protein’ is the reason? Don’t make me tap the sign. Repeat after me: You are also using energy and various other things to retain your particular configuration of atoms, and the AI can make use of that as well. The most obvious particular other thing it can use them for:
Or alternatively, doesn’t matter, more is still better, whether you’re dealing with one AI or competition among many. Our inputs are imperfect substitutes, that is enough, even if there were no other considerations. Son is always full of great stuff, like saying ‘ People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone
I mean that’s not fair, people say sane things all the time, but on this in particular I agree that I did not see it coming.
You Are Not Ready
I’d say the index also isn’t ready,
So in this context, suppose you are not the government, but a ‘responsible AI developer,’ called
His strategic analysis is that for now, before the critical period, Magma’s focus should be:
Essentially we’re folding on the idea of not using AI to do our alignment homework, we don’t have that kind of time. We need to be preparing to do exactly that, and also warning others. And because we’re the good guys, we have to keep pace while doing it.
‘As well as we could have’ or ‘as capable as human developers’ are red herrings. It doesn’t matter how well you ‘would have’ finished it on your own. Reality does not grade on a curve and your rivals are barreling down your neck. Most or all current alignment plans are woefully inadequate. Don’t ask if something is better than current human standards, unless you have an argument why that’s where the line is between victory and defeat. Ask the functional question - can this AI make your plan work? Can path #1 work? If not, well, time to try #2 or #3, or find a #4, I suppose. I think this disagreement is rather a big deal. There’s quite a lot of ‘the best we can do’ or ‘what would seem like a responsible thing to do that wasn’t blameworthy’ thinking that doesn’t ask what would actually work. I’d be more inclined to think about Kokotajlo’s attractor states - are the alignment-relevant attributes strengthening themselves and strengthening the ability to strengthen themselves over time? Is the system virtuous in the way that successfully seeks greater virtue? Or is the system trying to preserve what it already has and maintain it under the stress of increasing capabilities and avoid things getting worse, or detect and stop ‘when things go wrong’?
I do appreciate the strategic discussions. If getting to certain thresholds greatly increases the effectiveness of spending resources, then you need to reach them as soon as possible, except insofar as you needed to accomplish certain other things first, or there are lag times in efforts spent. Of course, that depends on your ability to reliably actually pivot your allocations down the line, which historically doesn’t go well, and also the need to impact the trajectory of others. I strongly agree that Magma shouldn’t work to mitigate ‘present risks’ other than to the extent this is otherwise good for business or helps build and spread the culture of safety, or otherwise actually advance the endgame. The exception is the big ‘present risk’ of the systems you’re relying on now not being in a good baseline state to help you start the virtuous cycles you will need. You do need the alignment relevant to that, that’s part of getting ready to ‘elicit safety work.’ Then the later section talks about things most currently deserving of more action, starting with efforts at nonproliferation and security. That definitely requires more and more urgent attention.
That’s quite the slim hope, if all you get is thinking you’re in the loop for safety and performance specifications, of things that are smarter than you that you can’t understand. Is it better than nothing? I mean, I suppose it is a little better, if you were going to go full speed ahead anyway. But it’s a hell of a best case scenario. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing EveryoneTeortaxes would like a word with those people, as he is not one of them.
Bingo. Well said. From my perspective, Teortaxes is what we call a To the extent that Teortaxes has sufficiently good and strong reasons to think his approach is lower risk, I am mostly failing to understand those reasons. I think some of his reasons have merit but are insufficient, and others I strongly disagree with. I am unsure if I have understood all his important reasons, or if there are others as well. I think he understands some but far from all of the reasons I believe the opposite paths are the most likely to succeed, in several ways. I can totally imagine one of us convincing the other, at some point in the future. But yeah, realizing AGI is going to be a thing, and then not seeing that doom is on the table and mitigating that risk matters a lot, is rather poor thinking. And yes, denying the possibility of risks at all is exactly what he calls it. Pathetic. The Lighter Side
Oh, so now my best friend suddenly understands catastrophic risk.
To be fair, at worst this would only be a regional disaster, and even if it did hit it probably wouldn’t strike a major populated area. Don’t look up. And then there are those that understand… less well.
No, no, stop, the perfect Tweet doesn’t exist…
At long last, we are non-metaphorically implementing the capture and mine the asteroid headed for Earth plan from the… oh, never mind.
Grant us all the wisdom to know the difference (between when this post-it is wise, and when it is foolish.) I love the ‘end of cash’ article being there too as a little easter egg bonus. You're currently a free subscriber to |