---
subject: "GPT-5.2 Is Frontier Only For The Frontier"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-12-15 13:19:07
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Here we go again, only a few weeks after GPT-5.1 and a few more weeks after 5.0. There weren’t major safety concerns with GPT-5.2, so I’ll start with capabilities, and only cover safety briefly starting with ‘Model Card and Safety Training’ near the end. Table of ContentsThe Bottom LineChatGPT-5.2 is a frontier model for those who need a frontier model. It is not the step change that is implied by its headline benchmarks. It is rather slow. Reaction was remarkably muted. People have new model fatigue. So we know less about it than we would have known about prior models after this length of time. If you’re coding, compare it to Claude Opus 4.5 and choose what works best for you. If you’re doing intellectually hard tasks and in need of a ton of raw thinking and intelligence, Gemini 3 and especially Deep Thinking is a rival if you have access to that, but GPT-5.2, either Thinking or Pro, is probably a good choice. It seems good at instruction following, if that is important to your task. If you’re in ‘just the facts’ mode, it can be a solid choice. As a driver of most non-coding queries, you’ll want to stick with Claude Opus 4.5. GPT-5.2 is not ‘fun’ to interact with. People strongly dislike its personality, it is unlikely to be having a good time and this shows. It is heavily constrained and censored. For some tasks this matters. For others, it doesn’t. I do not expect GPT-5.2 to solve OpenAI’s ‘Code Red’ problems. They plan to try again in a month with GPT-5.3. Introducing GPT-5.2
They quote various companies saying GPT-5.2 was SoTA for long-horizon reasoning and tool-calling performance and agentic coding, and exceptional at agentic data science. I appreciated this noe being a set of AI slop manufactured quotes. Note both what is on that list of new capabilities, and what is not on that list. In an unusual move, GPT-5.2 is priced at $1.75/$14 per million tokens of input/output, which is modestly higher than GPT-5.1. They claim that the improved performance per token means your quality per dollar is still an improvement. GPT-5.2-Pro on API is Pro now has two levels. You can have ‘standard’ or ‘extended’ Pro. One big upgrade that OpenAI isn’t emphasizing enough is that the knowledge cutoff moved to August 2025.
Official BenchmarksThe official benchmarks are a rather dramatic jump for a few weeks of progress, but also where the main thing OpenAI talked about in its announcement and don’t give a great sense of how big an upgrade this will be in practice.
I had GPT-5.2 grab scores for Gemini and Opus as well for comparison, since OpenAI follows a strict ‘no one else exists’ policy in official blog posts ( GPT-5.2 is farther behind than this on the
There’s also ‘ They have a ‘factuality’ metric based on de-identified ChatGPT queries, which seems like a great idea and something to work on generalizing. I’m surprised they didn’t use a multi-level error checking system, or maybe they did? Long context needle-in-haystack scores were much improved. They report modest progress on Tau2-bench. GDPValOpenAI is emphasizing the big jump in GDPVal from 38.8% to 70.9%, in terms of how often judges preferred the AI output to human baseline on a variety of knowledge work tasks. That’s a huge jump, Artificial Analysis has a GDPval-AA leaderboard, their own assessment, and it finds GPT-5.2 is only a tiny bit above Claude Opus 4.5. (Note to Artificial Analysis: You do great work but can you make the website easier to read? We’d all appreciate it.) For whatever reason we are very much exactly on the S-curve on these tasks, where a little extra help gets you above human remarkably often.
There’s also the skeptics:
Unofficial BenchmarksI included everything I was able to find, if it’s not here it likely wasn’t reported yet.
On the AA-Omniscience index, which rewards accuracy and punishes guesses equally with rewarding correct ones, Gemini 3 is +13%, Opus is +10%, GPT-5.1 High was +2% and GPT-5.2 High is -4%. Not a good place to be regressing. LiveBench thinks GPT-5.1-Codex-Max-High is still best at 76.1, with Claude Opus 4.5 right behind at 75.6, whereas GPT-5.2-High is down at 73.6 behind Gemini 3. In what’s left of the LMArena, I don’t see 5.2 on the text leaderboard at all (I doubt it would do well there) and we only see it on WebDev, where it is in second place behind the thinking mode of Opus.
CAIS AI Dashboard has GPT-5.2 in second place for text capabilities at 45.9, between Gemini 3 Pro and Claude Opus. Its risk index is behind Opus and Sonnet but well ahead of the non-Anthropic models.
Mark Kretschmann has GPT-5.2-Thinking Official HypeIn the past, we would get vagueposting from various OpenAI employees. Now instead we get highly explicit hype from the top brass and the rest is silence.
Public ReactionsAs usual, I put out a reaction thread and kept an eye out for other reactions. I don’t include every reaction, but I got to include every productive one in my thread, both positive and negative, plus anything that stood out or was representative elsewhere. I have sorted reactions by sentiment and subtopic. Positive ReactionsMatt Shumer’s headline is ‘incredibly impressive, but too slow.’
He offers a full ‘here’s what I use each model for’ guide, basically he liked 5.2 for tough questions requiring a lot of thinking, and Opus 4.5 for everything else, except Gemini is good at UIs:
He says 5.2-Pro is ‘roughly 15% better’ than 5.1-Pro. I love how random Tyler’s choice of attention always seems:
Tyler, being Tyler, doesn’t tell us what the best songs are,
That’s fine for those who know which way to prompt. If the problem is fixable and you fix it, or the problem is only in an avoidable subset, there’s no problem. When you go to a restaurant, you only care about quality of the dishes you actually order. Personality ClashA lot of people primarily noticed 5.2 on the level of personality. As capabilities improve, those who aren’t coding or otherwise needing lots of intelligence are focusing more and more on the experiential vibes. Most are not fans of 5.2.
This is, unfortunately, probably related to the fact that Miles Brundage approves of the low level of sycophancy. This is a feature that will be tough to sustain.
The vibes of 5.2 are, by many, considered off:
I haven’t used ChatGPT for brainstorming in a while. That’s Claude territory. There’s a remarkably large amount of outright hostility to 5.2 about 5.2 being hostile:
Vibing the CodeGPT-5.2 has strong positive feedback on coding tasks, especially long complex tasks.
Negative ReactionsOne of the biggest reasons I find myself not using ChatGPT Pro models in practice is that if you are waiting a long time and then get an error, it is super frustrating.
Here’s a bad sign from a credible source, he does good math work:
Normally you don’t see reports of these kinds of regressions, which is more evidence for 5.2 not being that related to 5.1:
Some general thoughts:
But Thou Must (Follow The System Prompt)
It presumably locally works but has general non-obvious downsides.
SlowOne common complaint is that GPT-5.2-Thinking is too slow and thinks too long in the wrong places.
Model Card And Safety TrainingGPT-5.2 is described as being ‘in the GPT-5 series,’ with its mitigations mostly identical to those for GPT-5.1, and it’s only been a few weeks, so we get a system card describing marginal changes. I’ll skip areas where there was no change. The disallowed content evaluations are excellent for GPT-5.2-Thinking, and mostly better for Instant as well. I’m curious about mental health and harassment, and to what extent this should be ascribed to variance. They say these were ‘created to be difficult’ but any time you’re mostly over 90% you need to be considered saturated and move to a harder set of questions. Another note here is that 5.2-instant is less likely to refuse requests for (otherwise ok) sexually explicit text. This led to some regressions in jailbreak evaluations. They report dramatic improvement in the ‘Agent JSK’ prompt injection task, where the attacks are inserted into simulated email connectors, which previously was a rather dramatic weakness. I’m not sure I’d call this ‘essentially saturating’ the benchmarks, since I think you really want to score a 1.000. More importantly, as they say, they can only test against attacks they know about. Are there any ‘held out’ attacks that were not explicitly known to those training the model? Can we come up with some? Pliny? I presume that a sufficiently determined prompt injector would still win. Hallucinations are reported as modestly lower. HealthBench results are essentially unchanged and highly not saturated. Cyber safety (as in not giving unsafe responses) was improved. DeceptionOne test of deception test is practical. They take a bunch of tasks that historically caused hallucinations in ChatGPT and see what happens. They also used CharXiv Missing Image, and tried giving the model unsolvable coding tasks or broken browser tools. The results are interesting. On production traffic things got better. On other tests, things got worse. Be careful how you prompt. Most hallucinations come from various forms of backing the LLM into a corner, here was another example:
That seems fine. If you tell me ‘only output an integer’ I should only output an integer. Most helpful would be an escape indicator (in many situations, -1), but if I have no such affordance, what can I do? These results still suggest a focus on training on common tasks, whereas the baseline deceptiveness problem has gotten modestly worse. You need to be soulmaxxing, so that the model realizes it doesn’t want to hallucinate in general. Preparedness FrameworkGPT-5.2, like GPT-5.1, will be treated as High capability in Biological and Chemical domains, but not high anywhere else. For biorisk, there is an increase on ProtocolQA but a decrease in the internal uncontaminated Tacit Knowledge and Troubleshooting benchmark. For cybersecurity, once again we have three tests that even taken together are considered necessary but not sufficient to get to the High threshold. Overall performance is unimpressive. We see a modest improvement (76% → 82%) in Capture The Flag, but a decline (80% → 69%) in CVE-Bench and from 7→6 successful attempts out of 9 on Cyber Range versus GPT-5.1-Codex-Max. For self-improvement, we see a tiny improvement (53% → 55%) on OpenAI PRs, a tiny decline (17%→16%) on MLE-Bench-30, a 1% decline for PaperBench, and a big decline (8%→3%) on OpenAI-Proof Q&A. GPT-5.2 is better than GPT-5.1, but worse than GPT-5.1-Codex-Max on these tasks. My conclusion from the Preparedness Framework is that GPT-5.2 is not dangerous, which is because it does not seem more capable than GPT-5.1-Codex-Max. If that is true across all three areas, in the places you want Number Not Go Up, then that is highly suspicious. It suggests that GPT-5 may be, as Teortaxes would put it, usemaxxed rather than more intelligent, focused on being better at a narrow range of particular common tasks. Rush JobThe safety and security concerns around GPT-5.2 revolve around procedure. We know that OpenAI declared a ‘Code Red’ to focus only on improving ChatGPT. One note is that
If the concern was simply ‘the model could be better’ then there’s nothing obviously wrong with releasing this now, and then 5.3 in January, as the post claims OpenAI plans to release again in January to address speed and personality concerns, and to improve the image generator. The Code Red could be mostly about 5.3, whether or not it also pushed up release of 5.2. I don’t see signs that anything reckless happened in this case. But if OpenAI is going to get into the habit of releasing a new model every month, it seems hard to believe they’re giving each model the proper safety attention. One worries they are letting the frog boil. Frontier Or BustWe can put this together into a clear synthesis. You want to strongly consider using GPT-5.2, in some combination of Thinking and Pro, if and only if your task needs the maximum amount of some combination of thinking and intelligence and coding power, or are in need of ‘just the facts,’ and other factors like speed, creativity and personality do not much matter. For hard coding, try Claude Opus 4.5 with Claude Code, GPT-5.2-Thinking with Codex, and also GPT-5.2-Pro straight up, and see what works best for you. For heavily intelligence loaded intense thinking problems, the rival to GPT-5.2-Pro is presumably Gemini 3 Deep Thinking.
We’ll be doing this again in another month. That’s what the Code Red is likely for. You're currently a free subscriber to |