---
subject: "The PADI Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-04-09 13:41:19
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Colin here. I recently got my PADI Open Water dive certification. I can’t say I had a tremendous amount of historical interest in diving, though I’ve been surrounded by hyper enthusiastic diver friends for a long time. Truth be told, I didn’t really know what I was getting into. The process is pretty straightforward: You start in shallow water, getting familiarized with safety protocols, learning how to clear a mask, and generally getting used to a feeling that is odd and unfamiliar: inhaling pressurized air underwater. But then, the heat gets turned up a bit. Over the span of a few days, you are put through a lot of bookwork, culminating in some real-world execution. Some things are harder than I would have thought: taking off a mask underwater, closing your eyes, and breathing through a regulator for a minute, then putting on the flooded mask and clearing it, for example. Ditching your rig underwater and putting it back on. Figuring out the correct sequencing and signals to ask your dive buddy for their emergency air supply (aka the “octopus”). Then there are some underwater swims As you progress, you get more comfortable with things like buoyancy: controlling your position in the water as you swim, which was elegantly described to me as the “soul” of diving. A post-Open Water certification class, Why is this interesting? Similar to what I would imagine learning to fly a plane is like, this PADI instruction (when done well), is hyper dialed in, and sets you up for success. You do just enough difficult things to simulate problems in the water, and learn how to manage your mental panic in a safe setting. The combination of the bookwork (detailed, but doable with focus), and the applied practice was top-notch. A lot of this came down to luck: talented and empathetic instructors (shoutout Hassan and Zhidan) played a huge role in my getting comfortable in the water and conveying the seriousness of the material: A months weeks prior, a lot of rumored recklessness with another dive center, plus some strong currents, resulted in the My first certified dive was a highlight reel of amazing marine sightings, but sure enough there were three sharks on the prowl trying to snack on a few schools of fish. Watching the cool heads of the other instructors and more seasoned divers made the cortisol spike manageable. Of course, when you do your homework, you realize that this type of reef shark, however large, isn’t dangerous. But I am not actively searching for a face-off with a Tiger shark anytime soon. At least not until a few more Padi certifications. (CJN) — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) —
You're currently a free subscriber to |