---
subject: "Reddit and Platform Politics"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <byrne@thediff.co>"
to: ""
date: 2023-06-20 12:56:41
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
|
In this issue: - Reddit and Platform Politics
- The Boomer Market
- Network Effects
- Direct to Retail
- Strategic Investing
- ByteDance and AI
- Diff Jobs
Today's free issue is brought to you by our sponsor, Reddit and Platform PoliticsFor the last week, large swathes of Reddit have gone dark in protest of Reddit's plan to increase the price of their API. The reaction comes after price hikes rendered some third-party apps economically untenable, and irritated Reddit's power users enough that they banded together to temporarily cripple the site. Most of the subreddits that went dark have come back online (as of this writing, Reddit, like most platform companies, has found it optimal to offer a mostly-free service with a handful of paid services. The business of building a status hierarchy where people compete by sharing or moderating content, monetized through ads, has worked well whether the fundamental unit of content is a link (as on Reddit), a short video (YouTube, TikTok), or 140 characters (Twitter). It also works as a vertical-specific model, or a collection thereof, as in the cases of Stack Exchange, Fandom, and SumZero. Most people don't contribute much, but for a subset of them, it pays, whether through status, through indirect economic benefits, or just because it's fun. Which immediately brings up a question of who really owns the site. There are a few different possibilities here: - As a legal matter, Reddit is owned by its shareholders and managed by its managers. If they want to change the terms of service to increase the cost of API calls, or to replace moderators with people who will reopen subreddits, they're within their rights.
- In some sense, though, Reddit Inc. is a sort of trustee for the collective asset built by the people who contribute to the community—posters and moderators. They're what make the site worthwhile. The underlying technology took money and effort to create, but since
[you can download the site's source code circa 2017 for free](https://www.thediff.co/r/5a69b94f?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)it’s probably not the true source of value. - The broadest conception of Reddit is close to a public utility whose main users, and thus biggest interest group, consists of passive lurkers who read the site but never comment. The trick of appending "reddit" to a search query to get answers from real people is so ubiquitous that
[Google turned it into a feature](https://www.thediff.co/r/2a0f97a8?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99). These users, in the aggregate, fund the site because they're a large share of ad pageviews. They don't impose any meaningful cost burden other than bandwidth and servers, so they're a profitable demographic.
When the site started, groups 1 and 2 were in control, because they were the same people: Reddit's founders - There's the obvious first-order benefit that Reddit doesn't have to pay its own moderators to enforce the rules.
- A secondary benefit here is that when there's a controversial moderation decision, it comes from some individual running their own mini community, not Reddit as a whole. Moderation always involves edge cases, and edge cases are a no-win situation for big platforms: if they're too strict, users complain that they're arbitrary; too lax, and the content the site allows becomes newsworthy. (And even if they try to avoid both issues by enumerating every controversial answer in advance,
[the rules get leaked and every one of them inspires hypothetical edge cases](https://www.thediff.co/r/56a3a8cd?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99).) - The fact that every community has different rules means that moderators can create niche groups that are perfectly designed around one kind of content and one kind of discussion. (One funny result of this is that when some communities reach critical mass,
[spinoff communities can form based on hair-splitting disagreement with the mods](https://www.thediff.co/r/118d860f?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99).)
On the other hand, the moderators can also make thousands of high-traffic communities inaccessible to users for a few days. There are always tradeoffs. For context, this is not the first controversy between Reddit's users and the company; a discussion-oriented site naturally selects for people who like to argue, and a site built around virality is also a good venue for making a protest go viral. Huffman has been on a media tour recently to give the company's side of the dispute. One interesting line from This is apt! The system is somewhat feudal, not in the mildly pejorative sense in which a normal person might dislike it, but in the sense that Many systems have a tension: between decentralization that takes advantage of local knowledge and that converts the social capital of a community into a monetizable asset for the company, and the centralization required to get anything done. And the usual way centralization works, in any system that weights popular opinion, is that the centralizer gets legitimacy by saying they're operating on behalf of the average person. Caesar had his And there's also the meta question about the granularity of freedom: if moderators can decide what shows up on their subreddits, then subreddit members can't. In an Reddit is making a business decision, here. They say in the Verge interview above that the infrastructure cost of supporting third-party apps is $10m, and that doesn't include the apps' share of their operating expenses or the opportunity cost of replacing ad-supported pageviews with ad-free ones. Ultimately, Reddit will do what it needs to do to make the business sustainable. Its immediate revenue needs will have to be balanced against what the community wants, but that also requires knowing what the community is. If you look at what community moderators are doing, you'll get a wildly distorted view of what the median user wants. Even if you ask users, the ones who are likely to answer and likely to have strong views will be a distinct group. (As a case study, And this kind of discussion extends far beyond Reddit. The big downside to having a consumer brand is that the product ends up being one that everyone has an opinion on; the downside to outsourcing important work to unpaid moderators is that they have opinions about what direction the site goes in and what decisions the business behind it makes. And plenty of other companies are in the same position, where much of the value is created by third parties who use the platform but don't have input into how it's run. Strategically, it's better to control anything that's mission-critical for the business, but that doesn't fully solve problems. As Reddit's situation demonstrates right now, it just pits companies against a whole new category of problem. Disclosure: Long META. This has happened before, at other companies. When Facebook launched the News Feed, part of their evidence that it was working was that 10% of users signed up for "I Hate the News Feed" groups—it would have been impossible for such content to go viral without that feature, so coordinated opposition actually turned out to be a good sign. [↩︎](#fnref1)Some of the blame for that lies at Reddit's feet, too. The company introduced image and video hosting in the mid-2010s—partly a prudent reaction to the fact that Reddit could deliver enough traffic to overwhelm some sites, partly to avoid link-rot, and partly to ensure that the company had more control over the content that made it valuable. They'd pay less for hosting if they outsourced media hosting to Imgur, but they'd also have a weaker business. [↩︎](#fnref2)
You're on the free list for The Diff. Join thousands of founders, fund managers, and other curious people by signing up for the paid version. (Many readers expense their Diff subscription.) A Word From Our SponsorsConsistent, value-added investment advice is still hard to come by. Traditional private banks and wealth managers charge expensive wrap fees for unremarkable risk-adjusted performance. Online robo-advisors still recommend clients volatile one-size-fits-all portfolios with minimal bespoke guidance. For June, Fortuna is offering readers of The Diff a free portfolio risk review and one-on-one financial strategy consultation. ElsewhereThe Boomer MarketA good way to start explaining the existence of the financial system is to point to consumption smoothing: everyone's earnings start at zero, then move up gradually, typically peak in their fifties, and then generally decline to zero. Unless the plan is to live a monastic lifestyle in your early twenties and really get into partying in a big way thirty years later, the usual way to address this is to borrow money early on, especially for housing, and then accumulate net savings that can provide a supply of money to match the next generation's demand for debt. This model has been directionally true for a long time, but there are quirks. The baby boomer generation entered their peak savings years at a time when rates were high and assets were, as a consequence, cheap. As a result, Network EffectsThe site where gamers want to stream videos for money is the one with the biggest audience; the site with the biggest audience is the one that attracts the most popular gamers. And people like watching gaming streams. This is the short bull case for Twitch, which dominates video game streaming. But as with other network effects, once it starts unwinding the math works in the opposite direction. Direct to RetailThe WSJ highlights the trend of Strategic InvestingJapan Post Bank, which has 24,000 branches and ~$1.6tr in assets, is ByteDance and AITikTok parent ByteDance has Diff Jobs
- Ready to leave banking or consulting and jump straight into PE? A vertically integrated PE-backed cannabis company is looking for a data analyst with visualization experience. Excel wizards encouraged to reach out. (Little Rock, AR—no remote, but relocation assistance is possible)
- A fintech startup that gives companies with complicated financials a single source of truth for managing their cash flows and understanding their unit economics is looking for a founding engineer with JS, Typescript, Node.js, and React experience. (Bay Area, Hybrid)
- A company that helps investors use alternative data to make better decisions is looking for early-career data scientists and business analysts. (Remote)
- A company building ML-powered tools to accelerate developer productivity is looking for software engineers. (Washington DC area)
- A profitable AI startup is looking for a product designer for its new services that help small companies accelerate their growth. (SF)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. |
||
|
|
|
|||
|