---
subject: "moving beyond ‘tokenomics’; open source is the way"
from: "web3 weekly from a16z crypto <a16zcrypto@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-04-23 22:45:01
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "STARRED", "YELLOW_STAR", "a16zcrypto"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "STARRED", "YELLOW_STAR", "Label_2535365729249697677"]
---
👉 Trend + tips: Token design, beyond tokenomicsGuy Wuollet et al “Tokens” are a hot-button topic, capturing mindshare not just for those in crypto but for anyone interested in art, design, economics, gaming, math, psychology, and more. And while tokens have been described as everything from a “ Tokens can be used to coordinate and organize people beyond a purely economic context. That’s why the term “tokenomics” — token + economics — for describing the study and design of tokens is too limited. We need another term to designate “the study of “ tokens (“tokenology” perhaps?) for how to coordinate people, organizations, and/or computation towards a common goal through the use of cryptography and mechanism design. Okay; so if tokens are a powerful new primitive that can be defined in many ways — allowing for a very rich design space — it would be great to have It’s too early to produce such a definitive text on tokens, but some of early token design principles are already becoming clear. And while effective token models will have design elements unique to their specific objectives, most flawed token designs do share a number of common pitfalls. So here’s a list of instructive tips our team has observed, to help builders avoid the most common failure modes:
related: ▶️ watch: “ [Token Design: Mental models, capabilities, and emerging design spaces](https://substack.com/redirect/589ba468-8e22-4dd6-91a6-71287af09d00?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)” (2022) by Eddy Lazzarin📖 read: “ [The web3 Playbook: Using token incentives to bootstrap new networks](https://substack.com/redirect/50182824-9785-40ef-80c4-81392d7c01ca?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)” (2021) by Chris Dixon
see also: 📖 “ 📐Code + theme: More client diversity through open sourceNoah Citron et al A recurring theme in our (and more importantly, the broader crypto community’s) open source efforts is making sure networks have no single point of failure. This helps makes decentralized networks more robust, more secure, and far more resilient than their centralized counterparts. But in practice, we often see potentially vulnerable points of centralization — whether due to specific aspects (like Client diversity, in particular, is critical for But it also helps bring more contributors into the ecosystem, simply by broadening the developer base with clients in other languages...
see also: 🎧 “ --Sonal Chokshi and a16z crypto team You’re receiving this newsletter because you signed up for it on our websites, at an event, or elsewhere (you can opt out any time using the ‘unsubscribe’ link below). This newsletter is provided for informational purposes only, and should NOT be relied upon as legal, business, investment, or tax advice. Furthermore, the content is not directed at nor intended for use by any investors or prospective investors in any a16z funds. Please see a16z.com/disclosures for additional important details, including link to list of investments. subscribe to our podcast ' |