---
subject: "Many-Worlds Vision/Life in Weeks/Overview effect"
from: "Recomendo <recomendo@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-03-16 09:02:18
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Recomendo", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8455078693589186571", "UNREAD"]
---
Dreams illustratedOther people’s dreams are usually not interesting, but Claudia Dawson—our "CD" in this newsletter—records and visualizes her dreams daily in a way I find enjoyable to read. She summarizes her dream in a few brief sentences, and illustrates them with an AI-generated image. She made a book of her most potent and profound dreams of the last few years, and I’ve been sending friends a copy because it is an unusual and distinctive art. The collection is called Life in Weeks
Cosmic perspective changerAstronauts seeing Earth from space experience a mix of awe and interconnectedness that reduces anxiety and increases well-being. Astronaut Edgar Mitchell called it an "explosion of awareness." This Forbes article explains how to get this " Genre-bending movieI recommend you watch the Oscar-winning film Best coffee bean storage containerI use an Developmental Affirmations
Recomendo is an authentic, hand-crafted, human-written weekly newsletter that is free, but not cheap. Please consider supporting our work with a paid option, now at the low price of $45 per year. Paid subs enable us to keep making it free for others. Recomendo Unclassified Ads work! UNCLASSIFIEDS Thousands of trusted product recommendations from Recomendo, now instantly searchable. Explore years of our newsletter picks in one 10 Amazon Prime Perks You Need to Be Using. Are you taking advantage of your Amazon Prime perks? Whether you’re already a Prime member or considering signing up, Pets can't tell you what's wrong—but we can. At Sage Veterinary Imaging, pets get human-quality MRI & CT scans for precise answers. People travel from all over to our Round Rock, TX center for expert diagnostics. Learn more at Want to save money on travel? Subscribe to JourneyWoman, the world's first resource for women's solo travel, est 1994 for exclusive HOT FLASH travel deals and discounts and connect with a global community of adventurous women over 50. Discover what matters most for health optimization. Use your genetic raw data on Recomendo is published by Cool Tools Lab, a small company of three people. We also run the Recomendo is copyrighted by Cool Tools Lab, LLC. Commissions may be earned from the links above. |