---
subject: "Wander: Owning Happy Places"
from: "Not Boring <notboring@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-01-31 13:55:34
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Not Boring"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2982495070691762429"]
---
Welcome to the 868 newly Not Boring people who have joined us since last Tuesday! If you haven’t subscribed, join 184,121 smart, curious folks by subscribing here: Hi friends 👋, Happy Tuesday! It’s a great week over here at Not Boring HQ. The Eagles are back in the Super Bowl and I get to write about one of my favorite companies: Wander has a chance to build one of those iconic brands that becomes both noun and verb. As they grow their portfolio of incredible vacation rental properties throughout the US and beyond, I suspect that “Let’s Wander” will become synonymous with “Let’s get away for the week.” Building that kind of brand, especially when Airbnb and established hotel chains exist, is really hard. It takes a relentless attention to detail, a rare willingness to do everything in-house, and an uncommon ability to fit all of the pieces together just so. It also takes the capital to achieve ubiquity, which is why Wander recently launched So this is a piece about Wander, but it’s also a case study on how to build a Natively Integrated Company from the ground up. We’ve written that the most important companies of the next decade will be built at the intersection of Bits & Atoms — Wander provides a playbook for those willing and able to do the hard work. This essay is a Sponsored Deep Dive on a Not Boring Capital portfolio company. You can read more about how I choose which companies to do deep dives on, and how I write them Let’s get to it. Wander: Owning Happy PlacesNot all those who wander are lost. Look, I didn’t want to use that quote, but bear with me. Since J.R.R. Tolkien first wrote those words in The Riddle of Strider, they’ve been splashed across so many inspirational posters and Instagram bios that they’ve become meaningless. Worse than meaningless, in fact. Tolkien meant the exact opposite. The original is a reference to Aragorn, who wanders around his kingdom not because he is lost, but because he has a very specific goal: to learn to become a great ruler. Those who wander with a purpose, according to Tolkien, are not lost. Those who wander aimlessly are. Admittedly, I only looked into the history of that quote because this is a piece about a company called Wander is vertically integrated and purposeful; Airbnb is a more meandering marketplace. You’ve heard of Airbnb, probably stayed in a few, and maybe even listed your home. I have, and I’ve had good, if varied, experiences. I’ve stayed in some Airbnbs that were more wonderful than the pictures and descriptions could have conveyed, and some that were more appalling than the Host would have wanted us to believe. Airbnb is a marketplace, and navigating a marketplace can feel like aimlessly wandering. For a long time, Airbnb had that special startup sheen on it that glossed over the inconsistencies. Sometimes, you’d show up to an Airbnb and the door was locked and the host didn’t answer the phone and you’d be stuck outside in a foreign country for hours. Sometimes the beds were barely made. Often, the pictures looked just a little bit better than the real thing. When people booked Airbnbs, all of the little hiccups became part of the adventure. “Remember when we were stranded outside our Airbnb in the rain in Porto for three hours and we found that amazing little bar next door?!” That was part of the fun! Not all those who wander are lost, and we were ~wAnDeRiNg~! Now, however, Airbnb is a public and well-known company, and the little inconsistencies aren’t as much fun as they used to be. The beds aren’t as comfortable as hotel beds. There’s no food in the fridge. The Host charged me a $300 cleaning fee and made me take out the trash? Tweets and videos like this one are more and more common:
Lol. Why would anyone stay in an AIRBNB over a hotel?
No wonder these places are empty.
This won’t end well |