---
subject: "The Lost Valley"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-12-14 12:02:44
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
I hope you’ve enjoyed this series on the making of our ideas about the American West. We’ve focused on the relationship between If you like learning about history, you should subscribe to this newsletter! You can do it right here: And if you want to support this newsletter, I’m offering a discount right now — 35% off, which makes the price about $2 per month. Becoming a paid subscriber gets you access to the archives and the warm feeling that comes from supporting something you enjoy. If you value the work that goes into this newsletter, please consider signing up as a paid member by clicking this link: I think it matters whether I start the story with this image: Or this one: The first picture is an 1875 painting by Albert Bierstadt of the Hetch Hetchy valley in Yosemite National Park. The second shows the devastation of San Francisco in the moments after the 1906 earthquake, as If your focus is on the natural beauty of the valley, you’ll probably see this week’s topic — the building of the O’Shaughnessy Dam on the Tuolumne River in California — as an awful mistake, perhaps even a crime against nature. If your focus is on the needs of the growing city of San Francisco, you’ll be more likely to see the dam as a necessity, justified by sober cost-benefit analysis. The controversy over damming Hetch Hetchy was, in some ways, a culmination of many of the themes we’ve been looking at for weeks now in this series — the idea of wilderness, the winners and losers of the “conquest” of the American West, and the ways in which money and nature were in constant collision. We’ll start with the pretty pictures. You may be familiar with the “star attractions” of Yosemite National Park. Five million people visit Half Dome, El Capitan, and Bridal Veil Falls every year; these areas are fairly close to one another in the Yosemite Valley and are fairly easy to access by road (it’s a national park But just north of the Yosemite Valley was a place of similar beauty, another river valley filled with flower-specked meadows and ringed by granite cliffs. You could hear the rush of the waterfalls that cascaded down the mountainsides. This was the Hetch Hetchy valley, along the Tuolumne River. The name came from the A Sierra Club booklet
This photo shows the waterfalls of Hetch Hetchy in 1908: This panoramic photo from 1911 attempted to capture the scale of the area: Painters like Bierstadt did their best to render the area in color: And this Thomas Moran painting of Kolana Rock in the area was included in John Muir’s article pushing for Yosemite to be designated as a national park: It’s impossible to tell the story of Hetch Hetchy without talking about Muir, who you can see here in the valley: Muir returned to the Yosemite area countless times over several decades and became the area’s greatest champion. It was his writing and activism that made this place a blueprint for the national park system. He tried to
To people like Muir, a place like Hetch Hetchy was holy, and no amount of economic reward would justify sullying it. In San Francisco, the view was different. The city had In the 19th century, the city relied on the Spring Valley Water Company, which had a monopoly on the water business. Spring Valley was widely regarded as corrupt and extractive. Its prices were high and the public resented it. This 1908 The water issue came to a head when an earthquake measuring 7.9 on the Richter scale hit in April 1906. The quake The earthquake turned the city’s attention to a plan that had already been brewing for some time: damming Hetch Hetchy. The very features that stunned visitors with their beauty — sheer cliff walls, a winding river, and a flat meadow — made the area a good candidate for a dam and reservoir. The only problem was that it was in a national park. What ensued over the next seven years was a battle between the engineers and the economists on one side and the nature-lovers on the other. The engineer John Freeman, for example,
The local press framed the Hetch Hetchy project as a way to liberate San Francisco from the clutches of the evil Spring Valley Company: Meanwhile, Muir and his environmentalist allies
The engineers won. Congress passed the Raker Act in 1913, authorizing the building of the O’Shaughnessy Dam inside the national park. Construction took more than 20 years. Eventually, the valley was logged and submerged beneath 300 feet of water. It’s the source of 80% of San Francisco’s water supply today. Although the engineers were right about some things — Hetch Hetchy was a practical location for a reservoir — they were wrong about others. The lake did not provide another way for people to “visit the valley in pleasure.” Nobody really goes there; only But the failure of preservationists to protect Hetch Hetchy did have an effect elsewhere. “Remember Hetch Hetchy” In the end, San Francisco got the water it needed, but the West lost something irreplacable. Was the damming of Hetch Hetchy a triumph or a tragedy? That depends on how you think about the history of the West. Was the story of the West a narrative of the conquest of a land of opportunity, the harnessing of resources to build a thriving nation? Or was it a tale of the exploitation of people and nature that couldn’t protect themselves? These questions remain unanswered, and the battle over Hetch Hetchy continues — there’s now a growing This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: Or you can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading! You're currently a free subscriber to |