---
subject: "The Nutgraf: Starlink’s toe-hold in India"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-03-15 04:42:05
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
If you’d rather listen to today’s edition on The Nutgraf podcast, you can stream it on [The Ken app](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/the-nutgraf/starlinks-toe-hold-in-india/) with a Premium subscription or on [Apple Podcasts](https://podcasts.apple.com/in/podcast/starlinks-toe-hold-in-india/id1794924619?i=1000699254218) for just Rs 199/-.
Last week, on Tuesday evening, Airtel announced that it had reached an agreement with SpaceX to distribute Starlink’s high-speed internet service to customers in India.
By Wednesday morning, the business papers were in a predictable frenzy. In their print edition, The Economic Times published the development prominently on their front page with the headline “Mittal and Musk Chart a Surprise Orbit”. Others gave the news similar levels of importance, but with lesser rah-rah and wordplay. But what didn’t change is how the development was described—this was a masterstroke orchestrated by Airtel to get an upper hand over Jio, its competitor. Genius.
Well, a few hours later, Reliance Jio came out with an announcement of its own. Jio was also partnering with SpaceX to distribute Starlink’s high-speed internet service to customers in India. There were some slight differences in how Jio was partnering with Starlink, as opposed to Airtel, but essentially, India’s leading telecom companies had one thing in common—both would distribute Starlink along with their existing offering, and also help with installation and support.
One of the oddities of India’s duopolistic telecom market is that when one company does something, it’s declared as a masterstroke, but when both companies do exactly the same thing… well, nobody is sure what to make of it anymore.
Honestly, I don’t want to overplay the significance of this too much. And I feel the responsibility to say this because a few months ago, I [described](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/elons-monsoon-hungama-moment/?utm_source=ro_hdr&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=nutgraf) Starlink’s entry into India in these words: “Much to the anger, disappointment, and frustration of existing telecom operators, mostly led by Reliance Jio, Starlink is on the verge of starting operations in India, which will disrupt and change the way we think about mobile internet connectivity for the next several decades”.
The operative word in that sentence is “decades”, because I don’t expect much to change in the short- to medium-term, if at all. Businesses and sectors rarely get disrupted over a single event in a short period of time. The likelihood drops much more if this involves India’s telecom sector, which is simultaneously cheap, well-serviced, and has two mighty companies controlling 80% of the market. It’s true that Starlink has seen success in Africa and other countries on the back of similar distribution provided by local players, but those are also markets where Starlink was absolutely the better product, even though it was significantly more expensive. I don’t expect Starlink to make much of a difference in India anytime soon.
So why are we talking about this?
Well, because of how Starlink did it. And what it means for Jio and Airtel.
In some ways, the Starlink agreement is interesting because it forces everyone to choose something they didn’t really want in the first place. As recently as November last year, Jio and Airtel executives were literally in [a shouting match](https://www.deccanherald.com/business/companies/clash-of-titans-trai-open-house-sees-jio-airtel-spar-with-starlink-amazon-over-satcom-spectrum-norms-3268781) with Starlink executives at TRAI’s open house discussion. Starlink wanted spectrum to be allotted to them instead of being auctioned (something that Jio was fighting for). And now, Starlink hasn’t just got what it wanted, it’s even gotten India’s telecom companies to distribute its product. Again, there’s some truth in the claim that Starlink mostly offers a complementary service, so it’ll probably be used by affluent people in remote locations, for emergencies and maybe by some maritime and military applications.
While business newspaper headlines claim that Airtel secured a victory, I’m not so sure. And that’s because Airtel already has a satellite communications company to challenge SpaceX, and it paid a cool sum of US$500 million to acquire it—Oneweb. In [an interview](https://interactive.satellitetoday.com/sunil-bharti-mittal-talks-renewed-faith-in-hidden-gem-oneweb/), Sunil Mittal, founder and chairman of Bharti Enterprises made his thoughts clear when he said, “Too much attention is being paid to SpaceX, which is good. Oneweb has been a hidden gem, maybe even a damaged gem. I think it is time to polish it up and present it to the world.”
Well, what happens now to Oneweb? Is Airtel going to simultaneously invest and develop its own version of Starlink while also distributing Starlink in its stores? I’d imagine that this is unlikely.
Jio is in a slightly better position, but not by much. Sure, it didn’t go out and buy a satellite communication company, but it fought hard to ensure that satellite companies don’t get spectrum handed out to them. But with 5G mobile telephony being integrated with satellite, Jio is hardly assured. How long before they hit a wall and then figure out that the better option to expand services is by being dependent on a satellite company, which in this case is Starlink? Airtel at least has Oneweb as a backup. Jio has none.
And what about Starlink? Did it get everything it wanted?
Well, not exactly. For one, the Indian government has placed demands of its own, and I imagine that Starlink will comply with most of them. As expected, some of this has to do with national security and control. For instance, [one](https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/business/india-business/centre-sets-tough-conditions-for-india-entry-by-starlink/articleshow/118993013.cms) of the demands is for Starlink to set up a control centre in India so the state can suspend or shutdown communications services in sensitive and troubled areas, whenever required, for maintaining law and order. There are other requirements like mandates to allow call interceptions by law enforcement when required.
And then of course, there’s the biggest limitation. Starlink wanted a license that enables it to operate for 20 years, but recent reports [suggest](https://www.livemint.com/technology/trai-plans-to-limit-satellite-permits-to-five-years-defying-musks-starlink-11741851362582.html) that this will probably be for three to five years at the most—which coincides with the tenure of the current US President, Donald Trump. I’m sure this is a coincidence.
Despite this, the real story is that Starlink found a way. It found a way into the world’s lowest-priced telecom market which was dominated by two heavyweights. It found a way over their objections, and their own private plans to bring satellite communications in India. A [report](https://www.business-standard.com/industry/news/starlink-s-tie-ups-with-jio-airtel-to-reshape-india-s-satellite-broadband-125031301305_1.html) in the Business Standard quotes a top executive who had worked with one of the two Indian telcos. In his words, “You face a big risk of shoring up your key rival Starlink even while you compete with them in the same broadband services space wooing the same customers—through fixed wireless access or satellite broadband. There is so much contradiction in the play. We are creating a foreign giant.”
For me, that’s the real story.
To be clear, Starlink has not won anything. In fact, it’s not even clear if it’ll ever win. Nobody has come from the outside and gotten even a toe-hold in Indian telecom. Most thought it was pointless to even try.
And right now, Starlink has a toe-hold.
Regards,
Praveen Gopal Krishnan