---
subject: "Android XR 🌎, Waymo's explosive growth 📈, Netflix cuts benefits ‍💰"
from: "TLDR <dan@tldrnewsletter.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-12-13 11:17:40
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "TLDR"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_795315172960844453"]
---
[
Google steps into “extended reality” once again with Android XR (2 minute read)
](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Farstechnica.com%2Fgadgets%2F2024%2F12%2Fgoogle-steps-into-extended-reality-once-again-with-android-xr%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000193bfbd15f0-47f0cad4-5361-437b-a046-6d366c3ce896-000000/gEXMQRYdxfGaa2Zdmv2p7_gg3ytbOzE0KzwOxcHKBGY=383)
Android XR is a mixed-reality operating system that will power future headsets and glasses. The first headset powered by the OS will be Project Moohan, a mixed-reality headset built by Samsung available for purchase next year. Project Moohan seems to be aimed at the same use purposes as the Apple Vision Pro. Android XR is available for developers now.
|
[
iOS 18.2 Review: The AI Apple Promised Us (5 minute read)
](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Flinks.tldrnewsletter.com%2FsduEXL/1/01000193bfbd15f0-47f0cad4-5361-437b-a046-6d366c3ce896-000000/y6U77JfFq1we5913P3DZfXgohysDHIxYVU0281_2nH4=383)
iOS 18.2 introduces several long-awaited Apple Intelligence tools. These features require an iPhone 15 Pro or the latest iPhone 16 models. This article looks at the new features, which include ChatGPT integration, emoji generation, and more. Examples of emojis generated by the new Genmoji feature are available in the article.
|
|
Science & Futuristic Technology
|
[
Waymo's market share is now equal to Lyft within SF (2 minute read)
](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fthreadreaderapp.com%2Fthread%2F1867257473671082356.html%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000193bfbd15f0-47f0cad4-5361-437b-a046-6d366c3ce896-000000/P5bQA_PpXWAxdxKzDrGVFPvF3sYzhr3B2yqsddlPojo=383)
When Waymo launched in August last year, Uber and Lyft were at 66% and 34% market share in San Francisco. 15 months later, Waymo is at 22% market share, the same as Lyft, while Uber sits at 55%. Waymo's wait times are longer than Uber and Lyft because the company doesn't have enough cars on the road. It's possible that Waymo's market share will climb even faster as it puts more cars on the road and reduces wait times to be in line with its competition.
|
|
Programming, Design & Data Science
|
[
Wave Terminal (GitHub Repo)
](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fwavetermdev%2Fwaveterm%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000193bfbd15f0-47f0cad4-5361-437b-a046-6d366c3ce896-000000/F3b8han4G0l4k1chEWooxEVQInzOjVphYKmqatUnjLc=383)
Wave Terminal can launch graphical widgets that are controlled and integrated directly with the CLI. It makes it easy to access the web from the CLI. Wave Terminal features a base terminal, directory browser, file previews, a graphical editor, a web browser, and integrated AI chat.
|
|
[
Netflix's Extraordinary Parental Leave Was Part of Its Culture. That's Over (14 minute read)
](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Flinks.tldrnewsletter.com%2FyYsd2W/1/01000193bfbd15f0-47f0cad4-5361-437b-a046-6d366c3ce896-000000/OiIhYq8qxfQbmoQX9TLIY6N_GBL2yHc5Euyl1AoS92c=383)
Netflix made headlines nearly a decade ago when it pledged to give new parents unlimited time off in their child's first year. More staffers than expected took full advantage of the benefit, which Netflix found unsustainable. The company has spent the last few years walking back the policy. Netflix's new mindset of cost-consciousness has aided its recovery from a sluggish period. The long-term risk for Netflix is that the characteristics that made its workplace distinct will erode, making it harder to attract and retain talent.
|
[
I saw Google's plan to put Android on your face (8 minute read)
](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.theverge.com%2F2024%2F12%2F12%2F24319528%2Fgoogle-android-xr-samsung-project-moohan-smart-glasses%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000193bfbd15f0-47f0cad4-5361-437b-a046-6d366c3ce896-000000/wtlrUMz6aHL1_zTg1gpUurehZADXr3RBamTTMGDYtJM=383)
This article details an experience with Samsung's Project Moohan, the first device to run Android XR. The experience of using its UI feels similar to that of the Apple Vision Pro's, but Google-flavored. Google believes that Gemini will help Android XR crack the augmented reality puzzle. Video demos from Google are available in the article.
|
|
[
European Ambition (16 minute read)
](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.generalist.com%2Fbriefing%2Feuropean-ambition%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000193bfbd15f0-47f0cad4-5361-437b-a046-6d366c3ce896-000000/QEifQ-M6j1taKL6yi0JCTFA_usmha_WMf3ku4PkQ-HU=383)
Europe could create the most consequential companies of the next generation, but it needs increased investment or friendlier regulations.
|
|
|
Love TLDR? Tell your friends and get rewards!
|
|
Share your referral link below with friends to get free TLDR swag!
|
|
|
[Track your referrals here.](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fhub.sparklp.co%2Fsub_3202f09298cc%2F1/1/01000193bfbd15f0-47f0cad4-5361-437b-a046-6d366c3ce896-000000/FuGc5M4AsKjvp8AIbrtEFuCvCtMMfSuvSA0vLsZGroI=383)
|
|
Want to advertise in TLDR? 📰
|
If your company is interested in reaching an audience of tech executives, decision-makers and engineers, you may want to [advertise with us](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fadvertise.tldr.tech%2F%3Futm_source=tldr%26utm_medium=newsletter%26utm_campaign=advertisecta/1/01000193bfbd15f0-47f0cad4-5361-437b-a046-6d366c3ce896-000000/8Ws8Pnfb9pBd6mxx1Vj01rWib-EIMJAJ5dhvsBFNA2c=383).
If you have any comments or feedback, just respond to this email!
Thanks for reading,
Dan Ni & Stephen Flanders
|
|
|
|