---
subject: "Fertilizer and Toxins"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <the-diff@ghost.io>"
to: ""
date: 2024-06-24 14:24:21
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
In this issue: - Fertilizer and Toxins—
- Margins
- A Better, Costlier Alexa
- Elasticity
- Counterparty Risk, Served Two Ways
- The Universal Denominator
Fertilizer and Toxins"Ecosystem" is a really wonderful way to describe sectors of the economy. It's one of those metaphors that gets better the more you overthink it. An actual ecosystem describes a set of relationships that organize how matter and energy circulate in some area—the actual energy and matter required to produce or sustain an acre of rainforest or an acre of the Gobi desert. In both cases, there's rocky sediment and a constant flow of energy from the sun, but in the former case, that solar energy is doing something more interesting than warming up sand. Thinking of a market as an ecosystem means thinking about what the inputs it needs are, and which entities' outputs are someone else's inputs. Nature has clearly engaged McKinsey many times, and loves complex supply chains in which every possible process is outsourced, so you have crazy chains of symbiotes designed to convert raw materials and sunlight into useful proteins. And natural ecosystems usually operate in an econ 101 environment of perfect competition, where just about everything is either at its maximum extent or fluctuating around it long-term. But ecosystems aren't static. They're a convenient way to isolate some set of living things and pay attention to their interactions, but the global set of inputs can change. There are two great examples of this, offset by two billion years, which analogize nicely to two kinds of technology transitions. In reverse-chronological order, one of these was the discovery of the There are darker instances of wholesale ecological change following the creation of novel inputs. For example, there was It's a useful framing to divide technologies into Haber-Bosch-style ones, that mostly make the rest of the economy function better, and Great Oxygenation Event technologies, which rapidly kill off any company that doesn't directly adopt or adapt to the technology in question. Air conditioning, for example, is mostly a Haber Bosch-style tool: it was a competitive advantage to the handful of retailers who initially adopted it, then it became a necessity. There's Factory electrification was closer to a Great Oxygenation Event. It changed where factories should be located (cheap land within commuting distance mattered more than proximity to a river for power). It changed how they expanded, by reducing the minimum increment of growth. It made them more fault-tolerant at the level of individual processes, since these processes weren't all connected by belts and pulleys, but the resulting efficiency improvement led to organizational changes that made them more obsessed with controlling variance. And the change in the chunkiness of expansion also helped create the concept of a growth stock; if a company could profitably retain its earnings, and keep investing them in expanding what it already had, shareholders didn't have to insist on the highest possible dividend at all times. These changes took place over a generation, and they're invisible today because we don't have any of the mental cruft that a 19th century factory manager might have. But that's another way of framing how big a change it was: whole domains of expertise rendered obsolete! There are smaller-scale changes like the Great Oxygenation Event worth discussing. Two with close parallels are Netflix's introduction of ad-supported plans and large airlines' use of Basic Economy. In both cases, the company that made the change was not the first, and was actually reacting to someone else—there were plenty of providers of ad-supported video and of cheap flights with separate charges for everything a flyer would need. In both cases, the market was roughly segmented between companies that offered a product to price-sensitive customers and companies that targeted everyone else. When the biggest everyone-else company starts aiming for those same price-sensitive customers, it means the industry has switched from a discontinuous pricing strategy to a continuous one. Netflix did not invent the idea of charging less money for a slightly crappier viewing experience, but they did eventually decide that they mostly wouldn't let competitors beat them on cost. And since Netflix was operating in a high fixed-cost space, that meant it was pricing some of its smaller competitors out of long-term viability. Similarly, the network carrier airlines were making it so that Spirit, Southwest, etc. did not enjoy an automatic price advantage flying the same routes, but were instead competing with United-but-worse, and dealing with the latter's larger scale. This is an old idea; it's mentioned in The full argument for this is beyond the scope of this piece, but a brief sketch is that the story of economic complexity over time has, increasingly, been a story of paying increasingly high fixed costs in order to get the marginal costs for some products as low as possible. Artificial nitrogen fixation is a literal example of this, where building an expensive facility means marginally increasing the calories per acre produced by farmland globally. But the big factor is human beings: the more of us there are, the more it makes sense to pursue megaprojects like chip fabs, search engines, operating systems, and other extremely big-ticket technologies. A smaller population has to amortize those costs over fewer users, so it's probably a world where Moore's Law peters out earlier because the upfront cost of the next node is simply too high. If you trace the history of the biggest industries during industrialization, you'd see railroads as the main player early on—a high fixed cost business, but also one where the available market for incremental sales that amortize that cost grows slowly due to geographic constraints. In the mid-twentieth century, the big engine for widespread wealth creation was the auto industry, which also has high fixed costs but which can amortize them more through exports. And now, running down the list of the world's most valuable companies gets you mostly tech, Saudi Aramco (which also paid a high fixed cost for low marginal-cost oil, though that was more of a historical accident), and pharma. Berkshire Hathaway is the main exception to the pattern of companies splashing out billions of dollars in order to sell more high-margin goods at lower price points—and even Berkshire has huge investments in railroads and utilities. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/64da38b8?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)The way scale pays is different for these two businesses, though. There will be some customer migration from Basic Economy when they're young and broke to business class—paid for by their employer—later on. But Basic Economy partly targets a different market, of people who fly so infrequently that it's just not too risky to the brand to give them a worse experience. For Netflix, the math is different, because advertising itself is such a scale-driven game: if they have more viewers, and more viewer-minutes, they know more about their customers' interests, and they can afford to buy more data to target the exact ads those customers will respond to. It's a brutal reality in online advertising that revenue per customer-minute is partly a function of cumulative total customer minutes spent, so the biggest players by user count tend to have the best per-user economics. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/1f267faf?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
You're on the free list for The Diff. This week, paying subscribers read about Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. See a sampling of current open roles below: - A mission-driven ed-tech startup is deploying AI tutors to revolutionize education. They have a strong customer base in Latin America and they're in need of a driven founding engineer. Key skills: TypeScript, React, Node.js, Postgres. (Remote, asynchronous)
- A startup building the world’s most performant parallel-EVM is looking for a low level engineer with C++/Rust/CUDA experience. (Remote, EU preferred)
- A blockchain-focused research and consulting firm is looking for an infrastructure engineer to secure their clients’ networks. Deep experience in DevOps, Linux systems, and Infrastructure-as-Code required; previous crypto experience preferred. (Remote)
- A company building the new pension of the 21st century and building universal basic capital is looking for a senior frontend engineer. (NYC)
- A private credit fund denominated in Bitcoin needs a credit analyst that can negotiate derivatives pricing. Experience with low-risk crypto lending preferred (i.e. to large miners, prop-trading firms in safe jurisdictions). (Remote)
- A newsletter, recruiting service, and early-stage venture investor—The Diff, if you must know—is looking for an associate. Python experience and the ability to juggle multiple projects is ideal. Interest in finance and tech required; experience in either/both a plus. (Remote, though Austin is a plus)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. ElsewhereMarginsThe Verge has a A Better, Costlier AlexaOne of the mysteries of Amazon is that they deployed tens of millions of smart speakers and did not turn this into a monopoly on the AI assistant business. One pretty decent reason is that an installed base that big, coupled with the marginal cost of inference, could make Alexa a giant liability if it were reimagined as the frontend for an AI tool. Amazon can advance that model in increments, and it will, by Disclosure: Long AMZN. ElasticityCities that set order fees or high minimum wages for delivery services - Higher costs are an absolute disadvantage, but they're a relative advantage for the biggest companies, because those companies can get the highest utilization. There's potentially some optimal-for-Uber tax that prices smaller operators out entirely and means that a given city is a duopoly or monopoly.
- When one city passes such a law, it starts a negotiation between the delivery platforms and every other city they operate in. This gives them a short-term incentive to respond as clumsily as possible. There is still some revenue in providing ludicrously expensive food to office workers who have subsidized meal allowances, and eliminating delivery as a slightly premium-priced occasional indulgence for everyone else. And doing that vastly improves the platforms' negotiating position: they can honestly tell other cities that a handful of well-off people will shrug that they're paying an extra $20 for sushi, and meanwhile a few hundred gig workers will have to find another job.
One limit on the second factor is that it's a competitive industry, and in a two-sided market you don't want to give your competitors a chance to get critical mass. But it's also really hundreds of mostly-separate two-sided markets, and losing share in one city might be a reasonable price for reducing the odds of a worse cost structure in every other city. Counterparty Risk, Served Two WaysIn late 2022, a number of crypto market participants discovered that some of the assets they thought they owned—various crypto tokens, stablecoins, and the like—were, in fact, credit instruments. They really owned a 0%-interest note, denominated in these assets, and issued by a crypto exchange that turned out to be insolvent. When FTX went under, a lively market in bankruptcy claims sprang up, allowing some customers to get out with a small amount of their money left and for speculators to bet that FTX would recover. And, between a rally in crypto and appreciation in the value of FTX's stake in Anthropic, that happened, which led to another problem: The Universal DenominatorThe dollar is |
||||||||||
|
|
|
||||||||||
|