---
subject: "Medical Roundup #5"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-10-06 15:00:49
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Some amazing things are going on, not all of which involve mRNA, although please please those of you with the ability to do so, do your part to ensure that stays funded, either via investment or grants. As for mRNA, please do what you can to help save it, so we can keep getting more headlines like ‘ Heart Disease
I wouldn’t go that far. Even if these trials are successful, it seems unlikely we’re talking about ‘mostly defeat,’ although we could plausibly be at ‘greatly reduce.’ Which could still be worth several years of life expectancy across the board. If we could also similarly help with other major causes of death and aging, you’d see compounding gains, but without that aging still catches up with everyone. Unfortunately, America under the current administration is making deep cuts in basic research funding that leads to advances like this. Hopefully AI can make up for that. Alcohol
As opposed to the reality, which is that alcohol is bad for you no matter what, but that inability to drink is highly correlated with alcoholism and other traits that go along with poor health, whereas ability to drink only in moderation is a good sign. So drinking in moderation, which is only a small amount bad for your health, is still a good sign for your health if you are drinking in moderation. Whereas heavier drinking consistently looks bad, perhaps even worse than it is. Trump himself is not fooled, and does not drink at all, as he has seen the dangers of alcoholism in his own family. A wise choice.
A 4% chance of dying on average 15 years earlier is a big deal. This is not the first time a Trump administration defied the data on this.
Legal ReformsMontana passes SB 535 with broad bipartisan backing, further expands its ‘right to try’ rules, Alex Tabarrok is correct that
Embryo Selection and Gene Editing
In practice what happens is you get your 5, 10 or 20 embryos, they profile each one, and you are choosing based on a variety of traits. What do you actually care about most? You are about to find out.
I agree that this technology is coming. I agree it will matter to people. And why shouldn’t it matter, at least from a selfish point of view? It also might be a better way to select for other good things than you might think, as in general health and other positive traits are correlated with beauty. I do not think it will be anything like ‘this overrides everything else.’ Even the graceful failure mode for things like this is a really big deal.
I mean that sounds pretty great? You got your choice of gender and a couple of IQ points, while presumably also dodging a variety of potential genetic disorders. That’s a pretty good haul. What you actually get is not maximizing on one to two traits, although you do have that option. What you get is to do a general maximization over many traits. That is a lot more valuable if you are making reasonable decisions. Mason is however making the very important point that if you want to use IVF and have confidence it will work at all, let alone confidence it will give you selection, you need to do it early. The younger you are, the better all of this will on average go, until such time as we figure out how to generate new eggs (which is plausibly only a few years away).
He also reminds us that we are spending all our gene editing resources on rare diseases where we can stick the government gigantic bills and the ‘ethicists’ stop trying to ban you from helping, whereas the places where most of the value lies are complete ignored, even by people who would directly benefit.
I mean, it’s not that simple, of course it is not that simple, but it is a little bit that simple? If you have the option to use the technology we do have, it seems crazy not to use it. I do strongly agree with Vitalik Buterin that while
We’ve been over this one many times. If that which is not forbidden is compulsory, then that which I do not want to be compulsory must be forbidden. GLP-1s WorkOh no, all these GLP-1 drugs are going to prevent people from dying,
Now we are potentially seeing These marginal improvements make a huge practical difference. GLP-1s are now a lot like AI, in that we keep getting better versions and people’s impressions don’t update.
As usual this as worded confuses lack of formalized data and evidence for a lack of data and evidence. These are not the same thing. It is an entirely sensible strategy to experiment with different doses and to choose, with a drug that has big benefits, but also downsides, and is clearly safe. Self-experimentation can provide highly useful data and evidence, and clearly different people respond differently in terms of benefits and side effects at different doses.
The marketing involving microdosing does sound not great, especially its claims of other vague and hard to measure benefits. There Is No Catch Other Than Availability And PriceThere are still some potential
People instinctively think there must be a catch to GLP-1s. But for people in most circumstances there mostly isn’t one, at least not one of magnitude similar to the benefits, other than that for some people it doesn’t work?
Of course, here I am saying that and then not taking them, but I am a bizarro case where I was able to get to my target through sheer willpower, and I have decades of experience dealing with essentially permanent hunger. That almost never works.
The Societal Impact of GLP-1sGLP-1s served as a large scale experiment in drug compounding, and in sidestepping the FDA’s various usual regulatory requirements. The results were amazingly great, everything went smoothly. This is even more evidence for FDA Delenda Est, while noting that ‘fire a bunch of people at the FDA’ makes things worse rather than better. Removing requirements is good, but if there are going to be requirements it is necessary to be able to handle the paperwork and meetings promptly. Going forward, the bigger question is: What happens if this actually works?
At what point do we start to think of weight loss as fully treatable?
Not every case can be treated, since we have a non-response problem, and some people will run into side effects or risk factors. But a large majority of people with a problem still haven’t attempted treatment. Most of them should try. If you were already going to lose the weight on your own, you could do it easier with help? What about the equilibrium, signaling and status arguments? That if we allow people to lose weight without willpower or personal virtue then that will make the signals harder to read and be Just Awful? Yeah, I don’t care. I’m Not a Yo-Yo
If you lose weight without resistance training you’ll lose some muscle mass. If you gain weight without resistance training you won’t gain muscle mass. Thus, if you do both, yes, you end up worse off. But that’s a choice, and it’s fixable by attacking ‘without resistance training.’
There are also other exercise methods. The point is clear. Back Problems Are An Underrated Reason To Lose Weight
No One Knows Much About NutritionThat is, no one knows much about how to do it right. We do know many ways in which one can do it wrong.
If there were two concrete specific things I would have said I was confident about, one of them would have been ‘vegetables mostly good’ and the other would be ‘sugar bad.’ I don’t think it’s bad enough to stop me all that much on either front, but I do buy that sugar is bad on the margin. And yet when Americans cut sugar consumption (modestly by ~10%, note the y-axis) the obesity rate still mostly kept moving up. He blames this mess on selection. Once sugar got blamed, choosing to consume more sugar became correlated with other health decisions, some of which matter. The associations between sugar and health only show up, he claims, after 2012. And he says this generalizes - certain people eat certain diets. He finishes with a survey of some of the other problems. I am inclined to be kinder, and see the epistemic problems here as actually super hard. Nutrition is remarkably different for different people, doing proper studies on humans is extremely hard, there are distinct effects for short, medium and long terms, a lot of this is about how you psychologically respond, lots of details matter and are hard to measure and can be changed without you realizing, and so on.
Ketogenic Diets Can Go Very WrongFrom what I’ve seen, they go wrong enough often enough that starting to mess with them probably doesn’t make sense if you aren’t already messing with them.
The graphs show dramatically accelerated PAV (Percent Atheroma Volume) and NCPV (Non-Calcified Plaque Volume) in those on Keto diets. As always, beware conclusions from intermediate endpoints, and also different people often have very different reactions and averages can be misleading. But I agree this does not look good.
I don’t think we have enough evidence here to draw that conclusion either? Here’s a counterargument from someone thoughtful and sympathetic to Keto:
He gives us the standard ‘correlation is not causation’ warnings that are at their peak in nutrition and a reminder that no one knows anything beyond that you need a basic set of nutrients and that different people are different. The key thing about Keto, as its fans envision it, is it is the ultimate case of never do anything by halves. The idea of Keto is that you force your body into ketosis. That means consistent hardcore restricting of carbs. Most people can’t do it. So almost any observational study is going to include a bunch of people who don’t actually do the thing and stay in ketosis, and being kind-of-keto doesn’t work. Remember, when evaluating diets, that people basically neve stick to one for very long. The majority of people who say they’re ‘vegetarian’ will then admit they’ve eaten meat in the past week. Keto is not optimized for longevity. You do it to feel and look better now, not to live for longer. Even if it has longevity costs, it might still be worth it. If you do want primarily longevity he suggests caloric restriction and pescetarianism, which is kind of the opposite of keto. Keto is the only diet that worked for him in terms of current health, but of course different things work for different people.
I find these defenses: Reasonable arguments. Clear indications that very few people should be trying to be on a keto diet.
For keto to make sense, even if you mostly buy the counterarguments, given the risks involved (over a range of possible worlds): You need to have extraordinary willpower and discipline, keeping in mind that most people who think they have it, don’t have it. You need to be willing to spend that, and give up carbs, and endure all the hedonic and social costs involved, to stick to keto for real. You need to prioritize short term health over longevity. You need to have a body where keto happens to be relatively beneficial for you. You keep avery close eye on various markers and your experience as you try it, and abort on the spot if an issue emerges, either in terms of your health or experience, or simply exposing that the willpower price is too damn high.
And that’s if you buy the counterarguments. In practice, even if you think this is right for you to try, I’m willing to go ahead and say that on average you are wrong about that. Weight Loss The Hard Way
Not everyone can do this. Not everyone should attempt this. And most people in the position to need to do it should probably take GLP-1s. It was still very nice to see a clear example of someone pulling off the pure willpower route who wasn’t me. And it sounds like she didn’t even use GLP-1s. We Ask Far Too Much Of SatietyOne thing I would push back on very hard is the idea that there is something perverse and modern about the fact that
I’m not saying that staying thin did not get harder on many fronts, and it is entirely possible that there are other things making things harder on top of that, but the idea that in the past eating as much as you wanted of what you wanted wouldn’t have made you fat is Obvious Nonsense. Rich people from the past who could eat as much as they wanted, and didn’t care, totally got fat. Sure, people mostly stayed thin, but largely out of lack of opportunity. Needing to control yourself to stay thin does not mean that your This doesn’t require toxins or any particular villain beyond widespread variety and caloric availability, including many calorically dense foods, and greatly increased food variety and quality, and various cultural expectations of eating frequently.
My answer is simple, and similar to Cremieux’s in the thread, that there was never really any robust natural ‘balance.’ For full disclosure, I say this as someone whose satiety has always been utterly broken to the point of uselessness. If left to my own devices I would put on insane amounts of weight very quickly. I might double my caloric intake. That’s what actually broken looks like. But don’t ask an evolutionary mechanism to give the right answer in a radically changed world, and don’t call it ‘broken’ when you have to adapt. Yes, until recently that meant you had to work for it. That’s one option. The other? Good news, now we have Ozempic and other GLP-1s. Supplements
Unfortunately there are what the economists call ‘long and variable lags’ in vitamin impact, both positive and negative. Even if it originally helped or hurt in a day, it might take a while for a supplement to wear off. Others only work via accumulation over time, or work on things other than observable mood. Experimental design here is very hard. I would not want to maximize purely on the basis of how I feel within 24 hours. Also, for various reasons, you cannot by default confidently equate any given pill with other pills from another source that claim to deliver the same dose of the same vitamin. If I was going to run such tests, as much I would like to randomize every day, I would at minimum want to wait three or so days between swaps, and I would limit the multiple hypothesis testing. The data is going to be super noisy at best. A Cure For Some Depression
Assisted Suicide
As in, MAID now is already 5% of all deaths in Canada and is about to be available for mental conditions and parliament wants to grant access to minors, and I see a bunch of claims about it being aggressively pushed onto people in various ways. One wonders where this stops, once it starts. If it stops. Former Bioethics Delenda Est
As in, you are trying to solve people’s health problems, but this might also cure aging, And That’s Terrible.
And 41% stand ready here to outright deny physical reality. How exactly would we design society such that it is not a disadvantage to be blind? If I was blind and I heard people were claiming this, I’d be pretty pissed off at them. Do you think, by answering that way, you are helping anyone? Ignorance Can Be Bliss
Here in New York they take every opportunity to push you to get tested for HIV, even when there is no reason to do that, as I found out on a recent hospital visit (it was an infection, I am 100% fine now, don’t worry). Living Forever In Your Apartment
I do see hope that some people might live to 150 this century, or even that some people alive today might live far longer than that. It will not happen because ‘organs can be replaced endlessly’ because that does not reverse aging, so the rate of new problems will keep doubling roughly every seven years, but we have other options. Also, yeah, thinking ‘at 70 you’re still a child’ is both obviously false and reflective of the geriatric ruling class that is doing so much damage. Until your anti-aging technology gets a lot better no one 70+ should be in high office. In Other Health NewsIn response to RFK’s War on Vaccinations and as Florida repeals all vaccine requirements,
Ross Rheingans-Yoo
A potentially serious incentive problem: If CRISPR treatments can permanently cure conditions,
You're currently a free subscriber to |