---
subject: "The Fashion Counter-Revolution"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-03-01 12:03:01
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
This is part two of my series on the fashion of the French Revolution. You can read part one, on what clothes meant in the early days of the Revolution, here: As always, thanks for reading! If you enjoy these posts, please subscribe. If you think they’re worth a few bucks a month, please consider a paid subscription. After Charlotte Corday was The court granted her request, so she asked a soldier, Jean-Jacques Hauer, who had been making sketches of her during the trial, to draw her portrait. Hauer later turned the drawing into a painting: Soon after, Corday was taken in a cart to the guillotine. Lest the gathered crowd have any questions about why this pretty young woman was being sent to her death, she was dressed in a garment that made her crime clear. She wore to her execution a bright red shirt that designated her as a convicted murderer, as you can see in this 19th-century painting of the guards preparing her for execution: Even in the final moments of the victims of the Terror, appearance mattered. Murderers like Corday were forced to wear a garment that made their crime clear to the spectators who gathered to watch them die. Their clothing was also functional: most of the Some prominent victims got to choose their outfit: Louis XVI wore a brown coat with breeches. Marie Antoinette, executed after her husband, wanted to wear a widow’s black dress. That request was denied by revolutionary authorities who didn’t want her to seem sympathetic. She was forced instead to wear a simple white chemise — the garment that the poorest criminals wore, and one not that different from the dress she wore in the controversial 1783 portrait we And then a strange thing happened: when the fever broke and the Terror ended, the haircuts and garments associated with the guillotine became strangely fashionable. Men and women started to get rid of their elaborate powdered hairstyles and embrace the “Titus cut.” Named after the character of Titus in Voltaire’s play about the ancient Roman Brutus, it bore an uncanny resemblance to the short haircuts that guillotine victims had been given. Some people started calling it the coiffure à la guillotine. It also became fashionable for wealthy women to dress in simple white dresses that resembled the clothing that victims might have worn to their executions. Some even wore red choker necklaces, as if to indicate where the guillotine might have severed their necks: This may have been the result of the shifting tides of fashion — after all, the trend toward simpler hairstyles and clothing was in line with revolutionary culture — but some saw this as a way to make an ironic reference to the recently concluded Terror. There were even reports of “victim’s balls” where aristocrats gathered, wearing red ribbons around their necks, to drink and dance and mourn their dead relatives (though the prevalence of these events has probably been The exhilaration of the elites who survived the Terror — and their optimism that, after the Thermidorian Reaction had removed the radical Jacobins from power, they would be able to reclaim their place at the top of the social and economic hierarchy — led to a backlash against revolutionary fashions. Young aristocrats started to strut through the streets of Paris again. These privileged young people (who, depending on your viewpoint, you might think of either as victims of trauma celebrating their survival or arrogant elites thumbing their noses at the people’s revolution) decided to flaunt their opposition to revolutionary values through their attitude (haughty), their behavior (they spoke with over-the-top posh These elites (the men were known as Incroyables, or Incredibles, and the women were Merveilleuses, or Lady Marvels) were playing a game — how could they signal their disdain for the revolution without getting in trouble? Men affected elaborate jackets, skin-tight breeches, and lots of accessories, all of which would have marked them as counterrevolutionaries in 1793: Their female counterparts wore thin, often see-through dresses that scandalized more conventional tastes: This cartoon mocks the fashion as a “blind” man “accidentally” steps on a rich woman’s dress, tearing it and exposing her naked buttocks: The excesses of the Incroyables soon got old, even for them, and fashion during the Directory period (1795-1799) settled into a sort of compromise. Theresa Tallien, a noblewoman who had been imprisoned during the Terror, had a portrait made of herself in jail. Here she makes the simple prisoner’s garments, and even the fact that she’s had her hair chopped off (she holds it in her hands), seem fashionable. During the Directory period, she and some of her associates, including Josephine Bonaparte, Napoleon’s wife, established a new “Directory style.” It was inspired by the revolutionaries’ embrace of neoclassical influences, as you can see in this portrait of Madame de Verninac: And this one of Tallien: Dressing like this was still seen as decadent by many people — Talleyrand
Theoretically, these outfits were accessible to ordinary women, too, but wealthy people like Tallien made sure to accessorize in ways that made it clear they had money. She once visited the Bonapartes wearing 8 sapphire rings and a ruby tiara. For her part, Josephine, the future empress, took a more luxurious approach to fashion. Though she could be seen in simple revolutionary dresses at times: She often favored more exotic clothes, adorned with colorful Before the French Revolution, the silk industry (or “fabrique”) in Lyon had been quite profitable, mostly because it sold its luxury fabrics to the aristocracy. You’ll recall that Marie Antoinette’s infamous cotton chemise was scandalous partly because she was expected to support the French silk industry with her clothing purchases. After the revolution came, the silks produced by the fabrique became unfashionable and even dangerous — to swan around Paris in fancy silks was to risk being seen as a counterrevolutionary. The silk industry fell apart, which is one reason why Lyon became a center of resistance to the revolution, leading to a bloody siege by the revolutionary government in 1793: Silk garments became nearly worthless for a while. At one point, But, once he had overthrown the Directory and consolidated his power over France, Napoleon tried to combine revolutionary values with an old monarchical approach to power. One sign that the revolution had ended and something else had started was, once again, fashion. The new emperor revived the silk industry that Marie Antoinette had supposedly endangered. He Wealthy women wore clothes with simpler, revolution-inspired lines, but made out of fancier silks: The new era would not go all the way back to pre-revolutionary splendor, but as Napoleon’s officials swanned around in Lyon silk, everyone could see, as they’d been able to throughout the revolutionary period, which way the winds were blowing by simply looking at the clothing people wore. This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: Or you can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading! You're currently a free subscriber to |