---
subject: "An Empire Built on Excrement"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-02-25 12:52:17
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
If you’re an American citizen, did you know that you can expand the territory of the United States all by yourself? All you have to do is find an island that isn’t claimed or inhabited by citizens of another country, and take “peaceable possession” of it. Oh, and the island has to be covered in bird shit. If you expand your personal and national dominion in this manner, you can thank the As the global population grew in the 1800s, farming became more intensive. The increased demands of farming had depleted soils in many parts of the world of phosphate, potassium, and nitrogen, which are necessary for most plants to grow. Traditional methods of fertilization — which mostly involved putting manure on fields — weren’t cutting it. So people began looking for alternative sources of these nutrients to augment their soils. They found them on tiny islands out in the ocean. In some waters, like those west of South America, rocks jutted above the surface of the Pacific. These islets were no good for traditional human habitation; there was little fresh water, and very little soil to grow crops. Instead, there were immense colonies of seabirds, hundreds of thousands per island, which rested, nested, and, crucially, defecated there. In the sunny, dry weather off the coasts of Chile and Peru, this excrement never washed away. It dried and piled up into what looked like mountains. Though these mountains of excrement were, by all accounts, repellent, they were economically valuable because they contained concentrated deposits of — you guessed it — phosphates, potassium, and nitrogen. Crush that stuff up and spread it on your field, and you’d grow a lot more food. Unlike the Inca, who had In the middle of the 19th century, the United States had what you might call an official project of imperialism and an unofficial one. The official imperialism was the “manifest destiny” of westward expansion, which took place through the Mexican-American War and land seizures from Native Americans. But there was a type of American imperialist who was too impatient to wait for the government to take action. These people — sometimes called The search for guano islands took both of these forms. The U.S. government looked for opportunities to seize islands itself. It made the questionable But, even before the Guano Islands Act passed, some Americans struck out on their own. The well-capitalized American Guano Company was formed in 1855, and its ships began sailing around and “ To clear the matter up, a law was written to retroactively justify what had already happened. New York Senator William Seward — the guy who would later Under the new Guano Islands Act, Americans went on to There was just one problem: the law was not clearly written. The
One word in the law led to confusion: what did it mean for an island to “appertain” to the United States? It seems that nobody really knew. For a while, this didn’t matter much, until the horrors of Navassa Island came to light. Navassa, a small island between Haiti and Jamaica, had been claimed and occupied in 1857 by the Navassa Phosphate Company of Baltimore. Haiti had claimed the island, too, but the United States did not recognize the Haitian government at the time, so the Americans brushed off Hatian complaints. The grueling work on Navassa — in which guano miners toiled in the hot sun, hacking away at a mountain made of a substance so foul that it endangered the health of those who worked with it — was mostly performed by black workers, who were treated especially cruelly. An American sailor who visited the island In 1889, the workers on Navassa finally snapped. A man named John Ross climbed out of a pit in which he had been mining phosphates to tell his boss that they were going to have to blast a hole in a particularly stubborn deposit. The supervisor, Charles Roby, kicked Ross back down into the hole. One of Ross’s coworkers attacked Roby, and a riot ensued. Five overseers were After a series of trials, three of the men were sentenced to death as murderers, while others were convicted on manslaughter or rioting charges. But there was a tricky legal question: in what country did the crimes occur? Was Navassa Island really part of the United States? The defendants tried two arguments. They claimed that their crimes were committed in self-defense, but also that they couldn’t be tried under American law because Navassa was Haitian territory. In Jones v. United States, the Supreme Court decided that the “appertaining” clause meant that Navassa belonged to the United States, but was not a part of any state or other existing legal framework. The island, and those like it, existed in a kind of legal gray area. In the end, President Benjamin Harrison commuted the sentences of the Navassa workers, acknowledging that they had been very badly treated. But Navassa remained in legal limbo, and mining By the early years of the 20th century, the guano islands had been mostly stripped of their value. The miners had taken hundreds of years’ worth of guano deposits, often The era of guano mining has largely been forgotten, but the legacy of these small islands looms rather large. They were the As Christina Duffy Burnett As the United States embarks on what may be a Like the guano islands themselves, imperialism stinks to high heaven. Why we’d want to do it again is beyond me. This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: Or you can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading! You're currently a free subscriber to |