---
subject: "Not your parent’s PG. Student living is now ready for disruption."
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2019-06-10 02:36:10
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031"]
---
Indian college students and young, single professionals have had a hate-love relationship with PGs, or “Paying Guest” accommodations, for years. What started out as a way for young adults new to a city to find cheap lodging or boarding by staying with a family, often in their spare room, gradually morphed into crammed hostels with overcrowded rooms, terrible food, ridiculously strict rules and almost nothing else. But bereft of any real options, generations of students and young professionals glumly counted PGs as part of their rites of passage to adult independence, and to a day they could afford to rent their own room or apartment.
Not for much longer though, because venture-funded startups are here to disrupt PGs. Their product? “PBSAs”, or Purpose Built Student Accommodation. (What about professionals, you ask? Well, they will have their “co-living” nirvana too.)
Stanza Living is a great example of the student housing opportunity, estimated at ~$20 billion annually in India. In the last year, it claims to have gone from 2,000 beds to 22,000. Its founder says they could’ve hit 40,000, but they decided to take a pit-stop and focus on the “consumer experience.” Its goal for 2021? 100,000 beds. Rival OxfordCaps wants to scale up to 200,000 beds by then.
It’s a great business to be in, because over 10 million students migrated to different cities in India in 2017, according to a study. And even though student living startups charge between Rs 1.3 lakh ($1,900) to Rs 1.6 lakh ($2,300) a year on average, many parents are willing to spend more for quality accommodation and associated services. “Associated services” from good food, free wi-fi, gym and laundry services, to movie screenings, game nights and dance evenings.
The business models vary. Some lease existing properties and refit them before subleasing them on a per-bed basis. Others build their own custom properties from scratch. Of course there are apps. And big data analytics. And biometrics.
But there’s also instant revenue. Predictable lifetime customer value. And that most elusive of startup dreams: profits. No wonder even OYO, SoftBank’s perpetual motion valuation machine*, is considering an entry.
Can the likes of Stanza Living and OxfordCaps scale fast enough to become sustainable before OYO decides to drop a few hundred million dollars to burn everyone else to the ground? Or is the market “big enough for everyone”, as startups and VCs like to say even in the midst of the most bruising of discount wildfires? That’s Vandana’s story today: [https://the-ken.com/story/stanza-oxfordcaps-and-the-student-housing-goldrush/](http://link.the-ken.com/wf/click?upn=HQSq6eeRV1xAVaGuFOahuNCZVVXPeP-2FJpSqxhvIUDrlCcsFrBifWFsiZfaRwLlnD2mRx-2FlDWFE6ji7bq1olhubAYbTFcGQocU5AC5ztKA8lJ2L9b4BN4bYZAuiD3zw6BWQE5MHaJYZjuCsG-2BAvAK-2Fg7vfwbbiENfo5tlk67nTgBI6Xcgc6dQydLE0bcWMm0GCx8EmuoVDgHLzQm-2BnpQjPw-3D-3D_S4jLOsNx-2Fv6Jev2nvow8b7P9pBCWGd8KNZfb200gkZLQNlXQHio0noZzXtsWoloZmPWeyZsh7a4QCV9ufwCUKi00jlBT0uEdvwYDMuVuqcOi5t-2F0ylOnz9ZXtilAmE6jn-2Bt41B5u0Zsaeg2SXcOaBPhfdiMerNxrrckADFwq56E-2Fb-2BQHP8YpEVmhU0jUNinz3FoaYriEB8RoYy9vGSBL6izQYsklHJkjC5Mj8vNmyeU4a-2F-2F6QroVqeLup2zMHECVojeK-2B4gV1Xxmwzqw4e445fRDuOf5m5FUwCzD77AK5HGz4SB-2FMUmBsGs0PvW0QxSGp597djQPm7e15UB8ICVxH8edfT2GZgHMIPz8e7FTvu8exBtIlFPVWOHaCaCH-2BgzHFsP-2BvDTKLFfMsnnapob-2BPLy4iXY60k9jqmEITCENsjdLrMtHHKnvI5Ag9K5UH6zY)
Regards,
*OYO today reminds me of the predator city of London from ["Mortal Engines”](http://link.the-ken.com/wf/click?upn=HQSq6eeRV1xAVaGuFOahuJ9RGgoMwavuwcMkZDkWi-2Bq03CuknCr2yrOHdADCDShmNXloTeFVCEyCRuXoLY703A-3D-3D_S4jLOsNx-2Fv6Jev2nvow8b7P9pBCWGd8KNZfb200gkZLQNlXQHio0noZzXtsWoloZmPWeyZsh7a4QCV9ufwCUKi00jlBT0uEdvwYDMuVuqcOi5t-2F0ylOnz9ZXtilAmE6jn-2Bt41B5u0Zsaeg2SXcOaBPhfdiMerNxrrckADFwq56E-2Fb-2BQHP8YpEVmhU0jUNinz3FoaYriEB8RoYy9vGSBL6nq3wt1IX6z8sU0la-2B8fD2WCdUnAtl4jIPZN-2Fi-2BA0e-2FyaiVbpliDUDR-2BBx3AXLtH7yklPrh8p4F4w8FTD5cj3d2xBLS7kg3cOlKv28rlslYsBooktvAjquEtUOpkWJwyT4Oj4anYzrboiCNOsGyvnCsRI2oCbeJbmnt8zLxnPUH58mrAfFWyuPcLH-2Bg-2BEG7CF09zDdE9PEjHWRCPVi0zwfcoHcnZWrAEe5vTsUisHZZF) , the book & movie. Set in a post-apocalyptic world, “Municipal Darwinism” leads to large cities that roam continents on giant treads, mercilessly hunting down smaller cities for their resources and people. In OYO’s (and by extension, SoftBank’s) case, the other cities are new markets and the resources are valuation gains.