---
subject: "The Road That Made Japan"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-09-14 11:19:25
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
In 1689, the German doctor Engelbert Kaempfer visited Japan for two years as part of a trip that included Persia, Russia, India, and Southeast Asia. He was one of the very few Westerners to see the isolated nation during that period because his medical knowledge made him valuable to Japanese authorities who might otherwise have shunned or expelled him. Kaempfer wrote extensively about his time in Japan; he seemed equally fascinated by the plants he found (he brought ginkgo seeds to Europe for the first time) and the culture he encountered. His observations weren’t all correct (he asserted that Japanese people had descended from ancient Babylonians), but his books were the best information that Europeans would have about Japan for some time. Kaempfer, obviously an intrepid traveler himself, noted with interest the Japanese people’s interest in travel. His book contained an illustration of the retinue of a daimyo (feudal lord) moving toward Edo (modern-day Tokyo): Kaempfer was also fascinated by the enthusiasm of ordinary Japanese people for traveling. He Like a lot of Kaempfer’s observations, this was only partially correct. The Shoguns who ruled the country tried to keep firm control over their subjects. Recreational travel was illegal, but the government wasn’t willing to forbid religious journeys. So what Kaempfer was seeing was not necessarily an abundance of religious enthusiasm; it was the Japanese people finding a way to indulge their love of travel under a strict set of rules. The Shogunate had created a problem for itself. On the one hand, the shoguns required daimyo to alternate their residences — lords would spend one year in Edo under the careful supervision of the shogun and the next year back home, supervising their subjects. The daimyo, eager to demonstrate their power and wealth, would make these journeys with thousands of retainers. The artist Utagawa Sadahide depicted some of these processions in the 19th century, giving us a sense of their scale: Such massive processions required infrastructure, so the shoguns built up the ancient roads between the country’s two urban and ceremonial centers, Kyoto and Tokyo. The main highway, the Tokaido, followed the coast and passed through the territory of several daimyo. The government established 53 stations along the way — one every few miles — at which travelers could rest, along with checkpoints at which they would have to present their papers. The route was lined with shops, lodges, and restaurants. The Tokaido became more than just a road. Yes, it was a 300-mile-long conduit of trade between two of the world’s biggest cities and a way for the shoguns to maintain control over their domains, but travel along the Tokaido also became the subject of poetry, art, and legend. One of the most famous pieces of Tokaido lore was the Tokaidochu Hizakurige, a comic novel written by Jippensha Ikku. The novel, published serially between 1802 and 1822, tells the story of two foolish travelers, Yaji and Kita, who make their way along the Tokaido. Though the two tell authorities that they’re on a religious pilgrimage, they’re decidedly not; instead, they’re in search of female companionship, food, and drink. They’re classic arrogant buffons — they come from Edo, the capital, so they think they’re very sophisticated, and then proceed to embarrass themselves over and over again. In one episode, the two companions panic because they’ve seen a ghost; it turns out to be a kimono flapping on a clothesline. The story is both an irreverent comic romp and a travel guide, as it tells readers about the sights and experiences they can have along the highway. It capitalized on the growing popularity of sightseeing in Japan and helped to make Ikku one of the most popular authors of his time. Ikku’s stories inspired the great ukiyo-e artist Hiroshige — he made the illustration of the characters spooked by a kimono above — to travel the Tokaido himself. He decided to illustrate each of the 53 stops along the highway. This wasn’t the first attempt to do so. An earlier collection of illustrations had come out in 1797: But Hiroshige’s illustrations became wildly popular. He ended up creating dozens of sets of woodcuts about the Tokaido, all of which sold like hotcakes. Like other ukiyo-e, they were art for and about ordinary people. As Japan grew wealthier and more people traveled along the Tokaido, Hiroshige’s images allowed people to remember their trips — or to take a virtual trip if their finances or circumstances did not allow. In one of Hiroshige’s collections, the images begin with a daimyo’s procession departing Edo. It’s a charmingly ramshackle affair. Many of Hiroshige’s images, like this one of Kawasaki, emphasize the beauty of the Japanese landscape and the routines of everyday life: Here we see the mountain peaks around Hakone, with Mount Fuji in the background: And here some tired travelers eat at Mariko’s “famous tea shop:” The images show the hardships of travel — in Shono, the travelers are soaked in the rain: While others are scenes of stunning beauty, like this fresh snow in Kameyama: The final image is of travelers crossing a bridge into the old capital of Kyoto, which is ringed by magnificent mountains: Taken together, Hiroshige’s images — and the travel they represented — helped to Hiroshige’s prints of the Tokaido stations were so popular that they inspired copycats — in some cases, as we will see, quite literally. Utagawa Kuniyoshi centered his images around individuals. Rather than depicting anonymous ordinary people, he foregrounded the prominent, as in this view of Kawasaki: Many of his drawings are clearly based on Hiroshige’s. It’s especially apparent in his depiction of the mountains around Hakone: Kuniyoshi’s most famous Tokaido drawing was not of the Tokaido at all, but of cats. The cat-lover painted “Cats Suggested as the 53 Stations of the Tokaido;” each of the cats represents a play on words referring to each of the stations on the highway. People also loved to travel the Tokaido virtually. Several publishers put out board games in the mid-19th century in which players would make their way through the 53 stations. The game boards borrowed from the ukiyo-e artists: This one features Hiroshige’s famous artwork: As Japan modernized in the late 19th century, the old highway by which people had traveled on foot for centuries gave way to railroads. Now, the Tokaido route of the Shinkansen bullet train speeds travelers along a similar route. I’m sure nineteenth-century Japanese people thought there was a lot of tourism in their day; now, the number of travelers who descend on the cities along the Tokaido is truly immense. Nobody really walks the entirety of the Tokaido anymore, but parts of the old route are still accessible. If you’re ever in Japan, I highly recommend it. You can slip away from the tourist throngs and walk along the old path lined with giant cedars and imagine what it must have been like to travel that road back in Hiroshige’s time: This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are three ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: You can share the newsletter with others: You can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week! You're currently a free subscriber to |