---
subject: "The Brutal Origins of the Beautiful Game"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-05-14 13:48:32
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
In 1583, a pamphleteer named Philip Stubbes railed against the growth of a violent game that was sweeping across England. He wrote about the game in his pamphlet “[An Anatomie of Abuses](https://substack.com/redirect/22b68edc-8708-4520-b808-76c0b81a8c34?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o),” calling it (in Old English, which I’ve cleaned up a bit) more of
A bloody and murthering practise, then a felowly sporte or pastime.
For: dooth not euery one lye in waight for his Aduersarie, seeking to ouerthrowe him & to picke him on his nose, though it be uppon hard stones…
He goes on to catalog the injuries that result from this game:
sometimes their necks are broken, sometimes their backs, sometimes their legs, sometimes their armes, sometimes one part thrust out of joynt, sometimes an other, sometimes the noses gush out with blood, sometimes their eyes start out: and sometimes hurt in one place, sometimes in another. But whosoever scapeth away the best goeth not scotfrée, but is either sore woūnded, craised and bruseed, so as he dyeth of it…
What happened in the game caused people to break their backs and have their eyes “start out” of their heads? Well, a lot of underhanded violence. Stubbes said that players tried:
to hit him under the short ribber with their griped fists, and with their knees to catch him upon the hip, and to pick him on his neck, with a hundered such murdering devices: and hereof groweth enuie, malice, rāncour, cholor, hatred, displeasure, enmitie and what not els? and sometimes fighting, brawling, contention, quarrel picking, murther, homicide and great effusion of blood, as experience dayly teacheth.
Stubbes is especially horrified that this takes place on Sundays and religious holidays:
Is this murthering play now an exercise for the Sabaoth day? Is this a christian dealing for one brother to mayme and hurt another, and that upon prepensed malice, or set purpose? Is this to do to another, as we would wish another to doo to us, God make us more careful over the bodyes of our Bretheren.
Depending on the type of sports fan you are, you might read this and agree with Stubbes that this game sounds pretty awful — or you might wonder whether you can get this on pay-per-view somewhere. Unfortunately for those of you in the latter camp, this game no longer exists. Or, to be more correct, it’s evolved into a form that Stubbes would find unrecognizable. Philip Stubbes was describing medieval football (soccer for Americans) in England and Scotland, the ancestor of the most popular and profitable game in the world.
Nowadays, we’re used to seeing footballers roll around in apparent agony after the lightest of touches. Some even practice the “[art of the flop](https://substack.com/redirect/5bc59653-4526-4e42-ba60-6e43b5613085?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).” Nobody, thank goodness, is losing an eye or committing homicide on the pitch. So why was early football so violent, and how did it change from something more like a mass brawl into the slick, money-spinning game we see today?
Thanks for reading!
If you like this post so far, you should subscribe to the newsletter. If you are really enjoying it, please consider purchasing a paid subscription. Paid subscribers — it’s only about 75 cents a week! — get access to the archives, the satisfaction of supporting work they enjoy, and my undying gratitude.
To support this newsletter, please click the button below:
Now, we should be clear about one thing here: Philip Stubbes was an opinionated Puritan who [hated](https://substack.com/redirect/bd4eed8a-639c-4c96-803a-3230ec53137e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) chaos and disorder (the next section in his pamphlet rails against the “reading of wicked Bookes,” to give you a sense of the guy’s priorities), so we shouldn’t necessarily take him at his word that medieval football was so brutal. What do the other sources say?
Stubbes’ description of football may have been a little sensationalistic, but it doesn’t seem all that far off the mark. Sir Thomas Elyot [described](https://substack.com/redirect/9066d6c2-f438-4d50-8806-31b6bd795362?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) it similarly in 1531:
Football, wherein is nothing but beastly fury and extreme violence, whereof proceedeth hurt, and consequently rancour and malice do remain with them that be wounded.
And, in the 1400s, the author of The Miracles of King Henry VI [described](https://substack.com/redirect/0524d186-9e28-4d89-99ef-bbe007c21348?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) it this way:
A game, I say, abominable enough, and, in my judgment at least, more common, undignified, and worthless than any other kind of game, rarely ending but with some loss, accident, or disadvantage to the players themselves.
So it seems that medieval football was a bloody sport, but how did it work? Unlike today’s organized sports, which have clearly codified, almost self-parodically Baroque rules, early football was more like a children’s schoolyard game.
I’m sure you played something like this on the playground when you were growing up — a contest that had vague rules, but those rules changed year to year and place to place. You’d think that everybody in the world played “Wall Ball” or whatever, and then learn that the kids at the school down the road had never heard of it, or that they played it completely differently. Historian [Gavin Kitching](https://substack.com/redirect/34eb2636-e3f6-4c24-8da5-2a5399444e88?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) has done an admirable job of trying to make sense of what the word “football” meant to medieval people:
It is tolerably clear that, right up to the late eighteenth century, we are dealing not with one game, but with a loosely linked family of pastimes (not all of them even bearing the name ‘football’). Some were relatively small-scale team games, others were large-scale ‘mass or melee’ games occurring on feast days and holidays (most notably at Shrovetide). Also, while all of these games featured the use of a ball, not all were pure ‘kicking’ games. In some the ball appears to have been moved primarily or entirely by kicking, in others it was thrown or carried in hand, and in yet others (possibly the majority) play consisted of a promiscuous mixture of handling and kicking. About the only thing that all these games had in common (and the one thing they undoubtedly bequeathed to the modern sport) was the scoring of goals.
So, just as you probably did on the school playground, medieval people identified some makeshift goals (your team has to get it past that big tree, and my team has to get the ball past the yellow house) and came up with a set of rules about how you were supposed to try to get the ball into them. In contrast to the glitzy game of today, this was a poor person’s pastime, which means that the people who could read and write didn’t think it was much worth writing about. So the historical record has some references to football, and some condemnations of it, but very few serious descriptions of how it worked.
Here’s what we can figure out from the sources:
Kicking was part of the game, but, in some places, at least, you could use your hands to advance the ball.
Football was sometimes played by small groups but the most famous games were the big ones, in which entire towns’ worth of people would come out on a holiday and play on a field that might stretch a mile or more in length, perhaps trying to move the ball to one end of tow or the other.
The biggest games happened on Shrove Tuesday, the day before Ash Wednesday, as part of a pre-Lenten Mardi Gras/Fat Tuesday kind of celebration. These might have hundreds of participants!
There weren’t a lot of rules. You weren’t supposed to kill anybody, but
[hitting or biting](https://substack.com/redirect/78d483de-209e-4bbf-8ad5-f7aec75fdeee?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)your opponents was just part of the game. There were no referees to enforce the rules.The games were often a way for communities to take out their frustrations on one another, or for people to settle grievances in the framework of a game. They presented an excellent chance for you to punch that guy you’d been wanting to hit all year.
The game spread to other parts of Europe. In Italy, a similar violent game called
[Calcio Fiorentino](https://substack.com/redirect/0d2bc88f-808a-4922-94f2-7e0d1ca0c5fe?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)emerged, but it was reserved for noblemen rather than the poor.
Other than that, rules differed from place to place. If you want to get a sense of what it might look like, some English towns still hold a game on Shrove Tuesday, although the modern version is much tamer:
As you can see from some of our sources, the more powerful people in British society didn’t much care for football. A few medieval observers [described](https://substack.com/redirect/0524d186-9e28-4d89-99ef-bbe007c21348?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) it relatively positively, as William FitzSteven did in 1174:
After lunch all the youth of the city go out into the fields to take part in a ball game. The students of each school have their own ball; the workers from each city craft are also carrying their balls. Older citizens, fathers, and wealthy citizens come on horseback to watch their juniors competing, and to relive their own youth vicariously: you can see their inner passions aroused as they watch the action and get caught up in the fun being had by the carefree adolescents.
Others described the risks with a cheerful nonchalance, as in this [Scottish poem](https://substack.com/redirect/6a11eb5e-b40c-4115-bbca-8023be43b8e8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o):
Bruised muscles and broken bones
Discordant strife and futile blows
Lamed in old age, then crippled withal
These are the beauties of football.
But sources that are positive about football are in the minority. Not only did upper-class people look down their noses at the game, but they occasionally tried to ban it. King Edward tried to outlaw it in 1314 because of the “great noise” and potential for “many evils” it presented. Other kings — Richard II, Henry IV, Edward IV, and others — tried, too, as did the Puritan leaders of England during the Civil War period. The reasons varied: some thought that football was associated with too much violence and property damage, others thought it immoral, while some rulers linked their bans to national defense — they wanted strong young men to be practicing archery rather than beating the snot out of each other in football games. Not all English kings hated football, however: Henry VIII apparently ordered himself some [football boots](https://substack.com/redirect/6833ded2-b043-40d4-9afc-9affc5c1fab1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) so he could play.
The repeated nature of these bans demonstrated their ineffectiveness. Even when officials tried to sanction town officials who allowed football, the game proved impossible to kill. People seemed to love it.
Despite the efforts of political leaders to tame football, they seemed unable to do so. If the kings couldn’t stop this game — or at least civilize it — who could? It turned out that schoolteachers and employers were able to do what so many kings could not.
In the 1500s, teachers at British schools tried to adapt folk sports into more organized games for their pupils. [Richard Mulcaster](https://substack.com/redirect/be1e00ae-4ba8-4dac-a82e-f77349d6a9a4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), an administrator at Eton and other schools, wrote about three sports that he had his students play — handball, armball, and “footeball.” He acknowledged that the way most people played football was pretty unpleasant, describing the
… thronging of a rude multitude, with bursting of shinnes, and breaking of legges, it be neither civil, neither worthy the name of any traine to health.
But Mulcaster saw potential in the sport. With a “trayning maister” in charge, students
may use footeball for as much good to the body, by the chiefe use of the legges, as the Armeball, for the same, by the use of the armes. And being so used, the Footeball strengtheneth and brawneth the whole body, and by provoking superfluities downeward, it dischargeth the head, and upper partes, it is good for the bowells, and to drive downe the stone and gravell from both the bladder and kidneies. It helpeth weake hammes, by much moving, beginning at a meane, and simple shankes by thickening of the flesh, no lesse then riding doth.
Who wouldn’t want to help their students brawn their bodies and drive the gravel from their kidneys? Many English schools followed suit and adopted tamer versions of football with referees and rules. Different schools played different versions of the game, and when they played each other, they often agreed on that day’s rules right before they started playing. By the 19th century, a few versions of the game became more standardized.
There’s a lot of mythmaking and apocryphal storytelling here, too. Some sources say that a version played at the Rugby School allowed picking the ball up and running with it; this eventually developed into modern rugby. Other schools’ versions forbade the use of the hands, transforming into modern football. But the real history of the development of football seems to have been gradual and confusing, shrouded today by competing claims and schoolboy lore.
By the late 1800s, workers started to have a little more free time again. They started to form football clubs, competing against one another, and the football clubs established by schools, on weekends. These matches didn’t always follow set rules. A match report on the contest between Wanderers and Forest School from 1865 gives a sense that the rules were still quite fluid:
In spite of the heavy rain, . . . and the Wanderers’ inexperience at the school rules, which were a happy mixture of Rugby, Charterhouse and Harrow, some good play was exhibited . . . The illustrious Wanderer who attempted to run with the ball and signally failed in the attempt, having his shirt sleeve torn off, has promised not to do it again.
Four years later, when Wanderers played Kensington Civil Service Club, the players resisted efforts to play by standard rules:
A praiseworthy attempt was made to abolish all handling in this match, but owing to the general perversity of the two teams, little success attended the movement, both sides using their hands throughout with all the freedom that has marked recent matches.
Interestingly, these matches both took place after the establishment of the Football Association, which tried to standardize the rules of football (the earliest rules allowed players to handle the ball only when making a “fair catch”). It wasn’t until the end of the 19th century, when many clubs in England joined to play in the FA Cup, that rules became clearly standardized. [By the 1880s](https://substack.com/redirect/8bf0fe47-7f17-4abb-9a64-3eef42ac62f0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), the sport of football looked very different than it had just a couple of decades before, and by the 1890s, the professionalization of these football clubs made them follow a standard set of rules.
The people who improvised rules for football on muddy school fields in the 1600s or village greens in the 1400s would have had a hard time imagining what football has become today. From humble, complex, and bloody origins, the sport has become something played by multimillionaires in front of tens of thousands of fans, watched by millions on television. Nobody, I hope, is breaking anybody else’s back or putting out their eyes.
But the game still performs the same roles for the players and fans who obsess over it — it’s a way to acceptably engage in tribal conflict, a rare chance to engage in zero-sum conflict with a chosen enemy. There’s some need for this sort of rivalry in human psychology, and it’s better to do it on the field of play rather than the field of battle. It’s especially nice that we’ve found a way to play the game without murthering anyone.
This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are three ways to support my work:
You can subscribe as a free or paying member:
You can share the newsletter with others:
You can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment:
Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week!
You're currently a free subscriber to [Looking Through the Past](https://substack.com/redirect/9b033344-46e0-4463-ba5f-db8132672972?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). For the full experience, [upgrade your subscription.](https://substack.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.QUs1BCdfuOIlcSB4Foetuj2trVBtB-mip3X80DShwQo?&utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email&utm_content=postcta)