---
subject: "The Gemini Incident Continues"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-02-27 15:51:25
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Previously: The fallout from Also the incident continues. The image model is gone. People then focused on the text model. The text model had its own related problems, some now patched and some not. People are not happy. Those people smell blood. It is a moment of clarity. Microsoft even got in on the act, as we rediscover There is a lot more to discuss. The Ultimate New York Times ReactionFirst off, I want to give a shout out to The New York Times here, because wow, chef’s kiss. So New York Times. Much pitchbot.
This should be in the dictionary as the new definition of Chutzpah. Do you see what The New York Times did there? They took the fact that Gemini systematically refused to create images of white people in most circumstances, including historical circumstances where everyone involved would almost certainly be white. Where requests to portray white people were explicitly replied to by a scolding that the request was harmful, while requests for people of other races were eagerly honored. They then turned this around, and made it about how this adjustment was unfairly portraying people of color as Nazis. That this refusal to portray white people under almost all circumstances was racist, not because it was racist against white people, but because it was racist against people of color. As I discuss, we may never know to what extent was what Google did accidental versus intentional, informed versus ignorant, dysfunction versus design. We do know that what The New York Times did was not an accident. This should update us that yes, there very much are people who hold worldviews where what Google did was a good thing. They are rare in most circles, only one person in my Twitter firehoses has explicitly endorsed the fourth stage of clown makeup, but in certain key circles they may not be so rare.
The Ultimate Grimes Reaction
Then again, I am across the street from the MoMa about once a month, and have less than zero desire to set foot inside it. Three Positive ReactionsThe most positive reaction I have seen by far by someone who is not an AI Ethicist, that illustrates the mindset that was doubtless present at Google when decisions were made, comes from Colin Fraser. Pay attention to the attitude and perspective on display here. Notice what it values. Notice what it does not value, and will blame you for caring about. Notice how the problem was the reaction that was induced, that Google did it so poorly it got caught.
Also note later when we discuss Sydney’s return that Colin Fraser is perfectly capable of reacting reasonably to insane AI behavior. The AI Ethicist Reacts
The system Mitchel is advocating for seems eminently reasonable, although it is difficult to agree on exactly which ‘dream world’ we would want to privilege here, and that issue looms large. Mitchel’s system asks of a query, what is the user’s intent? If the user wants a historical context, or a specified current day situation, they get that. If they want a ‘dream world’ history, they get that instead. Take feedback and customize accordingly. Honor the intent of the user, and default to one particular ‘dream world’ within the modern day if otherwise unspecified. Refuse requests only if they are things that are harmful, such as deepfakes, and understand that ‘they asked for a person of a particular type’ is not itself harmful. Ideally, she notes, fix the training set to remove the resulting biases in the base model, so we do not have to alter user requests at all, although that approach is difficult and expensive. That is not remotely what Google did with Gemini. To the extent it was, Google trained Gemini to classify a large group of request types as harmful and not to be produced, and it very intentionally overrode the clear intent and preferences of its users. I am sympathetic to Mitchel’s argument that this was largely a failure of competence, that the people who actually know how to do these things wisely have been disempowered, and that will get discussed more later. The catch is that to do these things wisely, in a good way, that has to be your intention.
I mean, no, that is not what happened, but it is fun to think it could be so. Google Reacts on ImagesGoogle has had no comment on any of the text issues,
Their stated intentions here seem good: To honor user requests, and to not override or label those requests as offensive or inappropriate if it does not like them, unless the request is actively harmful or calls for a picture of a particular person. I would love to see this principle extended to text as well. In terms of explaining what went wrong, however, this seems like a highly disingenuous reply. It fails to take ownership of what happened with the refusals or the universal ‘showing of a range’ and how those behaviors came about. It especially does not explain how they could have been unaware that things had gotten that far off the rails, and it gives no hint that anything is wrong beyond this narrow error. It is especially difficult to extend this benefit of the doubt given what we have now seen from the text model. I would also note that if Google’s concern is that it serves its model to people around the world, Gemini knows my location. That could be an input. It wasn’t. The Market Reacts a LittleWe should not get overexcited. Do not make statements like this…
…unless the market cap is actually evaporating. When the stock opened again on Monday the 26th, there was indeed a decline in the price, although still only -1.5% for the five day window, a small amount compared to the 52-week high and low: And notice that this has been a rather good year to be holding these shares, despite AI’s potential to severely disrupt Google’s core businesses. Could Google be up vastly more if they had been executing better on various fronts? Absolutely. The Efficient Market Hypothesis is false, this is what Google stock looks like when their performance is disappointing, with most of the increase coming before Gemini proved itself at all. The market does not think this incident is that big a deal. So when people say this is going to kill off Google, or severely impact them, that does not mean they are wrong, but you do need to keep this in perspective. The counterargument is that the market reliably sleeps on AI developments. The efficient market hypothesis is false. There was ample time to buy Microsoft or Google based on AI before the market caught up, and then there’s Nvidia. Consider also that Google announced Gemini Pro 1.5 recently as well. That should have been a substantial update on Google’s ability to ship great products. The market did not notice that, either. The combination of capital gains taxes, indicators in both directions and the time lags before markets correct make these issues impossible to fix.
|