---
subject: "How humanity saved the ginkgo, Fernando Pessoa on unselfing into your most authentic self, Rachel Carson on wonder as an antidote to self-destruction"
from: "The Marginalian by Maria Popova <newsletter@themarginalian.org>"
to: ""
date: 2025-09-28 10:01:23
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Maria Popova", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_464868432690921211", "UNREAD"]
---
|
Hello D! This is the weekly email digest of [The Marginalian](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=9a6f69e41b&e=a81b7681f8) by Maria Popova. If you missed last week's special edition — a new poem about love, how a 19th-century painter invented virtual reality, and a poet's field guide to the art of noticing — you can catch up [right here](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=93c08adb40&e=a81b7681f8). And if my labor of love touches your life in a meaningful way, please consider supporting it with a [donation](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=5b7af4eaa9&e=a81b7681f8) — it remains free and ad-free and alive thanks to reader patronage. If you already donate: I appreciate you more than you know. |
Pressed between the pages of Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland — a favorite book of my childhood, which my grandmother used to read to me and which still dwells in her immense library — is a single yellow leaf, its curved fan almost glowing against a faded illustration of the White Rabbit gazing anxiously at his pocket watch. I still remember the afternoon I picked it up from under the four majestic ginkgo trees standing sentinel at the northern entrance of Varna’s Sea Garden — the iconic park perched on the cliffs of the Black Sea in my father’s hometown, where my grandparents took me each summer; I still remember the shock of seeing something so strange and beautiful, so unlike my notion of a leaf, and then the gasp of revelation: I suddenly realized that anything — a leaf, a life — can take myriad shapes beyond the standard template, can bend and broaden the Platonic ideal. The Triumph of Life. (Available [as a print](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=c9183c5e08&e=a81b7681f8).) The improbable presence of four ancient trees native to Asia in Communist Bulgaria is a microcosm of the story of the ginkgo itself. Earth’s oldest surviving tree genus, ginkgos were there before the dinosaurs existed, before Africa and South America parted. But after a long epoch of triumph over droughts and floods and mass extinctions, they came teetering on the brink of extinction for reasons entombed in mystery. Jared Farmer chronicles their evolutionary trajectory in his altogether fascinating book [Elderflora: A Modern History of Ancient Trees](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=a9a9eb203c&e=a81b7681f8) ([public library](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=254b3fec85&e=a81b7681f8)): These ginkgophytes were, in their evolutionary heyday, the foremost innovators of the plant kingdom. They could shed leaves in winter, go dormant in low-light seasons, switch between stub growth and branch growth depending on conditions, and resprout from lignotubers — energy-storing roots — after disturbances. On a prior planet with relatively few tall plants and no fast-growing angiosperms, ginkgophytes achieved dominance as generalists. As Darwin said, “rarity precedes extinction,” but the duration of rarity varies greatly. Ginkgo is a temporal outlier. Ginkgophytes survived multiple mass extinction events and outlived their original seed dispersers, which might have been carrion-eating animals attracted by the sweet-rotten smell of the fleshy seedcoats. After a long period of glory in the Mesozoic era, ginkgophytes declined in the Cenozoic and dwindled to one species by the ice ages. Ginkgoes disappeared from North America, then Europe, and finally Japan, becoming, by the Pleistocene epoch, mountain refugees in China.
Long-eared owl in ginkgo by Japanese artist Ohara Koson, c. 1900-1930. (Available as [a print](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=2caa0f104a&e=a81b7681f8) and [a stationery card](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=c7745c666d&e=a81b7681f8).) It was there that itinerant Buddhist monks discovered them. Taken both by the trees’ medicinal properties, which had become a staple of Chinese medicine, and by their uncommon beauty, the monks began landscaping Buddhist temples and Shinto shrines all over Japan with ginkgos. In 1683, the polymathic German naturalist Engelbert Kaempfer set out for Japan under the auspices of the Dutch East India Company. He spent a decade there, then another decade writing the first Western study of Japan’s history, culture, and flora, which included the first botanical description of this singular tree he had encountered in Nagasaki. He gave it the awkward name Ginkgo, likely in error, as the original Japanese name should have been transliterated as ginkio, ginkjo, or ginkyo. Ginkgo by Engelbert Kaempfer, 1712. (Available as [a print](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=f14263c0b7&e=a81b7681f8) and [a stationery card](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=5304faffa9&e=a81b7681f8).) The printed word, like the Internet that succeeded it, is a copying machine for error. The spelling spread across botany until Linnaeus himself adopted it in his taxonomical Bible, relegating Ginkgo biloba — which he had never seen or studied himself — to the appendix of “obscure plants.” Still, the ginkgo captivated the Western imagination with its striking geometry and its dramatic [dance with chlorophyll](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=ab06435159&e=a81b7681f8), casting its spell on masses and monarchs alike. Among the enchanted was the Duke of Weimer. When Goethe — the Duke’s personal adviser — encountered the ginkgo at the royal gardens in 1815, it lit him up with a metaphor for the nature of love and the nature of the self, which he rendered in a poem penned in a letter to a friend he may or may not have been in love with, signed with a pressed ginkgo leaf. Goethe’s manuscript GINKGO BILOBA by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe In my garden’s care and favor From the East this tree’s leaf shows Secret sense for us to savor And uplifts the one who knows. Is it but one being single Which as same itself divides? Are there two which choose to mingle So that each as one now hides? As the answer to such question I have found a sense that’s true: Is it not my songs’ suggestion That I’m one and also two?
Goethe was by then Europe’s most eminent poet, his verses the era’s equivalent of viral. Just as [he had popularized the cloud names we use today](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=bd874de2ce&e=a81b7681f8), his poem contributed to the ginkgo craze that overtook Europe, then spread to America. Soon, horticulturalists and urban planners all over the Western hemisphere were saturating botanical gardens and city parks with ginkgos. Among them was Anton Novak — the Czech visionary who spent forty-two years dreaming up Bulgaria’s Sea Garden and building it into the most admired urban wilderness of the Balkans, so that a six-year-old girl can pick up a ginkgo leaf a century later and have a revelation that lasts a lifetime. Meanwhile, geology was in its heyday and evolutionary theory was taking root. Scientists were unearthing ginkgo fossils hundreds of millions of years old, beginning to wonder how the first land plants evolved, beginning to suspect the ancient trees might hold a key to the enigma. In 1894, Japanese botanist Sakugorō Hirase set out to study the reproduction of ginkgos, which are not [“perfect flowers”](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=4a061df803&e=a81b7681f8) and therefore produce male and female gametes on separate trees. Under a microscope, Hirase discovered the ginkgo spermatozoid and, with surprise, watched it arrive at the ovum by swimming through the fluid — motility inherited from the marine past of plants, establishing the ginkgo as a primordial species, the missing link between ferns and conifers, and a living fossil, like [the dawn redwood](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=485c7bd377&e=a81b7681f8), reaching across deep time to bridge our stratum of being with that of the dinosaurs. Today, ginkgos line the streets of countless cities and rustle in parks all over the world. The oldest survivors in the wild have witnessed the births of major religions and the deaths of massive civilizations. Six ginkgos were among the handful of organisms that survived the bombing of Hiroshima. Long after Hitler and Openheimer have been pressed between the pages of history, the ginkgos are still alive, rising from the ruins of our capacity for destruction by hate as an emblem of our capacity for salvation by love. Two pigeons with falling ginkgo leaves by Japanese artist Ohara Koson, c. 1900-1930. (Available as [a print](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=a30440f703&e=a81b7681f8) and [a stationery card].) Salvation, be it of a species or of a soul, is always anchored in some act of love, and every act of love is at bottom an act of salvation. “Fearlessness is what love seeks,” Hannah Arendt wrote in [balancing the equation between love and loss](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=1241d5a6c6&e=a81b7681f8). “Such fearlessness exists only in the complete calm that can no longer be shaken by events expected of the future… Hence the only valid tense is the present, the Now.” Nearly two centuries after Goethe, poet Howard Nemerov lenses this elemental unit of aliveness through the ginkgos: THE CONSENT by Howard Nemerov Late in November, on a single night Not even near to freezing, the ginkgo trees That stand along the walk drop all their leaves In one consent, and neither to rain nor to wind But as though to time alone: the golden and green Leaves litter the lawn today, that yesterday Had spread aloft their fluttering fans of light. What signal from the stars? What senses took it in? What in those wooden motives so decided To strike their leaves, to down their leaves, Rebellion or surrender? and if this Can happen thus, what race shall be exempt? What use to learn the lessons taught by time, If a star at any time may tell us: Now.
sharing=lovingIf you think someone in your life would love The Marginalian, you can gift them a subscription [on this page](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=42c730dab5&e=a81b7681f8) — it is free, but please do let them know you have signed them up to spare them confusion and spare me the fate of being sent to spam.
|
|
donating=lovingEvery month, I spend hundreds of hours and thousands of dollars keeping The Marginalian going. For nineteen years, it has remained free and ad-free and alive thanks to patronage from readers. I have no staff, no interns, not even an assistant — a thoroughly one-woman labor of love that is also my life and my livelihood. If this labor makes your own life more livable in any way, please consider aiding its sustenance with a one-time or loyal donation. Your support makes all the difference.monthly donationYou can become a Sustaining Patron with a recurring monthly donation of your choosing, between a cup of tea and a Brooklyn lunch. | | one-time donationOr you can become a Spontaneous Supporter with a one-time donation in any amount. | | | |
|
Partial to Bitcoin? You can beam some bit-love my way: 197usDS6AsL9wDKxtGM6xaWjmR5ejgqem7
Need to cancel an existing donation? (It's okay — life changes course. I treasure your kindness and appreciate your support for as long as it lasted.) You can do so [on this page](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=9ed50c25d4&e=a81b7681f8). |
|
“To be nobody-but-yourself — in a world which is doing its best, night and day, to make you everybody else — means to fight the hardest battle which any human being can fight,” E. E. Cummings wrote in his [timeless summons for the courage to be yourself](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=d7dd985d13&e=a81b7681f8). But what does it really mean to be oneself when the self is an ever-moving target of ever-changing sentiments and cells, a figment of fixity to dam the fluidity that carries us along the river of life, to soften the hard fact that we never fully know who we are because we are never one thing long enough. “The self, the place where we live, is a place of illusion,” Iris Murdoch insisted in [her magnificent case for unselfing](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=f36215f061&e=a81b7681f8), and yet we do live out our entire lives in it — the self is our sieve for reality, the sensory organ through which we experience love and politics and the color blue. How to inhabit it with authenticity but without attachment might be the great task of being alive. Card from [An Almanac of Birds: 100 Divinations for Uncertain Days](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=dd85401bc4&e=a81b7681f8). The great Portuguese poet and philosopher Fernando Pessoa (June 13, 1888–November 30, 1935) takes up these immense and intimate questions in [The Book of Disquiet](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=91e05fac26&e=a81b7681f8) ([public library](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=eb8596e876&e=a81b7681f8)) — his posthumously published collection of reflections and revelations partway between autobiography and aphorism, profoundly personal yet shimmering with the universal. Considering himself “the sort of person who is always on the fringe of what he belongs to, seeing not only the multitude he’s a part of but also the wide-open spaces around it,” with a soul “impatient with itself,” Pessoa writes: Inch by inch I conquered the inner terrain I was born with. Bit by bit I reclaimed the swamp in which I’d languished. I gave birth to my infinite being, but I had to wrench myself out of me with forceps. […] Perhaps it’s finally time for me to make this one effort: to take a good look at my life. I see myself in the midst of a vast desert. I tell what I literarily was yesterday, and I try to explain to myself how I got here. […] I retreat into myself, get lost in myself, forget myself in far-away nights uncontaminated by duty and the world, undefiled by mystery and the future.
A generation before the great Zen teacher and peace activist Thich Nhat Hanh [lost his self and found himself in a dazzling epiphany at the library](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=71c6c8db57&e=a81b7681f8), Pessoa recounts one such moment when the veils of the self parted long enough to glimpse the vastness of the unself: All that I’ve done, thought or been is a series of submissions, either to a false self that I assumed belonged to me because I expressed myself through it to the outside, or to a weight of circumstances that I supposed was the air I breathed. In this moment of seeing, I suddenly find myself isolated, an exile where I’d always thought I was a citizen. At the heart of my thoughts I wasn’t I. I’m dazed by a sarcastic terror of life, a despondency that exceeds the limits of my conscious being. I realize that I was all error and deviation, that I never lived, that I existed only in so far as I filled time with consciousness and thought… This sudden awareness of my true being, of this being that has always sleepily wandered between what it feels and what it sees, weighs on me like an untold sentence to serve. It’s so hard to describe what I feel when I feel I really exist and my soul is a real entity that I don’t know what human words could define it. I don’t know if I have a fever, as I feel I do, or if I’ve stopped having the fever of sleeping through life. Yes, I repeat, I’m like a traveller who suddenly finds himself in a strange town, without knowing how he got there, which makes me think of those who lose their memory and for a long time are not themselves but someone else. I was someone else for a long time — since birth and consciousness — and suddenly I’ve woken up in the middle of a bridge, leaning over the river and knowing that I exist more solidly than the person I was up till now.
And yet, like Virginia Woolf’s [garden epiphany about the creative spirit](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=2a6544c518&e=a81b7681f8) and Margaret Fuller’s [hilltop unselfing into “the All,”](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=d0a4165cbb&e=a81b7681f8) such moments of revelation in which the soul contacts reality are but brief sidewise glances at some elemental truth we cannot bear to look at continuously less we dissolve into it. Pessoa reflects: To know nothing about yourself is to live. To know yourself badly is to think. To know yourself in a flash, as I did in this moment, is to have a fleeting notion of the intimate monad, the soul’s magic word. But that sudden light scorches everything, consumes everything. It strips us naked of even ourselves.
Complement with Herman Melville on [the mystery of what makes us who we are](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=5d174eeb95&e=a81b7681f8) and philosopher Rebecca Goldstein on [what makes you and your childhood self the “same” person despite a lifetime of physiological and psychological change](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=bd66b9e9e8&e=a81b7681f8), then revisit Jack Kerouac on [the self illusion and the “Golden Eternity” found in its wake](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=337c7eac35&e=a81b7681f8).
sharing=lovingIf you think someone in your life would love The Marginalian, you can gift them a subscription [on this page](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=5f65098713&e=a81b7681f8) — it is free, but please do let them know you have signed them up to spare them confusion and spare me the fate of being sent to spam.
|
|
donating=lovingEvery month, I spend hundreds of hours and thousands of dollars keeping The Marginalian going. For nineteen years, it has remained free and ad-free and alive thanks to patronage from readers. I have no staff, no interns, not even an assistant — a thoroughly one-woman labor of love that is also my life and my livelihood. If this labor makes your own life more livable in any way, please consider aiding its sustenance with a one-time or loyal donation. Your support makes all the difference.monthly donationYou can become a Sustaining Patron with a recurring monthly donation of your choosing, between a cup of tea and a Brooklyn lunch. | | one-time donationOr you can become a Spontaneous Supporter with a one-time donation in any amount. | | | |
|
Partial to Bitcoin? You can beam some bit-love my way: 197usDS6AsL9wDKxtGM6xaWjmR5ejgqem7
Need to cancel an existing donation? (It's okay — life changes course. I treasure your kindness and appreciate your support for as long as it lasted.) You can do so [on this page](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=b51af8ab4e&e=a81b7681f8). |
|
A century and a half after Novalis declared that [laboratories will be temples](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=fa72b80ee6&e=a81b7681f8), the poet turned marine biologist [Rachel Carson](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=9075527d52&e=a81b7681f8) (May 27, 1907–April 14, 1964) consecrated science in her lyrical writings about the natural world. At the center of her creative cosmogony was a vital symbiosis between literature and science in illuminating the nature of reality — a credo she formulated directly only once, in the acceptance speech, excerpted in [Figuring](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=8b2d862c2a&e=a81b7681f8), for the National Book Award her 1951 book [The Sea Around Us](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=167b47b762&e=a81b7681f8) had earned her: “a work of scientific accuracy presented with poetic imagination and such clarity of style and originality of approach as to win and hold every reader’s attention,” read the award citation. Rachel Carson At the ceremony held on January 29, 1952, the drama critic John Mason Brown welcomed Carson to the stage with introductory remarks that captured the [unexampled allure](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=0d7143d8c6&e=a81b7681f8) of her scientific-artistic sensibility: Miss Carson [has] made those odd creatures of the sea, those bipeds known as men and women, interested the world over in the mystery of our beginnings and the profundity and beauty of something far greater than mortals, with their petty egotisms and vanities, can hope to know… She has atomized our egos and brought to each reader not only a new humility but a new sense of the inscrutable vastness and interrelation of forces beyond our knowledge or control. She has placed us as specks in time and yet inheritors of a history older, and certainly deeper, than many of us realized… Where prose ends and poetry begins is sometimes hard to say. But I do know that Miss Carson writes poetic prose or prose poetry of uncommon beauty.
Rising from the table she shared with the poet Marianne Moore, Carson took the podium, looked softly, almost shyly, at the audience with her eyes the color of sea water, and spoke with confident composure about the animating ethos of her work: The materials of science are the materials of life itself. Science is part of the reality of living; it is the what, the how, and the why of everything in our experience. It is impossible to understand man[*](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=ad0f15aee7&e=a81b7681f8) without understanding his environment and the forces that have molded him physically and mentally. The aim of science is to discover and illuminate truth. And that, I take it, is the aim of literature, whether biography or history or fiction; it seems to me, then, that there can be no separate literature of science.
19th-century [Solar System quilt](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=a7c3a64701&e=a81b7681f8) by Ellen Harding Baker, embroidered over the course of seven years as a teaching tool in an era when women were barred from higher education in science. (Available as [a print](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=8063eb3ad0&e=a81b7681f8).) Speaking before we discovered the double helix, before we set foot on the Moon, before we heard the sound of spacetime in the collision of two black holes, Carson considers how science invites us to be wonder-smitten by reality, which is the ultimate poetry of existence: We live in a scientific age; yet we assume that knowledge of science is the prerogative of only a small number of human beings, isolated and priestlike in their laboratories. This is not true. It cannot be true. The materials of science are the materials of life itself. Science is part of the reality of living; it is the what, the how, and the why of everything in our experience. It is impossible to understand man without understanding his environment and the forces that have molded him physically and mentally. […] The winds, the sea, and the moving tides are what they are. If there is wonder and beauty and majesty in them, science will discover these qualities. If they are not there, science cannot create them. If there is poetry in my book about the sea, it is not because I deliberately put it there, but because no one could write truthfully about the sea and leave out the poetry.
In a sentiment she would echo a decade later in her [bittersweet farewell and challenge to posterity](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=d8b69b1ba7&e=a81b7681f8), she intimates that such a worldview can make us better stewards of this irreplaceable world — which means, invariably, better stewards of our own survival: I wonder if we have not too long been looking through the wrong end of the telescope. We have looked first at man with his vanities and greed and his problems of a day or a year; and then only, and from this biased point of view, we have looked outward at the earth he has inhabited so briefly and at the universe in which our earth is so minute a part. Yet these are the great realities, and against them we see our human problems in a different perspective. Perhaps if we reversed the telescope and looked at man down these long vistas, we should find less time and inclination to plan for our own destruction.
Complement with Carson, at her finest, on [the ocean and the meaning of life](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=6173332451&e=a81b7681f8), the story of [how she inspired M.C. Escher](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=2ea52d7e81&e=a81b7681f8), and this [stunning choral tribute](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=063803a5f1&e=a81b7681f8) to her legacy, then revisit Ursula K. Le Guin on [the relationship between poetry and science](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=bce71eea2d&e=a81b7681f8).
sharing=lovingIf you think someone in your life would love The Marginalian, you can gift them a subscription [on this page](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=ff27a42527&e=a81b7681f8) — it is free, but please do let them know you have signed them up to spare them confusion and spare me the fate of being sent to spam.
|
|
donating=lovingEvery month, I spend hundreds of hours and thousands of dollars keeping The Marginalian going. For nineteen years, it has remained free and ad-free and alive thanks to patronage from readers. I have no staff, no interns, not even an assistant — a thoroughly one-woman labor of love that is also my life and my livelihood. If this labor makes your own life more livable in any way, please consider aiding its sustenance with a one-time or loyal donation. Your support makes all the difference.monthly donationYou can become a Sustaining Patron with a recurring monthly donation of your choosing, between a cup of tea and a Brooklyn lunch. | | one-time donationOr you can become a Spontaneous Supporter with a one-time donation in any amount. | | | |
|
Partial to Bitcoin? You can beam some bit-love my way: 197usDS6AsL9wDKxtGM6xaWjmR5ejgqem7
Need to cancel an existing donation? (It's okay — life changes course. I treasure your kindness and appreciate your support for as long as it lasted.) You can do so [on this page](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=a78382d364&e=a81b7681f8). |
|
ALSO:
[The Coziest Place on the Moon](https://themarginalian.us2.list-manage.com/track/click?u=13eb080d8a315477042e0d5b1&id=8ef78130c4&e=a81b7681f8)
An illustrated fable about how to live with loneliness and what it means to love
ALSO:
|
|
|
|