---
subject: "How Charles Morgan Met His Moment"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-01-28 13:04:05
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Charles Morgan, Jr. was born in Cincinnati, spent his youngest years in Kentucky, and moved to Birmingham, Alabama when he was 15 years old. There, he belonged to a “good” white family. They Morgan went off to the University of Alabama, studied law, and returned to Birmingham. He got married and had a son. He started his own law firm, The young lawyer was all set up to have a comfortable career. He could have spent his days taking mundane cases for paying clients, spending Saturdays at Alabama football games or down at the club with the other wealthy and powerful men in Birmingham. Maybe he could have run for political office or served on the philanthropic boards. He could have been a prosperous, respected pillar of the community. All he had to do was avoid rocking the boat too much. But it quickly became clear that this was not Morgan’s style. Unlike so many of his fellow white Alabamians, he could not ignore or explain away the racial oppression of black people. Birmingham was the site of some of the most egregious racist violence of the period. Some called it “ In April, 1960, the New York Times To be honest, if you change the focus and the details a bit, much of it could describe America today. The article captioned a picture of Police Commissioner “Bull” Connor saying he was elected on a “race hate platform.” It presciently quoted an unnamed black woman who said, “I just don’t understand the white people around here. They seem to act so crazy. It doesn’t make any sense. Don’t they know there is a limit to what people will stand?” Salisbury wrote:
City officials So he started taking other clients who questioned the racial status quo. After he represented a white minister who had dared to try to bridge the gap between white and black citizens, he got And then, the day after the church bombing that killed four girls in 1963, he stood up at the Young Men’s Business Club of Birmingham. He looked out at the audience: respectable, white local burghers gathered for a nice little lunch. His
If this were a movie, Morgan would have gotten a standing ovation and Alabama would have changed right then and there. But life is not a movie. The audience But Charles Morgan’s life was changed forever. Anonymous callers Having taken his stand, Charles Morgan focused his life on getting his country to live up to its promise. He led lawsuits for racially fair elections in Alabama and for desegregation in courthouses and prisons. He worked for the ACLU, where he Charles Morgan’s choice in the early 1960s — to risk his career, his social position, and his safety to do the right thing — helped to make America better. Why resurrect the story of Charles Morgan right now? Because our national situation feels, in some ways, like Birmingham and other parts of the country must have felt in the 1960s, and I went looking for stories that could help me understand how ordinary people met that moment. I found some inspiration in the story of Morgan. Perhaps you’ve had the experience of realizing that a relative or friend lived through some turning point in history — World War II, the Civil Rights Movement, Vietnam. If you’re like me, you’ve asked them two questions: What was it like? And what did you do? Not everybody who lived during the Civil Rights Movement turned their life upside down like Charles Morgan, of course. A lot of people helped in the ways that they could, attending protests, establishing local Someday, I suspect that your children or grandchildren will ask you what it was like to live during the siege of Minneapolis or whatever else might descend on us before all this is over. What will you be able to say that you did? You're currently a free subscriber to |