---
subject: "Links For July 2025"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-07-01 10:13:42
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
[I haven’t independently verified each link. On average, commenters will end up spotting evidence that around two or three of the links in each links post are wrong or misleading. I correct these as I see them, and will highlight important corrections later, but I can’t guarantee I will have caught them all by the time you read this.] 1: 2: In the Although Shivers was a Democrat, the Republicans nominated him too as part of a galaxy-brained plan to encourage Shivers supporters to vote straight Republican ( 3: 4: 5: Trigger warning: creepy, insects, body horror, seriously DON’T READ IF YOU DON’T LIKE CREEPY INSECT BODY HORROR: The tweet thread doesn’t have a working link, but it seems to be the same technology discussed in 6: 7: Related: 8: Ming Chinese karma scoring systems (h/t 9: Meta 10: From Comments attribute the shift to some combination of Trump, the manosphere, and wokeness, but all those things existed well before the peak in 2018. Did it just take a while for them to get big enough to have an effect? If not, what’s going on? 11: Report from a recent Harvard conference on drugs and religion: Many Jews are really into psychedelics. It would be convenient if there were seem deep synergy between the Jewish religion and psychedelia. But there isn’t. So they can either drop the issue, or else confabulate something. Anyway, the link is titled 12: 13: Related: Trump’s “Big Beautiful Bill” originally banned states from regulating AI for ten years, but this provision got pushback, including from Republicans whose votes Trump needed. Earlier today, Senator Blackburn, a leading Republican critic, said she struck a compromise with proponent Ted Cruz - the ban would only last five years, and some online privacy and child porn regulation would be exempted. But this evening, 14: Related: Michael Trazzi has released a half-hour documentary on the fight over California’s SB-1047 AI regulation bill, available free on YouTube: 15: 16: Related 17: From the Economist, via I’d always heard modernism was a reaction to the trauma of the World Wars, but it looks like the rhyme decline started well before then. 18: The latest on theism, fine-tuning, anthropics, and many-worlds: 19: Mifepristone (aka RU-486, the “morning-after pill”) 20: A journal 21: 22: 23: 24: Naomi Kanakia is running 25: Contrary to rumor, you will not go to Hell just for 26: Related - 27: Works In Progress on whether 28: Eliezer Yudkowsky and Nate Soares have a book on AI coming out in September, catchily titled 29: The Daily Show did 30: 31: 32: Superforecaster Nuno Sempere (maybe with the rest of the Samotsvety team?) has launched 33: A few years ago, a group surveyed expert biologists on their beliefs about zoonotic vs. lab origins of COVID; most believed zoonosis. Lab leakers objected that many of the “experts” said they hadn’t heard of DEFUSE (the gain-of-function project Wuhan was involved in; knowing about this should be table stakes for this discussion), and many others said they had heard of a fake paper put into the poll to trap lazy/dishonest responses; this (they said) invalidated the survey. But 34: Some forecasters have bimodal AI timelines: either we’ll get AGI before mega-scaling runs out in 2030, or we’ll have to wait for something other than mega-scaling and will probably take until 2040 or beyond. 35: More research on o3’s GeoGuessng abilities: 36: A humanitarian aid veteran 37: The Grok vs. xAI saga 38: Expert survey on adolescent social media use (h/t 39: Between 1993 and 2021, female labor force participation in India 40: 41: 42: Did you know: 43: How do Africans feel about the influence of their former colonizers? (h/t 44: 45: 46: Wikipedia on the attempt to censor Michelangelo’s Last Judgment:
Like the Streisand Effect if people still had some dim memory that there was something about the name “Streisand” in the year 2500.
47: When a couple has a child, everyone knows the woman’s career suffers more than the man’s. 48: 49: University of Austin’s attempt at a non-woke free speech school not going so well: My strongest opinion on this topic is that if 50: Murder rates 51: Related: 52: 53: 54: 55: 56: Who says psychology research is dead? You're currently a free subscriber to |