---
subject: "Monthly Roundup #9: August 2023"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-08-07 13:11:07
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
What a month. So much to cover. What this post does not cover beyond this introduction is the biggest news story of the month, a potential room temperature superconductor. If this discovery is real, it could be transformative. Think of the potential. We could be so back. Chances are that instead it is over, but even a small chance of something this big is huge. Even if it ends up being all over, it was amazing to see people around the world come together and do science to this to try and actually figure out something physical and real. Even in failure, we are so back. What I am not going to do is pivot to suddenly becoming an expert on physics or get into the weeds myself. There is no need for that, I work fast and it would be fun but there are limits and I simply haven’t the time. We have a whole world stepping up to replicate the results and soon we will know the answer. In the meantime, it is easy to know the probability of the answer. Polymarket does not allow Americans and requires crypto. So if you are in American or want to get involved via charity funds instead, You can also enjoy my movie retrospective, So what else has been happening? Bad News
We make many aspects of ordinary living illegal unless large regulation-imposed mandatory costs are paid, but we enforce that be threatening your standing in society, which drug users are willing to lose or have already lost. And allowing more drug use increases the number of people who end up like that over time. What to do?
Yet another debate debate continues. Previously I looked at claims from The Free Press that debate had been taken over by judges uninterested in debate who instead rewarded whoever successfully deployed the proper left-wing shibboleths. That post failed to provide statistics or base rates. After looking at judge profiles, it was not clear that there was a severe problem.
Instead it requires arguing obvious nonsense, with failure to accept such nonsense as the baseline of discussion, or insisting that it is irrelevant to the topic, treated as a de facto automatic loss. The format is broken when played at the competitive level, so you can perhaps get value playing it casually, but that’s it, and if someone pulls out a bazooka then you lose. A shame. Are we indeed this lame? It seems that we are. We also don’t value unique identifiers sufficiently, also the people choosing this many white cars seem low-level insane. Product variety is one of the things that make America great and we are letting it slip away. Worst of all is that Uber and Lyft seem to encourage black cars, the hardest ones to distinguish, when strangers have to find your car constantly. Give me the purple or green Uber every time.
Tech No Longer or Not Yet Calling Itself Artificial Intelligence
I get the view that this could be predatory or what not, but in practice what you get are fewer, higher-priced, higher-relevance ads that people actually do not mind seeing. The alternative is a scattershot army of random useless junk. Perhaps we can have a compromise, where we define certain types of advertising as potentially predatory - such as things like gambling or recreational drugs or multi-level marketing schemes - and say that those in particular can’t custom target. What we actually deserve, and might benefit from requiring, is user control over ad customization. This would benefit everyone. The ads I want to see are the ads you want to show me. For me, the best ad types are movie previews, game advertisements, restaurants and of course delicious Goldbelly-style temptations.
There are quite a lot of time or duration estimation systems that are reliably horribly wrong, with sufficient reliability that you can adjust to find the right estimate. Often you see exactly the above, where you get two answers from two different processes, one of which is lying. It always points to something very wrong on some level, so if you care about fixing problems it is highly useful. It continuously baffles me that such estimations cannot be done better. Food delivery time estimates consistently make no sense to the point that I ignore them.
Government Working
More related bad
Will the UK really drive all encrypted messaging services out of the country? ( Some claim that this is actually on track and going to happen.
This seems like the kind of thing that continuously threatens to happen, then does not actually happen when people realize the consequences. They do on occasion actually happen, though.
In other NEPA news, the CHIPS bill is not going to do much if we don’t address those concerns, as well as other regulatory requirements effectively nullifying our efforts.
A cute tax trick (
There was a 14-year gap in which some appreciation doubtless did occur. Still, not like this, also this was literally higher than any recorded private home sale in the country.
I think this is right. You want to protect against corruption. You want transparency of who does what, and who gets paid what and how, and other such outcomes. You also need to allow the people involved to sometimes speak freely, ideally also to write freely, especially in the age of social media.
I would actually be mostly fine with mandating porn sites require ID in order to upload material, for authorization reasons, there are already plenty of similar rules. For viewing it? The issue is that there is no ‘flash you ID badge to prove you are 21 without creating any stored data’ on the internet.
I notice I remain confused that no good technological solution exists here. In such a solution, some websites would be classified as ‘adult.’ To access them, you present a token that contains only the information ‘this is an adult’ as provided by, say, Apple or Google or whomever, with no identifying information and no ability to trace it back, and they check your ID one time at some point. If you want your child to not do this, you give them a phone or computer without such verification, and you can easily do a spot check to see if they’ve hacked around it. Yes, it’s not bulletproof but it does not need to be. Why is this impossible or non-viable? On a podcast, Connor Leahy pointed out that there are larger regulatory barriers to selling a sandwich than there are to deploying a superintelligence. There are two different ways to fix this and I am open to both of them.
There is no more vile industry or lobbying group than the tax preparation firms, whose entire existence seems mostly to be lobbying the government to require mountains of completely unnecessary paperwork so that citizens will pay the firms to make this problem go away. Can I say, perhaps, new EA cause area? Since 2006, total lobbying by these companies is on the order of $40 million, if we assume all their lobbying money is opposing filing reform. Public opinion is overwhelming here, and there are approximately zero other people on the side of more paperwork, so presumably you would at most have to match that rate of spending. The logic invoked by those who take the bribes is so absurd.
The idea that the IRS is going to use this opportunity to cheat the taxpayers is, well, it’s an idea I suppose. We have an existing service, which is designed to intentionally not be used for obvious commercial reasons.
In related news, we put arbitrary limits on H1B visas,
Our immigration system is utterly broken, and no one seems to care to fix it. Masoud here documents a student who gets turned down for a visa
Money Stuff
It seems to be true,
These seem like highly different failure modes, if they even are failures. For sufficiently large investments a lot of investigation makes sense, but VCs have learned to focus on certain aspects in general rather than others. In a hits-based business, it can be right to mostly not sweat future regulatory hurdles, and focus on other considerations. The Fed has a lot of work yet to do in order to get inflation back to target, made harder by people’s inability to realize that money is not tight, we are doomed to never listen to Scott Sumner.
Usually a technical issue is only a technical issues,
Sadly, FTX
Thus, The Caroline Diaries.
The need for SBF to avoid this, that is? Good News, Everyone
There is still time to
If you pump your own gas you’ll have to go with Thursday:
Someone’s reaction to this proposal tells you a lot about what it is they actually value. Also works wonders insulating buildings.
How does Patrick McKenzie keep getting all these mountains of paperwork that would presumably drive ordinary people to tears?
It seems we still have >20% of people smoking and taking on credit card debt. Stop it, everyone. Having credit card debt should be an act of desperation, not something about half of people carry, which is the only way the 83% number is that small. The most surprising are the last two. The top 20% only have half of the sex partners and alcohol? I would have assumed both were highly fat-tailed distributions. About 20%-25% of American adults don’t drink at all, many of the rest drink only rarely, and alcoholics often drink quite a lot. The sexual partner distribution seems like it should have quite a lot of 0s and 1s in it. While I Cannot Condone This
In Medical and Health News
What does he mean by this absurdity?
This is the branch of philosophy that says that anyone who disagrees with you, or makes decisions of which you do not approve, you are right and it is the people who are wrong. Also that there are no trade-offs or preferences, only that which public health thinks is right and that which stupid ugly Americans do instead that causes them to die. All the crusades Califf actually lists are petty. He’s at least mostly not wrong, but none of the issues in question kill that many people. Instead Califf is essentially saying that ‘misinformation’ is behind every decision to not eat optimally healthy food, or engage in proper exercise, or not seek proper health care, or to take various other risks. This is such nonsense. People have other preferences and other things to do. They make choices, sometimes badly, sometimes foolishly, sometimes out of laziness or short time horizons or addictions or feeling like it. They get to do that. Misinformation is not ignorance, nor is it lack of wisdom, or lack of caring, nor is it having different priorities. Misinformation, to the extent it is a thing, is when people are told things and those things are false. When one attributes smoking to ‘misinformation,’ or blames it for more deaths than heart disease which kills 23.5% of us, one reveals a failure to understand this distinction. And also one reveals… misinformation.
No doubt the list goes on.
Arnold Kling points out that
My view continues to be that different people are different. All five interventions make it easy to run the experiment and cheaply gather data on whether it works for you. Nature and socializing in particular seem like things that benefits some people a lot and others little or not at all, for me socializing is iffy and nature mostly doesn’t work. Exercise I am confident is helpful overall but the people who expect it to make you happy directly rather than as a secondary effect of being healthy are highly annoying, that does not work for me or many others I now. Mindfulness I strongly suspect is mostly a scam. My experience says that gratitude does work, and that it has a lasting effect when you feel gratitude in a systematic way, or for things that mattered in your life. It can make a big difference. But while you do have to actually do it to get the benefits, I do think you have to mean it, this can’t be forced or it won’t work. And no doubt there are people for whom it won’t work at all. Lying About the Lab Leak HypothesisWe likely will never know whether Covid-19 leaked from a lab. What we do know is that there were those that also did not know the answer, yet misrepresented their beliefs and suppress the lab leak hypothesis, as the result of a collaborative process that did so in part for political reasons and in part to protect gain of function research. If people knew they might have caused the pandemic, how would they be funded to go cause another pandemic?
I have not independently gone into the details, because I do not find them so important, and do not think it makes much difference whether this was deliberate explicit coordination or implicit forces pushing outcomes in a particular direction. That failure to care itself reflects a problem. To me, the biggest scandal of all is our collective failure to take this issue seriously as a scandal. The scandal is that at this point such behaviors are expected, considered standard procedure, do not represent news, are not something I have even bothered diving into so deeply, do not seems likely to make any difference. Nate Silver is still all-in on this issue.
Doing Science To It: Marinara Edition
This matches my general experience more generally. The big brands, the standard products, are popular for a reason. You can sometimes do better by moving up the cost curve and finding a bespoke alternative that fits exactly your preferences or is that good, but most of the small brand alternatives will be worse. One of the glories of America is that many of the standards - such as Heinz Ketchup or Oreo Cookies, or famously Coke - are flat out the best version of that product known to exist and the rich man cannot do better.
I would expect the correlation to not be as strong as most people would expect, but almost none surprises me as well. There are clear price-quality tradeoffs one makes when producing sauce. Among the bigger brands, I would expect price to indeed predict quality quite a bit.
I hadn’t thought about temperature. Texture issues are clear. Her ratings, all with detailed descriptions in the thread: 10/10: Rao’s 8/10: Newman’s Own 7/10: Barilla, Michael’s of Brooklyn 6/10: Classico, San Merican 5/10: Mantova, Bove’s 4/10: Victoria, Prego 3/10: Cucina Antica, Pizza Girl, Di Bari 2/10: Carbone 1/10: Billy’s Italian Market Here’s her note on Rao’s:
What is missing is the sauce I actually use, which is Lidia’s, and also Trader Giotto’s Marinara, and one commentor mentions il Mulino. America, what a country. To the extent I have tried the sauces, which is not that many of them at this point, I can confirm these ratings make sense. To the extent that I haven’t, based on my general heuristics, they continue to make perfect sense. While I Cannot Condone This
IANAL and none of this is legal advice, but as I understand it, this is at least kind of how all laws work. If everyone is doing it and no one is suing or bringing enforcement actions over it, is it illegal? There is a reason Jewish law says no, a law that is not enforced is null and void. American law is not something that can, strictly speaking, be entirely adhered to, and if your action is popular locally such that a jury will likely not find you liable or guilty, and the government is doing similar things and unlikely to sanction you, I do not see the urgency in calling one’s employment lawyers.
May want to click through to better see the graphs. This was definitely not the best possible way to graphically represent this data. A clear preference on the one side for compensation, on the other for reduced hours. Note that having children leans male here, and overall there is much more balance. Another stark contrast. One is free to ask what outcomes such preferences would produce. What kind of incompetent person would have to rate limit something like Twitter?
I would combine them, especially the economics response from Miles, extending that to include standardization and a system of regulations and permissions. You used to be able to go ahead and do any old awesome thing without asking permission. Now you would need to get all sorts of approvals, risking destroying the entire timeline or approval of the project. That simply is not worth the trouble. Except that it is. We need to go back. We need to build awesome statues again. We need uniqueness, character, art, awe, and we can damn well afford it. The problem goes well beyond the statues - before AI went crazy I was planning an extensive series inspired by Christopher Alexander’s A Pattern Language. This is not a lost cause I intend to spend my ammunition on given the opportunity costs, but it must be said. Almost all the gains from A/B testing, and new ideas, come from a handful of very good ones. How is this for irony? Of course the Paperwork Reduction Act causes paperwork.
The loans given out in 2009 were typically in the 5%-8% interest range. This amount of failure to repay during the late 2010s reflects some combination of extreme illiquidity, extreme insolvency and extreme economic illiteracy. Whereas for loans from 2020, indefinitely paying the legal minimum seems highly reasonable. I’d love to see the crosstabs on this in terms of income and family size and marital status and economic literacy.
I would caution there on correlation versus causation. If you are healthy you are more likely to exercise. I am sure there is a big and real effect, but it isn’t 400%. I’d also add this one:
To me (and I’d assume anyone else who did math competitions) this is trivial, the sequence has limited memory so it will repeat in a loop, all you have to do is find one containing a 6, and I did not do well on the USAMO or Putnam. He solves this by not giving up based on knowing there is a solution, and concludes that scientists and founders have faith that there is an answer out there. The next level is to be able to do the search where you look for the path to victory with the same determination as if you knew it existed, without assuming that the path exists, and indeed instead also trying to prove that no such path exists, so that you figure out why you can’t prove that yet. Or so that you do prove it, and can stop. My biggest failure as a founder was, quite literally, not knowing when to quit. In section five he discusses science brain versus founder or CEO brain, where scientists need to be driven by curiosity to find the value, whereas CEOs and founders need to get their heads in whatever game is most valuable right now. I wonder if part of what I have, for both better and worse, is a strange hybrid of both. Also curious: Despite my being (last time I checked) only a B-player at best, in the [4] footnote, which was meant to be an example of complacency, my first candidate move was the right one and instinctively looked like it would work, whereas the move he says is ‘automatic’ didn’t occur to me since I was confident I’d found a forced win. The second example is even weirder to me, even if you discount the fact that the question didn’t say ‘integers.’ The moment you write out a 1 you have to know that’s wrong. That’s not complacency, that’s a complete failure to do sanity or error checks. Sports Go SportsWinning turnover battles wins football games,
A rival explanation is this is ‘sportswashing’ designed to distract us from their failure to uphold proper Western values, or to buy indulgences for it. This does not make sense to me. Sports instead is a giant beacon, drawing more attention, making people suspect they are up to something. It didn’t work for Qatar and it won’t work for Saudi Arabia. No one is going to forgive them for anything because they have good soccer. An alternative explanation that I have not heard, but that seems obvious, is what if this has nothing to do with the national interests of Saudi Arabia? This is a kingdom, not a democracy, ruled by one family. They want sports because they want sports, and by framing it as for the country, they justify spending billions for the same reason every Western billionaire buys sports teams. Because it’s fun.
The Pac-12 has now completely collapsed. Colorado fled to the Big 12, then Washington and Oregon went to the Big 10 (which it seems is keeping that name despite having 18 teams) which triggered Arizona, Arizona State and Utah to also flee for the Big 12. As Nate Silver puts it in the link above,
If it were strictly this with no way in for other teams that would be unacceptable. However, if you included some form of relegation and some way for wild cards to enter the playoff, kept rivalry games and ensured everyone had a free slot to schedule a non-premier team every season, then it seems fine? Say, the top two division champions outside the league get to play wild card games against the bottom two Premier teams to steal their slots (which is great for drama) and if they succeed and win their challenge game (or get so far along that they don’t have to play one, and instead the two bottom finishers play to see who gets relegated, the problem there is you have to factor in TV ratings somehow without being obvious that you are doing so), then they get promoted to the Premier league. Conferences seem forced in the long run to treat all their members mostly or entirely equally, temporary junior status of Washington and Oregon notwithstanding, so whoever is a bigger draw will inevitably defect to bigger and better things, geography and rivalry be damned. There is no stable equilibrium. There also is no way to expel a school from a conference. Which means that a conference with a number of underperforming schools, like the Pac-12, loses its best schools, then either downgrades a tier like the Big 12 did or it falls apart entirely. I suppose the long term plan is that the SEC and Big 10 expand more, all the best teams play each other for a while, then after a while there is enough dead weight in both that the top teams start thinking about breaking away, and the cycle continues? We get a kind of slow-motion relegation, except chaotic and without giving the games drama and breaking things apart in ways that don’t make sense. It is a shame. Things were better for everyone - fans, players, schools, everyone - when we had conferences with geographical and cultural identities that mattered. What to do about this? My presumption is that for now there is nothing that can be done. The money is what it is and money talks. But the money could be different. That will be especially true in the 16 team playoff era. At that point, there should be little need to game the system on that front, your scheduling will probably mostly be a wash on the new bubble or reward tougher schedules, and no one capable of going deep will be that likely to miss. What everyone will want are the best individual games, as often as possible. So what system would we design to do that? Well, what do we want? We want rivalry games, especially those with rich histories. We want top matchups, top 25 vs. top 25 or even better, with fewer cupcakes. We want things to make geographical sense when possible. We want the games to matter, tell stories, have stakes. We want to maximize TV ratings.
That all is good for pure fans, and also makes more money. And it has to be something that is incentive compatible, given the money. That’s what make it so hard. I’ve gone over this many times over the years. Thought about options. Relegation. Swiss pairings, either within or between years. Legislation. Different revenue schemes. I don’t have a good answer. Not one that might actually happen. If I was Czar, and given the power to go wild, here is what I might do to your city. Restore geographical conferences with 12 teams per conference, with a 1st tier (ACC, SEC, Big 10 and Pac 12) and 2nd tier conference (American, Big 12, Mac and Mountain West) in each of the four classic regions, then other conferences are at-large. Any teams that are not in contiguous states with teams in the conference, or in the region itself, are expelled, after that initial downward placement where needed is by average strength of record over the last four years. Any teams not in either regional conference go into other conferences, which are free to organize as they see fit. Each conference divides into two 6 team divisions, has one championship game between the top teams from each division. The bottom teams from each division play the safety game. Each year there are two relegation matches in each region, played as special Bowls named after the conference the teams are playing for. The conference champion of the 2nd tier conference plays the loser of the conference safety game from the 1st tier conference. The loser of the safety game of the 2nd tier conference plays the highest strength of record conference champion from the region. They play for the conference spot, and trade their old one if they win. Joint revenue from non-TV sources is split evenly by each conference. Revenue from TV and streaming contracts is half split evenly, and half given out proportional to combined TV ratings of your games, including bowl games and playoff games. Players can get paid via one four year contract, with no limits or caps, and can supplement via NIL. Any player whose eligibility is used up automatically gets a full scholarship for that year if they don’t already have one, and anyone who is paid a dollar gets a full ride until graduation. Players can use the transfer portal, but they can’t use it to get a pay bump and there is some sort of financial friction introduced (a transfer fee, or something else) because otherwise everyone is a free agent and the teams lose their identities. Teams that have good revenue bases but that have been underperforming would get more revenue from TV, so they could use that to pay players better and catch up. If they can’t, that’s on them. Teams in first divisions play 12 regular season games, with 8 conference games (all 5 in their division, 1 Swiss-style across divisions based on previous year’s records to open the season, 2 across Swiss-style played after 4 of the 5 games in-division), 1 rivalry game (if this is a conference game, it counts as that, and the team gets another Worthy Opponent), 1 Swiss-style game against another conference, 1 free non-conference game against a Worthy Opponent of their choice that they schedule (either a team that has been Top 25 in the last 2 years, or was in a top conference in the last 4), and 1 Challenge Game against a second division team. Teams in second divisions play up instead of down, and are allowed to schedule anyone as their Worthy Opponent. Conference championship week now includes championship safety matches as well. After championship weekend, an eight team playoff is formed, consisting of the four first division champions, the top two ranked second (or lower) division champions, and two highest ranked wild cards, as chosen by the committee. The four division one champions get the top four seeds and host the first round, committee ranks 1-4 and ranks 5-8. The quarterfinals take place the week after the conference championships. Bowls can give a bid collectively to both teams, and the higher seed decides which one to accept - whoever loses the game goes to the bowl accepted, let them have fun. The semifinals are the Rose Bowl and the Sugar Bowl. The Rose Bowl is Pac 12 vs. Big 10, or if one of them didn’t make it at all, whoever beat the champion. The Sugar Bowl is ACC vs. SEC, or their replacements, same deal. They take place on New Years Day, not New Years Eve. New Years Eve is reserved for the relegation bowls, although others are free to schedule against them if they dare. The finals is a week later and takes place at a rotation of the other former New Year’s Six bowls.
Gamers Gonna Game Game Game Game GameGame of the month was a new Tier 2 roguelike my friend Alan Comer introduced me to I’ve also been playing I put down Diablo 4, and with time to reflect on that experience, I’d say this was a Tier 3 game, while being modestly better than Diablo 3 which I would also have at Tier 3, whereas Diablo 2 was Tier 2 and remains the best game in the series. The best and only Tier 1 ARPG remains Both Final Fantasy 16 and Baldor’s Gate 3 are in my ‘play eventually’ queue. I’ve heard nothing but great things about Baldor’s Gate 3, but I want to wait for some upgrades and patches and for when I have the right mindset, and maybe finally play the first two first. I’ll eventually get to FFXVI as well but I am in no rush there either, and am going to continue replaying the old ones first if I continue enjoying that, although FFV is proving to be a grind once again. I’m going to keep posting gorgeous Premodern deck pictures.
Or, alternatively, if it’s more than that, you’d prefer not to answer.
Vic Jenny notes one perversity of the free-to-play model, where the goal of the game is to keep playing it.
Right now Arena offers you essentially four options. Play a lot of drafts with or without contructed and clear daily quests and win enough that you can break even or lose small on currency while building your collection, keep up with set releases, play for free. Clear daily quests via playing constructed, don’t draft much, play for free but stay non-competitive or fringe because you don’t keep up with set releases. Don’t do either of these things, draft when you want, pay if you need to. Don’t do either of these things, play constructed by paying a metric ton.
Invoking options one also means letting the release schedule dictate what you play when. As a set is first released, that’s when constructed is most fun, yet you need to stick to limited for a while. Otherwise you lose on both ends, your limited pays out less usefully and you need to pay up front. When I played Arena, I was good enough that my lifetime spend was only $50, which was for the Eldraine package when I saw how nuts the set was and I didn’t want to risk being stuck drafting it forever. I would have happily paid more, but like most free-to-play games, the game mostly does not give you a reasonable way to pay a reasonable price. The issue with a subscription is you risk being stuck, where you no longer build your collection, so you then have to keep subscribing forever to play constructed. It also would draw many whales away from very large fees, so it’s likely a nonstarter, that’s the whole point of not giving you a reasonable way to pay. And also if you let it be month-to-month, a lot of players would come back for set releases, then quit again, over and over, which is a good way to lose those players when they decide not to come back one time. Still, it is sad that Magic is so all-or-nothing. Now that I have quit for a few years, if I wanted to come back and not spend tons of either (A) time or (B) money, I couldn’t play most constructed competitively. I wish there was a solution, but the economics seems to be saying there is not. My position is I would happily pay quite a lot per month for full access if I (1) wanted to be playing Magic again and (2) there were goals to strive for, a strong outer loop. Right now, if you exclude currency grinding, all that’s left are the Arena Opens (which are fine but kind of mid and uninspired) and the ladder grind. I need another reason, or another mode, at that point.000The “goal” of arena for me is to play for free and stack up gems while rank up. A subscription model basically takes this goal away, that would drive me to away more than the subscription money would.
I think what Slay the Spire needs, if this was still possible, is… Ascension 25, where perfect (limited information) play is only ~50% win rates at best, rather than 80%+, and also probably a few nerfs to some of the infinite-related Watcher cards balanced by strengthening a few others that don’t help you go infinite. The new restrictions would be designed to kneecap anything that would take forever or shortcut the game too much. You could even have the 25 restriction be something that outright kills infinites, such as ‘When you play a card for the (fifth?) time in a battle, it exhausts.’ Perhaps the 23 could be ‘limited buff stacks’ and 24 could be ‘limited debuff stacks.’
I know! I’ve always said if you can’t have fun playing Magic, don’t play. The same applies to poker, unless you have an hourly rate that justifies a different strategy. Some future year I will go to the World Series of Poker to play the main event, and I will presume I am lighting $10,000 on fire, and I will be 100% fine with that and do my best to have a total blast and play as if only first place matter. Otherwise, I realize there is some +EV in the main event in particular because of the extra value of doing well, and that might even exceed the taxes involved, but if you are sitting there miserable do yourself a favor and do something else next time. World Series of Poker was a lot of fun to watch either way, a fine way to relax, although I definitely worry it doesn’t contain efficient training data. Also new agony of defeat just dropped, great run Nate Silver (
I like watching people play games
Yeah, I don’t know what to say to any of that except The Lighter Side
It is legit. If they do not know, let them have this one.
Whenever possible, it is wise to avoid anything that is labeled ‘free’ of anything, or of any hint that something is an imitation of the form and function of a different thing. Or that tells you something you didn’t think you had to confirm - if you tell me the fish is fresh, or the bagels are baked fresh daily, that is better than the alternative but it is very much not a good sign.
Odd that we haven’t been able to create better filters than this. If you missed the clip of the woman leaving the airplane,
No Context Brits: Never deleting this app.
This is nothing.
One does need to be careful with such calculations. Much of what we buy is optionality and slack, and reliability in moments of maximum leverage. Other people need to engage in extended deep work with increasing returns to scale. Thinking about people’s hourly rate tells you little about the value of their marginal hour. Tyler points to this point:
A central reason you don’t get to expense a $500 dinner is that the incentives involved are dangerous and destructive. A meeting does not create a similar principle-agent problem. While that does not fully invalidate the point, most things in business that are worth doing, and most things not in business too, are not close calculations, and are instead overwhelmingly valuable. There is tons of surplus. Often it is wise to obfuscate the ‘cost’ of such things, since the benefits are similarly elusive.
You're currently a free subscriber to |