---
subject: "Network State Conference 2025"
from: "Balaji <balajis@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-09-28 12:18:03
labels: ["Balaji", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_3304713803370614215", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Network State Conference 2025 will be in Singapore on October 3. We already have 3000+ registrations, but by the time you read this there may still be a few spots left. You can attend This year’s speakers include Vitalik Buterin, Bryan Johnson, Ben Horowitz, Brian Armstrong, Amjad Masad, Ranveer Allahbadia, Arthur Hayes, Nas Daily, Noah Smith, Andrew Huberman, and the governments of Singapore, Dubai, Abu Dhabi, and El Salvador. Our event is right after Token2049 and Solana APEX, where I’ll also be making guest appearances. So, if you’re in Singapore for this week’s cryptocurrency gatherings you should certainly come to the Because the next step after cryptocurrencies is cryptocommunities. From Cryptocurrencies to CryptocommunitiesNetwork states are becoming real. We wrote our This year’s conference documents that movement. We have Vitalik Buterin and Ethereum cofounder Mihai Aislie on So: Ethereum, Coinbase, Solana, Telegram, and Don’t Die — all important online movements with billions of dollars and millions of followers — are materializing their cloud communities into the physical world. And they’ll be speaking about it at the Nation States + Network StatesBut wait, there’s more. Because the concept of the network state is also about win/win cooperation between nation states and digital networks. After all, many countries (particularly small states, and those from the Towards that end, we have talks by representatives of the governments of El Salvador, Dubai, Abu Dhabi, and Singapore. The Network State EcosystemAnd there’s still more. Billion dollar funds. We have heads of billion dollar funds, including Ben Horowitz of Andreessen Horowitz, Olaf Carlson-Wee of Polychain, Avlok Kohli of AngelList, and Haseeb Qureshi of Dragonfly. Billion dollar companies. We have fireside chats with founders of multi-billion dollar companies, including Amjad Masad of Replit, Arthur Hayes of Bitmex, and Yat Siu of Animoca. Billion dollar coins. We have major crypto projects like Dan Romero of Farcaster, Sreeram Kannan of Eigenlayer, Circle cofounder Sean Neville, and Zcash cofounder Zooko Wilcox. Million follower creators. We have creators with millions of followers, including Ranveer Allahbadia of Beer Biceps, Nuseir Yasin of Nas Daily, and Andrew Huberman. Public intellectuals. We have talks from Noah Smith of Noahpinion, Thiel Fellowship and 1517 Fund cofounders Michael Gibson and Danielle Strachman, seasteading inventor and Pronomos founder Patri Friedman, Pascal Emmanuel-Gobry of PolicySphere, Murtaza Hussein of Drop Site, Parag Khanna of AlphaGeo, Avik Roy of the Foundation for Research on Equal Opportunity, and Kathleen Tyson of Multicurrency Mercantilism. And startup societies. And, of course, we have founders of startup societies¹ like Farhaj Mayan of [Forma](https://substack.com/redirect/b583d853-c09c-4e8d-88d9-3b779c0ba346?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), Niklas Anzinger of[Infinita](https://substack.com/redirect/4d0c3ff2-79b7-48fa-9aee-95581ccb98f0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), Timour Kosters of[Edge City](https://substack.com/redirect/47fdb96c-1d0b-47b4-bd38-85c716f30e54?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), Aaron Renn of[American Reformer](https://substack.com/redirect/b831fd28-08e7-4da0-9744-45ef3fd44780?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), Alexander Grinspan of[Fractal Boston](https://substack.com/redirect/9049b764-a135-472b-9d4d-c962ea1f171c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), Maya Parbhoe of[Bitcoin Sranan](https://substack.com/redirect/6766dbce-ff54-49eb-b7cf-c2a342cdf794?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), Paul McNiel of[Wagon Box](https://substack.com/redirect/07a55851-2ff5-424e-9429-a40a22a7fcaa?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), Adam Miller of[MIDAO](https://substack.com/redirect/fb82d855-401c-4abb-a17b-423cc574dbc8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), Bradford Cross of[Alpha City](https://substack.com/redirect/e2b583d3-788e-4fa2-ba0a-df19dcbfc32a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), Olly Kovalieva of[Oz City](https://substack.com/redirect/b6d8c010-0f94-4b44-8e5c-198c20d6d2e5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), Vit Jedlicka of[Liberland](https://substack.com/redirect/7a645b59-0f99-4215-845b-a396d51cabdd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), Lonis Hamaili of[Prospera](https://substack.com/redirect/b49ce91c-9851-4926-b4f6-d0d74d03330a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), Jean Hansen of[Ipe City](https://substack.com/redirect/eca76164-78a8-4c09-a09a-20f56b37a968?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), and James of Arc’s[ârc.com](https://substack.com/redirect/45329b0d-71f7-4d6b-8a74-01de7574c535?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).
I could say more…but need I say more?² The point is that many of the most successful founders, creators, and investors in the world are now interested in the idea of bringing online communities into the physical world. Moreover, writers, policymakers, and intellectuals from around the world (and across the ideological spectrum!) are aligning around the concept of fusing networks with states, with ideas ranging from pro-tech regulations to special innovation zones. And all this capital and talent going towards the area means that you too³ can join a startup society that suits you — or found one yourself. Because that’s the next step. We’ve started internet companies, we’ve started internet currencies, and now we’re starting internet communities.⁴ Come to the 1 These startup societies are global. They’re both inside America (Indiana, Boston, Wyoming, NYC, etc) and outside it (in Brazil, Honduras, Kazakhstan, Thailand, Suriname, the Marshall Islands, and more). 2 To fit in all our distinguished speakers, 3 4 As we’ve discussed at our |