---
subject: "Consciousness as a Gödel sentence in the language of science"
from: "Erik Hoel <erikhoel@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-10-24 15:17:29
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Erik Hoel", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_2504961760700514996", "INBOX"]
---
Let's say you lived in a universe where you really were some sort of incarnated soul in a corporeal body. Or some sort of agent from a vaster reality embedded in a simulation (depending on definitions, the two scenarios might not be that different). What would the science in such a dualistic universe look like? It would probably look like this: in an incarnated-soul universe, the laws of physics make sense, and are nice and rule-following, except for one notable absence, which is that no one can explain how exactly corporeal bodies (or simulated ones) have a you. The incarnated/simulated scientists would open up the incarnating/simulating brains and say, “Hmm, it looks like it's following all the physical rules, but we can’t explain how you fit into this thing!” There would be, in other words, an
Which is exactly the kind of thing great thinkers write in our universe (here, What would the state of the rest of science be there? For one, their version of neuroscience would lag significantly behind. Which again, looks like our universe, where there is What else? Well, it’s likely that in the incarnated-soul universe, their version of AI would suspiciously have nothing to do with how the brain works. It would be as if they had discovered this totally orthogonal form of intelligence, one based more on all the actual sensible physical rules, and not based off of mysterious confusing soul stuff. An orthogonality which, uh—and things are getting uncomfortable here—is arguably also the case in our universe. One could go whole hog and say that this all points to proof of religion. But which one? What details? A gap of inexplicability doesn't recommend anything. And it feels a bit too easy, right? For there is another explanation, which is that there is no way to set up a universe without this sort of confusion. Which ends up being the same as asking: Are all scientific facts knowable? Or is science fundamentally incomplete? Science being fundamentally incomplete is at least conceivable to me. It would mean that there are scientific facts that at first look tantalizingly discoverable, but then their true answers remain closed to us for non-trivial reasons. (“Non-trivial” is important here—there are clearly many facts trivially closed for us, like counting every atom in the universe.) Non-trivial scientific incompleteness would be a different beast. It’d be more like some statements within science end in paradox, the scientific equivalent of “This sentence is a lie.” Scientists usually shy away from meta-scientific questions like that of scientific incompleteness. I understand why! It seems too much like philosophy, which is dangerous (something I was told during my PhD repeatedly). Dark and deep waters. But of course, a very similar question was famously asked in mathematics, and it has a very famous answer in Gödel's theorems (essentially that yes, mathematics is necessarily incomplete). While the “genre” of incompleteness proofs doesn’t affect most working mathematicians, it also isn’t irrelevant—it crops up like an ominous weed. Here we must initially be wary: gesturing to incompleteness in mathematics is merely an analogy. It is up for debate (or investigation) to what degree the analogy holds. The various incompleteness results in mathematics (some are more famous than others) conceptualize mathematics as a What to do such paradoxes look like? A brief example is necessary to capture their gist. Might as well do the most famous. As with many proofs in the “incompleteness genre” Gödel's theorems are based on self-reference. Basically (and warning: one must radically simplify here) Gödel uses a form of encoding (an interpretation of what the system is doing) to read a formal system S as talking about itself. He then constructs what’s known as a “Gödel sentence.” A Gödel sentence is basically a more complex version of the classic “This sentence is a lie.” It instead claims that “This sentence is not provable in S.” Now just think about it: If that sentence were proved to be true, then it would render S inconsistent, because it’s proving true something it says cannot be proven (inconsistency). On the other hand, if S is consistent, it must not be able to prove the sentence, meaning incompleteness—certain things are true (because the sentence is indeed not provable), but you can’t prove them from within. Here's a pause (with smooth jazz) to work through that yourself if you like. Similarly, it’s worth asking: (a) can science be thought of as a formal system? And also (b) Is there anything in science that, if you squint, looks like a Gödel sentence? As to the first ask: obviously science is an incredibly messy process, the details of which change depending on exactly what natural phenomena you seek to explain, how practices vary between fields, heck, even departmental politics. Yet the messiness of science in an applied sense doesn’t outright preclude it being modellable as a formal system. Crack any basic high school textbook and you will often find some (obviously superficial) formal description of science. We could imagine empiricism as a very complicated formal system, replete with epicycles, with various inference rules to arrive at scientific truths, and so on. We can even see kernels of formalizing science in ideas like Karl Popper’s notion of science as being primarily about While there has been a smidgeon of In fact, incompleteness might necessarily creep into science due to its reliance on mathematics itself. This is what Stephen Hawking thought. While he’s known for his triumphal pursuit of a Theory of Everything, toward the end of his life Hawking All this stuff has a long intellectual heritage. The question of whether physics could be grounded in a set of axioms was one of Hilbert’s
Good enough for Hilbert, good enough for me. In fact, Hilbert would be interested to learn that we already know that physics appears to include undecidable properties. There are a number of these, again, all remarkably little discussed. E.g., in 2015 a Nature paper literally titled “ So in a sense, we can already say that science is incomplete! At least, we know there are physical properties that cannot be actually discovered (in a rigorous or systematic manner). So it's very much not a foregone conclusion that scientific incompleteness is true. And if it were true, it would be a very good explanation for why the Hard Problem of consciousness is so damn Hard. I'm certainly not the first person to point out that there are oddities around consciousness and self-reference. But I actually think a lot of the work doesn't directly touch on scientific incompleteness—it's the sort of thing that people think exists fleshed out in detail somewhere, but then struggle to put to a clear source. E.g., consider Roger Penrose’s In Colin McGinn’s A third example would be the extremely classic One of the earliest proto-statements of the idea of scientific incompleteness I’ve found is actually in Nobel-Prize-winning economist Friedrich Hayek’s mostly forgotten book on psychology, But none of these make direct arguments about scientific incompleteness, which is why I spent a chunk of my book
I'll openly admit there is no direct evidence of this. But there is circumstantial evidence, and some viable paths toward a philosophical proof. E.g., no matter which way we broadly turn on what is traditionally called the “mind-body problem” we end in paradox. On one side, once we encode ourselves in the scientific worldview we realize that something is missing (our consciousness). Thomas Nagel, in Can we then go to far to the other side and believe that consciousness does not exist? This also seems paradoxical. After all, we only know the world through our own consciousness. Every tidbit of science that you know is known only through your consciousness. In fact, it’s arguable that science is just a set of corroborated first-person experiences! Imagining science without consciousness asks us to throw away the entire foundation of our knowledge, the one thing we are truly sure of, and what mediates all our other information—paradoxically, including our certainty of the facts of science itself. Allow me to get even more head-scratchingly gnarly for a moment with my own example of how paradoxes crop up in our thinking about consciousness in exactly the way you would expect if scientific incompleteness were true. In the popular “ But let's say that a zombie makes the zombie argument. They imagine a possible world filled with zombies and find it conceivable and therefore conclude that materialism is false. But wait! Materialism is true in the zombie world! So therefore, the zombie argument would be wrong. Its validity relies on a hidden premise that the person making the argument is themselves not a zombie. Fine. That's a premise, but so what? Well, if the zombie argument were to be valid, then no utterance or behavior or experiment could tell the difference between a zombie and a non-zombie. Nor any amount of self-reflection or introspection. There could even be some zombie version of Descartes (let’s call him Zescartes) who concludes he is indubitably conscious, then makes the zombie argument. But for Zescartes, the zombie argument returns the wrong conclusion: materialism is false, despite it actually being true in his world. And there's no way for Descartes or Zescartes to tell themselves apart. So the zombie argument itself ends in paradox. If it were valid without the premise of already being conscious, a materialist zombie could use it to argue against materialism, indicating inconsistency. On the other hand, if it is valid only with the premise of consciousness, then any conscious being can always make the zombie argument, and then notice that whether or not they are a zombie cannot be resolved by introspection or empirical evidence, indicating incompleteness. The existence of consciousness appears to be the kind of true fact that cannot be proven from the inside. Here's a pause (with frenetic jazz) to work through that yourself if you like. More evidence for scientific incompleteness comes from an examining how science has historically developed, with consciousness lagging behind. As philosopher Philip Goff notes in Galileo’s restriction of the purview of science to the material and mechanistic looks to me much like Bertrand Russell’s and Alfred North Whitehead’s attempts to remove self-reference (and its associated paradoxes) from mathematics in their infamous Principa Mathematica. Their attempt was based on creating a tier of types of sets (the mathematical entities that they tried to ground all other math in). Their strategy disallowed tiers to “talk about” (contain) members of a similar tier. It only kind of worked, merely delaying paradoxes from creeping in. This bracketing looks to me a lot like what Galileo did to science, removing consciousness and allowing it to proceed. In fact, even now in consciousness science, people talk about different “strengths” of theories of consciousness. E.g. for a philosopher like Chalmers, the distinction between the Hard versus Easy problems of consciousness, or for a scientist like Anil Seth, the distinction between In summary, we know this: (a) It is conceivable that science could be some sort of formal system, (b) Some properties of nature have already been proven to be undecidable, (c) Arguments in philosophy of mind often end in paradoxes indicating inconsistency or incompleteness, and (d) The historical development of science, and even the contemporary science of consciousness, resembles a series of bracketings very similar to how mathematicians tried to remove self-reference and paradoxes. All of this fits perfectly with a world that is scientifically incomplete. Obviously, we must indulge a final instance of self-reference. If scientific incompleteness is true, how do you—yes, you—exist in a world that is paradoxical? How do you relate to it, I mean? If it is indeed a fact that there are questions about the universe that are true but cannot be proved, this unfortunately recommends no particular religion, points you to no higher mysteries. It is merely a blankness, a clouded-over wall that extends infinitely in all directions. But still, upon finding such an inaccessible wall, we humans cannot help our nature. We cannot help but wonder: what’s behind the wall? What do you do when something just You're currently a free subscriber to |