---
subject: "My first trip to Haiti"
from: "Marginal REVOLUTION <donotreply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-03-21 04:46:41
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tyler Cowen", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2466199532210586699", "UNREAD"]
---
This was in 1994, right after the Aristide regime was restored by Clinton. I had traveled a good deal by that time, mostly in North America, Europe, and southeast Asia. But I had never been anywhere truly dangerous. It seemed impossible to visit such places. It is not that I did any serious risk calculation, rather the option simply was not part of my mental toolkit.
But somehow I started thinking about visiting Haiti. It seemed like it would be the most dangerous place I could possibly choose. I had this recurring mental image that I could not even set out on the street without someone coming along and cutting off one of my arms with a machete.
And so I bought my ticket. I suppose I viewed this as a kind of challenge. I also knew that if it went OK, I would end up going to a lot of other places as well.
Not long before the trip, I was on the phone with my friend Christopher Weber, the renowned investor, writer, and [Offenbach scholar](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=2ba54585e064f1aa523f6e96d86a3b713ae3efcf51ca33d61625cb77ff8613ac&blog_id=42693868&post_id=90282&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=d184361c51c99842e6c2d76f0b079db1&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cDovL29wZXJldHRhLXJlc2VhcmNoLWNlbnRlci5vcmcvamFjcXVlcy1vZmZlbmJhY2gtZmVzdGl2YWwtdHJhdmVsLXJlcG9ydC1jaHJpcy13ZWJlci8&email_id=ae42974bc23e7bda98a95f8ff8af0cc2). I mentioned I was going and next thing you know Chris, being a "bounder of adventure," was coming along with me.
I arrived in Haiti first. As I walked into the baggage and pick-up area of the airport (lovely live compa music), some men immediately grabbed my bags and took them from me. "Uh-oh." In fact they brought them to the cab and wanted a tip, and they didn't want anyone else carrying my bags first. High-trust oases in low-trust countries remains a [very interesting topic to me](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=8c7a37c996828612c9ca444d6130ccdc1b431d15cebfdf338bb6fa08aaedeee4&blog_id=42693868&post_id=90282&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=7ea9af1fee6be6550a19d7f9f8dab96b&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly9tYXJnaW5hbHJldm9sdXRpb24uY29tL21hcmdpbmFscmV2b2x1dGlvbi8yMDE3LzAxL3RoZS10ZXN0Lmh0bWw&email_id=ae42974bc23e7bda98a95f8ff8af0cc2), to this day.
I stayed in [Petitionville](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=2b6467c101cd3a1a71cfdb5d55a8d2448ee434c1b9e8035d1b7486520251feb0&blog_id=42693868&post_id=90282&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=126d2efa0729d8ab87547ef75b618ef1&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly9lbi53aWtpdm95YWdlLm9yZy93aWtpL1AlQzMlQTl0aW9uLVZpbGxl&email_id=ae42974bc23e7bda98a95f8ff8af0cc2), the wealthier "suburb" of Port-au-Prince, known for its restaurants and nightlife, and I loved the place. The food, music, and art were all amazing, and they were everywhere. You could find interesting artwork on many of the street corners and for very low prices. A known artist might be selling a work for $200. I bought a political satire piece by Maxan Jean-Louis entitled "Aristide's Wedding," showing his semi-forced alliance with the United States military. I also bought "Soccer Angels" by the great Jean-Baptiste Jean, and a Claude d'Ambreville painting of women with basket on their heads, now a Haitian standard. That set me off buying art.
The architecture was amazing -- think a more elaborate New Orleans style -- but very badly ailing, you could even say collapsing.
My favorite dishes were the "combie hash," the Dinde (a small turkey, best I have had), and the seafood mixing French and Caribbean influences. The tender conch (lambi) is arguably the Haitian national dish. The rice and beans cooked in mushroom juice was another delight, totally new to me. At the time it was obviously the best food in the Caribbean.
My arms remained intact, and walking around Petitionville required some basic caution but did not feel dangerous. Furthermore, the population at that time was hopeful for the future, so it felt very good to be there. The storytellers communicated an appropriate sense of drama.
After a day of walking around, Chris and I rented a car, which was in retrospect an unsound thing to do. We drove to Moulin Sur Mer, a "resort" on the ocean, originally an 18th century sugar plantation. Only a few other people were staying there and one of them appeared to be a Dominican drug lord family. Inside one of the buildings was a list of all the Haitian presidents, and at times the rate is about one leader per year -- "model this." I recalled Hegel's adage that governments based on voodoo religion were bound to be unstable.
The water was lovely, but the drive to and from Moulin Sur Mer was not uneventful. On the way back, at a service station, a man pulled a submachine gun on Chris and asked for a rather favorable exchange rate on our gasoline purchase. Another man ran at the car and tried to jump on the roof as we drove past. I still am not sure whether he wanted to commandeer the vehicle or simply was looking for a free bus ride (Haitians frequently ride on the tops of their buses).
In any case we pressed on, and it didn't all seem that dangerous after all. I went away vowing to return, and indeed over the years I was to make four more trips to Haiti, as it became one of my favorite countries. The next time I went I met [Selden and Carole Rodman](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=3b8f89a24e7dc7c133340d17cd3ceeb6d5094dcbfebb8ae2ce63dbc1aa2b5eb0&blog_id=42693868&post_id=90282&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=e6aafbf696374f8c5b8d121884f8429f&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly9lbi53aWtpcGVkaWEub3JnL3dpa2kvU2VsZGVuX1JvZG1hbg=&email_id=ae42974bc23e7bda98a95f8ff8af0cc2) in the line boarding the flight from Miami, and that was to change my life yet again...