---
subject: "2025 Year in Review"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-12-31 19:41:31
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
It’s that time. It’s been a hell of a year. At the start we barely had reasoning models. Now we have Claude Code and Opus 4.5. I don’t code. Yet now I cause code to exist whenever something about a website annoys me, or when I get that programmer’s realization that there’s something I am planning on doing at least three times. Because why not? The progress has simultaneously been mind bogglingly impressive and fast. But a lot of people don’t see it that way, because progress has been incremental, and because we were reasonably expecting to often get even more than this. The public conversation and debate, even more than before, was full of false narratives and active attempts to make the situation worse. The same goes for attempts to shape Federal policy towards AI, and OpenAI’s conversion into a for-profit. It’s been, as they say, one battle after another, with many wins, many setbacks and a lot of things in between. This includes the key developments in AI, and also other blog posts from the year that I consider memorable looking back. This is only our corner of the world’s Year in Review, not one in general, thus things like Liberation Day are happening in the background and go undiscussed. JanuaryThe confusions started in January, as we prepared for Trump to take office. OpenAI had just given us o1-preview, the first reasoning model. At the tail end of 2024, DeepSeek released v3, or Then a few weeks later,
Collectively this was called The DeepSeek Moment. White House rhetoric talked about how this meant we were in a ‘race’ with China, so of course any other considerations than ‘winning’ must be thrown out the window. With time, those paying attention realized all of that was overblown. DeepSeek was impressive as a lab, and v3 and r1 were excellent models, but still on the order of eight months behind OpenAI, Anthropic and Google. We had been comparing the relatively best features of r1 on their own, and then using that to project into the future, which flat out did not happen. This happened at a crucial inflection point, right when reasoning models had started, which was when a tiny amount of compute could go a maximally long way. Later on, FebruaryGoogle started out the month A OpenAI declared that its primary alignment strategy The Administration made its AI feelings clear at The year would play out in similar fashion. We had some modest success in California and New York, but the White House would, under the influence of David Sacks, become an active force for interference with efforts to not die, and later even to beat China. They would do some pro-America things along the way, but also things that actively interfered with our competitiveness. I introduced a key new concept handle which I call AI is going to move a lot of things to lower levels of friction. That is by default bad, but frictions can be load bearing, such as with job applications or limiting antisocial behaviors. It protects the commons. We will have to adjust quite a lot of things once key frictions are removed from the system. February was the peak of We also got our first introduction to MarchA non-AI highlight was my piece on elementary education,
A big part of AI coverage is getting confident in dismissing hype. A great example of this was my coverage of I warned against using Image generation had its first big moment, when the
April
OpenAI had other problems with GPT-4o. It was always an absurd sycophant that could get some of its users into trouble, but updates made around this time May
The White House had from the beginning made a huge deal out of how Just Awful the Biden diffusion rules were, just like it talks about everything Biden did, but it initially acted generally wisely on chip diffusion and export controls, including on the H20. Alas, over time David Sacks got more control over their narrative and increasingly started spouting
I wrote my first ‘ June
OpenAI and in particular Sam Altman continued to try and sell us on the
JulyThe first attempt to pass a federal moratorium on AI regulation, as in tell the states they aren’t allowed to regulate AI because that should be federal while also not regulating AI at the federal level, came dangerously close to passing as part of the BBB. Congress had one of its finer hearings, Grok ran into trouble.
AugustThe big hyped release of the year was of course GPT-5. This would be their big moment to unify all their crazy model variations and names, and create one model to rule them all, with a router to think longer if and only if that was worthwhile. There were approaching death stars and we saw a variety of assertive valueposting. It was the big version number jump, and people expected a lot. GPT-5 was a good model, I found it to be a clear upgrade, but it very much did not live up to the hype. Many even strongly wanted to keep GPT-4o for its far friendlier and more empathic attitude, or some would say its sycophancy - the very features that make GPT-4o not a great thing for many users are alas the reasons users often like it so much. I covered the Unfortunately, the model OpenAI chose to call GPT-5 being a disappointing release gave so many people, up to and including David Sacks and Sriram Krishnan at the White House, the wrong idea. There is a constant demand for data points that say AI won’t advance much, that scaling is dead, that it will all be a normal technology and you don’t have to worry about AGI. Washington seems to have come away from the GPT-5 release with this message, and it plausibly did great harm in numerous ways, including to our export controls.
I noticed It’s so funny to have half of people debating AI consciousness, while the other half thinks AI is not making any progress.
September
The month ended with Anthropic reclaiming its role as my daily driver There was OctoberOpenAI meanwhile decided to release
One of the consequences of the GPT-5 release was more people talked about AI as OpenAI completed its trio of
The biggest advantage America has over China is its access to vastly more compute. This is thanks in large part to our export controls. Alas, David Sacks it the AI Czar, acts like a de facto Nvidia lobbyist, and is trying to make us give that edge away. Emboldened by prior success in getting authorization for H20 sales, Nvidia and David Sacks made their move, and came (based on what I know) remarkably close to getting America to commit quite a lot of civilizational suicide and Unfortunately, although far less unfortunately than if we’d sold B30As, they then regrouped and in December would successfully push, despite it being obviously unwise and unpopular,
November
I offered The year would finish with a flurry of new model releases.
Anthropic then gave us the big one, Claude Opus 4.5 felt like a large practical leap, some like Dean Ball going so far as to call it AGI. I don’t agree but I understand where they are coming from. DecemberI went to San Francisco for the Solstice, and wrote
We learned OpenAI upgraded again to GPT-5.2, I offered a sequence of posts on why median wages are up, economists keep saying times are solid, yet young people keep saying things suck. Questions For Next SeasonAI is going gangbusters. The news about it is accelerating, not slowing down. It’s going to increasingly impact our lives and be the topic of conversation. The model releases will come fast and furious. The agents will make big leaps in 2026, and not only for coding. It will likely be a major topic in the midterm elections. I don’t expect full High Weirdness in 2026, but you can’t fully rule it out. Blog growth, in terms of views, stagnated this year. That’s disappointing, as previously I had experienced strong growth, and I likely need to explore additional ways to get the word out. But ‘number go up’ was never the ultimate goal and I am confident that I am directly reaching quite a lot of the people I care about reaching. I do intend to send out a user survey some time in the near future. One big personal goal for 2026 is to do more coding and evergreen posting, going deeper into questions that matter or that I get curious about, and being better about organizing my thoughts, and to focus less on ephemeral items and news, and to finally get a handle on organizing what I do have to better create longer term resources. I am fully aware that almost all views happen within a few days of posting, but that doesn’t need to dictate anything, and there are some basic things where I could build permanent resources much better than I’ve been doing. The other big goal is to focus on what matters, including the fights and debates that matter, making sure to do that in a way that adds to permanent resources and not let important things end up buried. I have to do better triage, especially in letting relatively unimportant matters drop. I intend to publish fewer words on the blog in 2026, and with that to become more willing to skip days. I know the amount of content can be overwhelming. One thing that got lost in the shuffle this year, and illustrates the problem, was my planned review of Open Socrates. It’s a book warning you not to live your life 15 minutes at a time, and I didn’t finish my response because life kept throwing too much stuff at me. Well, that’s kind of the worst possible excuse not to finish that, isn’t it? Even if because of the delay I ultimately have to reread a lot of the book. I also have a bunch of projects I’d love to try. We’ll see how that goes. But also movies to watch, and games to play, and people to see, and fun to be had. Life beckons. And you know what? Life is pretty awesome. Other people sing Ald Lang Syne. Happy New Year, everyone.
You're currently a free subscriber to |