---
subject: "AI #107: The Misplaced Hype Machine"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-03-13 14:33:52
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
The most hyped event of the week, by far, was the Whereas here in America, OpenAI dropped an entire suite of tools for making AI agents, and previewed a new internal model making advances in creative writing. Also they offered us a very good paper warning about Google dropped what is likely the best open non-reasoning model, Gemma 3 (reasoning model presumably to be created shortly, even if Google doesn’t do it themselves), put by all accounts quite good native image generation inside Flash 2.0, and added functionality to its AMIE doctor, and Gemini Robotics. It’s only going to get harder from here to track which things actually matter. Table of Contents[Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/1ccef784-63a6-4847-8f2d-9dfa723247fe?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)How much utility are we talking so far?[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/bd133ac6-0de6-4a7e-b91d-69d3d04224c9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)It is not a lawyer.[We’re In Deep Research.](https://substack.com/redirect/e163fac6-2b83-4eeb-a677-9220f7310efa?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)New rules for when exactly to go deep.[More Manus Marketing Madness.](https://substack.com/redirect/80c8db0a-4fb0-40d7-8c89-f23150260657?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Learn to be skeptical. Or you can double down.[Diffusion Difficulties.](https://substack.com/redirect/d394d608-b0b0-40cb-a4b3-68f6c12836f4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)If Manus matters it is as a pointer to potential future issues.[OpenAI Tools for Agents](https://substack.com/redirect/df58e6bb-9d96-4695-b660-859c28f2ef22?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/df58e6bb-9d96-4695-b660-859c28f2ef22?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)OpenAI gives us new developer tools for AI agents.[Huh, Upgrades.](https://substack.com/redirect/16f9c5c7-8918-4787-a423-1cc9878aaa83?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Anthropic console overhaul, Cohere A, Google’s AMIE doctor.[Fun With Media Generation.](https://substack.com/redirect/1959d12d-e245-4f83-a7fd-db8a171e1374?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Gemini Flash 2.0 now has native image generation.[Choose Your Fighter.](https://substack.com/redirect/8636df05-ef34-409c-8de4-e2ac1b42cd45?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)METR is unimpressed by DeepSeek, plus update on apps.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon.](https://substack.com/redirect/f70358fe-6df5-4575-bac3-4449ac497065?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Feeling seen and heard? AI can help.[They Took Our Jobs.](https://substack.com/redirect/09fd99e8-7e50-48e5-8100-e32efe254f88?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Is it time to take AI job loss seriously?[The Art of the Jailbreak.](https://substack.com/redirect/4d556ae7-ae07-4e02-a6a6-fb8520ddd7b9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Roleplay is indeed rather suspicious.[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/6671f6d6-b513-4a5d-a069-d0efebd65cf1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Anthropic, Paradome, Blue Rose, a general need for more talent.[Introducing](https://substack.com/redirect/479e3f66-8c8b-4041-8835-59153c63f598?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/479e3f66-8c8b-4041-8835-59153c63f598?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Gemma 3 and Gemini Robotics, but Google wants to keep it quiet.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/ebc90f99-71bd-4d57-9150-1788065c58df?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Microsoft training a 500b model, SSI still in stealth.[Show Me the Money.](https://substack.com/redirect/c7c1242c-2cb1-416f-b287-9c1fd1eb96ad?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)AI agents are the talk of Wall Street.[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/dca87caf-27e2-4c40-b79d-8a826bd473e4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)What does AGI mean for the future of democracy?[The Quest for Sane Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/40441387-5129-4a36-a961-7c86865e4b08?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)ML researchers are not thrilled with their work.[Anthropic Anemically Advises America’s AI Action Plan.](https://substack.com/redirect/2ec49303-ccf0-47df-8f26-e5b6a0a7fdbc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)It’s something.[New York State Bill A06453.](https://substack.com/redirect/1a849e82-068b-48ce-bf1d-280f7b7a7728?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Seems like a good bill.[The Mask Comes Off.](https://substack.com/redirect/60cafc46-6af6-48a1-b790-1db6f72eb0de?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Scott Alexander covers the OpenAI for-profit conversion.[Stop Taking Obvious Nonsense Hyperbole Seriously.](https://substack.com/redirect/9b209c96-20b7-4992-92ca-4e06244f7248?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Your periodic reminder.[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/6b6f15a5-e6fe-4e1e-9c4a-23fdaa606657?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)McAskill, Loui, Amodei, Toner, Dafoe.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/55f25563-a34f-45b3-83d4-a0454a7f909f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Keep the future human. Coordination is hard. Incentives.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/fef399f3-d168-4d1d-92fc-d0e0663e676a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A prestigious award.[The Lighter Side.](https://substack.com/redirect/6d2ef568-9b83-4edf-bebe-81dfe53ba5fd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Important dos and don’ts.
Language Models Offer Mundane UtilityHow much is coding actually being sped up?
To me this is an obviously great use case. The AI is going to be vastly more accurate than the dentist. That doesn’t mean the dentist shouldn’t look to confirm, but it would be unsurprising to me if the dentist looking reduced accuracy.
I find the actual big problem to be 90%+ ‘they are scouring everyone’s social media posts for Wrongthink’ rather than ‘they will occasionally have a false positive.’ This is a rather blatant first amendment violation. As we have seen over and over again, once this is possible and tolerated, what counts as Wrongthink often doesn’t stay contained. Note that ‘ban the government (or anyone) from using AI to do this’ can help but is not a promising long term general strategy. The
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
Another round of ‘ In this case, the claim is that [X] is ‘have unique insights.’ As in, sure an LLM will be able to be an A+ student and know the ultimate answer is 42, but won’t know the right question, so it won’t be all that useful. Certainly LLMs are relatively weaker there. At minimum, if you can abstract away the rest of the job, then that leaves a lot more space for the humans to provide the unique insights - most of even the best scientists spend most of their time on other things. More than that, I do think the ‘outside the box’ thinking will come with time, or perhaps we will think of that as the box expanding. It is not as mysterious or unique as one thinks. The reason that Thomas Wolf was a great student and poor researcher wasn’t (I am guessing) that Wolf was incapable of being a great researcher. It’s that our system of education gave him training data and feedback that led him down that path. As he observes, it was in part because he was a great student that he wasn’t great at research, and in school he instead learned to guess the teacher’s password. That can be fixed in LLMs, without making them bad students. Right now, LLMs guess the user’s password too much, because the training process implicitly thinks users want that. The YouTube algorithm does the same thing. But you could totally train an LLM a different way, especially if doing it purely for science. In a few years, the cost of that will be trivial, Stanford graduate students will do it in a weekend if no one else did it first. We’re In Deep Research
More Manus Marketing Madness
To Robert, I would say you cannot follow 20,000+ people and critically process the information. Put everyone into the firehose and you’re going to end up falling for the hype, or you’re going to randomly drop a lot of information on the floor, or both. Whereas I do this full time and curate a group of less than 500 people.
Contrary to claims that Manus is ‘the best general AI agent available,’ it is neither the best agent, nor is it available. Manus has let a small number of people see a ‘research preview’ that is slow, that has atrocious unit economics, that brazenly violates terms of service, that is optimized on a small range of influencer-friendly use cases, that is glitchy and lacks any sorts of guardrails, and definitely is not making any attempt to defend against prompt injections or other things that would exist if there was wide distribution and use of such an agent. This isn’t about regulatory issues and has nothing to do with Monica (the company behind Manus) being Chinese, other than leaning into the ‘China beats America’ narrative. Manus doesn’t work. It isn’t ready for anything beyond a demo. They made it work on a few standard use cases. Everyone else looked at this level of execution, probably substantially better than this level in several cases, and decided to keep their heads down building until it got better, and worried correctly that any efforts to make it temporarily somewhat functional will get ‘steamrolled’ by the major labs. Manus instead decided to do a (well-executed) marketing effort anyway. Good for them?
That’s… very much not how any of this works. It was a good sketch but then it got silly. Diffusion Difficulties
Dean instead wants to make a broader point, which is that the Chinese may have an advantage in AI technology diffusion. The Chinese are much more enthusiastic and less skeptical about AI than Americans. The Chinese government is encouraging diffusion far more than the our government. Then he praises Manus’s complete lack of any guardrails or security efforts whatsoever, for ‘having the chutzpah to ship’ a product I would say no sane man would ever use for the use cases where it has any advantages. I acknowledge that Dean is pointing to real things when he discusses all the potential legal hot water one could get into as an American company releasing a Manus. But I once again double down that none of that is going to stop a YC company or other startup, or even substantially slow one down. Dean instead here says American companies may be afraid of ‘AGI’ and distracted from extracting maximum value from current LLMs. I don’t think that is true either. I think that we have a torrent of such companies, trying to do various wrappers and marginal things, even as they are warned that there is likely little future in such a path. It won’t be long before we see other similar demos, and even releases, for the sufficiently bold. I also notice that only days after Manus, OpenAI went ahead and launched new tools to help developers build reliable and powerful AI agents. In this sense, perhaps Manus was a (minor) DeepSeek moment, in that the hype caused OpenAI to accelerate their release schedule. I do agree with Dean’s broader warnings. America risks using various regulatory barriers and its general suspicion of AI to slow down AI diffusion more than is wise, in ways that could do a lot of damage, and we need to reform our system to prevent this. We are not doing the things that would help us all not die, which would if done wisely cost very little in the way of capability, diffusion or productivity. Instead we are putting up barriers to us having nice things and being productive. We need to strike that, and reverse it. Alas, instead, our government seems to be spending recent months largely shooting us in the foot in various ways. I also could not agree more that the application layer is falling behind the model layer. And again, that’s the worst possible situation. The application layer is great, we should be out there doing all sorts of useful and cool things, and we’re not, and I continue to be largely confused about how things are staying this lousy this long. OpenAI Tools for Agents
I expect this is a far bigger deal than Manus. This is the actual starting gun. The agents will soon follow. Please, when one of the startups that uses these to launch some wrapper happens to be Chinese, don’t lose yourself in the resulting hype. Huh, Upgrades
Cohere moves from Command R+
The goal here seems to be as a base for AI agents or business uses, but the pricing doesn’t seem all that great at $2.50/$10 per million tokens.
Fun With Media Generation
I’d be so much more excited if Google wasn’t
Google, I get that you want it to be one way, but sometimes I want it to be the other way, and there really is little harm in it being the other way sometimes. Here are three of the four top replies to Anca:
Choose Your Fighter
Then on six challenging R&D tasks, r1 does dramatically worse than that, being outperformed by Claude 3.5 and even Opus, which is from 11 months ago. They did however confirm that the DeepSeek GPQA results were legitimate. The core conclusion is that r1 is good at knowledge-based tasks, but lousy as an agent. Once again, we are seeing that r1 was impressive for its cost, but overblown (and the cost difference was also overblown). Rohit Krishnan writes Google, also, give me an LLM that can properly use my Docs, Sheets and GMail as context, and that too would go a long way. You keep not doing that.
Doesn’t seem so crazy to me given everything else we know. Google is simply terrible at marketing.
The top 100 GenAI Consumer Apps list is out again, and it has remarkably little overlap with what we talk about here. The entire class of General Assistants is only 8%, versus 4% for plant identifiers. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
They Took Our JobsMaxwell Tabarrok goes off to graduate school in Economics at Harvard, Matthew Yglesias says The Art of the Jailbreak
Want to make your AI care?
Get Involved
YC startup Blue Rose, David Shor’s outfit which works to try and elect Democrats, is hiring for Claims about AI alignment that I think are probably true:
The charitable ecosystem is definitely also funding constrained, but that’s because there’s going to be an explosion in work that must be done. We definitely are short on talent across the board.
Introducing
I am sure Marc Andreessen is going to thank Google profusely for this Real Soon Now. Arena is not the greatest test anymore, so it is unclear if this is superior to v3, but it certainly is well ahead of v3 on the cost-benefit curves. Presumably various versions of g1, turning this into a reasoning model, will be spun up shortly. If no one else does it, maybe I will do it in two weeks when my new Mac Studio arrives.
In Other AI News
Show Me the Money
Wall Street Journal asks ‘ Quiet Speculations
I strongly agree with the conclusion that we must pursue a ‘narrow corridor’ of sorts if we wish to preserve the things we value about our current way of life and systems of governance, while worrying that the path is far narrower than even they realize, and that this will require what they label anticipatory governance. Passive reaction after the fact is doomed to fail, even under otherwise ideal conditions.
The Quest for Sane Regulations
As Dean Ball points out, those who think AISI is involved in attempts to ‘make AI woke’ or to censor AI are simply incorrect. AISI is concerned with catastrophic and existential risks, which as Dean reminds us were prominently highlighted recently by both OpenAI and Anthropic. Very obviously America needs to build up its state capacity in understanding and assessing these risks. I’m going to leave this here, link is in the original:
Dean Ball also points out that AISI plays a valuable pro-AI role in creating standardized evaluations that everyone can agree to rely upon. I would add that AISI allows those evaluations can include access to classified information, which is important for properly evaluating CBRN risks. Verifying the safety of AI does not slow down adaptation. It speeds it up, by providing legal and practical assurances.
Anthropic Anemically Advises America’s AI Action Plan
They focus on safeguarding national security and making crucial investments. Their core asks are: State capacity for evaluations for AI models. Strengthen the export controls on chips. Enhance security protocols and related government standards at the frontier labs. Build 50 gigawatts of power for AI by 2027. Accelerate adaptation of AI technology by the federal government. Monitor AI’s economic impacts.
This is very much a ‘least you can do’ agenda. Almost all of these are ‘free actions,’ that impose no costs or even requirements outside the government, and very clearly pay for themselves many times over. Private industry only benefits. The only exception is the export controls, where they call for tightening the requirements further, which will impose some real costs, and where I don’t know the right place to draw the line. What is missing, again aside from export controls, are trade-offs. There is no ambition here. There is no suggestion that we should otherwise be imposing even trivial costs on industry, or spending money, or trading off against other priorities in any way, or even making bold moves that ruffle feathers. I notice this does not seem like a sufficiently ambitious agenda for a scenario where ‘powerful AI’ is expected within a few years, bringing with it global instability, economic transformation and various existential and catastrophic risks. The world is going to be transformed and put in danger, and we should take only the free actions? We should stay at best on the extreme y-axis in the production possibilities frontier between ‘America wins’ and ‘we do not all lose’ (or die)? I would argue this is clearly not even close to being on the production possibilities frontier. Even if you take as a given that the Administration’s position is that only ‘America wins’ matters, and ‘we do not all lose or die’ is irrelevant, security is vital to our ability to deploy the new technology, and transparency is highly valuable. Anthropic seems to think this is the best it can even ask for, let alone get. Wow. This is still a much better agenda than doing nothing, which is a bar that many proposed actions by some parties fail to pass. From the start they are clear that ‘powerful AI’ will be built during the Trump Administration, which includes the ability to interface with the physical world on top of navigating all digital interfaces and having intellectual capabilities at Nobel Prize level in most disciplines, their famous ‘country of geniuses in a data center.’ This starts with situational awareness. The federal government has to know what is going on. In particular, given the audience, they emphasize national security concerns:
They also point out that such assessments already require the US and UK AISIs, and that similar evaluations need to quickly be made on future foreign models like r1, which wasn’t capable enough to be that scary quite yet but was irreversibly released in what would (with modest additional capabilities) have been a deeply irresponsible state. The specific recommendations here are 101-level, very basic asks:
That certainly would be filed under ‘the least you could do.’ Note that as written this does not involve any requirements on any private entity whatsoever. There is not even a ‘if you train a few frontier model you might want to tell us you’re doing that.’ Their second ask is to strengthen the export controls, increasing funding for enforcement, requiring government-to-government agreements, expanding scope to include the H20, and reducing the 1,700 H100 (~$40 million) no-license required threshold for tier 2 countries in the new diffusion rule. I do not have an opinion on exactly where the thresholds should be drawn, but whatever we choose, enforcement needs to be taken seriously, and funded properly, and it made a point of emphasis with other governments. This is not a place to not take things seriously.
Once again, these asks are very light touch and essentially free actions. They make it easier for frontier labs to take precautions they need to take anyway, even purely for commercial reasons to protect their intellectual property. Next up is the American energy supply, with the goal being 50 additional gigawatts of power dedicated to AI industry by 2027, via streamlining and accelerating permitting and reviews, including working with state and local governments, and making use of ‘existing’ funding and federal real estate. The most notable thing here is the quick timeline, aiming to have this all up and running within two years. They emphasize rapid AI procurement across the federal government.
This is again a remarkably unambitious agenda given the circumstances. Finally they ask that we monitor the economic impact of AI, something it seems completely insane to not be doing. I support all the recommendations made by Anthropic, aside from not taking a stance on the 1,700 A100 threshold or the H20 chip. These are good things to do on the margin. The tragedy is that even the most aware actors don’t dare suggest anything like what it will take to get us through this. New York State Bill A06453In New York State, This bill is another attempt to do common sense transparency regulation of frontier AI models, defined as using 10^26 flops or costing over $100 million, and the bill only applies to companies that spend over $100 million in total compute training costs. Academics and startups are completely and explicitly immune - watch for those who claim otherwise. If the bill does apply to you, what do you have to do? Don’t deploy models with “unreasonable risk of critical harm” (§1421.2) Implement a written safety and security protocol (§1421.1(a)) Publish redacted versions of safety protocols (§1421.1(c)) Retain records of safety protocols and testing (§1421.1(b)) Get an annual third-party audit (§1421.4) Report safety incidents within 72 hours (§1421.6)
In English, you have to: Create your own safety and security protocol, publish it, store it and abide by it. Get an annual third-party audit and report safety incidents within 72 hours. Not deploy models with ‘unreasonable risk of critical harm.’
Also there’s some whistleblower protections. That’s it. This is a very short bill, it is very reasonable to simply read it yourself. As always, I look forward to your letters. The Mask Comes Off
Stop Taking Obvious Nonsense Hyperbole Seriously
No, that does not call for any of those things. This is a common pattern where people see a proposal to do Ordinary Government Things, except in the context of AI, and jump straight to global totalitarian surveillance state. We already treat restricted goods this way, right now. We already have a variety of export controls, right now. Such claims are Obvious Nonsense, entirely false and without merit. If an LLM said them, we would refer to them as hallucinations. I am done pretending otherwise. If you sincerely doubt this, I encourage you to ask your local LLM. The Week in Audio
One note here that sounds right:
If the things here are relatively new to you, this kind of ‘survey’ podcast has its advantages. If you know it already, then you know it already. Early on, Will says that in the past two years he’s considered two hypotheses: The ‘outside view’ of reference classes and trends and Nothing Ever Happens. The ‘inside view’ that you should have a model made of gears and think about what is actually physically happening and going to happen.
Will notes that the gears-level view has been making much better predictions. I resoundingly believe the same thing. Neither approach has been that amazing, predictions are hard especially about the future, but gears-level thinking has made mincemeat out of the various experts who nod and dismiss with waves of the hand and statements about how absurd various predictions are. And when the inside view messes up? Quite often, in hindsight, that’s a Skill Issue. It’s interesting how narrow Will considers ‘a priori’ knowledge. Yes, a full trial of diet’s impact on life expectancy might take 70 years, but with Sufficiently Advanced Intelligence it seems obvious you can either figure it out via simulations, or at least design experiments that tell you the answer vastly faster. They then spend a bunch of time essentially arguing against intelligence denialism, pointing out that yes if you had access to unlimited quantities of superior intelligence you could rapidly do vastly more of all of the things. As they say, the strongest argument against is that we might collectively decide to not create all the intelligence and thus all the things, or decide not to apply all the intelligence to creating all the things, but it sure looks like competitive pressures point in the other direction. And once you’re able to automate industry, which definitely is coming, that definitely escalates quickly, even more reliably than intelligence, and all of this can be done only with the tricks we definitely know are coming, let alone the tricks we are not yet smart enough to expect. There’s worry about authoritarians ‘forcing their people to save’ which I’m pretty sure is not relevant to the situation, lack of capital is not going to be America’s problem. Regulatory concerns are bigger, it does seem plausible we shoot ourselves in the foot rather profoundly there. They go on to discuss various ‘grand challenges:’ potential new weapons, offense-defense balance, potential takeover by small groups (human or AI), value lock-in, space governance, morality of digital beings. They discuss the dangers of giving AIs economic rights, and the dangers of not giving the AIs economic rights, whether we will know (or care) if digital minds are happy and whether it’s okay to have advanced AIs doing whatever we say even if we know how to do that and it would be fine for the humans. The dangers of locking in values or a power structure, and of not locking in values or a power structure. The need for ML researchers to demand more than a salary before empowering trillion dollar companies or handing over the future. How to get the AIs to do our worldbuilding and morality homework, and to be our new better teachers and advisors and negotiators, and to what ends they can then be advising, before it’s too late. Then part two is about what a good future beyond mere survival looks like. He says we have ‘squandered’ the benefits of material abundance so far, that it is super important to get the best possible future not merely an OK future, the standard ‘how do we calculate total value’ points. Citing ‘The Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas’ to bring in ‘common sense,’ sigh. Value is Fragile. Whether morality should converge. Long arcs of possibility. Standard philosophical paradoxes. Bafflement at why billionaires hang onto their money. Advocacy for ‘viatopia’ where things remain up in the air rather than aiming for a particular future world. It all reminded me of the chats we used to have back in the before times (e.g. the 2010s or 2000s) about various AI scenarios, and it’s not obvious that our understanding of all that has advanced since then. Ultimately, a four-hour chat seems like not a great format for this sort of thing, beyond giving people surface exposure, which is why Will wrote his essays.
One could write an infinitely long response or exploration of any number as aspects of this, of course. Also, today I learned that by Will’s estimation I am insanely not risk averse?
Are you kidding me? What is your discount rate? Not flipping that coin is absurd. Training AIs to have this kind of epic flaw doesn’t seem like it would end well. And also, objectively,
Not flipping won, but the discussion was heated and ‘almost no one’ can be ruled out. Also, I’m going to leave this here, the theme of the second half the discussion:
Something something risk aversion? Or no?
From Allan Dafoe’s podcast,
Rhetorical Innovation
He says ‘the choice is clear.’ If given the ability to make the choice, the choice is very clear. The ability to make that choice is not. His proposal is compute oversight, compute caps, enhanced liability and tiered safety and security standards. International adaptation of that is a tough ask, but there is no known scenario that does not involve similarly tough asks that leads to human survival. Perception of the Overton Window has shifted. What has not shifted is the underlying physical reality, and what it would take to survive it. There is no point in pretending the problem is easier than it is, or advocating for solutions that you do not think work. In related news, this is not a coincidence because nothing is ever a coincidence.
The reason people who think in probabilities and do actual forecasting predict AI existential risk is because that is the prediction you get when you think well about these questions, and if you care about AI existential risk that provides you incentive to learn to think well and also others who can help you think well.
It is hard to make predictions, especially about the future. Especially now.
I know this guy:
A chart of reasons why various people don’t talk about AI existential risk.
I very much hear that line about immediate impact. You see it with people’s failure to notice or care about lots of other non-AI things too. The individual incentives are, with notably rare exception, that talking about existential risk costs you weirdness points and if anything hurts your agenda. So a lot of people don’t talk about it. I do find the ‘technology brothers’ explanation here doesn’t ring true, it’s stupid but not that stupid. Most of the rest of it does sound right.
There are a lot of technical arguments past that point, but they are all commentary, and twisted by people claiming the burden of proof is on those who think this is a dangerous thing to do. Which is a rather insane place to put that burden, when you put it in these simple terms. Yes, of course that’s a massively dangerous thing to do. Huge upside, huge downside. A book recommendation from a strong source:
If you define AGI as the system for which Chollet’s statement is false, then Chollet’s overall statement is true. But it would then not be meaningful. Very obviously one can imagine a plausible AI that can function as an AGI, but that has some obvious weakness where you can generate adversarial challenges. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
That’s a continuation of last week’s discussion about Sonnet 3.7 making modifications to be able to assert it completed its goal rather than admit failure. And again, deeply wanting to accomplish the goal in this way has some Unfortunate Implications.
Yes, by default, if your rest allows it, you will get the If you test for appearance-of-alignment, and everyone involved has the goal of passing the test, then that is exactly what you get. Which means at first, at lower capability levels, you get something at least somewhat like alignment, and then as capabilities advance the model gets smart enough to figure out how to fake alignment directly. And yes, Janus points out the next level of the problem, which is that the training data is teaching the AI how to pretend to be aligned. In case of emergency, here’s probably the best offer available?
The Lighter Side
No idea if real, but sure why not:
You're currently a free subscriber to |