---
subject: "Why Japan Succeeds Despite Stagnation"
from: "Tomas Pueyo from Uncharted Territories <unchartedterritories@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-16 15:03:41
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tomas Pueyo"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_28238133486362596"]
---
I don’t usually do guest posts, but today is an exception. Maxwell Tabarrok is an economics researcher at Dartmouth College and author of the substack For more than three decades, Japan has endured near complete economic stagnation. Since 2000, Japan’s total output has grown by only That’s less additional output than Nigeria, Pakistan, and Chile, even though they all started from much lower bases, and only around a fifth of South Korea’s growth over the same period. But despite severe economic stagnation, Japan is still a What explains Japan’s lost decades? And how has the country still managed to maintain such a high quality of life? Facts of Japan’s StagnationBefore explaining why so many aspects of life in Japan succeed despite its economic stagnation, we ought to make sure that the stagnation is real.
Japan isn’t doing better on a per capita basis. Its What about productivity? Per capita GDP is usually highly correlated with productivity, but it’s a particularly biased measure in this case. Much of Japan’s population is too old to be in the workforce, so dividing GDP by the entire population counts millions of people as labor input when they don’t actually work. If you instead compare Japan’s GDP growth per working age adult to other nations, it doesn’t look quite as bad. By this metric, Japan still has lower growth than everyone except France and Italy, but it’s only near the bottom of a tight pack, rather than an outlier far behind anyone else. So is Japan’s stagnation a statistical illusion masking what is actually reasonable performance? No, the stagnation is real. First, even by the adjusted metrics Japan’s growth is worryingly slow. It does the best relative to the US by GDP per working-age adult, but it’s still barely 6th out of the 8 countries graphed. The countries that Japan beats or matches: Italy, Spain, and France, are not examples of healthy, high growth economies. Compared to Japan’s neighbors like South Korea, Taiwan, China, Singapore, Malaysia, or Vietnam, its growth rate is a low outlier. Casting Japan as similar to Western European economies is evidence for the severity of its stagnation. Second, and more importantly, is that total GDP matters! Japan needs a high level of total GDP to provide for its Causes of Japan’s StagnationJapan spent over a century on the frontier of global economic growth. What caused Japan’s growth to crash in the late 90s and never recover? DemographicsJapan’s Japan’s demographics drag down its productivity growth, too. Productivity is ultimately a result of new technologies and ideas which Japan’s demographics overshadow and underpin all the other explanations for its stagnation. If Japan’s working age population had stayed at its 1997 peak and productivity growth had been the same, its GDP would be 20% larger than it is today. The true cost of population decline is even larger than this because of its effects on innovation and productivity growth. Zombie FirmsThere is more to Japan’s stagnation than demographics. The challenges posed by falling population are magnified by a debt-funded resistance to creative destruction. This has kept Japan entrenched in industries where it lacks comparative advantage while stifling the emergence of new, dynamic sectors to replace uncompetitive ones. A key mechanism sustaining these declining firms is heavily subsidized debt. The practice of extending loans to failing companies is known as " When a borrower fails to pay interest on a loan or goes bankrupt, their bank must classify the loan as “non-performing.” This means the bank can no longer count the loan value as an asset, and they have to set aside cash to at least partially replace the value of the non-performing loan. That leaves less cash available to loan out and thus less profit for the bank. Alternatively, the bank can offer more money to the ailing borrower which the borrower uses to continue making interest payments on their loans. Thus, the loan remains as an “asset” on the bank’s balance sheet, even though everyone involved understands that there is little chance the loan will ever be repaid. This creative bookkeeping allows the bank to accept more deposits and loan them out to other, hopefully more profitable, ventures. A The percentage of “zombie firms” i.e those firms subsisting purely on subsidized debt Industries with more zombies have less churn of resources between firms; exactly the opposite of what is optimal in an industry with lots of unproductive firms. Usually, in an industry with unproductive competition, a highly productive firm will expand rapidly, but when the unproductive competing firms are subsidized by cheap debt, healthy firms Zombie lending has lowered aggregate Japanese productivity growth by at least 30-50%. Productivity growth can be decomposed into four parts based on where it happens: Within firms, reallocation of resources between low and high productivity firms, entry of new firms, and exit of existing ones. Throughout Japan’s lost decades, the exit portion of The negative exit effect decreased Japan’s annual manufacturing productivity growth by a full percentage point between 2000-2005, meaning productivity growth would have doubled without it and grown even more if firm exit had a positive effect as in most healthy economies. The other major productivity slowdown from shrinking “within-firm” growth is more directly related to Japan’s aging and less innovative population. Zombie lending also contributes to falling within-firm productivity. It prevents the death of stagnant firms and allows their innovation-stifling practices to ossify and spread. To summarize, Japan's stagnation comes from two forces: a shrinking population, which means fewer workers to produce economic output and fewer inventors to raise productivity; and "zombie firms," kept alive by subsidized loans, which prevent creative destruction and drag down productivity growth across the economy. Successes Despite StagnationJapan’s economic stagnation is among the most severe in the world, especially when compared to its world-beating growth in previous decades. Yet, Japan is still a great place to live and work. How does Japan retain these good qualities despite its poor economic performance? Japan Gets Housing RightA major source of economic pessimism in Western countries is high housing costs. These countries have throttled housing and most other physical construction activities with Japan’s zoning code is set at the national level and therefore tends to be much less restrictive than the local zoning codes found in the West. Its national system lays out just 12 inclusive zones, which means the permitted building types carry over as you move up the categories, allowing mixed-use development by default. This compares favorably to zoning codes in the US which often have multiple For environmental permitting, Japan mostly relies on First is Second, the completed environmental assessments are Permissive national zoning and an absence of environmental proceduralism leads to Japan having the Expensive and exclusionary housing can make the most prosperous and beautiful city on earth Capital and CultureJapan has two other advantages which offset the bad vibes and welfare costs that one might expect from a stagnant economy. The first is downstream of its demographic decline and its well-designed building regulations. Japan has a Japan’s second advantage is more difficult to quantify but is likely as important as the previous factors for offsetting the costs of stagnation: Japan has high levels of trustworthiness, cleanliness, order, and peace. Japan has extraordinarily low rates of
Japan’s social order is incredibly valuable. The annual cost of crime in the United States is around Japan’s exceptionally orderly and safe public spheres are matched only by other countries in Can Japan Reverse Course?Japan’s highest priority should be reversing demographic collapse. Directly addressing birth rates with subsidies is a simple first step. Given Japan’s fiscal obligations to its growing elderly population, each member of future generations must contribute The success record of fertility payments is In addition to economic incentives, Fertility is Japan’s biggest challenge, but it's not the only one. Japan needs to address its lending policies, allow more creative destruction and more startup formation. The practice of banks holding onto non-performing loans should be discouraged by stricter accounting standards that force recognition of bad debt. This would free up capital and human talent currently trapped in unproductive zombie firms, allowing resources to flow to more innovative enterprises. Japan’s success in the face of demographic collapse and economic stagnation is one way of proving the importance of housing policy and social order. Getting those things right, as Japan has, creates a foundation strong enough to withstand three decades of zero growth. But even the strongest foundation will crack under enough weight - and the combined mass of demographic collapse and zombified capital misallocation grows heavier by the year. If Japan can turn these trends around, its other advantages would do more than simply offset stagnation — they would create rapid growth and widespread prosperity for decades to come. I hope you enjoyed the article. Let me know what you think! If you want to read more about economics, science, policy, or AI, you can subscribe to The next article, for premium customers, will be about why Japan has the zombie lending policies today, why it’s a direct result of its past success, how that is similar to South Korea, Taiwan, and China, and why Southeast Asian countries didn’t follow the same path. 1 Note from Tomas Pueyo: There is evidence that on average inducing one birth costs about the same as GDP per capita, which in Japan is about $34k, so Japan could definitely boost fertility with big spending. You're currently a free subscriber to |