---
subject: "Longreads + Open Thread"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <diff@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-02-19 17:00:31
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_PROMOTIONS", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_PROMOTIONS", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
You're on the free list for The Diff. Subscribe now to get access to the full archive, plus three subscribers-only posts each week.
|
|
The NYT has a
[deeper look at Spotify's deal with Joe Rogan, and its consequences](https://email.mg2.substack.com/c/eJwlkUuOhSAQRVfzmD3Cx89jwKAnvQ2DUCrdAgbKNu6-URNyT0KlqMrBGoQ55VNvqSC5YsBzAx3hKCsgQiZ7gTx4p3nTdlJyRZxuHP-0H-LLMGWAYPyqMe9Atn1cvTXoU7w7VCMZWfTYSGWmznTcCOmYUFIyLtreGWeNHO0z1-zOQ7Sg4Q_ymSKQVS-IW3nJr5f4ruc4DhpP9AEKtSnUG8GEqGBX8L6GyVgqwl68rSxbQj-d758E75xmE9_BFx-nlMO9JV0wrMTr6x0muOI9Y5JTQT8d6xs-gRQdV9ZJmssyyy5_Xg0Ls6BlHwsa-3vtQbL2ZTGRXiJqfb54F6qPoTLs0eM5QDTjCu5RhY_xW94wQ4Rcf8INBjXvmlYoxrorHjXVZaMYl71UpE52qXZF7fw0_QO4NJU5). The piece includes a higher reported cost for the Rogan exclusive ($200m vs $100m, though that higher number might result from a different treatment of earn-outs). It's another example of the usual media cycle: when there's a new distribution model, the early winners master distribution and the long-term winners own content; Spotify is working to own its own content, but being the high bidder can either mean paying more than other people will pay or buying things other people are afraid to own.PETITION has a
[downbeat view on the rapid grocery delivery business](https://email.mg2.substack.com/c/eJxVUEuOrDAMPE1nifIjDYssZjPXiEJiIBpIUGLeE7cf06xG8keyVS5XBY-wlHrZozRkd3F4HWAz_G8bIEJlZ4PqUrRC90YpMbJodRRDP7DU3FwBdp82i_UEdpzTloLHVPIHMWrF2WqjMmIUkxJGSA5DAC5CFN5MyvcSwvTw-jMmyAEs_IN6lQxssyvi0V7q6yW_KQ7AdN_u2jk19OGnC2W_55Sw1BIIx5KVXFIQ45tzJTrZDYa_tZhBSfojRNXVti7K1OGl-b7IP-dYtamtPne3Ktovd_8sSJyjvp854eUg-2mD-OjGx76PE26BDJVsjc6jFUb3cuTc3OXRScbokQv1ViMj5lgIlW1M8_wLFl-EyQ). My view on these companies has been: yes, they're insanely capital-intensive, but delivering a frequently-purchased product means collecting cohort data very quickly. It's an interesting coordination mechanism that so many of these companies are competing in New York, since it's a way for them to fight a sort of one-time tournament to determine who is best at operating a delivery network or at least making a convincing case to investors (being sufficiently good at either is enough to satisfy the victory condition). Extrapolating from their unit economics excluding user acquisition costs is a mistake, but extrapolating from a one-time loss-intensive launch is a mistake, too.Also in the NYT,
[a look at Squarespace's forward-thinking approach to podcast advertising](https://email.mg2.substack.com/c/eJwlkd2upSAMhZ9mc6fhb6tccHFu5jUMSlVyFBxaxvj2g3snZJW0aVfzdXYEa8q3PRMSe2Sk-wQb4cIdiCCzgpDH4K3Q704pYZi32ovhPbCA45IBDhd2S7kAO8u0h9lRSPHTYbTibLPGcD1Nwgg3g9b9u5-cc74Tixy0Xybz9XXFB4gzWPgH-U4R2G43ohNf6ucl_9R3XVcbbwoHYDuno2Ykl7IG_ohQVaaCIQJi_W7panzwDf4tLgOe1bz5jTV5Jj87JGyuVHbfrEANbQGbKaztRsfOgn3mclk37jlXopXt0PFeiwWU7ISZvWozbqvq8vDS_Fhli2VCcvPvsxfLNuDmYvuAqfX1iZ9C5TPWeJQY6B4humkH_0VH3wt8YI4rRMj1Mn50ZEWn39Jw3j3yRVXZasOF6pVh1dmn2hWtD8vyH1uum5U). Advertising has both relationship and transactional elements, especially in the early stages when the norms and metrics haven't been established. This creates an opportunity for venture-style advertising: buy lots of ads in a growing medium, on the grounds that once everyone knows what a "CPM" is, your CPM will be lower than that of new entrants.Abraham Thomas of Pivotal on
[Minsky Moments in venture capital](https://email.mg2.substack.com/c/eJxVkE2OhCAQhU_T7DT8NS0LFrOZaxCEUskoGCh74u0H29UkRVWFysvL-7xDmHM5zZ4rkqtZPHcwCX7rCohQyFGh2BgMk08lBNMkGBnY8BxIrHYqAJuLq8FyANmPcY3eYczpo9BSULIYJV1bFNVey8GNUoxaCwpB0DBy4Ybb1x0hQvJg4A3lzAnIahbEvT7E14N_t9rjO6Nb-3qMFZ3_6X3eru_2tpjqz9lteYOEtYupe7flKNB5t8cmItFwylsxzV6UCtbzflD0JdkEgiumfRB9qcssVBkekm4z_-dDiol1cam_0rb7fM3PoYW2bW5HinhaSG5cIdw88Mb6IWRnSFAa7mAdGqbkk2tK1dXu_A2Y1JSJl9CkOYfcVMmEOE1_iA-Nkw): when a particular trade gets popular, there's a magical period where realized risk-adjusted returns are going up, but likely future risk-adjusted returns are going up, driven both by higher risk and worse returns. Especially important: more money moving into VC means that investors get early markups, which makes it more likely than an average fund today will show the same year 1-2 performance an absolutely exceptional one would have gotten historically. This is straight out of Minsky: capital inflows produce cosmetically better risk-adjusted returns, which encourages more inflows.Kyle Harrison on
[the professionalization of startups](https://email.mg2.substack.com/c/eJxVkM1uhSAQhZ_msruGAS_qgkU3fQ2DMCipFwyMbezTF3XVZH4WZyZn5rOGcE750FsqxM4y0rGhjvhTViTCzPaCeQxOQ_tSUsLAnG4d9K-ehTL6jPg2YdWUd2TbPq3BGgopXhtDKzlbNEgQ1lvlbMcHoybVVWWyHgR4NUF3-5rdBYwWNX5jPlJEtuqFaCsP-fEQnzVC_MZCIc7AQbhEvCn7VMjYr8amdx3YatKCzy0nj6XUM8wafq97nsk_62imfSssaMFFDRig41xCI5pe8a4Fj1IoGKyTTS7LLFXuHy1_z-KfE8s6lMXE5vy86vPZL6ECGGt_7zHQMWI004ruZkM34ovWOGPEXNG70ZAG1b7EwLk6y82iwmsHDrKTA6vOLtWtqF3w_g_gcJIr). This is partly a celebration of how much more available tech tools and best practices are than they used to be—but also an acknowledgement that starting a startup is no longer the outsider thing to do. This is the fate of any interesting trend: by the time there's a name for it, there's a sense in which it's over. That's both correlation and causation. Lots of trends are mean-reverting; starting a startup was popular in 1999, wildly contrarian in 2002, and popular again by the early 2010s. Some of this was driven by media (Y Combinator applications inflected upwards after The Social Network came out), and some of it is because industries naturally get more institutional as they get bigger. For anyone trying to make a living or a decent return, the good news is that a lot more money is made after the point where something stops being cool. But the loss of coolness is still a loss.
[That Will Never Work: The Birth of Netflix and the Amazing Life of an Idea](https://email.mg2.substack.com/c/eJwlUcuK3DAQ_BrrNkYvP3TQIRDmmEt22aPQWG1brCwZSc5k8vVpj6HoJ0U11ZOtsKT80nsqlZzB1NcOOsKzBKgVMjkKZOOdZrLrhWCKOC0dG7uR-GLmDLBZH3TNB5D9eAQ_2epTfDOUFJSserDzMEjJZ9WJxyQnRQV1XSedGOeRd-7StYfzECfQ8AfyK0UgQa-17qURPxp-Rzyfz9Zu9l-K7ZQ2HHystt6-fAi3Xyfp9pXyN5Z1Dv4vrt2OgQrWd4JyKhtxNyiQnI9LI35-ftzHhveIkrG9ygvBxuWwC-AYovn8jaMMs8HWFhO8KcXUQLzmlCOYYgNFmZa3Y08HyWYQvGdqcqLNZV1En8dG0m3hbTkepdrp-7yfZO3LamN7-of75czvBdpoMG9H9PWFJ9tHAHc5XK9HvT03C0TI-EBnbNWslx1XlPZnuBzFF0hFmRiEIqjsErKidn6e_wMuW6NY): if you want to understand Netflix-the-streaming-giant today, it's great to start with Netflix-the-shaky-DVD-company circa the early 2000s. This book is a pretty early look, starting just before the founding and ending with the IPO. Among other things, it's a great peek into how hard it is to work with big hardware companies, especially on new technologies. It also shows Netflix's scrappier side; before they had a massive marketing budget and lots of Oscars, their tactics included having ringer accounts on movie forums that hyped up an amazing new site where you could get DVDs delivered by mail.
Drop in any links or thoughts that would be of interest to Diff readers.
What business is miss-monetized, rather than under-monetized? Some businesses rely on ads when they could do subscriptions, or use usage-based pricing rather than all-you-can-eat subscriptions.
The Fastest Way To Accelerate Your Career (And Your Network) Is Writing Online
In the internet economy, being qualified is now only one factor of success — but most people are missing out on the other part of the equation— having people know and believe that you’re qualified.
What’s the first thing people do when they consider hiring someone? They look them up online. The same is true if you’re looking for new potential business.
In our Internet World, online writers are speeding ahead of everyone else. While everybody else is stuck in the traffic of credentialism and bureaucracy, online writers get to hit the gas and speed right past the traffic. They get to craft the narrative that everyone sees first, and put their best thinking forward.
Are you looking for a new job, a new career, or new and interesting opportunities — but you haven’t been writing about the experience and knowledge you bring to the table?
[David Perell’s Write of Passage program will help you develop the consistency](https://email.mg2.substack.com/c/eJwlkM2OhCAQhJ9mOBr-RDlw2Mu8BkFolayCgXYnvv3imFS6k-5UKl95h7DkcpkjVyT3sHgdYBJ86gaIUMhZodgYDJO9EoJpEowMbOxHEqudC8Du4mawnECOc9qidxhz-jq0FJSsZgpqYK73fhqZ4FOYe67cqGEAEFxI_uS6M0RIHgz8QblyArKZFfGoL_Hz4u-mT4kIeT5crW6Brvo1563dSTSc8iam2UCpYB3vRkUHyeYWoJj2QXSlrotQZXxJui-8q-dU0fnfzuedFBPr6lJ3k7T_cu_vowHZtvczRbwsJDdtEB5WfCr70tsFEpRWZbAODVOy55pSdY-HrZUhNWViEJq05JCbK5kQ5_kf5QmAqw), clarity, and confidence you need to get your best thinking out of your head, and launch onto the internet. Enrollment is open now for a limited time.
You’re a free subscriber to [The Diff](https://email.mg2.substack.com/c/eJwlkM2urSAMhZ9mMyT8iTJgcCbnNQhCVXIUDdRrfPuL26RpkzarK98KHmHey22PvSJ5msP7AJvhqisgQiFnheJStFx1WkpuSLQq8qEbSKpuKgCbT6vFcgI5znFNwWPa81dhlGRksZOXnPNJsEHHMXQqxn4UTDHZKyFZL19ff8YEOYCFf1DuPQNZ7YJ41I_8-YjfVtd1UVwgpmmiYW8LkqxgohU3vGdMcirooFmv-ARSaG5ClLTUZZa6DB_FtlnQeo4VffhrHzZSbKqLz_RBaPf5md9DI3FtbmdOeDvIflwhvpD4ZvXFdjNkKC3D6DxarlUnDGP6aS9US0EZxmUvDWnOcW-qbB-C_90DfKg). For the full experience, [become a paid subscriber.](https://email.mg2.substack.com/c/eJw1kttymzAQhp8GLhkdMIcLLtxQtyQ1ttvEiXvDgLRg2SA8QgrGT19hpzM7q9Gn0fy7-y8rNTS9mpJLP2h3ToWeLpBIGIcWtAblmgFUIXiC_UVAKY5dnvgcR4vIFUNRK4CuFG2ilQH3YqpWsFKLXt5_xD5F7jGJQ15RgjEwVtV-zUMcBr4fBwSHUcl4_dAtDRcgGSTwCWrqJbhtctT6Mjh06ZCVjXEcPX0ELuraY70Fg6kGpkQFDl3p_gzSoSlMz5iR_fRB2nN26q95-kbWt_V182cU5fsK3dlph9en87hOD9Ovp-cWfi7F5vSd5CnzN2k25qdsyLr2xqYsyOQ3fBDounnd3dZPlsvc3i3v8v7ve64qukeZRF4bD1Gw_U2W9WHcfbyY9GXfbbFJ07H8Ic_N22cUpq_b7dLUo0MCo7ti6I1itvR0bkOX7PzFO9uh6eZW5sl-QdZLDVJbOg-L6dIVCUHEBo5xiBDFHvGiAIU-roGSAMeMU08Nx4YGKnJ81DXE-y9kp9e5KhHDsZTeXcRHzXzeH6yLVq7rjBR6KkCWVQv8YbB-7Mm9sKIBCcruDy9KneDAX5AYoWBOD0PtBvgxwjSksWuVeW9_yWR27x8JOtSK)