---
subject: "My Complaint Re Academia"
from: "Robin Hanson from Overcoming Bias <overcomingbias@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-05-21 19:50:15
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Overcoming Bias", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8616244883382228708", "UNREAD"]
---
If you want to get paid for abstract analysis that is not mainly organized around current cultural or political disputes, academia is pretty much the only game in town. So I am very grateful that academia exists, and has included me. But I do have a complaint. In most areas of life, activities are typically justifies in some detail in terms of the accepted purpose of that area. E.g., hospitals save lives, businesses serve customers, roads support travel, armies deter fights, and so on. But though the accepted purpose of academic research is to either answer deep important questions, or to help non-academics somehow, academics almost never explicitly justify their work in such terms. For example, polls found that these goals best explain ~7% of You can also check this yourself by asking individual academics to explain how their work could plausibly contribute to answering deep important questions, or to non-academic value. Most will be surprised by the question, having never been asked it, and answer them quite poorly. Yes, in principle the fashions that drive these choices could themselves be driven by processes that induce fashion to promote deep important questions and non-academic value. But I’ve been in academia for four decades now and I just don’t see this. Academic fashion, like other fashion, instead results mostly from individual competing to gain their usual selfish rewards. The arts are the other main area of life where specialists poorly justify their specific actions in terms of the usual area purposes. So if the arts are mostly about showing off personal abilities, and abilities to judge those, likely so is academia. You're currently a free subscriber to |