---
subject: "AI#29: Take a Deep Breath"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-09-14 11:59:01
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
It works for the AI. Take a deep breath and work on this problem step-by-step was the strongest AI-generated custom instruction. You, a human, even have lungs and the ability to take an actual deep breath. You can also think step by step. This week was especially friendly to such a proposal, allowing the shortest AI weekly to date and hopefully setting a new standard. It would be great to take some time for more long-term oriented posts on AI but also on things like the Jones Act, for catching my breath and, of course, some football. And, of course, Happy New Year! Table of ContentsIntroduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. Take that deep breath. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. Garbage in, garbage out. Gary Marcus Claims LLMs Cannot Do Things GPT-4 Already Does. Indeed. Fun With Image Generation. Where are our underlying item quality evaluators? Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. AI girlfriends versus AI boyfriends. Get Involved. Axios science and the new intriguing UK Gov ARIA research. Introducing. Time AI 100 profiles 100 people more important than I am. In Other AI News. UK taskforce assembles great team, OpenAI goes to Dublin. Quiet Speculations. How easy or cheap to train another GPT-4 exactly? The Quest for Sane Regulation. EU seems to be figuring more things out. The Week in Audio. The fastest three minutes. A well deserved break. Rhetorical Innovation. If AI means we lose our liberty, don’t build it. Were We So Stupid As To? What would have happened without warnings? Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. Not even a jailbreak. Can You Speak Louder Directly Into the Microphone. Everyone needs to know.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
What are our best prompts? Break this down is new. Weirder is ‘take a deep breath.’ What a concept! Why shouldn’t we let the LLMs optimize the prompts we give to other LLMs? The medium term outcome is doubtless using LLMs to generate the prompts, using LLMs to decide which prompt is best in the situation (in response to on its own LLM-designed and tested prompt) and then implementing the resulting LLM output without a human checking first. Seems useful. Why have a giant inscrutable matrix when you can have a giant inscrutable web of instructions passed among and evaluated and optimized by different giant inscrutable matrices?
My system is to accept that I am going to forget a lot of things, and try to engineer various flows to together do the highest value stuff without anything too robust or systematic. It definitely is not great. My long term plan is ‘AI solves this.’ I can think of various ways to implement such a solution that seem promising. For now, I have not seen one that crosses the threshold of good enough to be worth using, but perhaps one of you has a suggestion?
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
Taking all the knowledge and writing and tendencies of the entire human race and all properties of the physical universe as a given, sure, this is correct. The response corresponds to the prompt, all the uniqueness has to be there. What does that tell us, in practice? If you want to learn from the response, if you are using it to get information, or if the point is to automate parts of the process or generate potential options, it means little. If you want to use GPT to write your essay outright, then it means a lot more. Gary Marcus Claims LLMs Cannot Do Things GPT-4 Already DoesA continuing series that I will do at length once more because I found it amusing, Many others reported the same thing, GPT-4 gets this correct. What to do?
Imagine this in other contexts. If there is a person out there who can be made to give the wrong answer, and we cannot reliably say what a human will say since circumstances change their responses , we can only conclude humans are unreliable. All right, so… show us all the obvious ways that this presumably did not generalize? Surely all these correct responses using different wordings, all this ‘I can change up various elements and it still gets it right,’ is all a mirage? Or perhaps you found a way to force a plane to crash, and tried to get everyone to despair of ever safely flying? Also, That’s it, four words? That does not sound like the GPT-4 I know at all. Also, one guess how most humans typically solve most riddles, remembering that riddles are optimized to be tricky for humans. When a human proves not so good at riddles, I typically neither worry very much about it nor eats them, my precious. The real story is that other engines including Claude-2 are indeed getting this type of question wrong, despite chain of thought, most everyone is multiplying siblings, and it is all rather embarrassing. Why is everyone else still this far behind, not only here but in general? Does he stop digging?
My first attempt right when this came out, using GPT-4, since I was curious: So we are officially adding a new rule on what won’t be covered. I will still quote Gary Marcus if he is in the news or offers good insights, but if he once again says that LLMs are a bust or can’t do something or aren’t reliable, I pledge to not take the bait. No more piling on. Fun with Image GenerationWhere are the image classifiers that rate food quality and attribute details? Take for example this picture from the Twitter of Ess-a-Bagel advertising their Rosh Hashanah package. They make fantastic bagels (although I think not quite as good as Brooklyn Bagel), If we combined personal preference expression with image model classifiers that could then extend across the web, we could vastly improve searches, ratings and matching. This is merely one aspect of a startup I am hoping some of my friends do. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
Despite these, and everyone’s assumption that it would be AI girlfriends rather than AI boyfriends,
When it comes to images, male demand dominates. For physical activity, it is not obvious, as previous markets have proven women could easily be the dominant market there already. For performing the job of relationship or fantasy relationship, for simulacra of ideal relationship experiences, female demand has long dominated, as per romance novels and fan fiction. AI will likely follow the same pattern. One can interpret this finding any number of ways, which I leave as an exercise to the reader.
Steam has reversed their decision from last week, letting a game that contains no AI into their shop despite it previously having had an experimental option for ChatGPT-generated dialogue. Get InvolvedReminder:
IntroducingTechnically introduced last time,
Their video explains that the problem with current models is that there have to be humans in the loop to actually use the output and do the things. They want to fix that, and give their models the ability to accomplish goals in the world on their own.
Okie dokie. In Other AI NewsEliezer Yudkowsky reacts correctly to the UK Taskforce’s roster.
This week I learned Demis Hassabis, founder of DeepMind, Worried your AIs are being fine tuned using third world labor?
Quiet SpeculationsYou think our copyright law won’t shut down AI because that wouldn’t make any sense?
I always wonder who the other 10% of experts are, who think that there will be no unintended consequences of AI applications. That bar is flat on the ground. Do they not think there will be AI applications?
So, Padme-meme asks, this is because of extinction risk, right? Here’s the place they mention that issue, the final paragraph.
Such arguments prove quite a lot. They do not differentiate between AI and every other technology a scientist might develop. The argument would effectively shut down big tech, and also perhaps little tech and the rest of science too. What examples do they give?
People are already doing all these things. Existing non-AI algorithms were already involved heavily in these things. The first one of these things is clearly flat out good. Humans have already mostly maxed out the third one. I happen to agree that we need to get a handle on AI, because it happens to have far bigger consequences than all that, such as killing everyone. Even if that was not true, there would indeed be lesser reasons that require lesser interventions to steer the ship to better waters. When both sides ignore the most important issues involved and instead repeat the same old regulatory debates in a new context as if this is the same old story, it is frustrating. The Quest for Sane RegulationsSimeon files a report. Simeon: Coming back from a workshop on the EU AI ecosystem and the coming AI Act.
All of that is good to hear as far as it goes. The cooperate attitude is great, even if currently the concerns are not pointing in the right directions. Certainly better understanding and evaluations would be good. As the top response notes, an NDA won’t cut it if you are sharing access to a dangerous system, some academic will leak it or have it leaked for them. You will need highly strict technical controls, that grow stricter over time. That’s the general theme of such discussions, as always, that none of it will be enough. We still might get a good start, and start steering towards more sensible choices than the EU’s first attempt.
The Week in Audio
Rhetorical Innovation
I would expand that to those who advocate accelerationism. Those of us calling for taking the steps necessary to avoid AI killing everyone are being held, quite reasonably, to the standard of facing the other consequences of our actions. Saying ‘we do not want that particular consequence’ or ‘if people were more sane we would not need to do that’ or ‘if people could coordinate better we could use this better solution instead that does not have that problem’? Or ignoring the practical implications and problems, such as ‘but China!’ or even ‘but people will say “but China” and use that to keep going’? We accept that this would be is cheating, recognize the problem is extremely hard, and look for the least bad options. This is how action in the world works. This is how politics and policy work. You must evaluate your choices based on how everyone including your foolish enemies will react. Saying ‘that is not my fault, they are responsible for their own actions’ or even ‘well they started it’ is a child’s move. The universe does not care or grade on a curve, either we die or we live. To be very clear: That is not a reason to throw functional decision theory out the window. I am not advocating for pure act consequentialism. I am saying there is no living in fantasy land or ignoring humans who will do things you think are stupid. If you believe that the only path to compute governance is a surveillance state, and you are accelerating AI and thus when we will need and when we will think we need such governance, what are the possibilities? You believe the surveillance state is inevitable, can’t worry about that. You believe the surveillance state will not be ‘your fault,’ so it’s OK. You believe the surveillance state is good. You believe the surveillance state is bad but the price of AI and worth it. You believe the surveillance state won’t happen, so compute governance won’t happen, and this ungoverned situation will then work out for us somehow. You believe surveillance state won’t happen, humanity will end, and that is good.
If it’s one of the first three, I would urge you to reconsider the wisdom of that. If you think it’s the last one, please speak louder directly into the microphone. If you think it is #4, that this is the price of survival, then own it, and advocate for that. If you think it is #5, then tell me how in the world that is going to work. Include the part where we agree not to use AI to create such a state, and the part where we create a new equilibrium where we are free to do what we like with widely available AIs, we all survive and terrible things are not constantly happening. I would love to hear a hypothesis on this. Ideally a model, I will settle for a story that makes any sense at all. Were We As Stupid As To?When trying to help everyone not die, it is important to remember that all three major labs - DeepMind, OpenAI and Anthropic - were directly founded as the result of concerns about existential risk on the part of among other people Demis Hassabis, Elon Musk and Dario Amodei respectively. And that people with such worries were centrally responsible for RLHF and other techniques that made LLMs commercially viable, and for pushing the scaling laws, without which we would not be in an AI boom. So,
Counterfactuals are impossible to know. Long ago, I would have sided with Bogdan in situations like this. Scaling laws worked and were the obvious thing to try. RLHF is in a sense the obvious thing to do and others had already suggested it and were using versions of it in other contexts. There was too much potential here, someone would have figured this out soon thereafter. Nowadays I reply, the efficient market hypothesis is false. Inevitable discovery is a thing… eventually. It can still take quite a long time. If this was such an inevitable thing, where are all the attempts that don’t directly link back to fears of existential risk, even if they did not work out? As Remmelt points out, you had to go through quite a bit of not obviously profitable territory to get to the good stuff, even knowing that the theories were right. There is no reason to assume this would have quickly happened anyway. Indeed, it did not happen quickly anyway. There are no other rivals, no one else is remotely close, everyone else is either directly copying or building wrappers or both. I believe the counterfactual involves massively smaller amounts of funding into everything, and delays of getting to the GPT-3 and GPT-4 thresholds measured in at least years. That does not mean that our situation is worse than the counterfactual one. I would rather be where we are now, with the current state of alignment and discourse, and with safety-conscious people at least prominent in all three major labs, than the alternative world where we had stayed quiet and done nothing. It is an alarming situation and a very bad board state, but the board state was always quite bad, and seems to be improving. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
If forced to choose, I would hope Lawrence would indeed go to the technical side. I realize I have gone a different route, but I would argue I have very strong comparative advantage reasons for doing so. Mostly, I think most people should focus more on doing the thing, less on funding the thing or getting a pipeline to the thing or talking about the thing. Even I am looking at ways to move more in that direction.
|