---
subject: "Mantic Monday 1/29/24"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-01-30 02:23:22
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Do Prediction Markets Have An Election Problem?This is the claim of The two real-money prediction markets get 4th and 6th place. And Johnson chronicles other problems with them. For example, long after the media called the 2020 election for Biden, PredictIt held on to a ~9% chance of a Trump landslide so massive it could not possibly have occurred even if he won all of his voting fraud challenges. Betting sites favored Biden to win all swing states, but Trump to win overall. The whole thing was a mess. Johnson makes a pretty reasonable guess about the cause: lots of dumb money. People use their pocketbooks to root for their favorite candidate. Normally in a functioning market smart money would take the other side and set the final price, but the regulatory limits on prediction markets mean it’s not generally worth smart money’s time to correct the mispricing; Goldman Sachs isn’t going to hire statistics PhDs to make a model just so they can win $850 on PredictIt. All of this is true, so let me say a few words in prediction market’s defense. First of all, my allegiance has always been to forecasting in general, of which prediction markets are just a particularly flashy sub-category. So I find it encouraging that forecasting site Metaculus beats 538, usually considering the gold standard for political prediction. I also find it encouraging that the play-money prediction market site Manifold comes pretty close and beats all the real-money sites. Nate Silver is only one person, he has only one area of expertise, and you can’t hire him to predict random things for you (unless you’re rich and he’s bored). If Manifold can apply only-slightly-sub-Nate-Silver levels of analysis at scale to arbitrary topics, that’s a big deal. As for the real-money prediction markets, yeah, they seem worse than other options. But solar power was worse than other options in 1990. They’re a fledgling technology, we have strong reasons to think they’ll work when they’re mature, and we know what we need to do to help them grow. Unlike 538, Metaculus, and play-money markets, they have bias-resistance properties that could be really useful if they ever get big. So one way to think of this is that non-market forecasting systems will outperform market systems when the markets are small and immature, but we might expect this to change as they get bigger. If that’s true, Johnson reminds us we’re not there yet. You can find further discussion of the article Asterisk is now releasing its issues piecemeal; along with Johnson on prediction markets, Is Trump On Top?The latest round of polls shows voters preferring Trump to Biden in 2024: Biden’s popularity has been going down since the beginning of 2023: And Trump’s has been going up since the same time: Why? All the things voters might blame Biden for - inflation, Ukraine, Gaza - happened either well before or well after the early-2023 period when his numbers began to decline. So I’m not sure. Maybe people just got fed up? Vox has …Metaculus and PredictIt are 50-50, Manifold favors Biden, and Polymarket favors Trump. Shouldn’t really be possible, should it? This is probably the problem Johnson mentioned above. Manifold has lots of young people and rationalists, who probably lean Biden. Polymarket has lots of degenerate gamblers who use VPNs, who probably lean Trump. But as we saw above, the two best sources for politics have previously been Metaculus and Nate Silver. Nate Silver says (unofficially, I do think you could probably make a lot of real money in expectation buying Biden on Polymarket - if you were a degenerate gambler with a VPN, of course. Aaronson’s Five AI WorldsOne forecasting flaw is that it can only distribute probability between pre-selected outcomes. Usually those outcomes are “yes” or “no” on a binary event. For slightly more complicated events like the US Presidential Election, you can sort of chain these together - will Biden win the nomination Y/N? Will Biden win the Presidency Y/N? If Trump loses, will he concede gracefully Y/N? - and sort of get a picture of what might happen. For much more complicated events, it’s not really obvious how to do this. Here’s an experiment courtesy of Metaculus, Scott Aaronson, and Boaz Barak. Aaronson and Barak wrote a blog post trying to divide AI scenarios into five categories, which Metaculus summarizes as:
I think Paperclipalypse requires human extinction before 2050. It’s at 11%. But Metaculus’ direct This Month In The MarketsI haven’t been following the Trump Legal Issues Cinematic Universe, so I was surprised to see “Trump won’t go to jail” climbing so consistently. Maybe this is just because he has a higher chance of becoming President before the trials are over? I was surprised to see this one; I’d previously seen that Both 15% and 32% are low numbers, but Israelis in the comments bring up that there aren’t scheduled elections in 2024. So if Bibi didn’t resign and his coalition partners didn’t desert him, he could potentially cling on. And nobody clings to power more ferociously than Benjamin Netanyahu. That recent spike comes from It looks like things have gone downhill for Ukraine since about October. Related: What am I missing here? It’s got to be higher than 8%, right? Short Links1: For the past few years, ACX has run a yearly forecasting contest. This year I’m too busy, and have outsourced it to Metaculus. I linked it in an Open Thread and meant to link it here before it closed, but it took too long and I missed the January 21 end date. Still, you can find it 2:
3: Superforecaster Robert de Neufville 4: Matt Yglesias grades his predictions for 2023, finds his calibration is improving ( 5: Jake Gloudemans, who won Metaculus’ Quarterly Cup forecasting prize,
Maybe, but remember that from the inside, being good at something just feels like everyone else being inexplicably bad! You're currently a free subscriber to |