---
subject: "Should We Expect Valuations to Mean-Revert Over Time?"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <byrne@thediff.co>"
to: ""
date: 2023-08-21 12:49:27
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
|
In this issue: - Should We Expect Valuations to Mean-Revert Over Time?
- Diff Jobs
- Sushi
- Modeling Demand
- China's Debt
- Coevolution and Pulling Up the Ladder
- The Venn Diagram Career
Should We Expect Valuations to Mean-Revert Over Time?My running joke circa 2021 was that when I started investing in the early 2000s, a "growth" multiple was anything over about 30. The only thing that's changed is that it used to be 30x last year's earnings and now it's 30x next year's revenue. Now, the market has corrected a bit, companies have rearranged their models to focus on higher-profit growth—and Obviously, multiples can't go to infinity, and equally obviously, paying a higher price for a given set of cash flows means lower expected returns. So it makes sense to assume that multiples mean-revert. And over long periods, they do: stocks traded at high single-digit multiples in the late 40s and early 50s, high teens multiples in the 60s and early 70s, back to high single digits in the early 80s, straight up to a record of 40+ during the great large cap growth bull market of the late 90s, then down to the mid-teens during the early-2010s recovery. But it's equally true that timing these reversions is hard. Plenty of investors decided at various points in the 90s that stocks had gotten too richly-priced, and did some combination of getting out of the market, shorting it (Larry Tisch had a large short position in US equities starting in 1996), or lowering the quality bar in order to buy stocks at low multiples (when Tiger Management wound down in 2000, their biggest positions tended to be in sectors like airlines, banking, and manufacturing, where multiples are lower—they did happen to be right that these companies were too cheap, but their returns suffered as investors continuously moved money out of value-oriented strategies and into growth—both at the level of individual investors moving from micro-cap value to buying durable growers and at the level of asset allocators shifting money into growth strategies). The best you can do is to make general claims that are broad enough to be almost useless: you'll have better results buying stocks when everything is cheap than when everything is expensive, but you'll miss a lot of returns if you anchor to the wrong metrics—and even if you do commit to this, the times when everything is statistically cheap are also times when it's very easy to be pessimistic. Sure, stocks had dropped by about half at the bottom in early 2009, but real estate prices were still going down and unemployment was still going up, so it was a lot easier to articulate why any given company would go to zero than why it would trade back to where it had been in late 2007. A more interesting question to ask is whether multiples will ever get to where they were in the early 50s or the late 70s. Will today's investors be able to buy recognizable brand names that can plausibly grow faster than inflation long-term while paying under 10x earnings? There are two strong arguments against this: - Composition effects
- Behavioral changes
The first effect is that we have a different set of largest companies in the world than we used to. This table is helpful (though a bit dated now): (Via Compare 1980 to today. The top two companies are tech: IBM dominated computers, and while AT&T was a regulated utility it did produce some amazing technological advances in that period. IBM's earnings had compounded at 10.0% over the past five years, and AT&T's at 15.4%. Not bad! (Though the CPI had also gone up 8.3% annualized in that period, so their real earnings growth was in the single digits.) The rest of the list, though, is oil, oil, oil field services, oil, oil, oil, then GE and Eastman Kodak. So a large-cap investor circa 1980 was making a big bet on oil, a notoriously cyclical industry. It was also an industry where unit consumption relative to GDP was declining—each marginal dollar of real GDP required fewer incremental barrels of oil than the last one. Oil stocks were cheap on a P/E basis because they were earning gargantuan sums, though they would eventually have to go down due to some combination of political action, oil demand collapsing, or depletion (US oil production had ticked up from the lows by the early 80s, but was still 15% below the 1970 peak). Today's top list is one oil company, one holding company, one pharma business, and seven tech companies. Of these, only one, Saudi Aramco, has a model where slower-than-GDP growth is the default expectation. And it's a special case where the biggest influence on margins is the taxes it has to pay, and only a small sliver of the stock actively trades. Most of these companies are in high-margin businesses, and the rest tend to have higher margins than their peers. All of them have grown substantially over the last half-decade. If the ceiling for growth has gotten higher, then the largest companies will tend to be growthier than they used to be. And then the relentless logic of the dividend discount model kicks in: every point you add to long-term growth rate is a point you can subtract from current dividend yield to get a fair price. Of course, future growth is less certain than next quarter's dividend, but many of these companies also have a predictable growth model. Some of the compositional effect is from tech making up a larger share of market caps, but that's a vague category; Saudi Aramco certainly does plenty of data science and simulation, not to mention the more atoms-focused kind of tech, when it's extracting oil. But there's also a globalization effect: the biggest companies can get bigger because the size of the market they can access has grown. And when these companies get compounding benefits from their size—whether it's Meta being able to send 100m+ people to its Twitter clone in a few days or Nvidia's position in the software as well as hardware stacks—those potential markets are more likely to actually pay off. Sample a random big American company from 1980, and you'll probably find a company that mostly employs and mostly sells to Americans, and that is well past its peak growth. Pick one at random today and America will still be the plurality of their cost and revenue, but the rest of the world will be the majority, and a larger majority of the growth. So the average public company, on a market cap-weighted basis, is different from what it used to be, and that justifies a different valuation multiple. But companies and investors also allocate capital differently than they used to. On the company side, this is visible in the slow-growth companies. Consider one of those oil companies in 1980: business has never been better, and cash is piling up. What do they do with it? The broad categories are: hold onto the cash, reinvest in the business, invest in something else, or return it to shareholders. Today, such a company would be returning cash, mostly through a buyback, but that hasn’t always been the case: Today, when oil companies are over-earning, they tend to pay down debt, get rid of hedges (they're less valuable when the company has a cash buffer, and they're expensive), and then do large buybacks and pay special dividends. These moves have two effects: first, they mean that investors don't expect the profits from good years to be trapped inside a company that doesn't know what to do with them. And second, they ensure that these companies shrink their market caps over time by not reinvesting their profits. Big Oil has returned plenty of cash to shareholders during this cycle, but every dollar these companies return is a dollar that ceases to be part of their market cap. Meanwhile, that globalization effect above also comes for investors. In the early 2000s, a great thesis was to look at which US dot-coms turned out to be viable, and then to invest in that-for-some-other-country. This was especially good when some-other-country was China, which had no compunctions about keeping US companies out or at least making them less competitive. Capital has gotten much more mobile, so it's hard for individual markets to be depressed. Even Japan, which has More mobile capital means that it's harder for countries to get cheap unless there are stark regulatory uncertainties or strict capital controls. The US isn't really in a position to impose capital controls, and on the uncertainty side anything that makes America less stable tends to make other parts of the world even less stable. If America ever defaults on a treasury bond payment, for example, one of the best-performing assets that day will be long-term treasury bonds, since investors will rush out of risk assets and into something safer. (And will correctly assume that they'll get paid eventually, while any ensuing monetary chaos will affect equities more.) As you might have noticed, the side effect of this globalization is that a global financial crisis is more likely when everyone's banking systems and capital markets are linked. But this, too, ends up being net positive for the current large-cap stocks. The companies most sensitive to a financial crisis are the banks themselves, whose share of market cap has declined in the US over the last decade. They're still big in absolute terms, but relative to where they used to be they're much less important. Meanwhile, big tech is well-adapted to growing at a time of disinflation, since that describes the post-crisis environment in which most of them did most of their growth. If there's a global crisis and nominal rates reset to something close to zero, the net present value of a company that can still grow in that environment can go up faster from the rate change than it declines from the drop in absolute profits. None of this lasts forever, of course. For example, one reason US tech companies get a premium valuation is that they can produce asset-light growth. Or, at least, they used to be able to. Increasingly, they are writing big checks to buy physical things, mostly datacenters, so returns on capital have declined—but that kind of growth also expands their addressable market. From AWS' perspective, the rest of the software industry consists of investor-funded R&D projects meant to discover new and profitable ways to use AWS' services. So we're back where we started. Valuations are not mean-reverting over a decade or so because the characteristics of public companies can change so much. The biggest public companies in the 1920s were, increasingly, tech-focused growth stocks, albeit not by our contemporary definitions. (There are —----- Disclosure: Long META, MSFT, AMZN. Note that these charts give a different view of what historical valuation cycles looked like. On a price-to-replacement-value basis, the 1960s boom was more extreme than the 2000s, but on a P/E basis it was the other way around. One possibility is that the market got more tolerant of money-losing companies, which would depress earnings but not replacement cost. Another potential contributor is that [by one measure, returns on equity were unusually high in the 50s and 60s compared to later on](https://www.thediff.co/r/cd4fc791?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99), perhaps because the US was the dominant manufacturer and the world suffered from a severe manufacturing capacity shortfall.[↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/2ad38fa3?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)With occasional exceptions; AI funding is so localized that Nvidia's US revenue should outperform, but either that funding will drop and things will normalize, or the rest of the world will start to catch up and it'll normalize that way instead; for the US to get continuously more dominant you'd need an acceleration in investor interest in AI, which could happen but is not the default bet to make. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/ea3b4dce?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
You're on the free list for The Diff! Paying subscribers get access to three additional posts per week—this week, we looked at Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. A sampling of current open roles: - A fintech startup focused on helping Latam businesses operate across borders and currencies is looking for a founding engineer, ideally someone with experience building products that connect banks and other fintech platforms. (NYC ideal, remote possible)
- A proprietary trading firm is seeking systematic-oriented traders with ML experience—ideally someone who has displayed excellence in DS and ML, like a Kaggle Master. (Montreal)
- A company building the new pension of the 21st century and building universal basic capital is looking for fullstack engineers with prior experience in fintech. (NYC)
- A vertically integrated PE-backed cannabis company is looking for a data analyst with visualization experience. Excel wizards encouraged to reach out. (Little Rock, AR&mdas;no remote, but relocation assistance is possible)
- A company using Web3 to decentralize customer loyalty programs is looking for a founding senior engineer with Solidity experience and an interest in brands and the arts. (Brooklyn)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. ElsewhereSushiThe largest seller of sushi in the US is Modeling DemandA point The Diff has heavily emphasized over the last few months is just how hard it is to measure the real demand for Nvidia's GPUs. The company is investing in some of its own customers, it's unclear how much demand is pulled forward, and countries are subsidizing local GPU purchases. This was news a week ago when the FT wrote about how China's DebtThe Chinese government is On a related note, the WSJ looks at Coevolution and Pulling Up the LadderAn observation from recent evolutionary history is that there are large and dangerous animals that have coevlved with humans, but in places where humans arrived more recently and all at once, we tend to find those animals in skeletal form (examples here include Something similar happens in business, where a given field can have an arms race that makes it punishing for late entrants. The Venn Diagram CareerThis newsletter has periodically highlighted the by-no-means-original idea that a recipe for career success is to get pretty good at two different domains that lightly overlap instead of trying to be the world's best at exactly one of them. |
||
|
|
|
|||
|