---
subject: "The Fashion Revolution"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-02-22 12:00:33
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Welcome to week two on the art and material culture of the French Revolution. Last week, we looked at the story behind one of the If your email provider cuts this post off, As always, if you want to receive this newsletter every week, subscribe! And if you appreciate the work that goes into it, consider becoming a paid subscriber. It’s hard to feel bad for French monarchs like Marie Antoinette and Louis XVI. They monopolized power and lived lives of immense luxury while their subjects scraped to get by. But sometimes they messed up in very human ways that inspire, if not sympathy, at least a there-but-for-the-grace-of-god sort of understanding. The story of Marie Antoinette and the chemise does that for me. Marie, the new young queen of France, was under immense scrutiny about her life at Versailles. Her sex life was the talk of the aristocracy; she had to eat in public, with crowds gawking at her every gesture; and her clothing was part of the national discourse. The French queen was expected to reflect through her clothing the splendor and dignity of the monarchy. As historian Marie Antoinette seemed genuinely interested in fashion. She became close friends with Rose Bertin, the owner of a fashionable Paris boutique, and stopped dressing in the presence of her ladies in waiting, as was the custom, choosing instead to get ready in private with Bertin. The queen and her fashion guru wanted to push the envelope and establish themselves as what we would now call “cool.” Bertin and Marie Antoinette helped to popularize an over-the-top hairstyle, the “pouf,” which relied on heroic amounts of lard and flour to shape a woman’s hair around structural elements like cushions. Here’s a likely portrait of the young queen with a pouf (and clad in the kind of massive, impractical dress that noblewomen of the time wore): The queen was a style icon, which meant that her styles were widely watched and copied. Here’s an example from 1780 of a different noblewoman with an audacious pouf: This trend irritated people, as it seemed so frivolous. Marie Antoinette’s mother, Empress Maria Theresa of Austria, was one of them. She
Marie-Antoinette replied dismissively:
But any controversy over Marie Antoinette’s hair paled in comparison to the furor over her clothes. In 1783, the queen, who was expected to appear in public wearing elaborate, queenly clothing like the dress in her portrait above, chose to pose for a painting wearing a simple white cotton dress, called a chemise. This could be seen today as a “relatable” move — she was dressing down, as a commoner might. But this was not how it went down. The portrait of the queen in a chemise, displayed at the The scandal was bad enough that Marie Antoinette summoned the artist, Louise Elisabeth Vigée-Lebrun, to quickly paint a new portrait, this time of the queen wearing a silk dress made by the weavers of Lyon: The portrait was replaced, but the damage had been done. Marie Antoinette, by committing this fashion “crime,” had shown herself to be unpatriotic and undignified. The royal family’s standing teetered as revolutionary currents swelled in France. The story of Marie Antoinette’s fashion faux pas reminds us that, in revolutionary-era France, clothes and politics were intertwined. Most people, of course, didn’t dress like royalty. But women of means were still expected to wear complex and voluminous clothing like this: Or this: Whereas a man might dress up in something elaborate like this: As the revolution got underway, a person’s fashion choices came to signal not just their personal sense of taste but their political ideology. The bourgeois revolutionaries who attended the Estates General indicated that they were serious and opposed to aristocratic luxury by adopting simpler, black versions of men’s formal wear — often called a redingote because it was modeled on the English riding coat. Maximilien Robespierre models the look in this painting: Another change was the adoption of certain colors. Just before the Bastille fell in 1789, the revolutionary journalist Camille Desmoulins asked a crowd what the symbols of the revolution should be. He suggested green (the color of hope) or blue (associated with the American Revolution and, therefore, democracy). The crowd chose green, but an unfortunate problem arose: the Count of Artois, a brother of Louis XVI and someone very much not sympathetic to the revolution, had made green his color. So the next day they tried again. The revolutionary militias adopted the colors of Paris, red and blue. The Marquis de Lafayette — a moderate who tried to bridge the differences between his monarch and the revolutionaries — added white as a symbol of loyalty to the king. Thus, the tricolor was born, and it showed up in people’s apparel all over France. It appeared in the uniforms and cockade (the little round thing on the hat) of this member of the National Guard: Cockades eventually became mandatory. This 1792 sign from a pub tells men that they may not enter without one: The colors showed up in the outfits of revolutionary ladies, too, who favored slightly less elaborate clothes than their nonrevolutionary compatriots: By 1790, some people had adopted the Phrygian cap, a symbol of freedom in ancient Rome (freed slaves had worn it): As the revolution got bloodier, many of these caps were knitted by women who passing the time between executions by guillotine. Louis XVI himself was forced to don one of these caps and toast the health of the nation when a mob occupied his palace in 1792: By this point he’d long since been forced to ditch his grand royal costume, which you can see in this prerevolutionary portrait: Some of the most famous (and radical) of the revolutionaries were even named for their clothes: the sans-culottes were workers who didn’t wear silk breeches like the aristocrats. They embraced the term, which had once been hurled at them with disdain by their social betters, as a mark of revolutionary purity. The sans-culottes disdained the showy fashion of the rich and instead dressed in the simple garments of the everyday people. They also pushed the intellectual leaders of the revolution — who mostly tried to dress in simpler versions of the old aristocratic style — in a more radical direction. This cartoon, published in 1793, tries to give a summary of the fashion changes between 1778 (on the right) and 1793 (on the left). You can see the changes the revolution wrought right there on their bodies: Clothes have long meant a lot to the French, and they certainly did so during the revolutionary period. One of the people who said the most with their clothes was Théroigne de Méricourt, a singer who became an active participant in the early revolution. As a woman, she was often barred from participating in revolutionary activities, so she started to dress as a man. She wore a man’s jacket and breeches, which she sometimes hid under a petticoat: The outfit and her willingness to mix it up with men at the revolutionary clubs made her notorious, a hero to the radicals and a “ After her return, Théroigne was at the forefront of an accelerating and violent revolution. She led an attack on monarchist prisoners, killing several. But she found herself on the wrong side of the most significant political divide in France: she had allied with the Girondists, not the ascendant (and more radical) Jacobins. In May of 1793, Théroigne was attacked by a mob of Jacobin women who stripped her naked and viciously whipped her. She recovered from her physical wounds, but never made it all the way back mentally. She spent much of the rest of her life in an asylum. Théroigne de Méricourt’s life was ruined right as the revolution itself started to spin out of control. There would soon be a backlash against these revolutionary excesses, which would show up, as the revolutionary spirit had, in clothing. We’ll talk about those shifts next week. This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: Or you can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading! You're currently a free subscriber to |