---
subject: "When Female Athletes Outdrew the Men"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-10-01 10:46:24
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
On Boxing Day in 1920, A big crowd at a game on a holiday; nothing unusual about that. But one thing stood out about this contest: the spectators weren’t there to watch Everton Football Club, the stadium’s usual occupants; they were there to see a contest between two women’s teams. The game, an unofficial women’s national championship, featured the powerhouse teams of Dick, Kerr Ladies and St. Helens Ladies. On the day, Dick, Kerr dominated, winning 4–0. The team’s star was A newspaper
Parr was a chain-smoking, openly gay defender-turned-winger who stood nearly six feet tall. A How did women’s football become so popular in an age of strict gender roles and sexism? And why did it begin to die out soon after that match in Liverpool? The answer has to do with war, money, and chauvinism. In 1918, as the First World War came to a close, British Prime Minister David Lloyd-George gave
This was, he noted, a surprise:
Indeed, the war opened the door to rapid and unanticipated social change. A country that had, not long before, elevated the “cult of domesticity” — which dictated that respectable women should avoid public life and devote themselves to their homes and their children — suddenly needed women to step into new roles. Because an entire generation of men was shipped off to fight and die in the trenches, women, especially those in their 20s, postponed marriage and children and instead were asked to step into the country’s manufacturing jobs. Though working-class women had worked in some industries, especially textiles, before the war, they could now perform all sorts of jobs previously reserved for men. Women The munitionettes and other female workers quickly demonstrated that, contrary to Victorian ideas about Meet some of the members of the Palmers Munitionettes, the team associated with Palmers Shipbuilding Company Limited, in Hebburn-on-Tyne, near Newcastle. “Works teams” made up of coworkers were quite common for men, as well. Many well-known football behemoths started out this way in the 19th or early 20th century — Manchester United, for example, began life as the works team for the Carriage and Wagon department of a particular depot of the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway, playing against other LYR departments or rival railway companies. This was the way it worked for women’s teams, as well. Dick, Kerr Ladies, the team that won the sold-out match at Goodison, was the works team for Dick, Kerr Ltd., a company that made locomotives. Not everyone was comfortable with women playing football. There was some fear that women weren’t up to the physical demands of the game. Baron Pierre de Coubertin, who founded the Olympics, Despite the misgivings of some men, the women’s sport flourished. Teams popped up all over the country. Spectators were desperate for a diversion from the war news and flocked to women’s games; it helped that the proceeds from many of these games were donated to wartime charities, so that everyone could feel that their afternoon out was for the greater good. By 1917–1918, there were enough women’s teams to hold a “Munitionettes’ Cup,” which was won in front of 20,000 fans by the Blyth Spartans, which went undefeated for the entire season. Their star striker, Then the war ended. Would the changes to women’s lives last when the soldiers came back home? Some things did change. Lloyd-George, in his speech about women’s contribution to the war effort, went on to say that
Indeed, it was hard to deny (at least some) women the vote after all they’d done for their country. But men were eager to reclaim their jobs, and that meant that women had to go. Parliament passed the Restoration of Pre-War Practices Act, which, in the name of appeasing trade unions, removed women from jobs that they had been able to perform during the war. And what about football? For a couple of years, even after men’s professional football started back up, women kept playing, often in front of sizeable crowds. The new teams had built a real following, and their spectators continued to show up. But, as women moved (or were forced) back into more traditional roles, their participation in football began to seem more anomalous. Some men’s teams became frustrated that they were outdrawn by women’s matches on some occasions. It may not have helped that, after the war, several women’s teams got political and Finally, in 1921, the Football Association — the governing body of the sport in England — issued the following
Women weren’t banned from playing football, exactly, but they couldn’t hold their matches in any of the stadiums in England capable of hosting a significant crowd. Some women’s teams kept playing, but most, disconnected from the factories where their players had once worked and deprived of a way to raise money or get exposure, withered. The famous Dick, Kerr Ladies team kept going for a while. It undertook a well-attended tour of the United States and played on unofficial pitches in the UK, sometimes attracting a few thousand spectators. The team eventually changed its name to Preston Ladies F.C., playing teams from around the continent and sometimes claiming to be women’s world champions. Lily Parr, the fearsome teenage winger, became a mental health nurse who continued to play for the team until she retired from football at the age of 45, in 1951. In 1962, a women’s team formed in Accrington. They submitted an application to the F.A., which ruled against them. The F.A. spokesman
It wasn’t 1969 that the F.A. allowed women’s teams to form a Women’s Football Association. In 1971, the ban officially ended. By that time, Lily Parr, once a fearsome teenage phenom, was 66 years old. Two generations of women had been unable to follow in her footsteps. The story of women’s football in her lifetime is a reminder of how quickly progress can come — and how easily it can be lost. This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are three ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: You can share the newsletter with others: You can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading! You're currently a free subscriber to |