---
subject: "OpenAI: Fallout"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-05-28 13:12:54
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Previously: We have learned more since last week. How much worse? In which ways? With what exceptions? That’s what this post is about. The Story So FarFor years, employees who left OpenAI consistently had their vested equity explicitly threatened with confiscation and the lack of ability to sell it, and were given short timelines to sign documents or else. Those documents contained highly aggressive NDA and non disparagement (and non interference) clauses, including the NDA preventing anyone from revealing these clauses. No one knew about this until recently, because until Daniel Kokotajlo everyone signed, and then they could not talk about it. Then Daniel refused to sign, Kelsey Piper started reporting, and a lot came out. Here is Altman’s statement from May 18, with its new community note. Evidence strongly suggests the above post was, shall we say, ‘not consistently candid.’
Then there are the other recent matters. Ilya Sutskever and Jan Leike, the top two safety researchers at OpenAI, resigned, part of an ongoing pattern of top safety researchers leaving OpenAI. The team they led, Superalignment, had been publicly promised 20% of secured compute going forward, but that commitment was not honored. Jan Leike expressed concerns that OpenAI was not on track to be ready for even the next generation of models needs for safety. OpenAI created the Sky voice for GPT-4o, which evoked consistent reactions that it sounded like Scarlett Johansson, who voiced the AI in the movie Her, Altman’s favorite movie. Altman asked her twice to lend her voice to ChatGPT. Altman tweeted ‘her.’ Half the articles about GPT-4o mentioned Her as a model. OpenAI executives continue to claim that this was all a coincidence, but have taken down the Sky voice. (Also six months ago the board tried to fire Sam Altman and failed, and all that.) A Note on Documents from OpenAIThe source for the documents from OpenAI that are discussed here, and the communications between OpenAI and its employees and ex-employees, She went above and beyond, and shares screenshots of the documents. For superior readability and searchability, I have converted those images to text. Some Good News But There is a CatchOpenAI has indeed made a large positive step. They say they are releasing former employees from their nondisparagement agreements and promising not to cancel vested equity under any circumstances.
Tanner Lund: Is this legally binding?
I notice they are also including the non-solicitation provisions as not enforced. (Note that certain key people, like Dario Amodei, plausibly negotiated two-way agreements, which would mean theirs would still apply. I would encourage anyone in that category who is now free of the clause, even if they have no desire to disparage OpenAI, to simply say ‘I am under no legal obligation not to disparage OpenAI.’) These actions by OpenAI are helpful. They are necessary. They are not sufficient. First, the statement is not legally binding, as I understand it, without execution of a new agreement. No consideration was given, and this is not so formal, and it is unclear whether the statement author has authority in the matter. Even if it was binding as written, it says they do not ‘intend’ to enforce. Companies can change their minds, or claim to change them, when circumstances change. It also does not mention the ace in the hole, which is the ability to deny access to tender offers, or other potential retaliation by Altman or OpenAI. Until an employee has fully sold their equity, they are still in a bind. Even afterwards, a company with this reputation cannot be trusted to not find other ways to retaliate. Nor does it mention the clause of right to repurchase for ‘fair market value’ that OpenAI claims it has the right to do, noting that I mean, yeah, I also would in many senses like to see them try that one, but this does not give ex-employees much comfort.
Then there is the problem of taking responsibility. OpenAI is at best downplaying what happened. Certain statements sure look like lies. To fully set things right, one must admit responsibility. Truth and reconciliation requires truth. Here is Kelsey with the polite version.
If I were an ex-employee, no matter what else I would do, I would absolutely sell my equity at the next available tender opportunity. Why risk it? Indeed, here is a great explanation of the practical questions at play. If you want to fully make it right, and give employees felt freedom to speak up, you have to mean it.
Jacob Hinton is giving every benefit of the doubt to OpenAI here. Yet he notices that the chilling effects will be large.
Was this an own goal? Kelsey initially thought it was, then it is explained why the situation is not so clear cut as that.
There are big advantages to being generally seen as highly vindictive, as a bad actor willing to do bad things if you do not get your way. Often that causes people to proactively give you what you want and avoid threatening your interests, with no need to do anything explicit. Many think this is how one gets power, and that one should side with power and with those who act in such fashion. There also is quite a lot of value in controlling the narrative, and having leverage over those close to you, that people look to for evidence, and keeping that invisible. What looks like a mistake could be a well-considered strategy, and perhaps quite a good bet. Most companies that use such agreements do not have them revealed. If it was not for Daniel, would not the strategy still be working today? And to state the obvious: If Sam Altman and OpenAI lacked any such leverage in November, and everyone had been free to speak their minds, does it not seem plausible (or if you include the board, rather probable) that the board’s firing of Altman would have stuck without destroying the company, as ex-employees (and board members) revealed ways in which Altman had been ‘not consistently candid’? How Blatant Was This Threat?Oh my.
This makes it even clearer that Altman's claims of ignorance were lies - he cannot possibly have believed that former employees unanimously signed non-disparagements for free!
It does not get more explicit than that. I do appreciate the bluntness and honest here, of skipping the nominal consideration. It Sure Looks Like Executives Knew What Was Going OnWhat looks the most implausible are claims that the executives did not know what was going on regarding the exit agreements and legal tactics until February 2024.
There is also the question of how this language got into the exit agreements in the first place, and also the corporate documents, if the executives were not in the loop. This was not a ‘normal’ type of clause, the kind of thing lawyers sneak in without consulting you, even if you do not read the documents you are signing.
Pressure Tactics Continued Through the End of April 2024OpenAI claims they noticed the problem in February, and began updating in April.
The documents in question, presented as standard exit ‘release of claims’ documents that everyone signs, include extensive lifetime non disparagement clauses, an NDA that covers revealing the existence of either the NDA or the non disparagement clause, and a non-interference clause.
Here is what it looked like for someone to finally decline to sign.
Some potential ambiguity, huh. What a nice way of putting it. Even if we accepted on its face the claim that this was unintentional and unknown to management until February, which I find highly implausible at best, that is no excuse.
Again, even if you are somehow telling the truth here, what about after the catch? Two months is more than enough time to stop using these pressure tactics, and to offer ‘clarification’ to employees. I would think it was also more than enough time to update the documents in question, if OpenAI intended to do that. They only acknowledged the issue, and only stopped continuing to act this way, after the reporting broke. After that, the ‘clarifications’ came quickly. Then, as far as we can tell, the actually executed new agreements and binding contracts will come never. Does never work for you? The Right to an Attorney
I had the opportunity to talk to someone whose job involves writing up and executing employment agreements of the type used here by OpenAI. They reached out, before knowing about Kelsey Piper’s article, specifically because they wanted to make the case that what OpenAI did was mostly standard practice. They generally attempted, prior to reading that article, to make the claim that what OpenAI did was within the realm of acceptable practice. If you get equity you should expect to sign a non-disparagement clause, and they explicitly said they would be surprised if Anthropic was not doing it as well. They did not think that ‘release of claims’ being then interpreted by OpenAI as ‘you can never say anything bad about us ever for any reason or tell anyone that you agreed to this’ was also fair game. Their argument was that if you sign something like that without talking to a lawyer first that is on you. You have opened the door to any clause. Never mind what happens when you raise objections and consult lawyers during onboarding at a place like OpenAI, it would be unheard of for a company to treat that as a red flag or rescind your offer. That is very much a corporate lawyer’s view of what is wise and unwise paranoia, and what is and is not acceptable practice. Even that lawyer said that a 7 day exploding period was highly unusual, and that it was seriously not fine. A 21 day exploding period is not atypical for an exploding contract in general, but that gives time for a lawyer to be consulted. Confining to a week is seriously messed up. It also is not what the original contract said, which was that you had 60 days. As Kelsey Piper points out, Nor was it a threat they honored when called on it, they always extended, with this as an example:
And they very clearly tried to discourage ex-employees from consulting a lawyer. Even if all of it is technically legal, there is no version of this that isn’t scummy as hell. The Tender Offer Ace in the HoleControl over tender offers means that ultimately anyone with OpenAI equity, who wants to use that equity for anything any time soon (or before AGI comes around) is going to need OpenAI’s permission. OpenAI very intentionally makes that conditional, and holds it over everyone as a threat. When employees pushed back on the threat to cancel their equity, Kelsey Piper reports that OpenAI instead changed to
In other words, if you ever violate any ‘applicable company policies,’ or realistically if you do anything we sufficiently like, or we want to retain our leverage over you, we won’t let you sell your shares. This makes sense, given the original threat is on shaky legal ground and actually invoking it would give the game away even if OpenAI won.
No matter what other leverage they are giving up under pressure, the
‘Regardless of where they work’ is very much not ‘regardless of what they have signed’ or ‘whether they are playing nice with OpenAI.’ If they wanted to send a different impression, they could have done that. The Old Board Speaks
The answer to that is, presumably, The content is not the friendliest, but unfortunately, even now, the statements continue to be non-specific. Toner and McCauley sure seem like they are holding back.
We also know they are holding back because there are specific things we can be confident happened that informed the board’s actions, that are not mentioned here. For details, To state the obvious, if you stand by your decision to remove Altman, you should not allow him to return. When that happened, you were two of the four board members. It is certainly a reasonable position to say that the reaction to Altman’s removal, given the way it was handled, meant that the decision to attempt to remove him was in error. But then you don’t stand by it. What one could reasonably say is, if we still had the old board, and all of this new information came to light on top of what was already known, and there was no pending tender offer, and you had your communications ducks in a row, then you would absolutely fire Altman. Indeed, it would be a highly reasonable decision, now, for the new board to fire Altman a second time based on all this, with better communications and its new gravitas. That is now up to the new board. OpenAI Did Not Honor Its Public Commitments to SuperalignmentOpenAI famously promised 20% of its currently secured compute for its superalignment efforts. That was not a lot of their expected compute budget given growth in compute, but it sounded damn good, and was substantial in practice.
This is a big deal. OpenAI made one loud, costly and highly public explicit commitment to real safety. That promise was a lie. You could argue that ‘ It was very clearly either within their power to honor that commitment, or they knew at the time of the commitment that they could not honor it. OpenAI has not admitted that they did this, offered an explanation, or promised to make it right. They have provided no alternative means of working towards the goal. This was certainly one topic on which Sam Altman was, shall we say, ‘ Indeed, we now know many things the board could have pointed to on that, in addition to any issues involving Altman’s attempts to take control of the board. This is a consistent pattern of deception. The obvious question is: Why? Why make a commitment like this then dishonor it? Who is going to be impressed by the initial statement, and not then realize what happened when you broke the deal?
Indeed, if you think no one can check or will find out, then it could be a good move. You make promises you can’t keep, then alter the deal and tell people to pray you do not alter it any further. That’s why all the legal restrictions on talking are so important. Not this fact in particular, but that one’s actions and communications change radically when you believe you can bully everyone into not talking. Even Roon, he of ‘Sam Altman did nothing wrong’ in most contexts, realizes those NDA and non disparagement agreements are messed up.
It is the last two sentences where we disagree. I sincerely hope I am wrong there.
OpenAI Messed With Scarlett Johansson
The story also has some details about ‘building the personality’ of ChatGPT for voice and hardcoding in some particular responses, such as if it was asked to be the user’s girlfriend. Jang no doubt can differentiate Sky and Johansson As I covered last time, if you do a casting call for 400 voice actors who are between 25 and 45, and pick the one most naturally similar to your target, that is already quite a lot of selection. No, they likely did not explicitly tell Sky’s voice actress to imitate anyone, and it is plausible she did not do it on her own either. Perhaps this really is her straight up natural voice. That doesn’t mean they didn’t look for and find a deeply similar voice. Even if we take everyone in that post’s word for all of that, that would not mean, in the full context, that they are off the hook, based on my legal understanding, or my view of the ethics. I strongly disagree with Remember, in addition to all the ways we know OpenAI tried to get or evoke Scarlett Johansson, OpenAI had a policy explicitly saying that voices should be checked for similarity against major celebrities, and they have said highly implausible things repeatedly on this subject. Another OpenAI Employee LeavesGretchen Krueger resigned from OpenAI on May 14th, and thanks to OpenAI’s new policies, she can say some things.
The responsibility issues extend well beyond superalignment. OpenAI Tells Logically Inconsistent StoriesA pattern in such situations is telling different stories to different people. Each of the stories is individually plausible, but they can’t live in the same world.
When You Put it Like ThatA survey was done. Y Thus, this question overestimates the impact, as it comes right after telling people such facts about OpenAI: As usual, none of this means the public actually cares. ‘Increases the case for’ does not mean increases it enough to notice. People Have ThoughtsIndividuals paying attention are often… less kind. Here are some highlights.
I have, globally, severely downweighted arguments of the form ‘X would never do Y, X is smart and doing Y would have been stupid.’ Fool me [quite a lot of times], and such. There is a Better Way
There is of course an actually better way, if OpenAI wants to pursue that. Unless things are actually much worse than they appear, all of this can still be turned around. Should You Consider Working For OpenAI?OpenAI says it should be held to a higher standard, given what it sets out to build. Instead, it fails to meet the standards one would set for a typical Silicon Valley business. Should you consider working there anyway, to be near the action? So you can influence their culture? Let us first consider the AI safety case, and assume you can get a job doing safety work.
Even better, Daniel then get to keep his equity, whether or not OpenAI lets him sell it. My presumption is they will let him given the circumstances, Most people who attempt this lack Daniel’s moral courage. The whole reason Daniel made a difference is that Daniel was the first person who refused to sign, and was willing to speak about it. Do not assume you will be that courageous when the time comes, under both bribes and also threats, explicit and implicit, potentially both legal and illegal. Similarly, your baseline assumption should be that you will be heavily impacted by the people with whom you work, and the culture of the workplace, and the money being dangled in front of you. You will feel the rebukes every time you disrupt the vibe, the smiles when you play along. Assume that when you dance with the devil, the devil don’t change. The devil changes you. You will say ‘I have to play along, or they will shut me out of decisions, and I won’t have the impact I want.’ Then you never stop playing along. The work you do will be used to advance OpenAI’s capabilities, even if it is nominally safety. It will be used for safety washing, if that is a plausible thing, and your presence for reputation management and recruitment. Could you be the exception? You could. But you probably won’t be. In general, ‘if I do not do the bad thing then someone else will do the bad thing and it will go worse’ is a poor principle.
What about ‘building career capital’? What about purely in your own self-interest? What if you think all these safety concerns are massively overblown? Even there, I would caution against working at OpenAI. That giant equity package? An albatross around your neck, used to threaten you. Even if you fully play ball, who knows when you will be allowed to cash it in. If you know things, they have every reason to not let you, no matter if you so far have played ball. The working conditions? The nature of upper management? The culture you are stepping into? The signs are not good, on any level. You will hold none of the cards. If you already work there, consider whether you want to keep doing that. Also consider what you might do to gather better information, about how bad the situation has gotten, and whether it is a place you want to keep working, and what information the public might need to know. Consider demanding change in how things are run, including in the ways that matter personally to you. Also ask how the place is changing you, and whether you want to be the person you will become. As always, everyone should think for themselves, learn what they can, start from what they actually believe about the world and make their own decisions on what is best. As an insider or potential insider, you know things outsiders do not know. Your situation is unique. You hopefully know more about who you would be working with and under what conditions, and on what projects, and so on. What I do know is, if you can get a job at OpenAI, you can get a lot of other jobs too. The Situation is OngoingAs you can see throughout, Kelsey Piper is bringing the fire.
If you have information you want to share, on any level of confidentiality, you can also reach out to me. This includes those who want to explain to me why the situation is far better than it appears. If that is true I want to know about it. There is also the matter of legal representation for employees and former employees. What OpenAI did to its employees is, at minimum, legally questionable. Anyone involved should better know their rights even if they take no action. There are people willing to pay your legal fees, if you are impacted, to allow you to consult a lawyer.
Here Vilfredo’s Ghost, a lawyer, Matt Bruenig has a track record of challenging the legality of similar clauses, and has offered his services. It seems increasingly plausible that it would be in the public interest This is distinct from non-disclosure in general, which is clearly a tool we need to have. But I do think that, at least outside highly unusual circumstances, ‘non-disclosure agreements should not apply to themselves’ is also worth considering. Thanks to the leverage OpenAI still holds, we do not know what other information is out there, as of yet not brought to light. Repeatedly, OpenAI has said it should be held to a higher standard. OpenAI instead under Sam Altman has consistently failed to live up not only to the standards to which one must hold a company building AGI, but also the standards one would hold an ordinary corporation. Its unique non-profit structure has proven irrelevant in practice, if this is insufficient for the new board to fire Altman. This goes beyond existential safety. Potential and current employees and business partners should reconsider, if only for their own interests. If you are trusting OpenAI in any way, or its statements, ask whether that makes sense for you and your business. Going forward, I will be reacting to OpenAI accordingly. If that’s not right? Prove me wrong, kids. Prove me wrong. You're currently a free subscriber to |