---
subject: "The Daoist Image of Control (II)"
from: "Maxim Raginsky from The Art of the Realizable <realizable@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-12-09 02:50:55
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Maxim Raginsky"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3440436245007788095"]
---
In Is the discourse dao a reliable guide for performance dao? How can performance dao be aligned with discourse dao?
According to what Hansen calls the “computer analogy,” we use language to program others and are in turn programmed by them. This is how language (a World 3 artifact, in
There are two main currents of thought regarding this: the pragmatic realist one (underlying both the baseline Confucianism, with its emphasis on proper rites and the well-ordered social hierarchy, and various reactions to it, such as The Western-Chinese axis as the symbolist-connectionist axisHansen’s computer metaphor was inspired by the cognitivist turn in philosophy of mind, associated with people like Daniel Dennett or Paul Churchland. The cognitive science revolution has rekindled the debate between the adherents of the symbolic paradigm of Good Old-Fashioned AI and the followers of the connectionist view originally promoted by Frank Rosenblatt and later instantiated in the theory and practice of neural net learning. The symbolic view emphasized sequential information processing and logical reasoning, whereas the connectionist view emphasized parallel distributed processing, without any explicit symbolic intermediate representations. Hansen comes down on the connectionist side as he rejects the view of programs as arguments-on-paper and instead goes for the input-output formulation. From this vantage point, the GOFAI symbolic approach is tied to logical reasoning and problem solving, as laid out in the works of
This is the internalist-symbolic take on cognition, tied to Fodor’s
Hansen does not mention Hayek, but this is the Rectification of names, rectification of tokens?Hansen frames his analysis of Chinese social-pragmatic philosophy of language in terms of the basic notion of ming, names. The dao of the guiding discourse consists of these names, which closely correspond to the concept of tokens in LLMs. Viewed through this lens, rectification of names, zhengming, refers to the process of aligning the tokens in the discourse dao with the correct tokens in the performance dao—in other words, it’s what we know as
Linguistic input, arranged as a string of tokens, induces distinctions (Hayekian classifications or discriminations, which can be arbitrarily complex), which ideally should result in acts and behaviors deemed shi as opposed to acts and behaviors deemed fei. The often-expressed view is that LLMs serve as an empirical, constructive proof that intelligent behavior is all about “predicting the next token.” But, if we apply the more sophisticated view based on aligning the discourse dao with the performance dao, it’s not really about predicting the next token, but rather about performing appropriate actions in appropriately categorized situations. You need a good tokenizer (the generator of ming) and a good policy for interacting with your social milieu via the interface of tokens. The Mohist critique (reward is not quite enough)Mozi’s critical response to the Confucian tradition was centered on the issue of reliability and constancy. If the goal of rectifying names is to promote the making of appropriate distinctions which would lead to appropriate responses and actions, how do we know that the discourse dao sets the right standard? Mozi’s philosophy is utilitarian, although his utilitarianism is neither hedonistic nor subjective. His evaluation criteria are framed not in terms of happiness or pleasure or satisfaction of desire, but in terms of quantifiable material standards. If we stick with our reinforcement learning analogy, then Mozi’s concern is that Summing up (so far)The main point made by Hansen is that classical Chinese philosophy of language provides a convincing demonstration that we develop a rich theory of interaction of language and action without relying on propositional reasoning and serial information processing. In other words, we can bridge Popper’s Worlds 1 and 3 without going through World 2 of symbol-like mental states. The classical Chinese view of language (and, as it turns out, modern connectionist paradigm in AI as well) interprets strings of names (tokens) as the external interface guiding program execution, where program is understood not propositionally as a proof or a syllogism, but as a parallel and distributed mechanism for (to be continued) 1 However, as Hansen hastens to emphasize, the paradoxes of self-reference in Chinese philosophy are very different from the ones we are used to in the Western tradition (e.g., liar’s paradox). See, e.g., Gongsun Long’s 2 I would like to thank The Art of the Realizable is free today. But if you enjoyed this post, you can tell The Art of the Realizable that their writing is valuable by pledging a future subscription. You won't be charged unless they enable payments. |