---
subject: "The Monday Media Diet with Guillaume Heuguet"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-01-30 11:01:21
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
After the Tell us about yourself. I am 34 years old, I live in Paris. I started as a DJ and music journalist about 20 years ago. I founded a music label, Describe your media diet. I’m always looking for interesting long-form essays, especially on the critical left-political side of things. I am especially interested when they bring a focus on lived experience or culture. I read for myself but I am also looking to see what I should translate into French or what could spark commissions for the three journals that I edit ( I follow a lot of researchers and passionate people on social media, I use Feedly, newsletters, public and research libraries, specialized bookstores, and a bit of everything. On the technology front, I have been reading For French political thinking, I read french-speaking online magazines: To keep up with social struggles I also look at For US and international politics, I mostly read For cinema, I read mostly For music, different smaller blogs/online journals such as I listen to I am also closely watching different newsletters from booksellers – I will also read Since I joined the "art community" I have been diving into this area a little more, through the Hyperallergic newsletter for the NY scene, and checking What’s the last great book you read? Sarah Schulman's What are you reading now? I just finished Larissa Mann's Rude Citizenship Jamaican Popular Music, Copyright, and the Reverberations of Colonial Power, and I am reading Jonathan Sadowsky's The empire of depression. What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication? Grab coffee, find a quiet space – headphones if necessary – and forget the rest. Who should everyone be reading that they’re not? bell hooks's What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone?
Plane or train? Train, they are a big part of my life as I have to take them every other week to go teach. Although, Macron is fucking up our trains by making them more expensive, closing train lines, and instead investing in more controls against train fraud. What is one place everyone should visit? Your local public library. Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into. What started as translating and editing works by Ellen Willis with my friend Fanny Quément led to obsessively buying secondhand books of and about Eric Fromm, Wilhelm Reich, Herbert Marcuse, etc., and trying to figure out if our society is the product of the repression of desire or our being forced into lust. Anyway, I’m still in the rabbit hole. (GH) WITI Classifieds: We are experimenting with running some weekly classifieds in WITI. If you’re interested in running an ad, Noah here. I've got a new newsletter about brands and AI called BrXnd Dispatch. If you're in marketing, creative, or just interested in understanding what's up with AI, check it out. The Intermodal Spirit. Writing about Exploring, Relating, and Being. Available by newsletter or online. Daly is a comms+ agency that reaches beyond the standard PR playbook to deliver results (and some magic) for our exceptional clients. For 10 years, this has been the go-to newsletter for people who like to keep up with what’s exciting in design, books, beauty, food, & more. |