---
subject: "Ka-Ching!: The new Income Tax Bill promises simplicity. But what’s a tax bill without some ambiguity?"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-07-24 01:32:02
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
Ka-Ching!
Thu, 24 Jul 25
A weekly newsletter about how finance is getting supercharged by tech in India, and how you can make money work for you..
Good Morning Ishan,
As I sit down to write this edition on Wednesday evening, both houses of Parliament have been adjourned for the day—a complete washout on Day 3 of this year’s monsoon session. Day 2 and Day 1 weren’t much different. Of course, that’s nothing unprecedented; India’s legislative machine can often move ponderously.
What I found actually worthy of attention, though, was the tabling of the Select Committee’s report on the Income Tax Bill, 2025—one of the most awaited pieces of legislation this year.
Over 4,000 pages long, with 566 observations, the report has been in the making for months, ever since the bill was introduced in the Lok Sabha this February and sent to the committee for examination.
The sheer scale of this analysis shouldn’t be surprising, given the critical nature of the legislation that the bill seeks to replace from next year.
As it stands today, the Income Tax Act, 1961—the keystone of India’s direct-tax code—looks bruised and patchy. Amended 65 times since its institution, with over 4,000 individual amendments, it’s crowded with lines and lines of footnotes. It’s a legislative Ship of Theseus, with tax professionals and administrators obsessing and cursing over every clause, overriding clause, and overriding clause to the overriding clause.
Its thousand pages are not as terrifying as the United Kingdom’s [17,000-page monster](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/feb/13/britain-tax-code-17000-pages-long-dog-whistle-very-rich), but it’s certainly large when compared to, say, Hong Kong’s 276-page tax code, seen by some as among the most efficient in the world.
Don’t mistake me. I understand tax laws have to be complex. They have to accommodate every exemption and deduction, while closing all possible loopholes. But India’s income-tax code has been due for an overhaul for a long time.
And now, after decades of increasing complexity, the government is promising a sorely-needed infusion of the exact opposite: simplicity.
The project to declutter India’s direct-tax code has bounced around the corridors of North Block for a long time—for [decades](https://the1991project.com/sites/default/files/2023-07/1993%20Raja%20Cheliah%20Tax%20Reforms%20Committee%20Report.pdf), in fact—but a major push towards overhaul came in 2010 from then finance minister P Chidambaram, who introduced the Direct Taxes Code Bill to replace both the Income Tax Act, 1961 and the Wealth Tax Act, 1957.
But though the objectives of the 2010 bill and the new 2025 bill sound similar, tax experts The Ken spoke to think the two have “different souls”, and seek to solve different challenges. The 2010 bill was more an attempt to overhaul the entire direct-tax system, and hence had to deal with stronger divisions among stakeholders. But the new bill keeps its [focus pointed](https://sansad.in/getFile/loksabhaquestions/annex/184/AU1803_yuMOyd.pdf?source=pqals): the simplification of, and increased clarity in, the income-tax code.
At 600-odd pages, it makes a decent start.
It’s just over half the length of the current Act; down from five lakh words to three lakh words. And a number of clauses have been done away with, including some related to deductions like sections 80CCA (deduction for investment in the National Saving Scheme) and 80CCF (deduction for investment in long-term infrastructure bond). After all, as we’ve [written in Ka-Ching!](https://the-ken.com/kaching/the-new-tax-regime-now-makes-sense-for-more-people-but-not-for-everyone/) earlier, the much simpler new tax regime (which offers very few exemptions and deductions) makes sense for a lot more people now. Over three-quarters of income-tax-payers [opted for the new regime](https://www.thehindu.com/business/Economy/72-of-income-tax-assessees-opted-for-new-regime-in-2023-24/article68478586.ece?) in the tax year 2023–24.
And it’s not just the number of words that are different in the new bill. The very terminology is changing—for instance, the concept of “previous year” and “assessment year” (the year you earn the income and the year the income is assessed and taxed, respectively) is being done away with. The new law will bring in a single, unified term: “tax year” (the year in which the income is earned and taxed).
One of the more glaring signs of how inefficient India’s current tax code can get is the number of tax disputes it generates. We are a country where just about [7% of the population](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/banking/finance/only-6-68-of-population-filed-income-tax-return-in-2023-24-fiscal/articleshow/116400121.cms?from=mdr) files income-tax returns, and even then, according to Parliament filings, we had over 71,000 direct-tax [disputes pending](https://sansad.in/getFile/annex/267/AS187_pSvZp3.pdf?source=pqars) in various courts at the end of 2024, accounting for nearly Rs 12 lakh crore.
The new bill tries to address this by vesting [a number of powers](https://www.ey.com/content/dam/ey-unified-site/ey-com/en-in/alerts-hub/2025/02/ey-decoding-the-new-income-tax-bill-v1.pdf?) with the Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT), enabling it to deal with procedural matters, tax schemes, compliance framework, and digital tax monitoring systems without needing constant legislative changes. This isn’t the case for certain areas of tax administration right now.
Presently, CBDT is empowered to issue guidelines (subject to approval of Central Government and laying before both Houses of Parliament) to the tax authorities for removing any difficulty that arises in giving effect to certain specific TDS and TCS provisions.
The ITB 2025 seeks to broaden this power for the entire TDS/TCS chapter. This will facilitate a more cohesive and efficient approach to resolving difficulties in TDS/TCS related compliances.
Decoding the new Income Tax Bill, [EY, 2025](https://www.ey.com/content/dam/ey-unified-site/ey-com/en-in/alerts-hub/2025/02/ey-decoding-the-new-income-tax-bill-v1.pdf)
Some of these new provisions have attracted criticism, though. One, already [widely written about](https://indianexpress.com/article/business/economy/new-income-tax-bill-defines-virtual-digital-space-for-searches-seizures-9876076/), allows the government to break into “information stored in an electronic media” during tax raids. This has [sparked concerns over privacy](https://www.indialaw.in/outlook/) and potential misuse, with some experts pointing out that the term “reason to believe” in section 247 is too broad and open.
The Supreme Court, in the past, has held Right to Privacy as sacrosanct, but the now-tabled Select Committee’s report has backed section 247. The committee noted that while such arguments in favor of privacy came up during its consultations with experts, “the changes have been made with a view to align with the changed circumstances.”
And that brings us to the report itself.
The committee does recognise that a few provisions end up introducing more ambiguity than clarity. For example, it notes that the clause on tax rebates for individuals earning over Rs 12 lakh a year is unclear and can be interpreted in several ways that may result in unintended outcomes. Similarly, it says there is a lack of clarity on the TDS rate for recognised provident funds—should the TDS apply at an average rate or a flat rate of 10%? This particular ambiguity crept in due to the deletion of a non-obstante, or overriding, clause.
Another key recommendation of the committee has to do with penalties charged for the late filing of returns. Strangely, the new law ends up creating a mandatory requirement to file a return if a taxpayer is eligible to claim a refund from TDS collected, even if their income falls below the taxable threshold. If they don’t, they could be penalised. The committee has [recommended](https://www.newindianexpress.com/business/2025/Jul/22/select-committee-recommends-dropping-mandatory-itr-filing-for-claiming-refunds) that this be fixed.
Overall though, most of the recommendations are focused on removing ambiguities or correcting drafting errors, and the committee has suggested no “significant changes”, says Naveen Wadhwa, a chartered accountant and vice-president of law research firm Taxmann.
The committee’s views indicate that whether the bill becomes an Act in the monsoon session or the winter session, it is likely to get parliamentary assent soon and will probably be in force from next year.
But will it radically simplify India’s creaky old tax code, like its proponents argue? We can only wait and see.
Reform, after all, is not about how many words you delete, but how many loopholes you close without opening new ones.
That’s a wrap for this week. Write to us at [kaching@the-ken.com](mailto:kaching@the-ken.com), or leave a comment on our app or website.
We’ll be back next Thursday.
Regards,
Inderpal