---
subject: "1DaySooner's Trump II Health Policy Proposals"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-07 11:40:50
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
As RFK Jr. fights to be confirmed in Congress, the rest of Trump’s health team is already taking shape.
For practical reasons, we focus on upside only, so consider these the Venn-diagram-union of the ideas we’re most excited about, and the ones we think they might be most excited about - the new health policy we might get get in our ~90th percentile best outcome. Jim O’Neill: Deputy Secretary, Health And Human ServicesMy personal favorite as Compensating Organ Donors / End Kidney Deaths Act: Both of us co-writing this piece (Scott Alexander of ACX, Josh Morrison of 1DaySooner) have Develop Better Longevity Biomarkers: O’Neill spent 2019 - 2021 as CEO of SENS, the world’s leading anti-aging nonprofit, and will probably bring his interest in longevity to DC. Although there are major cultural barriers to the acceptance of longevity medicine, one of the biggest problems is technical - studying the effects of anti-aging drugs literally takes a lifetime. So one of the field’s holy grails is Warp Speed for Air Quality: RFK Jr’s “Make America Healthy Again” philosophy is a horseshoe-theory-style union between typical conservative concerns about purity and typical liberal concerns about the environment. There are many ways it could go wrong, but one place it might go very right is in air quality. Recent research has highlighted the role of air quality in both chronic disease (eg Marty Makary: FDA CommissionerMakary is a Johns Hopkins surgical oncologist, former MedPage Today editor-in-chief, and frequent FOX News guest. He wrote a book Improve FDA Transparency: The FDA sits on the world’s biggest repository of clinical data, yet its transparency policies remain conservative Better Post-Marketing Surveillance: Improvements in transparency for existing data could be paired with modernized surveillance of the real world effects of drugs after they’ve been offered to the public. Unlike countries like England and Israel, America’s healthcare systems are highly fragmented and make it hard to aggregate evidence. A focused attempt to modernize data collection could build on the Regulatory Reciprocity: I will keep this one in here until somebody does something about it. It’s the idea that Americans should be allowed to buy medical products if they’ve been approved by some trusted ally, like the European Union, possibly in exchange for the EU giving FDA-approved products the same deal in Europe. This has been amply championed by Regulatory Capacity For Emergencies/Pandemics: In 2020, Makary criticized the FDA’s slow response to COVID. This time, we could Jay Bhattacharya: NIH DirectorBhattacharya is a rare doctor and medical professor who also has a PhD in economics. His contrarian COVID positions provoked censorship and harassment from Big Tech and the academic establishment; the experience seems to have low-key traumatized him, and his preliminary policy proposals, Increase funding for novel research: Bhattacharya Remove Barriers To Human Challenge Trials: In a Release ARPA-H from the NIH: Bhattacharya likes unorthodox things, and the most unorthodox thing you can do in DC is to deliberately decrease the size of your empire. You're currently a free subscriber to |