---
subject: "Reincarnate Already"
from: "\"River Kenna from In•Star\" <riverkenna@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-05-30 14:18:11
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "River Kenna", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3010718370428876194", "UNREAD"]
---
All Circles PresupposeRoundabouts are fun, I like them a lot. Especially the big, confusing, multi-lane ones. Who doesn’t like driving in a centrifugal pull of the traffic circle, then breaking off in a new direction? Much better than a 4-way stop intersection, much smoother, much more sense of chaotic possibility. A lot of the spaces I’ve spent time in are basically roundabouts — university towns, yoga communities, healing circles, the Integrals, Metamoderns, meditation centers, Twitter’s TPOT scene… They’re all places that you can merge into, break your thoughtless inertia, and reconsider: “Where am I going? Where do I actually want to be going?” They’re places where you can take a beat, figure things out, and make a conscious decision about which direction to exit, where to go from here. The danger, of course, is that you end up going in circles forever. If the roundabout is the first place in your life where you’ve felt an open sense of possibility, where you’ve found friends you ecstatically connect with, where you’ve felt permission to be fully yourself and fully alive — I mean yeah, why would you want to leave? Just hang out with your buddies in the roundabout, that sounds great. As long as you don’t mind going in circles forever.
Paired ArchetypesMost archetypes stand on their own; they can lend their pattern to any number of things. The King, The Mother, The Innocent. They belong to a particular context, and they can interact with one another, but they don’t require other archetypal patterns to function. The rules are different for archetypes governing transitions. Rebirth, Transformation, Emergence. The pattern is versatile, it can show up in infinite contexts — but no matter what the context, it needs to be paired with another archetype to function. It has to be catalyzed by another pattern. “I’m being reborn.” Awesome! Reborn as what? “I’m in a process of transformation.” So excited for you! Transformation into what? “Something special is emerging.” Very nice — emerging from what, into what? I’m not being a smartass here; it matters. Not everyone will be able to answer these questions verbally. Often while in the process of rebirth, we don’t know where it will end up. “ But the answer will become clearer over time. You can’t avoid taking shape as what you ultimately are. —Unless, of course, you develop an unhealthy attachment to the process of transformation. To phrase it another way: unless you stay on the roundabout. If you get attached to the container that’s supposed to be a transformation vessel, you run the danger of losing the archetypal pattern that was trying to shape you. The roundabout’s exits, they start disappearing. That’s not a trivial thing, it’s a huge missed opportunity. From what I can tell, the archetypes that pattern us are kind of like Then the time comes to grow those seeds. You find the roundabout. You find a safe place where you can break down, decay, and let yourself be reborn as… well, as whatever those little clusters archetypal potential shape themselves into. It will feel messy while you’re in it, but increasingly free and ecstatic and right as you take shape again. Unless of course, you resist taking shape again. “No, you see, I just finished with having a shape,” you might say, “I’m done with that kind of lifestyle — now I’m all about shapelessness, no-self, flowing emptiness and definitely not going back to the shaped existence that gave me so much suffering before.” You hold on to the roundabout, try to stay with your friends, trying to stay forever in emergence, in transformation, without actually transforming into anything particular, or emerging as anything specific. One by one, the roads to exit the roundabout close off. The imaginal cells wither. The catalyzing archetypes fade. The lifetime of latent potential, carefully built up by your body and psyche, evaporates unrealized. ExitClinging to the rebirth container is natural, to some degree. I mean, I was born 2 weeks late. Mankind longs for a womb. And let’s face it: being born seems pretty stressful. But this clinging used to be known and dealt with, it was a part of the initiatory container. There are ways of making the experience increasingly painful to cling to, the longer you stick around after the kairos has passed. But these days, we don’t really have elders hanging around, willing and able to give you a kick in the ass and tell you to get back out into the world, to find how your new form fits into your larger reality. The boredom and increasing emptiness of going in circles becomes an incentive to get out, over time. But if you wait that long, it seems like it’s often too late to exit with your transformation intact. More often, your car breaks down and you just sort of slink away, headed nowhere in particular. A good rule of thumb seems to be: leave while it still feels risky. Leave when you kind of still don’t want to. You’ll feel a push from the inside (this strange new self, pushing to meet the World) and a pull from somewhere else (the World calling to your new self to join it) — and even if that feels risky, if there’s grief in it, if there’s fear in it, you have to at least start dipping back in to the world beyond the roundabout. Infra is free and will stay free, but if you get something out of my work, consider giving something back. Share my writing with friends & followers, pick up my |