---
subject: "AI 2027: Responses"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-04-08 12:44:24
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Kevin Roose in The New York Times
The final conclusion is supportive of this kind of work, and Kevin points out that expectations at the major labs are compatible with the scenario. I was disappointed that the tone here seems to treat the scenario and the viewpoint behind it as ‘extreme’ or ‘fantastical.’ Yes, this scenario involves things that don’t yet exist and haven’t happened. It’s a scenario of the future. One can of course disagree with much of it. And you probably should. As we’ll see later with David Shapiro, we also have someone quoted as saying ‘oh they just made all this up without any grounding’ despite the hundreds of pages of grounding and evidence. It’s easier to simply pretend it isn’t there.
And we have a classic Robin Hanson edit, here’s his full quote while linking:
I think it’s totally reasonable to be wary of predictions of continued smooth exponentials. I am indeed also wary of them. I am however confident that if you did get ‘superhuman A.I. coders’ in a fully broad sense, that the other necessary skills for any reasonable definition of (artificial) general intelligence would not be far behind. Eli Lifland Offers Takeaways
By 2027 we may automate AI R&D leading to vastly superhuman AIs. Artificial superintelligences (ASIs) will dictate humanity’s future. ASIs might develop unintended, adversarial ‘misaligned’ goals, leading to human disempowerment. An actor with total control over ASIs could seize total power. An international race towards ASI will lead to cutting corners on safety. Geopolitically, the race to ASI will end in war, a deal or effective surrender. No US AI project is on track to be secure against nation-state actors stealing AI models by 2027. As ASI approaches, the public will likely be unaware of the best AI capabilities.
If you accept the assumptions inherent in the scenario, the conclusions seem right. Scott Alexander Offers Takeaways
Cyberwarfare as (one of) the first geopolitically relevant AI skills A period of potential geopolitical instability The software-only singularity The (ir)relevance of open-source AI AI communication as pivotal Ten people on the inside (outcomes depend on lab insider decisions) Potential for very fast automation Special economic zones Superpersuasion Potential key techs with unknown spots on the ‘tech tree’: AI lie detectors for AIs, superhuman forecasting, superpersuasion, AI negotiation.
I found this to be a good laying out of questions, even in places where Scott was anti-persuasive and moved me directionally away from the hypothesis he’s discussing. I would consider these less takeaways that are definitely right as they are takeaways of things to seriously consider. Others Takes on Scenario 2027Having a Concrete Scenario is Helpful
My one disagreement with Nevin (other than my standard objection to use of the word ‘doomer’) is that I don’t expect ‘even more polarized fighting.’ What I expect is for those who are worried to continue to attempt to find solutions that might possibly work, and for the ‘yolo’ crowd to continue to be maximally polarized against anything that might reduce existential risk, on principle, with a mix of anarchists and those who want government support for their project. Remarkably often, it will continue to be the same people.
Writing It Down Is Valuable Even If It Is WrongI very much appreciate those who say ‘I strongly disagree with these predictions but appreciate that you wrote them down with detailed explanations.’
I strongly agree with Davidad that the speed at which things play out starting in 2028 matters very little. The destination remains the same. Saffron Huang Worries About Self-Fulfilling ProphecyThis is a reasonable thing to worry about. Is this a self-fulfilling or self-preventing style of prophecy? My take is that it is more self-preventing than self-fulfilling, especially since I expect the actions we want to avoid to be the baseline scenario. Directionally the criticism highlights a fair worry. One always faces a tradeoff between creating something engaging versus emphasizing the particular most important messages and framings. I think there are places Scenario 2027 could and should have gone harder there, but it’s tough to strike the right balance, including that you often have to ship what you can now and not let the perfect be the enemy of the good. Daniel also
I certainly don’t think this is presented as ‘everything until October 2027 here is inevitable.’ It’s a scenario. A potential path. You could yell that louder I guess? It’s remarkable how often there is a natural way for people to misinterpret something [M] as a stronger fact or claim than it is, and: The standard thing most advocates for AI Anarchism, AI Acceleration, or for any side of most political and cultural debates to do in similar situations is to cause more people to conclude [M] and often they do this via actively claiming [M]. The thing those worried about AI existential risk do is explicitly say [~M]. There is much criticism that the [~M] wasn’t sufficiently prominent or clear.
That doesn’t make the critics wrong. Sometimes they are right. The way most people do this most of the time is awful. But the double standard here really is remarkable. Ultimately, I see Saffron as saying that informing the public here seems bad. I strongly disagree with that. I especially don’t think this is net likely to misinform people, who are otherwise highly misinformed, often by malicious actors but mostly by not having been exposed to the ideas at all. Nor do I think this is likely to fall under the self-fulfilling side of prophecy on net. That is not how, at least on current margins, I expect people reading this to respond. Phillip Tetlock Calibrates His Skepticism
It is a well-known hard problem how much to update based on past predictions. In this case, I think quite a bit. Definitely enough to give the predictions a read. You should still be mostly making up your own mind, as always.
I do think Jan’s right about that. Predictions until now were the easy part. That has a lot to do with why a lot of people are so worried. However, one must always also ask how predictions were made, and are being made. Grading only on track record of being right (or ‘winning’), let alone evaluating forward looking predictions that way, is to invite disaster.
Jan Kulveit Wants to Bet
Being at least as right than ‘What 2026 Looks Like’ is a super high bar. If these odds are fair at 8:1, then that’s a great set of predictions. As always, kudos to everyone involved for public wagering. Matthew Barnett Debates How To Evaluate the ResultsThis is an illustration of why setting up a bet like the above in a robust way is hard.
It’s definitely true that there will be a lot of disagreement over how accurate Scenario 2027 was, regardless of its level of accuracy, so long as it isn’t completely off base. Teortaxes for China and Open Models and My Response
I see this as making a number of distinct criticisms, and also this is exactly the kind of thing that writing all this down gets you - Teortaxes gets to point to exactly where their predictions and model differ from Daniel’s.
On the spy angle, where in the scenario China steals the American lab’s weights, Teortaxes thinks both that China wouldn’t need to do it due to not being behind (because of the other disagreements), and doubts that it would succeed if it tried. I think that right now, it seems very clear that China or any number of other actors could steal model weights if they cared enough. Security is not plausibly strong enough to stop this. What does stop it is the blowback, including this being a trick that is a lot harder to pull off a second time if we know someone did it once, plus that currently that play is not that valuable relative to the value it will have in the future, if the future looks anything like the scenario.
Teortaxes claims that China has a talent advantage over the USA. And also that this will accelerate over time, but that it’s already true, and that if the major Chinese labs combined they’d lead in AI within a few months. This seems very false to me. I believe America has the talent advantage in AI in particular. Yes, DeepSeek exists and did some cracked things especially given their limited compute, but that does not equate to a general talent advantage of China over the USA at pushing the AI frontier. Consider what you would think if everything was reversed, and China had done the things America has done and vice versa. Total and utter panic. A lot of this, I think, is that Teortaxes thinks OpenAI’s talent is garbage. You can make of that what you will. The American lab here need not be OpenAI.
Teortaxes does not expect China’s lab merger to come sooner than America’s. This alone would mean America was farther ahead, and there were less race dynamics involved. Presumably in the full alternative model, China’s additional skill advantage more than makes up for this.
Teortaxes expects human talent to be more relevant, and for longer. This is definitely central to the scenario, the idea that past a certain point the value of human talent drops dramatically, and what matters is how good an AI you have and how much compute you spend running it. My guess is that the scenario is putting the humans off screen a little too suddenly, as in having a few excellent humans should matter for longer than they give the credit for. But it’s not clear where that grants the advantage, and thus what impact it has, ‘what matters’ is very different then. To the extent it does matter, I’d presume the top American labs benefit.
Teortaxes expects open models to remain relevant, and for inference and scaffolding to allow them to do anything the largest models can do. Agreed on Huge If True, this changes the scenario a lot. But perhaps by not as much as one might think. Access to compute is already a very central scenario element. Everyone’s progress is proportional to, essentially, compute times efficiency.
The quality of the underlying model, in terms of how efficiently it turns compute into results, still means everything in such a world. If I have a 2x efficient user of compute versus your model, after factoring in how we use them, that’s a big deal, even if both models can at some price do it all. The scenario treats AI as offering a multiplier on R&D speed, rather than saying that progress depends on unlocking unique AI abilities from beyond human intelligence. So we’re basically already working in the ‘small models can do everything’ world in that sense, the question is how efficiently. I’m not actually expecting that we will be in such a world, although I don’t think it changes things a ton in the scenario here.
If we were in a compounding R&D gains world as described in this scenario, and you had the best models, you would be very not inclined to open them up. Indeed, when I played OpenAI in the wargame version of this, I decided I wasn’t even releasing fully empowered closed versions of the model. Even if you could do plaintext, wouldn’t it be much less compute efficient if you forced it all to be plaintext with all the logic in the actual plaintext if you read it as a human? This is perhaps the key question in the whole scenario! Certainly you can write down a scenario where being open is more competitive, and makes sense, and carries a big advantage. Cool, write that down, let’s see it. This is not the model of AI progress being predicted here, it requires a lot of different assumptions. Indeed, I’d like to see the wargame version of the open-relevant scenario, with different assumptions about how all of that works baked in, to see how people try to cause that to have good outcomes without massive hand waving. We’d want to be sure someone we all respect was playing Reality.
Others Wonder About PRC Passivity
There’s a difference between ‘feel the AGI’ and both ‘feel the ASI’ and ‘be confident enough you actually act quickly at terrible cost.’ I think it’s correct to presume that it takes a lot to force the second reaction, and indeed so far we’ve seen basically no interest in even slightly costly action, and a backlash in many cases to free actions. In terms of the Congress, I think them doing little is the baseline scenario. I mean, have you met them? Do you really think there wouldn’t be 35 senators who defer to the president, even if for whatever reason that wasn’t Trump? Timothy Lee Remains SkepticalThis seems to be based on basic long standing disagreements. I think they all amount to, essentially, not feeling the ASI, and not thinking that superintelligence is A Thing. In which case, yes, you’re not going to think any of this is going to happen.
David Shapiro for the Accelerationists and Scott’s ResponseShapiro wants to accelerate AI and calls himself an ‘AI maximalist.’ I am including this for completeness. If you already know where this is going and don’t need to read this section, you are encouraged to skip it. This was the most widely viewed version of this type of response I saw (227k views). I will note that I found everything about this typical of such advocates. This is not meant to indicate that David Shapiro is being unusual, in any way, in his response, given the reference classes in question. Quite the contrary. If you do read his response, ask yourself whether you think these criticisms, and accusations that Scenario 2027 is not grounded in any evidence or any justifications, are accurate, before reading Scott Alexander’s reply. Then read Scott’s reply.
So in summary I agree with this response: David Shapiro offered nine bullet point disagreements, plus some general ad hominem attacks against ‘doomers,’ which is used here as if it was a slur. One criticism was a polite disagreement about a particular timeline development. Scott Alexander thanked him for that disagreement and offered to bet money. Scott Alexander definitively refuted the other eight. As in, David Shapiro is making outright false claims in all eight, that can be directly refuted by the source material. In many cases, they are refuted by the central points in the scenario. One thing Scott chose not to respond to was the idea of the ‘null hypothesis’ that ASI isn’t actually a problem. I find the idea of this being a ‘null hypothesis’ rather absurd (in addition to the idea of using frequentist statistics here also being rather absurd). Could ASI turn out super well? Absolutely. But the idea that it ‘isn’t actually a problem’ should be your default assumption when creating minds smarter than ours? As in, not only will it definitely turn out well, it will do this without requiring us to solve any problems? What? It’s so patently absurd to suggest this. Problems are inevitable. Hopefully we solve them and things turn out great. That’s one of the two scenarios here. But of course there is a problem to solve. LessWrong Weighs In
Knight Lee asks if they could write a second good ending based on the actions the authors actually would recommend, Yitz offers Other Reactions
Patrick McKenzie focuses on the format.
As usual I had
And having said that, watch some people get the takeaway that we should totally go for this particular alignment strategy. No, please don’t conclude that, that’s not what they are trying to say.
Next Steps
Here’s what they’re going to do next, in addition to writing additional content:
The Lighter SidePredicting things that are known is still impressive, because most people don’t know.
You're currently a free subscriber to |