---
subject: "Dating Roundup #4: An App for That"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-04-29 13:06:18
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
In the meantime, there’s always more to say, and I both find it enjoyable and am hopeful that it might help some of you out there, so here we are once again. Meanwhile, I am sorry to report that many of you are still single. I spent sufficiently long between updates and got sufficient material that this one is being split into conceptual sections. This one will focus in particular on the awfulness that are dating apps, and directly related considerations. You’re Single Because Dating Apps (Still) Suck
If they won’t say it, I will: With notably rare exceptions, if you are an adult and are not asexual, celibacy is not the answer.
It could be high time for a rival that does it better, but one must still solve the matching and coordination problems, and the desire of many of the most desirable users to sit there and swipe. People do not want to pay for good matchmaking, either with money or with actual effort and attention, in this or in other fronts. You might be having trouble on dating sites, but do not underestimate the value of ‘not being a lunatic’ if you can get past the first few seconds of filter. Or how many people seem determined to fail in those few seconds.
It also raises the question, would that work? On the one hand, yes, Hot Women Near You and all that. On the other hand, being ghosted sucks even worse than not matching. The hope is presumably that you think it was something you said so it’s your fault. Business Insider’s alternative suggestion is a government app like in Tokyo, and oh no. Except perhaps being the government solves some trust issues, allowing the site to verify information and thus be a better product?
Anyone who would suggest our government should be writing such software really needs to talk to someone such as Patrick McKenzie first, and learn some of the many reasons why we will absolutely be unwilling to attempt to do that. But also the talk about ‘equality’ and ‘eugenics’ should help explain why no one would dare touch it, even in worlds where they would ever try to make any software at all. Update: One danger of dating apps is that it raises the false implication that one should not date outside of the apps.
There is a list of preferences in the linked post on ways to find relationships, which corresponds to how social and friend-based techniques are, with blind dates and dating apps at the very bottom. Dating apps are a place where you go explicitly to find dates, and some young'uns get convinced that romantic interests should ONLY be pursued in such settings.
You’re Single Because Your Friends Are Insufficiently SupportiveYes, there are obvious downsides.
This is actually great and super thoughtful gift. It is something the person needs, but would never ever buy for themselves. This person clearly would never, ever pay, on principle. But I have little doubt the value is there, if only to find out if the value is there. You’re Single Because You Do Not Seek a Mentor for Basic App SkillsBrooke suggests that good dating app game is easy to identify when you care about it, so find someone who does to help you learn what to work on, and then try even a little.
Seems like good advice if you’re not getting good initial conversions. Yes, you should also be paying up, every boost helps, but don’t forget the basics. You’re Single Because Other People Lack Very Basic SkillsIt is a weird one, because in a matching market this should go the other way?
You’re Single Because Your Opens Aren’t Effortful
He only swipes right about three times a day, and ends up on four dates a week, an absurd conversion rate, so yes it can be done. Obviously there’s the mystery of how you get that many right swaps in the first place, but past that this does match my experiences too - if you put in the effort, conversation rates to first dates can actually be remarkably high. If you don’t have a good text game, well, you’re reading giant walls of text or you wouldn’t be here, text should be your friend. He also has a 70% rate on getting second dates. That’s actually way too high if you’re meeting multiple new people each week, you need to cut your losses when it isn’t a great match. A 70% rate only makes sense if you have ‘first date scarcity,’ if a promising first date is time consuming to get you want to not give up so easily. You’re Single Because Dating Apps Are Out of BalanceIn particular, Men like 53% of the profiles they view. Yet even so, women only match 36% of the time when they like a man. Men only match 2% of the time when they like a woman. Women like 5% of profiles they view according to that chart, [but 14% according to Zippia](https://substack.com/redirect/80825f66-df99-4715-a459-978ea353f61a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). That’s a huge gap, although the main points hold either way.
A lot of the explanation is that ~75% of Tinder users are men, which is actually a better ratio than many other apps. So even if you never showed a woman a profile of a man who would actively say no to her, about half the male likes never even get seen. There are also selection effects. The more people want to match with you, the less of them you want to match with in return, because you know you have options. Tinder, like all such apps, You’re Single Because Look at the Odds
You’re Single Because You Won’t Even Pay For Super LikesAlso, the linked Vox article reminded me of the ‘super like’ feature, where your like is visible to them while swiping, you show up faster, and the match is instant if they return interest. They have to be purchased. Costly signals are great, and so super likes reportedly triple your chances. Of course, You don’t have to Yes, $75 per additional match might sound steep, but is it for the ones you want most, in a world where matching is rare? If you’re doing reasonably well, it seems basically impossible for it to be worth being on the app at all, and also not being worth super liking when you see someone you do in fact super like. I’d apply a similar principle to other paid options, for any app you would already be using on a regular basis. If you’re paying your time, you need to also pay your money. The big advantages of paying are the (often under the hood) ways to increase your chances of success. Thus consider: Still, it’s a lot, and I don’t really believe it. But if you’re spending an hour a day and still running the no-pays, you’re making a very serious mistake. (If you’re spending that hour mostly chatting with matches, why haven’t you moved to regular texting or other messaging apps with most of them yet?) The other claim is that the apps are increasingly hard to use without paying. I would respond that the users spend 51 minutes a day on them. If you are spending 51 minutes a day, and yet refuse to pay a modest amount of real money, then the problem is you. Your time is valuable. The claim is this is not ‘equitable’ when money is charged, but seriously, what? Of course the post then goes on to call Singapore’s attempt to help college students date ‘eugenic’ so there you have it. How dare they. You’re Single Because of Dating App Game Theory
Frictionless dating apps create male haves versus have nots. The men with little female interest don’t get to date or commit at all. The men with lots of interest have multiple women interested in them and can always find more, so they see no reason to commit. Thus, you get a bunch of these situationships, where the man won’t commit. The men who both can get dates and want to commit get snapped up quickly. Which means the men mostly say ‘why won’t women date us at all?’ and the women mostly say ‘why won’t the men commit to us?’ Even if you’re not on the apps yourself, the incentives are there anyway.
This is largely a You’re Single Because DateMe Docs Don’t ScaleA great asset of OKCupid was scale. You answered the questions once, created a profile once, and you could check for lots of matches in detail, as could others. Getting that scale back is the key barrier.
The date-me doc does this as one-to-many even if there aren’t that many, but exposes your info and puts the filtering job on them (even if they don’t have to answer a bunch of specific questions). What about the date-me survey? They have to answer the questions but you have to design and execute all the filters.
One reply warned about Is that even so bad? I mean, yes, on average that’s 25,000 questions per date with a model influencer you know you’re into. I say that depends on the questions. And lo and behold, we’ve got them.
These are not exactly the hardest questions. I presume I know the right answers for nine of them, and so do you: #3, #5, #6, #7, #8, #9, #11, #12 and #13. Mostly that seems entirely fair, especially if the car is a proxy. That leaves six ‘real’ questions, one of which also has a clear right answer?
Not a wise filter, in either direction, and expensive with a 92% failure rate, but sure. Five to go. One of them is the most important question: Do you want kids? We don’t know which answer she wants but you should 100% be asking. The last two questions are taste questions, you’re allowed two, sure. Are you supposed to have or not have Twitter? Unknown, I can see it either way. The final question is about ex-girlfriends, and we can all guess what answers she is looking for here and why this is a reasonable question to ask if you have the leverage. So why did only 3 of 5,000 applications make it through? That seems like… not a lot, especially given most of them got the astrological sign correct, and if you’re going to fail the gimme questions you can decide not to turn in the survey. This must mean not a lot of men got the gimme questions right, and didn’t understand? Or alternatively she was looking for at least one very counterintuitive answer. You’re Single For Lack of Very Basic Dating StrategyAs in things like: Similarly, we have other basic principles in the stories below, that anyone should be able to handle: Show up on time. Be able to plan a date. Treat all people like people. Answer questions honestly and be able to handle honest answers. Be actually single and not married. Don’t be weirdly super intense. That doesn’t mean this is easy, but don’t make life Perhaps the biggest divide is between three groups: Those who think that ‘being a decent normal person’ works fine. Those who feel like they’re being decent normal people and failing. Those who the first group points to as no being decent normal people.
I definitely buy that lots of men, especially on dating apps but also everywhere, are doing quite a lot of shooting themselves in the foot in a ‘why can’t you just be normal and a decent human being’ ways. If you can avoid doing that, it’s a huge edge. The problem is that this is often a negative selection game, with complex rules. Whatever the basic principle is that you missed, that’s the one that gets put into a story like this, and it’s often not easy to learn which one you are messing up. Debugging is hard, and you don’t have good tools. And yes, you also need opportunity to ‘treat women like human beings’ in the first place, or the ability to do so won’t do anyone any good. You’re Single Because You Have an Android Phone
Don’t kid yourself. That’s a recommendation to switch to iOS. I use a Pixel 9 Fold, which very much costs more than an iPhone. I think it is a substantially better phone. There is very little financial cost in getting an iPhone these days, most carriers will basically give you one with a contract, and you can get used ones a few years old for very little money if you don’t want Apple Intelligence. The question is, should you let this matter, or even preference falsify here? You are combining two effects: Negative reactions from a large percentage of women. How big is this effect? It is hard to tell. Every little bit helps and this is something you can control. If you are going to want to date in the judgmental-iOS pool, it matters. Positive selection effects. If she’s looking down on you for not having an iPhone, none of the reasons for this speak well of her - it’s presumably either she has taste you disagree with and thinks your taste is actively bad, she has attachment to a blue bubble or what her friends will think, or she’s thinking you must be poor.
At minimum, the more ick there is here, the worse the sign. Whereas the women who will be vaguely disappointed that you have an iPhone? That’s a great sign. I might like to think I wouldn’t be one to switch to iPhone simply for the dating advantages despite the selection issue. We spend a lot of time on our phones, the experience matters. But also I know myself, and I know that’s actually kind of dumb. So yeah, if I was single I’d probably at least try out using an iPhone again. You’re Single and I’m Here to HelpA young lady who is single has reached out to me, and during our email exchange she asked if perhaps I would be willing to give her a shoutout in the hopes I could help her find someone. I decided to follow the Maxis ‘red card rule’: She was the first person to ask, so the answer was yes (but people I don’t know who ask again would by default get a no so this doesn’t get out of hand). Asking rocks. So here’s the description she sent me.
You can reach out to her at anitsirhc491 at gmail.com. Good luck! I was planning on including one more, but they’re not ready yet. So they’ll be in #5. To be explicit: On the SS version of this post you can share your own dating doc, but if you’re going to do it, do it there. And You're currently a free subscriber to |