---
subject: "Things that connect us to ourselves, and things that don't"
from: "Henrik Karlsson <escapingflatland@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-02-06 11:54:11
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Henrik Karlsson", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_928547876862665886", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
At the end of the post, I’ve listed some good things I’ve read / watched / listened to recently. The day before we left for Málaga, Johanna was talking to me about how a lot of consumption tends to make us lose touch with ourselves. If she goes to check something on the internet, for instance, she often forgets what she meant to do and discovers, half an hour later, that she’s aimlessly scrolling things that make her feel ambiently bad. Even just having internet turned on at home makes her—and me—feel less in touch with ourselves, as if some distracting noise is heard in the back of the head, making it harder to fully tune into ourselves. The internet (and other similar types of consumption, such as TV series) often creates some sort of insatiable hunger that makes you lose touch with yourself. And then there are the other kinds of consumption (if consumption is even the right word): the kinds that tend to bring us back into ourselves. Looking at paintings, for example. In the evenings, when we’re too tired to work, Johanna and I sometimes open a page in an art book and look at it for 10 minutes (we can’t do it for much longer than that: paintings, unlike reading the internet, spit us back out after a while). And despite having allowed ourselves to get completely absorbed by something external, when we close the art book, we feel more attuned to ourselves. On the ferry, traveling to the airport, Johanna and I discussed why this is. There’s this passage from the memoirs of the composer Philip Glass, which I think can shed some light on why art—good art—can bring us into a closer connection with ourselves. Glass writes that when he composes music for films,
Because art has a gap, a distance, a space we need to fill, well—there is little wonder that, at the end of a session sitting before a painting, we feel more connected to ourselves. To make a painting meaningful, we need to fill it with meaning; we need to listen inward and channel the felt sense that the painting evokes into the gaps left in the art. We need to attune to ourselves. And so when we step out of it, we feel closer to ourselves. Art can in this way be seen as I thought about this a lot during the week we spent in Málaga... Subscribe to Escaping Flatland to unlock the rest.Become a paying subscriber of Escaping Flatland to get access to this post and other subscriber-only content. A subscription gets you:
|