---
subject: "The Auto Infotainment Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-01-27 13:03:47
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Colin here. I am a sucker for a mid-nineties BMW 750. There’s something about the body design that is timeless and elegant. The 007 film integration at that time, diverging from the usual Aston Martin, also helped boost its stock in my mind. Bond chose a light blue 750il as his getaway for Tomorrow Never Dies (1997). I’d love to have one (preferably driven only in Southern California with low mileage). But as any fan of classic car shapes knows: it’s one thing to fall in love with an exterior and performance. It is quite another to have to deal with antiquated, old infotainment systems. Even modern cars that don’t have a smooth integration with how we navigate the world today (Carplay, Android), require sometimes arduous workarounds (and wires). WITI Classifieds: We are experimenting with running some weekly classifieds in WITI. If you’re interested in running an ad, Noah here. I've got a new newsletter about brands and AI called BrXnd Dispatch. If you're in marketing, creative, or just interested in understanding what's up with AI, check it out. The Intermodal Spirit. Writing about Exploring, Relating, and Being. Available by newsletter or online. Daly is a comms+ agency that reaches beyond the standard PR playbook to deliver results (and some magic) for our exceptional clients. For 10 years, this has been the go-to newsletter for people who like to keep up with what’s exciting in design, books, beauty, food, & more. Why is this interesting? There is a larger movement to overhaul vintage vehicles with modern, electric motors, giving a new lifeblood to classic cars. For example, a classic Landcruiser has “been re-birthed with an electric motor and Tesla batteries to enjoy a zero emissions coastal cruising life.” But a lighter lift (and more practical option) can be seen with the easy, modular installation of a new infotainment system, something Porsche just rolled out. According to
There are regional variations for users from around the globe. And while the prices aren’t cheap (around 1,500 USD), it allows a modern touch and conveniences for vehicles that still have some pep in their step. (CJN) — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) —
|