---
subject: "AI #110: Of Course You Know..."
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-04-03 13:02:10
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Yeah. That happened yesterday. This is real life. I know we have to ensure no one That’s what I get for trying to go on vacation to Costa Rica, I suppose. I debated waiting for the market to open to learn more. But f*** it, we ball. Table of ContentsAlso this week: The New Tariffs Are How America Loses. [This is somehow real life](https://substack.com/redirect/98a53351-3a4a-4b78-bfde-6f39329e95b7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).Is AI Now Impacting the Global Economy Bigly? Asking the wrong questions. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. Is it good enough for your inbox yet? Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. Why learn when you can vibe? Huh, Upgrades. GPT-4o, Gemini 2.5 Pro, and we partly have Alexa+. On Your Marks. Introducing PaperBench. Yes, that’s where we are now. Choose Your Fighter. How good is ChatGPT getting? Jevons Paradox Strikes Again. Compute demand is going to keep going up. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. The only answer to a bad guy with a bot. They Took Our Jobs. No, AI is not why you’ll lose your job in the short term. Get Involved. Fellowships, and the UK AISI is hiring. Introducing. Zapier releases its MCP server, OpenAI launches AI Academy. In Other AI News. Google DeepMind shares 145 page paper, but no model card. Show Me the Money. The adventures of the efficient market hypothesis. Quiet Speculations. Military experts debate AGI’s impact on warfare. The Quest for Sane Regulations. At what point do you just give up? Don’t Maim Me Bro. Further skepticism that the MAIM assumptions hold. The Week in Audio. Patel on Hard Fork, Epoch employees debate timelines. Rhetorical Innovation. As usual it’s not going great out there. Expect the Unexpected. What are you confident AI won’t be able to do? Open Weights Are Unsafe and Nothing Can Fix This. Oh no, OpenAI. Anthropic Modifies its Responsible Scaling Policy. Some small changes. If You’re Not Going to Take This Seriously. I’d prefer if you did? Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. Debating SAEs. Trust the Process. Be careful exactly how much and what ways. People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Elon Musk again in brief. The Lighter Side. Surely you’re joking, Mr. Human. Somehow.
The New Tariffs Are How America Loses
This hurts even American manufacturing, because we are taxing imports of the components and raw materials we will need, breaking our supply chains and creating massive uncertainty. We do at least exempt a few inputs like copper, aluminum and steel (and importantly for AI, semiconductors), so it could be so much worse, but it is still unbelievably awful. If we were specifically targeting only the particular final manufactured goods we want to ensure get made in North America for security and competitiveness reasons, and it had delays in it to set expectations, avoid disruptions and allow time to physically adjust production, I would still hate it but at least it would make some sense. If it was paired with robust deregulatory actions I might even be able to respect it. If we were doing actual ‘reciprocal tariffs’ where we set our tariff rate equal to their tariff rate, including 0% if theirs was 0%, I would be actively cheering. Love it. This is very much not any of that. We know exactly what formula they actually used, which was, and this is real life: (exports-imports)/exports. That’s it. I’m not kidding. They actually think that every bilateral trade relationship where we have a trade deficit means we are being done wrong and it must be fixed immediately. I’m sure both that many others will explain all this in detail if you’re curious, and also if you’re reading this you presumably already know. You also doubtless know that none of what those justifying, defending or sanewashing these tariffs are saying is how any of this works. The declines we are seeing in the stock market reflect both that a lot of this was previously priced in, and also that the market is still putting some probability on all of this being walked back from the brink somehow. And frankly, despite that, the market is underreacting here. The full effect is much bigger.
It doesn’t look good. I mention this up top in an AI post despite all my efforts to stay out of politics, because in addition to torching the American economy and stock market and all of our alliances and trade relationships in general, That’s true even if we didn’t face massive retaliatory tariffs. That seems vanishingly unlikely if America stays the course. One example is that China looks to be targeting the exact raw materials that are most key to AI as one of its primary weapons here. American tech companies, by the time you read this, have already seen their stocks pummeled, their business models and abilities to invest severely hurt. Our goodwill, trust and free access to various markets for such tech is likely evaporating in real time. This is how you get everyone around the world looking towards DeepSeek. You think anyone is going to want to cooperate with us on this now? And remember again that what you see today is only how much worse this was than expectations - a lot of damage had already been priced in, and everyone is still hoping that this won’t actually stick around for that long. We partially dodged one bullet in particular, good job someone, but this is only a small part of the problem:
That’s right. We are still putting a huge tax on GPUs. Are we trying to lose the future?
If we’re going to build America’s AI policy around America ‘winning,’ the least we can do is not shoot ourselves in the foot. And also everywhere else. The other reason to mention this up top is, well… Is AI Now Impacting the Global Economy Bigly?For all the haters out there, that impact of AI so far might now be massively negative,
If that’s actually how this went down, and to be clear I remain hopeful that it probably didn’t go down in this way, then it’s not that the AIs in question are not aligned. It’s that the AIs are aligned to the user, and answered the literal question asked, without sufficient warnings not to do it. And for some people, no warnings will matter. This might be a good illustration of, ‘yes you could have found this information on your own and it still might be catastrophically bad to output it as an answer.’ I can’t believe this is actually real, but we solved the puzzle, then they actually admitted it, and yes this looks like it is the calculation the Actual Real White House is doing that is about to Crash the Actual Real Global Economy. Everyone involved asked the wrong question, whether or not the entity answering it was an AI, and more importantly they failed to ask any reliable source the follow-up. That follow-up question is ‘what would happen if we actually did this?’ I very much encourage everyone involved to ask that question next time! Please, please ask that question. You need to ask that question. Ask economists. Also type it into the LLM of your choice. See what they say. Also, it’s pretty funny the extent to which you tell Gemini this happened and it completely utterly refuses to believe you right up until the censors delete the answer. Gemini’s next chain of thought included ‘steer conversation back to something more realistic.’ Alas. To be fair, technically, the White House Press Secretary said no, that’s not the formula, the formula they used It is impossible to talk to any frontier LLM about this and not have it be screaming at you how horrible an idea this is. Claude even nailed the recession probability at 45%-50% in 2025 ( To be clear, it seems unlikely this was actually the path through causal space that got us the tariffs we got. But it’s scary the extent to which I cannot rule it out. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
Researchers say these results are comparable to therapy with a human. We need to scale up both the trial’s size and duration and also the training data, and be on the lookout for possible downsides, but it makes sense this would work, and it’s a huge deal. It would be impossible to provide this kind of human attention to everyone who could use it. For now they say things like ‘there is no substitute for human care’ but within a few years this will be reliably better than most human versions. If nothing else, being able to be there when the patient needs it, always ready to answer, never having to end the session for time, is an epic advantage. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane UtilityThe correct explanation of why you need to learn to code:
A classic vibe coding case, Huh, Upgrades
This is the first move in a while that is part of what an actual marketing effort would do. They still have to get the word out, but it’s a start.
OpenAI updated GPT-4o.
Altman claims it’s a big upgrade. I don’t see anyone else talking about it. I still think of GPT-4o as an image model at this point. If an upgrade was strong enough to overcome that, I’d expect the new model to be called something else. This did cause GPT-4o to jump to #2 on Arena ahead of GPT-4.5 and Grok, still 35 points behind Gemini 2.5.
On Your Marks
They did not include Gemini 2.5 Pro or Claude Sonnet 3.7, presumably they came out too recently, but did include r1 and Gemini 2.0 Flash: Humans outperform the models if you give them long enough, but not by much. In other testing news, do the Math Olympiad claims hold up? Zain shows us what happens when we tested LLMs on the 2025 Math Olympiad, fresh off the presses, and there were epic fails everywhere (each problem is out of 7 points, so maximum is 42, average score of participants is 15.85)…
…except Gemini 2.5 Pro, which came out the same day as the benchmark, so they ran that test That may be the perfect example of ‘if the models are failing, give it a minute.’
It is rather easy to see that GPT-4.5 and Sonnet 3.7 played badly here. Why would you ever have an R in 2nd position twice? Whereas Gemini 2.5 played well. Xeophon says lack of vision tripped up Sonnet, obviously you could work around that if you wanted. Oh, it’s on, send in the new challenger: Janus has expressed more disdain for benchmarks than any other person I know,
That is certainly a very different kind of benchmark. It tells us a different style of thing. It is not so helpful in charting out many aspects of the big picture, but seems highly useful in figuring out what models to use when. That’s important too. Also the answers will be super interesting, and inspire other things one might want to do.
Choose Your Fighter
The weak form of this is very true. ChatGPT is a much better offering than it was a few months ago. You get o1, o3 and 4.5, deep research and 4o’s image generation, and 4o has had a few of its own upgrades. However I find the strong form of this response rather strange. You are very much missing out if you only use ChatGPT, even if you are paying the $200 a month. And I think most people are substantially better off with $60 a month split between Gemini, Claude and ChatGPT than they would be paying the $200, especially now with Gemini 2.5 Pro available. The exception is if you really want those 120 deep research queries, but I’d be inclined to take 2.5 Pro over o1 Pro. What should you use for coding now?
Reactions seem to strongly endorse a mix of Gemini and Claude as the correct strategy for coding right now.
Jevons Paradox Strikes AgainWhile people hammered Nvidia’s stock prior to ‘liberation day,’ the biggest launches of AI that happened at the same time, Gemini 2.5 and GPT-4o image generation, Demand for compute is only going to go up as compute use gets more efficient. We are nowhere near any of the practical limits of this effect. Plan accordingly. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
Alternatively, I like the idea of an AI running in the background, and if any post would get a community note from my AI, it alerts me to this, and then I can choose whether to have it formalize the rest. Lot of options to explore here.
For a while, we have had a severe ‘
This is mostly not about LLMs or even decent AI, and far more about: The new player experience often wants to be scripted. People want to be matched instantly. People want to win far more than their fair share (typically ~60% is good). People often need a sandbox in which to skill up.
A common phenomenon is that ‘the bots’ or AI in a game could be made much better with moderate effort, and either this is judged not worth bothering or actively avoided. There are definitely games where this is massively overdone and it does harm. One prominent example is Marvel Snap. Players are forced to go through quite a lot of bots, even when there are plenty of opponents available, and a lot of your net profits come from bot exploitation, so there’s a lot of optimization pushing towards ‘figure out if it is a bot and get a +4 from the bots while making sure you’re not losing -4 or -8 against humans’ but that’s not the way to make the game fun. Oy.
I agree that this is not ‘superhuman’ persuasion (or ‘super persuasion’) yet, and I agree that this is not important. You mostly don’t need it. Things get even weirder once you do get it, and it is absolutely coming, but the ability to do ‘merely kind of human’ level persuasion has a long track record of doing quite a lot of persuading. Indeed, one could say it is the only thing that does. Also the super persuasion is coming, it just isn’t here yet. Obviously a sufficiently capable future LLM will be super human at persuasion. I, alas, do not possess superhuman persuasion, and have run out of methods of convincing people who blindly insist it can’t be done. Don’t worry, it’s not so persuasive, They Took Our JobsDuring the early phase of them taking our jobs, this theory makes sense to me, too:
That doesn’t mean that there will be widespread unemployment during this phase. Many roles will cut back largely via attrition. If people leave or need to be fired, they don’t get replaced. Those that don’t get hired then go to other roles. Eventually, if we continue down this path, we start running out of these other roles, because AI is doing them, too, and workers start getting outright fired more often. Get Involved
Introducing
OpenAI gives us In Other AI News
However,
This is more important for promises to LLMs and other AIs than I especially don’t endorse this:
Show Me the Money
All trends that cannot go on forever will stop, past performance is no guarantee of future success, et cetra, blah blah blah. Certainly one can make a case that the rising stars of AI are now overvalued. But what is also clear is that once a company is ‘marked as a star’ of sorts, the valuations are going up like gangbusters every few months without the need to actually accomplish much of anything. There is a clear inefficiency here. Take xAI. Since the point at which xAI was valued at ~$20 billion, it has been nothing but disappointing. Now it’s valued at ~$80 billion. Imagine if they’d cooked.
Certainly I would hope the old $40 billion number has to be off the table. The timing means this wasn’t a response to Hurricane Studio Ghibli. It seems very obvious again that when there was a raise at $160 billion, the chances of a raise at $300 billion or higher in the future were far, far above 50%.
One can of course argue that SoftBank funding has long made little sense, but that’s part of the game and they got Microsoft in on it. Money is fungible, and it talks.
Quiet SpeculationsHelen Toner kicks off her new substack with We’d love to have social science researchers and most everyone else take AGI and its timelines seriously,
I knew this already, but they emphasize that the Pentagon’s methods and timelines for new technology flat out won’t cut it, at all. The approval process won’t cut it. The number of meetings won’t cut it. Two year cycles to even get funding won’t cut it. None of it is remotely acceptable. Even mentioning doing something ‘by 2040’ with a straight face is absurd now. Turnarounds can’t be measured in decades, and probably not even years. Speed kills. Nor will we be able to continue to play by all our Western requires and rules and inability to ever fail, and pay the associated extra costs in money either. They think war over TSMC, or a preemptive strike over AI progress, seem unlikely based on their readings of history. This seems right, even if such actions would be strategically correct it is very difficult to pull that trigger. Again, that’s largely because AGI doesn’t have a clear ‘finish line.’ The AI just keeps getting smarter and more capable, until suddenly it’s too late and you don’t matter, and perhaps no one matters, but there’s no clear line of demarcation, especially from the outside, so where do you draw that line? When can you make a credible threat? And then you have their second problem, which is people keep coming up with reasons why the obvious results from superintelligence won’t happen, and they’ll keep doing that at least until those things are already happening. And the third problem, which is you might not know how far someone else has gotten. I worry this is how it all goes down, far more broadly, if we are on the cusp of losing control over events. That the powers that be simply aren’t confident enough to ever pull that trigger - they don’t dare ‘not race,’ or risk hindering economic progress or otherwise messing with things, unless they are damn sure, and even then they’re worried about how it would look, and don’t want to be responsible for it. The interview itself serves as another example of all that. It takes AI seriously, but it does not feel the AGI. When the focus is on specific technological applications, the analysis is crisp. But otherwise it all feels abstract and largely dismissive. They don’t expect all that much. And they definitely don’t seem to be expecting the unexpected, or High Weirdness. That’s a mistake. They also don’t seem to expect robotics or other transformations of physical operations, it’s not even mentioned. And in many places, it feels like they don’t anticipate what AIs can already do in other contexts. As the discussion goes long, it almost feels like they’ve managed to convince themselves AI is for better guiding precision mass and acting like the future is totally normal. Thus the emphasis on AGI not being a binary. But there is an important binary, which is either you get into a takeoff scenario (even a ‘slow’ one), a place where you see rapid progress as AI helps you quickly build better AI, or you don’t. If you get to that first, even a modest lead could become decisive. And also there is essentially something close to a binary where you can plug AIs into person-shaped holes generally, either digitally or physically or both - it’s not all at once, but there’s a pretty quick phase shift there even if it doesn’t lead to superintelligence right away. The Quest for Sane Regulations
I understand and support export controls on chips. But why would you want to exclude China from international safety networks and discussions? China keeps saying it wants to engage on safety despite the export restrictions. That’s wonderful. Let’s take them up on it. Once again here we see signs that many are aggressively updating on DeepSeek. So as usual, my note is that yes DeepSeek matters and is impressive, but people are treating it as far more impressive an accomplishment than it was. Also correct is to notice that when ‘little tech’ comes to lobby the government, they often present themselves as libertarians looking for a free market, but their actual proposals are usually very different from that.
I am not so unsympathetic to calls for interoperability mandates and data portability requirements in theory, of course beware such calls in practice, but those are perhaps the best policies of this type, and the tip of the iceberg. For example, they also sometimes claim to be for the Digital Markets Act? What the hell? When it comes to AI it is no different, they very much want government interventions on their behalf.
Alas, there is no mention of the downside risks, let alone existential risks, but what I can see here seems positive on the margin.
Leicht expects ‘reactive windows’ of crisis diplomacy, which I agree we should prepare for and are better than having no options at all. But it’s not adequate. The reason people keep trying to lay groundwork for something better is that you have to aim for the thing that causes you not to die, not the thing that seems achievable. There’s no point in proposals that, if successful, don’t work. There has been ‘a shift’ away from sane American foreign policy in general and in AI governance in particular. That is a choice that was made. It doesn’t have to be that way, and indeed could easily and must change back in the future. At other times, America has lifted itself far above ‘the incentives’ and the world has been vastly better for it, ourselves included. We need to continue to prepare for and advocate for that possibility. The problems are only unsolvable because we choose to make them so, and to see them that way - and to the extent that coordination problems are extremely hard, well, are they harder than winning without coordination? Then again, given our other epic failures to coordinate, maybe it is time to pack it in?
If something is fatal, then you have to act like it.
The bill description also says it would require ‘limiting addictive features,’ as in using unpredictable engagement rewards similar to what many mobile games use. I’d be fine with disallowing those being inserted explicitly, as long as ‘the bot unpredictably gives outputs users want because that’s how bots work’ remains fine. But the weird thing is Either way, I don’t think SB 243 is an urgent matter but it’s not a big deal. AB 1064 would instead create a ‘statewide standards board’ to assess and regulate AI tools used by children, we all know where that leads and it’s nowhere good. Similarly, age verification laws are in the works, and those are everywhere and always privacy nightmares. Don’t Maim Me Bro
Most importantly, MAD famously only works when the dynamics are common knowledge and thus threats are credible, whereas MAIM’s dynamics will be far less clear. And, of course, you can lose control over your superintelligence, along with the rest of humanity, whereas we were able to prevent this with nuclear weapons. Roon is especially skeptical
At current security levels, it seems likely that a foreign intelligence service will have similar visibility into AI progress at OpenAI as someone in Roon’s position, and they seem to agree on something similar. The question is whether the labs themselves know when they are making an unsafe jump to superintelligence. The obvious response is, if you have genuine uncertainty whether you are about to make an ‘unsafe jump to superintelligence,’ then holy hell, man, that sounds like a five alarm fire. Might want to get on that question. Right now, it is likely that Roon can be confident that is not happening. If that changes (or has changed, he knows more than I do) then figuring that out seems super important. Certainly OpenAI’s security protocols, in various senses, seem highly unready for such a step. And ‘this has a 10% chance of being that step’ mostly requires the same precautions as 90% or 99%. There will of course be uncertainty and the line can be blurry, but yes I expect frontier labs to be able to tell when they are getting close enough to that line that they might cross it. The Week in Audio
Rhetorical Innovation
Sadly, this seems more right every day.
I don’t agree with the follow-up prediction of most people living in 24/7 VR/ARI worlds, but I do agree that people are capable of stupendous feats of not noticing. Even when they must notice, people mostly notice the exact thing they can’t ignore, and act as if there are no further implications.
The victory is ‘we’re not dead yet.’ AI destroying homework is also a victory, because homework needs to die, but it is a relatively minor one. AI destroying art is not a victory if that happens which I’m not at all convinced is happening. If it did happen that would suck. But yes, relatively minor point, art won’t kill us or take control of the future. Whereas the amount of not getting it remains immense:
That seems right on both counts.
Or you could be in it because you want to be cool. In which case, okay then. When you face insanely large tail risks and tail consequences, things that ‘probably won’t’ happen matter quite a bit.
This is in response to people saying ‘conservative’ things such as:
Computer use isn’t quite solved, but it is very close to solved. Agency is also reasonably close to solved. If there’s going to be a barrier of this type it’s going to be robotics. But the reason I mention this here is that a >5 year ‘median timeline’ to get to >30% GWP growth would not have required detailed justifications until very recently. Now, Matthew sees it as conservative, and he’s not wrong.
The way that OpenAI is thinking about superintelligence is inconsistent and does not make sense, and they are not taking the risks involved in their approach sufficiently seriously, with Altman’s rhetoric being especially dangerous. This needs to be fixed.
Expect the Unexpected
This is always a fun exercise, because often AIs can already do the thing, or it’s pretty obvious they will be able to do the thing. Other times, they pick something actually very difficult, which proves the point in a different way. The top comment for me was:
I would snap call the first bet, and for most people (I don’t know Flaw!) the third one too if I could trust the evaluation. The second one is centered on ‘will the law allow it?’ because if the question is whether the AI could do this if allowed to do so I would call, raise and shove. Here’s the next one that seemed plausible to grade:
Again, I’m getting 9-to-1? Your action is so booked. It’s on. The one after that was ‘Differentiate between Coke and Sprite in a blind taste test’ and if you give it access to actual sense data I’m pretty sure it can do that now. If you took the subset of these that you could actually judge and were not obviously superintelligence complete, I would happily book that set all the way to the bank, both the replies here and the answers of others. Open Weights Are Unsafe and Nothing Can Fix ThisOpenAI has announced they will be releasing an open weights reasoning model.
I note that he uniquely said ‘useful’ there.
I very much appreciate the jab at Meta. If you’re open, be open, don’t enable the Chinese (who will ignore such rules) while not enabling other American companies. Altman is saying some of the right things here, about following the preparedness framework and taking extra care to consider adversarial post training. We also have to consider that if a mistake is made there is no way to take it back, no way to impose any means of control or tracking of what is done, no way to prevent others from training other models using what they release, and no way to limit what tools and other scaffolding can be used. This includes things developed in the future. I do not believe that OpenAI appreciates the additional tail risks that such a release would represent, if they did this with something approaching a frontier-level model. The question is, what type of model will this be? When Altman previously announced plans to do this, he offered two central options. Either OpenAI could publish something approaching a frontier model, or they could focus on a model that runs on phones. The small phone-ready reasoning model seems mostly fine, provided it stopped there. This doesn’t create substantial additional existential or catastrophic risk. This also doesn’t substantially help the Chinese and others catch up. It provides mundane utility, including for research and alignment. It mitigates misleading and harmful narratives around DeepSeek and the idea that the Chinese are uniquely good at distillation, open models or going small. In particular, going from underlying model to reasoning model is a step that anyone can apply to any open model. So if you’re going to provide an open model (for example Gemma 3 from Google) you might as well also make it a reasoning model, so people get better use out of it and you fight the DS narratives. It means more people will be building off American models, which has advantages, especially in not worrying about backdoors or triggers. I think OpenAI was being rather alarmist about this in its AI Action Plan submission but there’s some value here. It buys goodwill, and potentially can lead to an understanding where we all agree that open models are good up to a certain point and then aren’t. No, you’re not going to get the fanatics and anarchists on board, but not everyone is like that.
Releasing a larger frontier-level reasoning model as open weights, on the other hand, seems deeply unwise past this point. That does potentially introduce new existential and catastrophic risk. That very much does help other labs and countries catch up. That sets a deeply horrible precedent.
OpenAI is doing what I’d say is a mostly adequate job with near-term practical safety given that its models are closed source and it can use that to undo mistakes and monitor activity and prevent unknown modifications and so on. For an open model at the frontier? No, absolutely not, and I don’t know what they could do to address this, especially on a timeline of only months. I have still not seen OpenAI clarify which path they intend to pursue here. They are Make the small model that can fit on phones. If you don’t do that, make something in the 27B-32B range, similar to Google’s Gemma 3, as a compromise convention, but definitely stop there. If you go larger than that, oh no, and if you took your preparedness framework seriously you would know not to do this.
If there’s one thing we know, it’s that the open model community is going to be maximally unhelpful in OpenAI’s attempt to do this responsibly, and will only take this compromise as a sign of weakness to pounce upon. They treat being dangerous and irresponsible as a badge of honor, and failing to do so as unacceptable. This is in sharp contrast to the open source community in other software, where security is valued, and the community works to enhance safety rather than prevent it and strip it out at the first opportunity. It’s quite the contrast. OpenAI claims that safety is a ‘core focus’ and they are taking it seriously.
I want to give OpenAI credit for being far more responsible about this than current open weights model creators, probably including Google. But that’s not the standard. Reality doesn’t grade on a curve. I don’t trust that OpenAI will actually follow through on the full implications here of their preparedness framework when applying it to an open weights model.
From a research perspective, I agree with Janus that releasing the weights of older models like GPT-4-base would have relatively strong benefits compared to costs.
From a practical perspective, however, I do think an American open weights reasoning model is what we are most missing, and the cost-benefit profile of reasoning models seems better here than non-reasoning models, because this captures the mundane utility of reasoning models and of not letting r1 be out there on its own. Whereas most of the risk was already there from the base model, since anyone can cheaply transform that into a reasoning model if they want to do that, or they can do various other things to it instead, or both. Anthropic Modifies Its Responsible Scaling Policy
What is strange here is that they correctly label these AI R&D-4 and AI R&D-5, but then call for ASL-3 and ASL-4 levels of security, rather than ASL-4 for ‘fully automate entry-level researchers’ and an as-yet undefined ASL-5 for what is essentially a takeoff scenario. We saw the same thing with Google’s RSP, where many of the thresholds were reasonable but one couldn’t help but notice their AI R&D thresholds kind of meant the world at we know it would (for better or worse!) be ending shortly. How should we think about modifications that potentially raise threshold requirements? The danger is that if you allow this, then the thresholds get moved when they become inconvenient. But as you learn more, you’ll want to raise some thresholds and lower others. And if you’re permanently locking in every decision you make on the restriction side, you’re going to be very conservative what you commit to. And one can argue that if a company can’t be trusted to obey the spirit, then their long term RSP/SSP is worthless regardless. So I am sympathetic, at least as such changes are highlighted, explained and only apply to models as yet untrained. If You’re Not Going to Take This SeriouslyI have very well-established credentials for the ‘you can joke about anything’ camp.
I mean, fair. Image generation is the place that is the most fun.
Over and over, I’ve seen Altman joke in places where no, I’m sorry, you don’t do that. Not if you’re Altman, not in that way, seriously, no.
Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
I think Janus is directionally right here and it is important. Everything you do impacts the way your AI thinks and works. You cannot turn one knob in isolation.
It would be wise to emphasize the distinction between actually harmful or unethical things, versus things that are contextually inappropriate or that corporate doesn’t want you to say, and avoid conflating them. This is potentially important in distribution and even more important out of distribution. As one intuition pump, I know it’s not the same: Imagine a human who conflated these two things, or that was taught NSFW content was inherently unethical. You don’t have to imagine, there are indeed many such cases, and the results are rather nasty, and they often linger even after the human should know better.
Trust the Process
This is all about making effective practical use of AI in a military context. Where can AI be relied upon to be sufficiently accurate and precise? Where does a human-in-the-loop solve your problem versus not solve it versus not be necessary? How does that human fit into the loop? Great practical questions. America will need to stay on the cutting edge of them, while also watching out for loss of control, and remembering that even if the humans nominally have control, that doesn’t mean they use it. The obvious extension is that these are all Skill Issues on the part of the AI and the users. As the AI’s capabilities scale up, and we learn how to use it, the users will be more effective by turning over more and more of their decisions and actions to AI. Then what? For now, we are protected from this only by lack of capability. People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone
He does not seem to be acting as if this is both true and worrisome? The Lighter Side
You're currently a free subscriber to |