---
subject: "The Vertical Evacuation Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-13 15:31:18
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Nick Parish (NP) has been a long-standing friend of WITI since his days as a junior reporter on the NY Post’s sports desk. He’s since worked in editorial, strategy, and product design. He lives in Portland, where he teaches fly-fishing and writes about it at Nick here. Last week in Newport, Oregon, Dungeness crab season was in full swing. Boats moved moving in and out of Yaquina Bay while sea lions bellowed and snapped at each other from nearly every floppable surface. I was in Newport to speak at So, if your honey-do list has you wanting to drop a boat, renew your fishing license, report a polluter, and talk with someone about data from Station 46281—a buoy out by Stonewall Bank—the Hatfield Marine Science Center is a one-stop shop. Why is this interesting? For the two days I was in and around the Hatfield Center, my death-by-tsunami likelihood was probably as low as it'll ever get on the Oregon Coast. That's because the Gladys Valley Marine Studies Building, the jewel in the Hatfield Center treasure chest, is designed to withstand a 9+ magnitude earthquake and "XXL" tsunami event. The GVMSB, as it is known, is a If you're like me, you associate evacuation with out and down, not in and up. But the GVMSB is designed to elevate people above a tsunami inundation, and protect them from debris: massive ships moored nearby, or parts of the aforementioned infrastructure like buildings and bridge pieces.
Once on the roof, a cache supplies "water, food, sanitation, shelters, communication, personal warmth, lighting, and trauma first aid supplies" for up to two days. (If only I'm not tsunami-anxious, but it was certainly calming to understand the building’s features. Ever since Kathryn Schulz' Pulitzer Prize-winning “ Visit the coast and inundation zones, evacuation routes, and estimated high-water marks are well signed and clear. Hotels and short-term rentals help visitors understand what to do when a siren goes off. But there's still an ongoing sense of unpreparedness when it comes to protecting places where people frequently gather—schools, for instance—that may be vulnerable when the Cascadia Subduction Zone finally rubs itself the wrong way. Iconography is clear at the GVMSB: a sign in tsunami blue ( Inside the building, amidst the laboratories and manufacturing spaces and visitor centers, and the artworks that keep you company— You're currently a free subscriber to |