---
subject: "The 80's Marketing Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-07-28 10:01:01
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Colin here. It’s a far cry from how I try to eat now, but as a kid I was a Cinnamon Toast Crunch devotee. On occasion I would dabble with Super Golden Crisp, or maybe some Count Chocula, but CTC was my go-to. What is astounding to me today about those heady elementary school days are (i) the level of thought created to cereal world building, (ii) the ethical complications of the brazen marketing to children, and (iii) how we were expected to focus in class a few hours after mainlining enough sugar to go do a full Marketing brilliance was on full display—creating memorable characters and mental associations in a crowded and competitive grocery aisle. Lots of thought and research went into the static characters on the box, with their comical gazes firmly facing down to see the child from its perch. According to
And, if you didn’t live through it and don’t have the messages burnt into your brain, Youtube offers a repository of Why is this interesting? Turns out the golden age for this branding and distinctiveness to peddle sugar was in the 1980s. And it came about because of deregulation. Prior to the Reagan presidency, there were rules and regulations about advertising to children. And it wasn’t just for cereal, it was for a range of different products, toys, and worlds. According to
It was proto branded content in a way. Cartoons and shows were vehicles to deepen a relationship (and lust) for the toy or the product. I never actually realized the nefarious trap that GI Joe was playing: each episode of the show would be focused on a specific new character or vehicle that would shortly be released. In the early 1990’s things came back to normal. Rules and regulations were put in place about advertising to children, in addition to limits on how much advertising could be placed in children’s programming. But on reflection, that 10 year stretch when I was growing up was a sugar addled, hyper commercialized weird one. (CJN) — WITI x McKinsey: An ongoing partnership where we highlight interesting McKinsey research, writing, and data. The Future of the Workplace. The COVID-19-pandemic caused a tectonic shift in where, when, and how we work. McKinsey experts in real estate, people and organizational performance, and operations are collaborating to help leaders understand how the workplace is changing and how their organizations can best prepare. Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) —
You’re a free subscriber to |