---
subject: "The 2 Types of Happiness, Fake Urgency, & More"
from: "\"Sahil Bloom's Curiosity Chronicle\" <sahil@sahilbloom.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-03-17 13:08:01
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Sahil Bloom"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_1989028747625928812"]
---
The 2 Types of Happiness, Fake Urgency, & Moreread on read time 3 minutes Here are 5 interesting ideas to spark your curiosity heading into the weekend. Today at a Glance:- Question: Do you need to respond to this?
- Quote: Judge by the questions.
- Framework: Pathways to happiness.
- Tweet: AI language processing.
- Article: Risk and regret.
Today's Newsletter is Brought to You by Sponsor Guess what? You're reading promotional content in a newsletter. Sponsoring influencer newsletters, like mine, is a great way to reach engaged and targeted audiences. It will build your brand — whether that is your personal brand or your business. The Curiosity Chronicle newsletter is part of the ConvertKit Sponsor Network. This network connects businesses to audiences of newsletter readers. For example, you can sponsor The Curiosity Chronicle and connect with about 269,497 people with similar interests to yours.
Question I constantly ask myself:Do I really need to respond to this right now? Life gets much less stressful when you realize that *URGENT* is very rarely that urgent. The hold that artificial urgency has over our lives is crazy. I once swerved onto the grass on the side of the highway and took out my laptop to respond to a work email that felt urgent. It makes me cringe to think about the number of moments I missed with family and friends because of fake urgency: - Leaving that dinner to reply to an email.
- Cutting off that conversation to reply to a text.
- Shortening a precious moment to check email.
The next time you encounter one of these moments, pause and ask yourself: Do I really need to respond to this right now? This simple act of pausing will have a positive impact. Fighting back against the patterns and behaviors created by constant connectedness is a worthy pursuit. Fake Urgency pulls you away from Real Importance. Quote to hang on the wall:"Judge a man by his questions rather than his answers." - Voltaire Knowledge is knowing a lot of answers. Wisdom is asking the right questions. Framework for happiness:The Types of Happiness: Hedonic vs. EudaimonicPsychology identifies two core types of happiness: - Hedonic: Achieved through pleasure, enjoyment, and satisfaction.
- Eudaimonic: Achieved through meaning, purpose, and authenticity.
Hedonic happiness is associated with a focus on maximizing short-term pleasure and minimizing pain. The phrase "hedonic treadmill" is a reference to hedonic adaptation, a scientific term for the tendency of humans to quickly revert to a baseline after new positive or negative events. Eudaimonic happiness is associated with a focus on virtue or value-oriented living. It was first proposed by Aristotle, who argued that achieving long-term, durable happiness required people to live in accordance with their values and focus on a higher purpose or meaning. Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs, which places self-actualization at the top of the pyramid, is based on a Eudaimonic view on happiness. Both Hedonic and Eudaimonic happiness have a clear and necessary role to play in your life. The exclusive pursuit of one or the other may lead to imbalance: - Too much focus on Hedonic happiness will lead to a short-term pleasure seeking cycle that may not lend itself well to long-term goals or growth.
- Too much focus on Eudaimonic happiness will lead to an ultra-long-term focus that may sacrifice too much short-term sweetness and miss out on some of the simple joys of life.
The Goal: Find your personal balance point of Hedonic and Eudaimonic happiness. Embrace short-term, earned pleasures, but focus on building a life grounded in your long-term values and purpose. Tweet I've been gawking at:How can something be simultaneously so fascinating and terrifying?
Article I've been sharing:Wonderful, short piece from Morgan Housel on regret ( One memorable quote from it: "The purpose of life is to experience things for which you will later experience nostalgia." - FedSpeak Twitter Account Worth a read. Sahil's Recommendation ZoneSmash your morning routine with I get asked frequently, “What is the one supplement you can't live without?” My answer is always I started taking it in 2011 after spending time with the founder and have been hooked ever since. It replaced an entire cabinet of supplements for me in one daily scoop—seriously, its latest iteration covers a multivitamin, multi-mineral, prebiotics, probiotics, adaptogens, greens, and more. Today, Athletic Greens is offering Curiosity Chronicle subscribers an exclusive deal: Refer Friends, Earn Rewards!
If you enjoyed today's newsletter, please share it with your friends and family! If this email was forwarded to you, consider |