---
subject: "The Locksmith Paradox, Makers vs. Managers, & More"
from: "\"Sahil Bloom's Curiosity Chronicle\" <sahil@sahilbloom.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-09-01 13:10:11
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Sahil Bloom", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_1989028747625928812", "UNREAD"]
---
The Seeking Paradox, Makers vs. Managers, & Moreread and listen on read time 4 minutes Here are 5 interesting ideas to spark your curiosity heading into the weekend. ICYMI: Today at a Glance:- Question: One change with greatest impact.
- Quote: Stop seeking to find what you seek.
- Framework: The Locksmith Paradox.
- Tweet: Deconstructing nutrition.
- Article: Makers vs. Managers.
Today's Newsletter is Brought to You by Sponsor Guess what? You're reading promotional content in a newsletter. Sponsoring influencer newsletters, like mine, is a great way to reach engaged and targeted audiences. It will build your brand — whether that is your personal brand or your business. The Curiosity Chronicle newsletter is part of the ConvertKit Sponsor Network. This network connects businesses to audiences of newsletter readers. For example, you can sponsor The Curiosity Chronicle and connect with over 500,000 people with similar interests to yours.
Question on creating change:If everything were to stay the same, what is the one change that would create the greatest impact? This question was raised during the mastermind retreat I attended in Montana. The idea: When faced with a variety of potential variables, a decision becomes very challenging. By adding a forced constraint (one change), we can create new clarity. What one change would create the greatest positive impact in your life? What one change would move you most efficiently and effectively in the direction of your ideal life? That is the atomic variable. Focus there first. Everything else is a distraction. Quote on seeking:"What could I say to you that would be of value, except that perhaps you seek too much, that as a result of your seeking you cannot find.” ― Hermann Hesse, Siddhartha The Seeking Paradox: To find what you are seeking, stop seeking. Framework on time and value:The Locksmith ParadoxImagine a junior locksmith who initially takes an hour to complete a basic lock picking task for the customer. The customer pays $100 for the task and is happy with the service. The locksmith continues to perform this basic task on a regular basis. By the following year, the junior locksmith is now a senior locksmith. The same customer calls the locksmith back for another basic lock picking task. Due to the accumulated experience, the senior locksmith is able to complete the task in just 30 minutes (half the time). He asks for his $100 and the customer stares at him, confused. The locksmith has improved at his craft, but the customer has become increasingly upset by the lower time input required to deliver the fixed output. The results are the same, but the customer's perception of value changed. The base logic of the Locksmith Paradox: - It takes you 60 minutes to do Task X
- Customers pay $100 for Task X
- You improve at Task X, so now you can do it in 30 minutes
- Customers want to pay you $50 for Task X
The output is the same, but the perception of value is reduced by 50%. You are getting penalized for your proficiency! This focus—on time over results—plagues most large companies. It leads to an unfortunate "game" that employees have to play: Create the illusion of work and long hours that mask productivity and efficiency gains. The classic story of Picasso in the market, which I've highlighted in the past, is a clear example of the Locksmith Paradox at play. The woman's perception of the value of Picasso's work is impacted by the short amount of time it took him to produce it. The most critical suggestion for how to manage this paradox: Focus on Outputs > Inputs. Traditional corporate culture has an obsession with input—hours worked—when what really matters is the output. It seems obvious, but as a manager or employee, always push for a focus on outputs vs. inputs. It takes time to shift cultures, but it's worth it in the long run. As a solo entrepreneur or freelancer, seek to detach earnings from hours. Rather than charging by the hour for your service or offering, charge based on deliverables. As you find new leverage in the system, you'll be able to scale your time efficiently and rapidly increase your income and wealth creation potential. So the next time a manager, client, or customer seems too focused on your inputs, shift the discussion to focus on the outputs. In the long run, everyone will benefit from this reorientation. Tweet to deconstruct nutrition:This was a really neat thread that deconstructs a (close to) optimal day of eating. I enjoyed seeing how each set of ingredients was contributing to the overall nutrient profile of the day. The general lesson: Eat whole, unprocessed foods 90% of the time and you'll be in a good starting point. My mini hack: Shop on the outer perimeter of the grocery store. This is (usually) where all of the whole, unprocessed foods are. The aisles have most of the processed junk.
Article on makers vs. managers: Brilliant, short blog on the difference between the maker's schedule and the manager's schedule. The basic idea: - Managers operate with a day blocked into one hour chunks. They change what they are doing each hour in order to operate and get through their appointments and to do lists.
- Makers operate in fluid, long blocks of at least a half day. They focus on a single project for extended periods.
- Each schedule works fine on its own, but when they collide and come into tension, problems arise in organizations. The manager who forces the maker into various meetings is doing a disservice to the organization. The manager who learns to let the makers make in their preferred cadence will always win.
Worth a read! In Case You Missed It:In Wednesday's edition, I shared In case you missed it, here's a quick summary: - Freedom is the Real Goal: The ability to do what you want, with who you want, when you want is what everyone prizes above all else.
- Environment is EVERYTHING: Thinking big is contagious. When you get a group of ambitious big thinkers in a room, incredible things happen.
- Insecurity is a Natural Human Condition: These entrepreneurs have built incredible companies and personal wealth, but all open up privately about their personal and professional insecurities. It's natural to feel this way, don't try to cover it up.
- Know the Game You're Playing: Always know the game you’re playing and whether you want the prize for winning that game.
- Create Without Expectations: If you create value with no expectation of return, you will experience the greatest returns.
- Owned Distribution is a Cheat Code: All of the entrepreneurs have come to realize what a massive business advantage it is to own your distribution via an audience or personal brand platform.
- Success Isn't Always Loud: The most successful entrepreneur at the event was quiet and highly observant. Listening, observing, and thinking is a superpower of the modern age.
- You Never "Figure It All Out": No one had it all figured out about their future. It's ok to feel this way, just focus on pointing your compass in the right direction, embracing curiosity, and getting around great people. Do that, and good things will happen.
- Entrepreneurial Loneliness is Real: Success is celebrated in the warm light, but the journey is often experienced in the cold dark. You don’t have to do it alone. Find your people and walk the path with them.
- See It Differently: Sometimes you need to see the problem differently to solve it. Ask others how they would think about it. Have them pressure test your thinking. Novel perspectives generate novel solutions.
Sahil's Recommendation ZoneMatch my morning routine with I get asked about my morning routine all the time. It changes from time to time, but It replaced an entire cabinet of supplements for me in one daily scoop—seriously, its latest iteration covers a multivitamin, multi-mineral, prebiotics, probiotics, adaptogens, greens, and more. It keeps me feeling healthy and strong throughout the year, even when I'm traveling (thanks to the travel packs). Athletic Greens is offering Curiosity Chronicle subscribers an exclusive deal:
Refer Friends, Earn Rewards!
|