---
subject: "The Bloomer's Paradox"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-11-06 12:22:20
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
In Jason Pargin’s This book is not shy about its moral, delivered in approximately one soliloquy per state by our author mouthpiece character (the girl). Although there is a literal black box of doom - the suspected nuke - the real danger is the metaphorical “black box” of Internet algorithms, which make us waste our lives “doom” scrolling instead of connecting to other human beings. Or the “black box” of fear that the algorithms trap us in, where we feel like the world is “doomed” and there’s nothing we can do. She urges us to break out of our boxes and feel optimism about the state of society. Quote below, Ether is the girl, Abbott is the loser, and he’s just ventured the opinion that it’s unethical to have children in a world as doomed and dystopian as ours:
Here’s another of her descriptions of the Black Box as she understands it. Phil is her mentor, Cammy a random friend:
Here’s an uncharitable summary of the theses of these two sections: The Black Box has scared us into believing that everything is dystopian and getting worse. The bad news we are so relentlessly exposed to is trapping us in a prison made of our own pessimism and fear. The Black Box is destroying everything that makes us human, causing our society to spiral into dictatorship, and turning us into zombies/puppets.
Or, to be even less charitable: We must reject doomerism, where we treat the problems of today as unprecedented crises that risk destroying us. …except for the problem of doomerism, which really is an unprecedented crisis that risks destroying us. You cannot possibly imagine how bad this one is, and we must treat it as an absolute emergency which requires us to uproot everything about our lives.
I’m not attacking Pargin for this. His book is great, and it’s the prerogative of great artists that we treat any apparent contradiction in their works as grist for the mill - if not done intentionally to provoke us, then at least enacted through some trickster urge of the subconscious. But Black Box Of Doom is hardly the only place where we find this contradiction. Peter Thiel recently gave a lecture on the End Times, But isn’t the idea that if we try to regulate things, it will summon the literal Antichrist and plunge the world into eternal darkness kind of a scare story? Isn’t Peter Thiel using this scare story to frighten people into accepting the, uh, Tyler Cowen had a recent post But isn’t the idea of an epidemic of negative emotional contagion, bringing in its wake collapsing state capacity and stagnant economies, so threatening that we must arguably suspend our usual liberal values in order to crush it before it spreads - itself a form of negative emotional contagion? If China banned criticism of climate projections, because global warming was too much of an emergency to allow debate or dissent, wouldn’t that be a classic example of doomerism gone too far? In None of this is logically contradictory. This is a real way the world could be: all crises are overreactions, except the crisis of overreaction to fake crises, which is worse than you can possibly imagine. The present is better than the past in every way, except that the past got the question of is-the-present-is-better-than-the-past right and the present doesn’t. Totally possible, nothing says it can’t happen. But would the bloomers be equally charitable to other people making this claim for other pet causes? Some would: many are smart people. For the rest, this situation should provide a lesson in humility. A strong view of the “crisis of doomerism” is incompatible with a worldview in which strong crises are impossible, or should never be mentioned because the overreaction to them will always be worse than the crisis itself, or must always be the tool of sinister interests trying to divide us. Rather, it forces us back to the normal position where optimism is a heuristic and nothing more: some crises will be overblown, and we may want a slight bias against taking them seriously, but this bias can yield to evidence like anything else. How strong is the evidence for the “crisis of doomerism”? Nobody has proven its existence with a p < 0.05 study. There is no universal scientific consensus on its existence. And there is no shortage of stories about how bad people might be using it to accumulate power (I’ve given you Thiel and China for free). So whatever evidentiary bar bloomers set for “a real crisis” cannot hold these as absolute demands. My own view is that we have many problems - some even rising to the level of crisis - but none are yet so completely unsolvable that we should hate society and our own lives and spiral into permanent despair. We should have a medium-high but not unachievable bar for trying to solve these problems through study, activism and regulation (especially regulation grounded in good economics like the theory of externalities), and a very high, barely-achievable-except-in-emergencies bar for trying to solve them through censorship and accusing people of being the Antichrist. The problem of excessive doomerism is one bird in this flock, and deserves no special treatment. You're currently a free subscriber to |