---
subject: "The BBM Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-01-12 14:18:09
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Re-running from the archives today. Back tomorrow. Colin here. Join me for a quick trip back to the recent past. The time is 2006 and BlackBerry, the must-have phone, released the Pearl, its slim replacement to the blue brick of yesteryear. This was two years before the iPhone, and your choices for a smartphone essentially boiled down to a But aside from how great this device was for communicating by text, I also used the hell out of Blackberry Messenger (BBM), the messaging protocol that has since all but disappeared from memory. The first time I learned about it, my friend Adam Freeland asked me for my pin. He showed me how to look it up on my device and within seconds I had an instant link. BBM was international and secure, plus it existed outside the pay-per-SMS model that was still prevalent at the time. BBM was very much a word-of-mouth thing, the ultimate Blackberry insider flex, and a lot of people used it— Why is this interesting? We don’t really give it the credit it deserves, but BBM was in many ways the gateway drug for a lot of mobile chat apps we use today: Whatsapp, Signal, Telegram, etc. The Verge
The platform was also responsible for another controversial feature:
Just as one can have a little archeological dig by signing into an old AIM screenname, there’s a WITI Classifieds: We are experimenting with running some weekly classifieds in WITI. If you’re interested in running an ad, Stat Significant is a weekly newsletter featuring data-centric essays about culture, economics, sports, statistics, and more. Supercharge your lifelong learning. Upnext lets you save any content, and actually get to it later. Supports articles, podcasts and video! For the inner journey. For the outer journey. The Intermodal Spirit. For 10 years, this has been the go-to newsletter for people who like to keep up with what’s exciting in design, books, beauty, food, & more. BrXndscape is a landscape of Generative AI companies specifically designed for the needs of marketers. January is a great month to begin working with a coach to meet your goals. Gain insight, accountability, and support. |