---
subject: "Of microbial housing and other interesting snippets"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2021-02-14 03:33:47
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
Every now and then, you come across something that you’ll find fascinating. It may not be mind-blowing or even grand. Something simple that probably changes nothing in your life, but you see it and go: “I’m glad I learnt this today”.
I came across a little snippet about microbes recently, courtesy, Ed Yong’s book I Contain Multitudes: The Microbes Within Us and a Grander View of Life. I reacted much the same way. The book gets into the minds (and labs) of researchers and scientists, making a case for how humans are entire ecosystems unto themselves. And how microbes—bacteria, viruses, and the likes—are our occupants.
So far, all nothing that we don’t know already. But apparently, these microbes living on us have their preferences. About everything. From where they live and what they eat to how they spread.
For example, the microbes on your left and right hands are distinct from each other. And, Yong says, the microbes on my right hand will probably be similar to the ones on your right hand. I’m now imagining a gang of microbes searching for a hand to occupy and finding themselves on a left hand. But too bad, because the left hand’s microbes aren’t pally with the right hand’s and won’t let them live for long.
Now, our stories this week didn’t have any snippets about microbial housing preferences, but they did have a good mix of “Aha, that’s interesting” and “Whoa, what!”
On Monday, Olina [wrote](https://the-ken.com/story/public-edtech-private-bottleneck/?utm_source=recap&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) about DIKSHA, a government-owned edtech platform. It’s not only free to use but it also decentralises education. But, as Olina reports, it’s built by a billionaire-run philanthropic foundation and states aren’t too happy with what they have in store for them.
Our [story](https://the-ken.com/story/how-digit-married-tech-with-tradition-to-build-an-insurance-unicorn/?utm_source=recap&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) on Tuesday, written by Arundhati, was a classic tale of disruption. But this one came with a twist. Digit, the new insurance company on the block, did in three years what most do in seven to 10. But despite its name, it didn’t do it by leveraging tech in the way one would expect a startup to do. It did it the old-fashioned way—to help agents, and brokers do their jobs better.
Old-fashioned is also a term that can apply to Bengaluru-based SaaS startup Postman. Not in terms of what they do, but how they became successful—with slow, steady, old-fashioned grunt work. The company is already valued at upwards of $2 billion and is gunning for much more. And it all began with an extension on the Chrome Web Store, co-founder Ankit Sobti [tells](https://the-ken.com/story/the-interview-postman-ankit-sobti/?utm_source=recap&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) Sumanth in an edition of The Interview.
On Thursday, Maitri [dove](https://the-ken.com/story/a-change-of-guard-and-priorities-at-indias-national-health-authority/?utm_source=recap&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) deep into the National Health Authority, an Indian government body responsible for implementing one of the world’s largest public health insurance schemes. Indu Bhushan, the founding CEO of the organisation, was booted out in favour of RS Sharma, the vociferous bureaucrat who oversaw the Indian telecom sector’s breakneck transformation. This free story of the week has all the juicy details of the agency’s transition period.
On Friday, Bhumika [went](https://the-ken.com/story/how-raw-pressery-ran-out-of-juice-and-into-wingreens-arms/?utm_source=recap&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) behind the scenes of Raw Pressery’s acquisition by another niche FMGC company—dips and sauces company Wingreens. And what an acquisition it was. Valued at $69 million two years ago, the cold-pressed juice company sold to Wingreens for one-fifth of that amount. Covid was only half the story.
We wrapped up the week with our Saturday newsletter, [The Nutgraf](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/clubhouses-10-better-solution/?utm_source=recap&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter), in which Praveen took a peek into the fascinating world of Clubhouse, a social media product that’s very different from other social media products. At a deeper level, it’s a Trojan horse, he writes.
That’s it from me. Our friends over at the Southeast Asia edition are celebrating the Chinese New Year this weekend. How is your Sunday looking like?
Cheers,
Shreedhar
|
What you just read is The Ken's weekly recap of its stories. Written by a different person each week. Often insightful, sometimes witty, and very rarely boring. Someone sent this to you? [Sign up for free](https://the-ken.com/?modal=register&utm_source=footer&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=in_recap_email). Don't like these? You can [unsubscribe](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/unsubscribe/?user_id=2349339&data=bQpvEhi3bUrP5eerQGQugxKTfv9seuws_fbf9sni2LPRjGULH46lMGOwL_MQu6OJGiYu2rgJo_MB4b7dBqWoi4JXSczg8EhOJeEizZIRWdTYwh7Y12Ezxpt1KRP5lLuNZGlTYwuPQOMofPXPXwpiGaWp8SpyxXq5-Vwwp_W2E-2T3GCpTtTJfExqzGwGnWQFnLZ6AS8tHMFQ_NUl9xzcimLceOykq2z0Lk07Tnf5e5GVeKHBlv4tjlzy0t8Uj-evtZ03VA4F8Nb7am9U9V1Q-FC2yHWmhLJ7FYccvA7L4yTqRsfJhlxjenYx42xBBL9WK48CcG6-heQ9hLBRVue0xwCazVgeGI98Z3eSiwl9mAr7Putq_1qKHInMOhwCrxSxpVYr0JCAdQtOw-oEuec1VLe49Ws5d8CuV3iz7c3C-c4Pjkw3JDQRE0UzRb20pLdiIh6KZ_FXj1mUmmpXpJeje_U6XdDlMezQRostY_RAw8uGzlFNycjJV3bxHQiWxs1WXOeA85zpDmGW5oxzFNhoicZb55tGJc6i8EaX3ooWMdw6qXh_IaUAjrl9N6EF3ks3). Want to manage your emails? Click [here](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/?user_id=2349339&data=M5cUwcJAZ3sXAhtGpr9_cyuCt5v3hXrYt92eTbtJrMB3R6rPDt_MhNUY9bD-N59CbhmJByOjBtaRwxA5E6e3FCg94CQGy6UzTqcqETApd6jRCDZ7yKIta6YWnU681-YqYjy7sr3Vva-MxG8Sjx_u79ghM-KZUBd_kulvdAcgRmqY7nMWmhn6_c44pJAcaG-0xKxmnHwno9vJih4B5VkUnRUU0VU-83b-lPrjDmXgWYOsOLBm5Rs8uXbPzsDpX1Qlg_6sAVfFvCf3nJnl9y3Del5AHOeat9e7RTno53rw7MP2KCPqLpnM1A6dDWaLWty0Ej5h4wEpenQES5HK16PJ78KPPYlYb0EmWkvZ2CeHeZGAE8hEIpjtgXedSOw0SoDRXhRhyIKAo274w-Kg3hEiy4S1V0u5zdDjF-a1JN_-Ow24L9w-Et1CjhmK5bcxzhvDrMM2utzPMaVsPDhGVnUQTDjUtfvc_3TxnLtN7EF3pdHic_xhsgqr6W-HUnREuj1NJ-FFwTIBm3a5dWlYxZ1Io-bVR4WbzmbfidzCIJZw8sRi2tiF7M3PN6XlVGlgsVcg).
|
|
|
|
|