---
subject: "5 ways to use NFTs; it's tax season; court cases"
from: "web3 newsletter from a16z crypto <a16zcrypto@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-01-24 22:45:09
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "a16zcrypto"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_2535365729249697677"]
---
📖🎨 5 ways you/ your company can use NFTsScott Duke Kominers and Steve Kaczynski
For everyday consumers: Have you ever tried to buy a sold-out concert ticket, and worried that the seller could have sold the exact same ticket code to someone else? Or ever wished you could move your x-rays to a new dentist more easily? NFTs solve these and other needs by turning such data into a digital asset that’s maintained in an account you uniquely own. If you wanted to move your NFT medical records, you could simply redirect access to a new provider — in the same way you might carry a sheaf of documents from one doctor’s office to another. Similarly, an NFT ticket can only be owned by one person at a time, bought and sold just like a physical good. And while some NFTs are transferable, others are non-transferable — tied to a specific account, just like a driver’s license is tied only to a specific individual. These features open up many use cases — from new kinds of loyalty programs to new kinds of experiences bridging the digital and the physical. share 🗞️🗳️ In the news: Coinbase vs. SECMiles Jennings The news: Last week, a hearing took place between Coinbase and the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), alleging that the firm had facilitated the trading of tokens that should have been registered as securities. Coinbase asked the court to dismiss the case, and the court is expected to rule by this spring. [The case was first filed this summer; other charges included failing to register its crypto asset staking-as-a-service program. We covered the significance of staking in a So, following high-profile collapses in 2023, the SEC appears to have shifted more attention to digital asset exchanges instead. If getting overwhelmed by issuers, it would (seem to) be much more efficient to throttle the chokepoint instead. Since exchanges act as a gateway for new users, with only a few such platforms that service customers in the U.S., targeting them would mean seizing control of what tokens U.S. trading platforms are able to list.
Their newfound focus raises the stakes while making actual progress unlikely. These cases are neither likely to produce clear rules of the road nor provide better consumer protection. Even if the agency succeeds, the rulings could create way more confusion than they resolve. Such inconsistent court rulings and long-time horizons only breed more uncertainty (as we’ve already seen with the 🧾💸 Signal vs. noise: Tax reportingMichele Korver and Marianne Winkler -- Sonal Chokshi, Tim Sullivan, Jonathan Ringen, and a16z crypto teams subscribe to our podcast ' |