---
subject: "On OpenAI Dev Day"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-11-09 16:03:02
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Turbo BoostFirst off, we have GPT-4-Turbo.
Knowledge up to April 2023 is a big game. Cutting the price in half is another big game. A 128k context window retakes the lead on that from Claude-2. That chart from last week of how GPT-4 was slow and expensive, opening up room for competitors? Back to work, everyone. What else?
This kind of feature seems highly fiddly and dependent. When it starts working well enough, suddenly it is great, and I have no idea if this will count. I will watch out for reports. For now, I am not trying to interact with any APIs via GPT-4. Use caution.
Better instruction following is incrementally great. Always frustrating when instructions can’t be relied upon. Could allow some processes to be profitably automated.
I love the idea of seeing the probabilities of different responses on the regular, especially if incorporated into ChatGPT. It provides so much context for knowing what to make of the answer. The distribution of possible answers is the true answer. Super excited in a good way.
Some academics will presumably grumble that the old version is going away. Such incremental improvements seem nice, but with GPT-4 getting a price cut and turbo boost, should be less call for 3.5. I can still see using it in things like multi-agent world simulations. This claims you can now
I don’t interpret the numbers that way yet. There is still a substantial difference at scale, a factor of five or six. If you cannot afford the superior GPT-4 for a given use case, you may want the additional discount. And as all costs go down, there will be temptation to use far more queries. A factor of five is not nothing. New ModalitiesI’m going to skip ahead a bit to take care of all the incremental stuff first: All right, back to normal unscary things, there’s new modalities?
I can see the DALL-E 3 prices adding up to actual money. When I use Stable Diffusion, it is not so unusual that I ask for the full 100 generations, then go away for a while and come back, why not? Of course, it would be worth it for the quality boost, provided DALL-E 3 was willing to do whatever I happened to want that day. The text-to-speech seems not free but highly reasonably priced. All the voices seem oddly similar. I do like them. When do we get our licensed celebrity voice options? So many good choices.
All right, sure, I suppose it is that time, makes sense that improvement is harder. Presumably it is easier if you want a quirkier thing. I do not know how the fine-tuning is protected against jailbreak attempts, anyone want to explain?
Expensive is presumably the watchword. This will not be cheap. Then again, compared to So far, so incremental, you love to see it, and… wait, what? Assistants API, Retrieval, and Code Interpreter
It has been months GPT-GPT
First off, horrible name, highly confusing, please fix. Alas, they won’t. All right, what do we got? Ah, one of the obvious things we should obviously do that will open up tons of possibilities, I feel bad I didn’t say it explicitly and get zero credit but we were all thinking it.
There will be an An incrementally better example is Tyler Cowen’s GOAT is another example. Authors can upload a book plus some instructions, suddenly you can chat with the book, takes minutes to hours of your time. The educational possibilities alone write themselves. The process is so fast you can create one of these daily for a child’s homework assignment, or create one for yourself to spend an hour learning about something. One experiment I want someone to run is to try using this to teach someone a foreign language. The right way to use ChatGPT going forward might be to follow the programmer’s maxim that if you do it three times, you should automate it, except now the threshold might be two and if something is nontrivial it also might be one. You can use others’ versions, but there is a lot to be said for rolling one’s own if the process is easy. If it works well enough, of course. But if so, game changer. Also goes without saying that if you could combine this with removing the adult content filtering, especially if you still had image generation and audio but even without them, that would be a variety of products in very high demand.
As usual, reliability is not perfect, and mistakes are often silent, a warning not to presume or rely upon a GPT will properly absorb details.
I am totally swamped right now. I am also rather excited to build once I get access. Alas, for now,
Luckily that is obviously not what is happening, but for the record I do not like to imagine that, because I like remaining alive. There are going to be a lot of cool things. Also a lot of things that aspire to be cool, that claim they will be cool, that are not cool.
Agents are where claims of utility go to die. Even if some of it starts working, expect much death to continue. Putting It All TogetherFrom the presentation it seems they will be providing a copyright shield to ChatGPT users in case they get sued. This seems like a very SBF-style moment? It is a great idea, except when maybe just maybe it destroys your entire company, but that totally won’t happen right? Will this kill a bunch of start-ups, the way Microsoft would by incorporating features into Windows? Yes. It is a good thing, the new way is better for everyone, time to go build something else. Should have planned ahead.
Look, no, stop. This stuff is cool and all. I am super excited to play with GPTs and longer context windows and feature integration. Is it all three orders of magnitude over the previous situation? I mean, seriously, what are you even talking about? I know words do not have meaning, but what of the sacred trust that is numbers? I suppose if you think of it as ‘10 times better’ meaning ‘good enough that you could use this edge to displace an incumbent service’ rather than ‘this is ten times as useful or valuable’ then yes if it they did their jobs this seems ten times better. Maybe even ten times better twice. But to multiply that together is at best to mix metaphors, and this does not plausibly constitute three consecutive such disruptions. Unless these new agents actually work far better than anyone expects, in which case who knows. I will note that if so, that does not seem like especially… good… news, in a ‘I hope we are not all about to die’ kind of way. It is also worth noting that this all means that when GPT-5 does arrive, there will be all this infrastructure waiting to go, that will suddenly get very interesting.
Being the CEO of an AI company does not seem incompatible with what is traditionally referred to as ‘hype.’ When people in AI talk about factors of ten, one cannot automatically take it at face value, as we saw directly above. Also, yes, ‘the next version of humanity’ sounds suspiciously like tech speak for ‘also we are all quite possibly going to die, but that is a good thing.’ Ben Thompson has covered a lot of keynote presentations, Users get faster responses, a larger context window, more up to date knowledge, and better integration of modalities of web browsing, vision, hearing, speech and image generation. Quality of life improvements, getting rid of annoyances, filling in practical gaps that made a big marginal difference. How good are the new context windows?
It makes sense to allow 128k tokens or even more than that, even if performance degrades starting around 73k. For practical purposes, sounds like we want to stick to the smaller amount, but it is good not to have a lower hard cap. Will Thompson be right that the base UI, essentially no UI at all, is where most users will want to remain and what matters most? Or will we all be using GPTs all the time? In the short term he is clearly correct. The incremental improvements matter more. But as we learn to build GPTs for ourselves both quick and dirty and bespoke, and learn to use those of others, I expect there to be very large value adds, even if it is ‘you find the 1-3 that work for you and always use them.’
Currently conspicuously absent is the ability to make a GPT that selects between a set of available GPTs and then seamlessly calls the one most appropriate to your query. That would combine the functionality into the invisible ‘ultimate’ UI of a text box and attachment button, an expansion of seamless switching between existing base modalities. For now, one can presumably still do this ‘the hard way’ by calling other things that then call your GPTs. You're currently a free subscriber to |