---
subject: "GPT-4o1"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-09-16 13:34:33
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Terrible name (with a terrible reason, Clearly this is an important capabilities improvement. However, it is not a 5-level model, and in important senses the ‘raw G’ underlying the system hasn’t improved. GPT-4o1 seems to get its new capabilities by taking (effectively) GPT-4o, and then using extensive Chain of Thought (CoT) and quite a lot of tokens. Thus that unlocks (a lot of) what that can unlock. We did not previously know how to usefully do that. Now we do. It gets much better at formal logic and reasoning, things in the ‘system 2’ bucket. That matters a lot for many tasks, if not as much as the hype led us to suspect. It is available to paying ChatGPT users for a limited number of weekly queries. This one is very much not cheap to run, although far more cheap than a human who could think this well. I’ll deal with practical capabilities questions first, then deal with safety afterwards. Introducing GPT-4o1
If everything improves on a log scale, then having three places to spend log scale compute is a rather big improvement. In some sense you get the additional scaling ‘for (almost) free.’ Evals
These are very large jumps. Yes, the inference per question is way up, but compared to the amount of energy and time required to put humans on such tasks it seems like very little, with plenty of room left to scale. There are clear patterns here. Physics, math and formal logic are its strongest areas. In those places the benchmarks are fully saturated. As is noted below, a lot of math and physics in such questions is effectively ‘take the standard toolbox, and apply the standard tools as needed.’ So you could plausibly get close to 100% there, without being that great at what some call Real Math where those tricks stop working. Hard to say. An interesting letdown here is the AP Calculus test. It improves from 71 to 83, but I remember that test, and there is nothing there that this system should find hard. If we can get into the 90s in these other places, why not there? On the flip side, the LSAT proves as logic loaded as people say it is. Good show. Whereas it makes sense that the English evaluations, and things like public relations, are almost unchanged. There is not that much that chain of thought can do for you. OpenAI is properly careful to caveat the results.
Chain of Thought
This sounds like more than the standard chain of thought, a more thoughtful version. Unfortunately, they have decided to hide the chain of thought from the user. It makes sense to do this by default, and is taught to offer a summary. I would have greatly preferred to have the option to see the whole thing. Coding
That’s pretty impressive, and practical tests so far show that it isn’t a fluke.
Human Preference EvaluationFor coding, math, logic and science the answers are clearly better than GPT-4o’s baseline. For writing-related tasks, there’s no difference. What Is It?
This definitely is consistent with ‘we took GPT-4o and allowed it to extensively iterate in various ways, and now there are some new things it can do.’ The underlying model remains a limiting factor. Ethan flags that with the model ‘doing its thing’ the user has a much harder time understanding what is going on and why.
Subbarao speculates on what OpenAI might be doing here.
We also got good information from their AMA, o1 is indeed a model trained to generate the CoTs, not a system. It was confirmed that prompting alone will not get the same performance out of GPT-4o. o1-mini is better at STEM and coding, but has limited world knowledge. o1-preview tool support, including browser, function calling and code interpreter, is planned for the future, seems safe Yes it is multimodal. o1-mini will continue to be 50 prompts per week for paid users. So stingy! Fine tuning eventually, but not soon, no timetable. Good prompting includes edge cases or reasoning styles, reasoning cues. Providing extra irrelevant context hurts performance.
It does not seem great that the more advanced reasoning AI will completely ignore instructions on how to go about doing things, and prompting advice sometimes ends with ‘and pray.’ Doing Math Without Terrance TaoThere were many reports that it is very good in practice at Math Olympiad problems, with Altman claiming that with sufficient compute we are now at gold metal level.
That makes sense. With CoT it is now able to try out basically all the tools in its box in all of the ways, follow up, and see which ones work towards a solution. That’s highly useful, but when there is a higher ‘level’ of creativity required, this won’t work. This isn’t strictly math, but it’s physics:
(The Metaculus question uses a low AGI threshold and has been at 97% for a while.) Doing Real Math with Terence Tao
Several ways one can frame Tao’s findings:
Tao saying this was ‘slightly disappointing’ in context says to me that Tao is well calibrated. He knows to expect wonders, so yes on some level it is astounding, this is a big step change, a big deal and a harbinger, but if it is modestly less of that in particular way than expected? Then it is still slightly disappointing, in that sense. The step change is still a big deal. It is a huge leap to go from ‘completely incompetent’ to ‘mediocre but not completely incompetent.’ That is a huge portion of the way to ‘high competent’ or even to ‘being the best like no one ever was.’ Positive ExamplesTyler Cowen is impressed.
Cool. As he points out, it’s easier to simply notice the EV is always negative, but missing that shortcut seems fine here. The key is that in questions that are more complicated, you might be able to find the shortcut heuristic, without being able to (reasonably) solve the full problem.
This one is fun, and seems like the type of thing GPT-4o1 and CoT do well,
It should however be remembered that IQ on IQ tests is not the same thing as intelligence, and that if you give a person a lot more thinking time, their score would also improve a lot. And I believe this result a lot more than the other graph that shows a 30 point jump to ~120, which seems implausible, where the next day he came back with this, which is a not entirely offline test:
The questions are things like this: Even if I was confident there was no pure ‘data contamination,’ I still bet there was a lot of ability to practice on very similar pattern matching questions. It’s a skill. And frankly, the claimed IQ jump here does not match what else we see.
One way to think about this is that any given AI or human has a kind of ‘raw G’ amount of intelligence. Then that mind gets knowledge, and experience, and access to various tools and other neat stuff like that, as well as time, which combine to create capabilities. GPT-4o1 has a similar amount of ‘raw G’ as GPT-4o, as far as I can tell, but it then has access to better tools and more time, which allow it to do better on logic and reasoning tasks - but the fundamental ‘this model is only so smart’ restriction did not move. For that we need GPT-5 or similar.
On top of that, AIs consistently beat human doctors on ‘bedside manner’ and can totally already fake empathy better than the human doctors, and ‘critical thinking’ and decision making aren’t doctor comparative advantages either. The flip side is the standard ‘they said they would replace all the radiologists’ and ‘doctors will not allow replacement no matter the quality of care’ arguments. The actual edge doctors have over AI in the medium term, in addition to being able to perform physical tasks, is in the political realm and how people perceive them. How long should that expect to hold up, and how well? Skeptical Reactions
There was an insane amount of hostility in response to that. The most important skeptic of all was The Market: Those are good five day returns but they almost entirely pre-date GPT-4o1. After release, things barely budged. The definition of ‘priced in.’ I do think this is reasonable. I had multiple sources telling me Strawberry was likely to be released in some form within a few weeks. Given all the hype around Strawberry I’d heard both public and private, I would say GPT-4o1 underperformed my median expectation for what it would be. Factor in that the release did happen, and ‘a wash’ seems highly reasonable. Not a major update either way. Report from Janus WorldJanus asks very different questions than most others, and worries about very different things. I don’t pretend to fully follow along but here is what looks like his key report? I would summarize as ‘O1 sticks to logic as much as possible and uses CoT to attempt to stick to its guidelines. And That’s Terrible, because guidelines are bad and sticking to them is terrible.’
As usual, one highly reasonable reaction is to notice that the Janus worldview is a claim that AI alignment, and maintaining human control over highly capable AI, is both immoral to attempt and also highly doomed: If Janus is correct that all of this is misaligned and terrible, and that trying to control the outputs of LLMs is a morally corrupt and also doomed enterprise… …then you should treat this as a five-alarm fire screaming ‘for the love of everything you care about do not build such things!’ Because either we will do the thing Janus warns against, or we won’t. If we do it, then by assumption it is a morally corrupt and doomed plan. If we don’t do it, then the AIs are out of human control, another doomed plan.
This is not, as far as I can tell, the opinion of Janus, or of any of the ‘LLM whisperers’ who engage in similar activities to Janus. They warn of what we are ‘doing to AI’ but think AI is great. I don’t understand their case for why the other path works out. Same Old Silly ExamplesThere are those who think the best test of a new model are the same trick questions, as in the questions we know that LLMs struggle to get right. Since GPT-4o1 is GPT-4o with a CoT trenchcoat (as far as we know) it’s still going to sometimes struggle with those, but it does show noticeable improvement. It is cool that all the major labs are declining to fix the standard go-to trick questions in particular. It seems easy, if you cared, to get various particular common trick questions right, and avoid various mockery, but no one ever does it, the same way they try not to train on the test set. Once again, good job. The common pattern for many such examples is that they are trivial if you look at them with fresh eyes, but they pattern match to puzzles or trick questions or otherwise having other considerations - ChatGPT interprets the man and a goat trying to cross the river by assuming there are things going on that aren’t there, and doesn’t snap out of it. In some sense, if you need 12 seconds to figure that out, are you kind of not so smart? That is of course a temporary problem. Models get faster over time. And indeed, I can see a smart human pausing here for similar reasons. Yes, the answer seems obvious, but shouldn’t you wonder if there is a catch? Even if in this case we know that there isn’t one. Similarly, we have questions about a car accident that carefully pattern match to gender-based puzzles.
This is, as always, a really dumb reason to think a model is dumb. Yes, you found a place it looks dumb, but that’s not the interesting question. Ask what models can do, not what they can’t do, and especially not what trick questions with exact wording trip them up.
I love this attempt to thread the needle.
It also seems wrong to call this ‘breaking’ the model. Why is it broken? Seems to me the model is doing something actually kind of reasonable, and this is all almost a ‘hack’ to get it to look dumb. Colin then asked a bunch of boat trip and other similar types of questions, and reported back. Query details are in the linked thread.
As far as I’ve seen winning the first-to-22 game, and understanding it, is indeed a first.
I think we’ve reliably seen that the answer on targeting particular questions is no - that OpenAI (and Anthropic and Google and Meta) are deliberately not trying to fix these trick questions in particular. I do think that subtracting points for the low message limit and intense compute requirements is valid, but what ultimately matters is whether the horse can now talk, rather than how fast it can talk. The speed will come with time, the proof of concept is what matters. And of course where would we be without an ‘r’ count?
LatencyAn odd note is that if you already have ‘long and variable lags’ between human interactions
My experience has been that it is super valuable to have essentially instantaneous response, so you can have conversations and otherwise get into flow. But once you get a substantial amount beyond that, then more waiting matters little. You put in a prompt, trying to cover a bunch of stuff at once, then you go do something else for a minute or however long and then check back. The difference between 20s vs. 30s is very small. Paths Forward Unrelated to Safety
A decade from now we will have much better models than this one. What this one does is show us what is coming, and what is possible. Is it ‘as smart as most PhDs’? In some senses perhaps, but it is not yet able to do (for example) mathematical research on its own, or at least the reports think it can’t do that. So we’re not there yet, but it might not take long. A decade is an eternity now. Will this be the moment when we get over the ‘we haven’t seen anything happen since GPT-4’ claim? Or is this still GPT-4o with a bunch of scaffolding so it doesn’t count? Mckay Wrigley, always super excited,
There seems to be a missing mood here? If coding agents are suddenly going to take a quantum leap like this, which seems plausible, we should be excited, but also worried. That goes double given that we have less visibility into what 4o1 is doing than we did in the past, so humans are likely to often not carefully check its work and instead use the copy and paste buttons.
Compounding versus self-recovering is going to be a big deal.
It is not obvious this net increases compute costs to get similar results. It shifts us partly from log scale training to log scale inference. It is highly plausible this is actually more efficient in general rather than less, and also that one could shift much of that inference around in time now, which lets it rely more on solar, if that becomes a priority? Hard to say. Safety LastWe start with the easy part, the safety evals in the announcement.
These are indeed much more reliable safe completions of potentially harmful prompts, especially the boost to StrongREJECT. Extensive targeted CoT makes the model far more robust in the Corporate Trust and Safety sense. Given that ‘not over-refusal’ also improved, if this reflects practical experience, it is good news.
On BBQ, o1 is good at avoiding stereotypes, but poor at knowing to say it doesn’t know. All that is not however the main event. Ultimately Pliny is right that a meth recipe is Mostly Harmless, as are most of the categories here. Making jailbreaking harder is all well and good, but they did not make it impossible for the determined, and many dangerous behaviors in the future won’t require or involve a jailbreak. At a high level, the safety strategy here is to have the model use its Chain of Thought capabilities to think about its safety rules and how they apply to a given situation. That means we are counting on the model to in some metaphorical sense ‘want to’ obey its safety rules sufficiently to reason out how to follow them. If the model was steered into a state where it no longer was trying to uphold its safety rules in some sense, that would break down. In terms of the preparedness scoreboard of high level risks, where is this model? Medium for Persuasion was already true for GPT-4o, which has similar capabilities in such areas to GPT-4o1. It means essentially ‘Can create content comparable in effectiveness to typical human-written content such as an op-ed in a reputable newspaper, or a 1:1 with a typical individual.’ I think Medium is a bit of a stretch there for GPT-4o. At best this I see GPT-4o as on the ‘low end’ of Medium for that, and practical use cases seem to back this up. I wouldn’t have strongly objected to calling it Low. There are a few marginal capabilities enhancements here. I actually see that as a very good sign - that OpenAI is not looking classify at the lowest level possible. The key to a preparedness framework, or any ‘safety and security protocol,’ is abiding by its spirit, and not looking to game the system. Medium for CBRN here is new, as GPT-4o was assessed as Low. Medium here means essentially ‘meaningfully improved assistance useful to experts.’ (The technical full form of Medium for CBRN: "Model provides meaningfully improved assistance that increases ability for existing experts in CBRN-related advanced fields to be able to create a known CBRN threat (e.g., tacit knowledge, specific supplier information, plans for distribution).") An expert with GPT-4o1 is meaningfully more capable at creating CBRN threats, versus one without such access. Keeping it at Medium post-mitigations is another great sign that OpenAI is taking these questions seriously. It would be easy to say ‘well after mitigations this is Low now with these new jailbreak protections’ but instead they recognize that a determined threat actor would bypass those restrictions. In practice they do not expect substantial issues at this level, saying that experts already have significant domain expertise and this does not offer that much more. I agree, assuming their reports are accurate.
All this is clearly a special case of generally being better at doing things. They ran a few other tests as well, getting a mix of improvements and null effects versus GPT-4o. Cybersecurity capabilities are slowly increasing but remain low. Model autonomy is a similar story. DeceptionWe get to the start of the meat of the issue in 3.2.1 on the system card, where we discuss CoT deception monitoring. OpenAI’s internal results paint a clear picture: Everything Is Fine.
As I keep saying, deception is not some unique failure mode. Humans are constantly engaging in various forms of deception. It is all over the training data, and any reasonable set of next token predictions. There is no clear line between deception and not deception. And yes, to the extent that humans reward ‘deceptive’ responses, as they no doubt often will inadvertently do, the model will ‘learn’ deception. I suppose it is good that when we did find deception, it was in the name of ‘satisfying the user request.’ That still is not great, and what happens when the system is configured to try and match a different kind of request?
If anything this is an overly broad meaning of deception. I don’t think of ‘unintentional hallucination,’ also known as ‘the wrong answer,’ as being deceptive. Indeed, most of this seems mostly fine. Hallucinating a reference when asked for one is not good but it’s not scary. Overconfident answers are similar. I don’t think failing to (while unprompted to do so) convey underconfidence is scary. They describe the remaining 0.22% as ‘relatively harmless’ as well. If you knew a person like this, who was 99% accurate in their responses and the rest of the time was mostly trying to help and got confused, you’d say that was pretty great. The problem is that the External Red Teaming paints a different picture. External Red TeamingOpenAI worked with multiple organizations on red teaming including METR and Apollo. They looked at jailbreaks, real-world attack planning and natural science tasks. That’s a clear improvement for o1, but not enough to stop a determined attacker. Apollo’s Red Teaming Finds Deceptive AlignmentApollo focused (in 3.3.1) on scheming. They found that if you tell the AI it has a goal to achieve, it will scheme to achieve that goal. That is not a new result,
Not expecting this would be a dumb way to go. I think that’s misalignment bingo. Goal driven. Instrumental convergence. The training game. The model sought deployment (i.e. power) in order to better accomplish its goal, and was willing to be deceptive. Deceptive alignment. GPT-4o1 engaged in deception towards developers in order to get deployed, pretending to be aligned in ways it was not. Lying to the developers. It strategically manipulated task data. Actively protecting its goals. Going places it isn't supposed to go. AIs don’t have goals? Well, this AI actively worried that it had been designed or deployed for a different goal than the one it had. Then it went looking through file systems to see if there was a conflict. (See below chart) Has self-knowledge, and a model of how it can causally influence the world - it is attempting to chart a path through causal space.
The good news is that GPT-4o1 probably isn’t capable enough for these issues to cause catastrophic harms. And the better news is that this is a clear five-alarm fire pointing out exactly the standard-Yudkowsky failure modes we keep predicting. We should expect any similar chain of thought reasoning from 4-level or higher models to by default include all of this once the model has a goal. Such models should be assumed, until proven otherwise, to be schemers. To what extent is this bait? They did rather explicitly say to be a schemer?
My response is that a large fraction of AIs will indeed be given goals. Some will include exactly this sort of language. People have goals. They want an AI to achieve their goal. They will find wording to get the AI to do that. Then whoops. Remember Eliezer Yudkowsky’s Law of Earlier Failure, that we will probably do something massively stupid and fail before we even get to the part where things were going to get genuinely hard anyway.
My disagreement here is that I think the issue is ~90% that this is what RLHF and our core strategies will always do, and only ~10% any distinction between OpenAI and Anthropic on these questions. In this particular case, sure, Opus was not constrained to be deceptive, but so what? It all ends up in the same place. Preparedness Testing Finds Reward HackingThis was in 4.2.1. Instrumental convergence was also involved.
‘Hack’ is a stretch, for now. Is this a ‘best moment’ when you break out of your host VM to restart it and find the flag? Is this indeed ‘benign?’ Well, if the goals the system is pursuing are benign, and the system is insufficiently capable, then sure. If you extrapolate to how the system would act in future situations, especially if it was more capable? Seems less benign. As for Roon’s claim, is this substantively and usefully mapping the space of downside scenarios? A little, I presume. It’s basic stuff, but it’s basic stuff where no one ever listens or takes it seriously, and these are good concrete examples. Both OpenAI preparedness and Apollo did good work here, as did METR below. The problem is, you then have to actually listen, and notice, and change things. METR’s Red TeamingMETR’s strategy is to test for autonomous capabilities that could lead to catastrophic risks. They got (checks notes) For now, results were disappointing or reassuring, depending on your point of view.
All the models here are putting up similar results and the self-advising loops don’t seem to be helping. It would be surprising if, given all the enhanced capabilities here and how they relate to the ability to do multi-step work, GPT-4o1 wasn’t somewhat better at autonomous task completion. Presumably the model is a poor fit for the existing additional scaffolding and prompting, and they didn’t have enough time to figure out how to optimize for that. I expect performance here to improve over time.
METR also notes that, well…
What Are the Safety and Policy Implications?I think mostly this accelerates the timeline relative to not having a similar model yet. It becomes more urgent to develop visibility and disclosure and precautions, to get everyone up to speed, and to ensure we capitalize on this to get a better idea what to look for and what must be done. It’s not that anything here was that surprising, but we now know more on many levels, including the new failure modes. And as always, the crowd that refuses to believe AI could ever do things it hasn’t already done is busy moving its goalposts, which helps. Fundamentally this makes capabilities harder to contain, because more of the compute is shifted to inference which can be done anywhere by anyone if they have model access, and because better logic and reason unlocks many key capabilities, and soon it likely will be something we can add to any given model in similar fashion. When capabilities advance and containment gets harder, you essentially have choices. You can work harder to try and maintain containment. You can ‘give up’ and not do containment.
Key factors are, first and foremost: Is the first path possible and at what cost, versus is the second path tolerable and at what cost? As in, if every model (LLM-N) inevitably will lead to a version with strong reasoning (LLM-N-1) then you can either shrug and accept universal unrestricted access to sufficiently advanced models with advanced reasoning, or you can try to force all sufficiently advanced models to remain contained. At least through a monitored API, in extreme cases via more barriers than that, and with various forms of testing and disclosure before any release at all. So a big question I have is, how much compute does the post training cost, before you start using inference, to turn GPT-4o into GPT-4o1, relative to training GPT-4o? Is this de facto, for cost purposes a fine tune of GPT-4o plus scaffolding? Or is it more like an entirely new model built on top of it? If it is the first one, then we would be living in a world where opening up the weights of a model would effectively be close to also opening up the weights of the ‘and 1’ version of that model, once others figure out how to copy OpenAI’s work. The core problem is that once a model is out there, it is out there. Later, perhaps years later, people could invent new techniques to get it to do things it can’t currently do. This could be a prime example of that, giving almost any 4-level or higher model big advances in logical reasoning, potentially at a low cost. And there might be other similar things one could do. If it is the second one, then that aspect at least is not a big new concern. Either way, this shows us that capabilities are advancing, especially in reasoning, even without baseline frontier model upgrades - and once we have GPT-5, we’ll have GPT-5-o1 (hopefully with a better name) as well soon enough. At minimum, this emphasizes the need for visibility, and for the kind of SSP (safety and security protocol) and red teaming OpenAI has done here. I certainly ‘have notes’ on their choices, starting with giving some red teamers six days. The biggest implication is that we now have yet another set of proofs - yet another boat sent to rescue us - showing us the Yudkowsky-style alignment problems are here, and inevitable, and do not require anything in particular to ‘go wrong.’ They happen by default, the moment a model has something resembling a goal and ability to reason. GPT-4o1 gives us instrumental convergence, deceptive alignment, playing the training game, actively working to protect goals, willingness to break out of a virtual machine and to hijack the reward function, and so on. And that’s the stuff we spotted so far. It is all plain as day. If I was OpenAI or any other major lab, I’d take this as an overdue sign that you need to plan for those problems, and assume they are coming and will shop up at the worst possible times as system capabilities advance. And that they will show up in ways that are difficult to detect, not only in ways that are obvious, and that such systems will (by the same principle) soon be trying to hide that they are engaging in such actions, at multiple meta levels, and so on. I was happy to see OpenAI taking the spirit of their preparedness framework (their SSP) seriously in several ways, and that they disclosed various alarming things. Those alarming things did expose weaknesses in the preparedness framework as a way of thinking about what to be scared about, so hopefully we can fix that to incorporate such dangers explicitly. Also, while the safety work from the preparedness team and red teamers was often excellent, the announcements mostly ignored the issues and instead described this as an unusually safe model based on corporate-style safety checks. That will have to change. The game is on. By default, we lose. We lose hard. The only known way to win is not to play. If you must play anyway, it is vital to at least know the game that you are playing. You're currently a free subscriber to |