---
subject: "The Four Day Restaurant Workweek Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-01-06 12:19:11
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Colin here. As the world went from confinement back into a semblance of reality, the stress on the hospitality world was real. Hoteliers and restaurant workers were often unceremoniously fired in the worst of times and then hastily courted back and thrust into hyper-busy workdays with less-than-polite patrons that seemed to lose their manners in the pandemic. It is a tale common in the US, but also abroad. In Dubai, which remained open for business, demands on hospitality workers were also high due to the surge of new arrivals. Based on these stresses, I was interested to see a popular restaurant experiment with a four-day work-week for staffers. The thesis was more time off means more refreshed teams and a better end experience for the consumer. And initial data shows it is working. WITI Classifieds: We are experimenting with running some weekly classifieds in WITI. If you’re interested in running an ad, The island whispers to me when no one else is around, its phosphorescent waters twinkling in the thick, flickering darkness. January is a great month to begin working with a coach to meet your goals. Gain insight, accountability, and support. Stat Significant is a weekly newsletter featuring data-centric essays about culture, economics, sports, statistics, and more. BrXnd is a new project at the intersection of brands and AI. Have a play with the first experiment: AI brand collabs.
Photo: Bloomberg. Why is this interesting? Hospitality is a race to attract the best talent in order to provide the highest touch service with warmth and care. To do this, well-rested and well-treated staff are the recipe. The restaurant industry is notorious for late nights, high standards, and a culture of “suffer in silence” as you move up the ranks. So, it is interesting to see a proactive approach being taken to care for emotional and mental well-being. It brings to mind more of the enlightened hospitality we see from somewhere like Union Square Hospitality. And at the end of the day, the war for talent matters a ton. Bloomberg
Experimentation with different working hours is nothing new for other industries—notably tech and startups—but this is an interesting precedent, and LPM plans to scale it to other locations around the Gulf. And though staff will work three fewer hours with this plan, it is a bet that the physical and emotional rest will have a knock-on effect the guests. One would surmise that greater loyalty to the restaurants and the resulting repeat visits could be a nice return on investment. The rest of the world should pay attention to what is learned. (CJN). — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) —
|