---
subject: "Highlights From The Comments On Vibecession"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-12-31 04:43:51
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
[Original post: Table of Contents 1: When was the vibecession? 1: When Was The Vibecession?… Kyla Scanlon
I appreciate this guide to the original intent of the word, but I claim ‘death of the author’ - it seems to me this is more than just a two-year problem. I remember people complaining about hellworld, the broken social contract, the Boomers tearing up the bridge behind them, vanishing opportunities for the young, the blackpill of modern life, etc, well before 2022. Memory can be faulty, but don’t we need something like this to explain the Trump campaign, the Sanders campaign, Chapo Trap House, Red Scare, 4chan, and all the other mid-2010s politicians and media telling us that things were worse than they’d ever been and outrage was the only acceptable response? And I appreciate that the economic data have gotten worse so that some level of worry is now justified. But GDP growth last quarter was 4.3% (without AI it would still have been like 4%). And I still hear people they’ll never be able to have a family but it doesn’t matter because it would be immoral to bring children into a world where they could never have any chance of getting ahead or living a normal life. Even if we’re in a mild recession now, that doesn’t sound like mild recession talk! Still, Kyla has spiritual copyright on vibecession, so maybe we need another phrase to discuss the longer-term hypothesis. I propose “The Great Vibepression”. TTAR
Good for TTAR, but I’m including this one here as confirmation that people graduating in 2014 felt like “my parents and literally every single media outlet and professor” were preaching doom at them. Moose
I agree that if you follow the consumer confidence numbers and date it to 2021-2022, inflation is an easy culprit and we don’t need to look for anything more. My theory predicts that some kind of vibecession will continue even when inflation is far in the past. Zahmakibo writes:
In 2008, a lot of people thought the Great Recession heralded the end of capitalism - either to be replaced with something better, or at least to degenerate into some obviously feudal dystopia that would end the charade and get everyone to finally agree that the system was rotten. But actually, capitalism shrugged off the Great Recession just fine, and continued exactly as before. That must have been a bitter pill to a lot of budding socialists. I wonder if something about the situation broke people’s brains. Erica Rall
I’m younger than Erica, and have less pop culture literacy: can someone tell me whether the Friends theme song was meant to express a zeitgeist that would be immediately recognizable by and sympathetic to most viewers, or whether we were supposed to interpret it as referring to a few especially unlucky people? 2: Is The Vibecession Just Sublimating Cultural Complaints?Tanya Jarvik
The two most certain things in the world are that people will suspect every social complaint of being a proxy for economic problems, and that people will suspect every economic complaint of being a proxy for social problems. The strongest argument against this position is that the vibecession started sometime between 2008 and 2023, and I don’t think this was an especially bad time for community and purpose compared to any other time since the 60s. I don’t think earlier periods of social dissolution were sublimated into economic complaints. Alex Zavoluk comes down in favor:
Alex also mentions the political angle: Obviously nothing real changes the exact second a new president is inaugurated, so people must be using questions about the economy to express their overall happiness about the state of the world. Alex asks whether increasing political polarization could make this worse. Both parties’ extreme factions share a tendency to treat the country as controlled by a hegemonic conspiracy of their enemies - the woke coastal elite Soros cosmopolitan establishment, or the neoliberal fat cat Koch Brothers tech oligarch blob. Does this mean everyone is getting some multiple of the “other party’s president is in power” effect all the time? 3: Discourse Downstream Of The Mike Green $140K Poverty Line Post… Shovacklerod
I haven’t, but other commenters suggest reading responses, including Noah Smith’s Most of these focus on Green’s explicit errors - for example, he gets most of his cost-of-living numbers from Essex, NJ, an especially rich county, then compares them to average earnings. Correct half a dozen things like this, and the real poverty line is probably somewhere between $35K - $60K. The percent of Americans below this line continues to decline every year, as it has for decades. Green finally pseudo-apologized, lambasting the “mockery machine” of the “cognitive elite” but admitting that his post “was never intended to go viral and was written for my existing audience that tends to be pretty understanding that I don’t do this for a living, but rather as PART of my living” Still, many people took Green’s article as a starting point to contribute to the Vibecession discourse, so let’s go over the ones that touch on our topic in more detail. Lincicome titles his response
I’m suspicious of including “housing (construction)” on this list - couldn’t you use the same argument to reclassify any manufactured good as a service good? - but the rest of these are well-taken. Still, did Baumol or the other economists who first discussed the effect in the 1960s predict it would make people feel like things were outright worse, as opposed to just getting better less than would be expected from raw productivity numbers? Seems strange. Also, hasn’t the Baumol effect been basically constant since at least the Industrial Revolution? And isn’t the Vibecession only 5 - 20 years old? Matt Bruenig has his own response to Green, …which is just making the common-sense point that, as society shifts from one-income to two-income families, the husband’s share of family income drops from ~100% to ~50%. So, Bruenig argues, if everyone is trying to keep up with the Joneses, and the Joneses are a dual-earner family, then this single working man has gone from making 100% of his comparison point, to making only 50%. This is a cool potential cognitive bias, but is anyone really making this mistake? Vibecession complaints hardly seem limited to men in traditional one-earner households wondering why they’re not making as much as the neighbors whose wife is a fancy lawyer. My impression is that they include both two-earner families who still feel like they’re falling behind, and (most of all) young singles who are comparing themselves to their young single friends where this issue never comes up in the first place. Matt Yglesias uses a similar strategy in He argues that the reason most wives work these days isn’t because we’re poorer (and they have to work to survive), but because we’re richer (and so wives can make so much money working outside the home that the opportunity cost is too high to pass up). A single earner could still support a family on a 1950s lifestyle. It would just feel like a failure, because we don’t realize how much worse than 1950s lifestyle was compared to our current conditions. The article’s paywalled, but you can get a pretty good sense of the argument from these paragraphs. After determining that the median man makes about $80,000/year, he writes:
When I try to retrace this, it seems possible, but barely. I imagined doing this in Sacramento, to be near family. Suppose I make $80K pretax = $6.6K/month pretax = $5K per month posttax. A cheap 3-bedroom house on a nice-enough block is $2200 mortgage, assume $3K after property taxes etc. A cheap new car is $350/month. Food can be arbitrarily low if you’re willing to eat rice all the time, but let’s say $250/month. CoveredCalifornia offered my family of four healthcare for $600/month. So top four expenses take $4200/month of the $5000/month pretax income. I don’t know; seems tough. I would like to see a more thorough breakdown of an average 2026 vs. 1956 man’s likely budget. There are also some areas where it’s harder to separate genuine declines from rising expectations. Most people in the 1950s didn’t have health insurance. Was that because they accepted lower levels of health, or because medical care was cheaper, and easy enough to afford out-of-pocket? Probably some very complicated combination of both. And it might be impossible to get certain kinds of 1950s medical care today, i.e. a bed in a cheap low-quality shared hospital room. (some of the best discussion around this came from the response to Elizabeth Warren’s The Two-Income Trap, Still, I find this tangential to the main point. Yes, a few conservatives complain that it’s hard to have a single-income family. But most vibecession complaints come from singles or dual-earner households! 4: What About Other Countries?… Dionysus
The link goes to an NYT article, which includes quotes like:
And
This is especially crazy in China, where GDP per capita is now ten times what it was back during the “Boom Years” that everyone reminisces about. This might be the smoking gun that people’s economic beliefs are totally unmoored from how rich they are. The Chinese story has an obvious moral: people care about growth rate more than level. But even this doesn’t work for America - our Vibecession doesn’t correspond to a period of unusually low growth. machine_spirit
I’m surprised to hear this. I hear many economic complaints from Europeans, but I suppose this passes through my own American filter bubble which is incentivized to talk about economic hardship for its own American reasons. Golden Feather
Citizen Penrose
I don’t know which direction this pushes. I think the UK is having the same problem with London that we have with Brooklyn, and China has their Tier 1 cities. I don’t know what the situation is in France or Germany, but I’m also not sure the Vibecession is happening in those places. JBB23
5: Comments On Rent And Housing… Fred
Good point. The chart I gave to show relatively-stable rents in NYC was 2010 - 2023. Basically no change during that time, weird. But Demost
I’d like to know more about what factors hold rents down for long-time residents. Without rent control laws, wouldn’t landlords raise rents on existing renters each year to keep them equal to the market price? David Levey
This is interesting, but I don’t think it affects most of our measures of vibecession, which aren’t looking at real estate wealth. The income of people today should be comparable to the income of people X years ago before the housing increase happened, with the exception of how much they spend on housing/rent, which we’ve already priced in. Aristides
Question for Aristides and others: why is renting so associated with apartments (eg your child can’t have a yard), and buying so associated with houses? I’m not denying this is true, I just can’t fully trace the economic logic that causes it. Ransom Cozzillio
6: Comments On Inflation… Citizen Penrose
I appreciate your work, but when I try to check ChatGPT’s work, I find that its “basket of goods” assumes the median person buys one house per year. This means the basket massively overweights the price of housing compared to everything else, and - since the price of housing has increased the most - it massively overestimates inflation. WoolyAI writes:
Okay, this one I’ll leave to the economists. 7: Comments On Vibes… Fluorescent Kneepads By Zoomers’ metric, about 1.5% of Americans are “financially successful”. Could their high standard for success be related to why they feel like they are unsuccessful, and from there why they think the economy’s bad? But an alternate interpretation of this chart is that every generation believes success is ~$500,000/year, inflation-adjusted to the value of the dollar when they were in their early 20s and forming beliefs about success. This is a bit of a stretch - surely Boomers have had plenty of time to update on the value of a dollar since their 20s, especially since many of them are still working and collecting salaries. But the math works out. Victor Thorne, responding to a demand that Zoomers to justify themselves,
Cue commenters yelling at him for feeling like he “needs” to shop at a nice grocery store, and him very reasonably responding that the question asked about “feeling financially successful”, not about what he “needs”. So one interpretation of this question is that companies have done a better job making Zoomers feel like expensive products are part of the good life (e.g. shopping at Walmart vs. Whole Foods). I endorse this: I’m in the same social class as my parents, but I remember them shopping at the same grocery store as the poor people in their hometown, whereas I mostly shop at upscale hippiesh places. Theodidactus
Ivan Fyodorovich
I was going to ask if the media is really this powerful, but DocTam
This was a formative experience for many people in Silicon Valley: there was a sudden turn from the early 2000s world where everyone loved technology and thought that the information superhighway was the utopian world of the cyber-future, to the late 2000s world where everyone hated techno-fascist tech-bro techno-oligarchs using The Algorithm to addict our children. Although there was some shift in the underlying terrain, the sheer speed of the change in opinion made a lot of people point to journalists realizing that tech was bad for their business and making an united decision to cover it negatively. Could the same thing happen to an entire economy? Should we subsidize journalists, on the theory that if they’re in a good mood, everyone else will be in a good mood too? Is this Chris Best’s secret plan for Substack? 8: Other Good Comments… Golden Feather
Cremieux (on X) He writes that they “divided by the square root of household size”, but that “this is problematic because it means Gen Z incomes are being inflated to the extent they live with their parents.” I’m not entirely sure what he means by this - if Zoomers were being counted as living in a large household, wouldn’t that deflate their income (by dividing by an artificially high denominator)? Maybe he means Boomers are getting deflated because their adult kids are counted as part of their household? But this wouldn’t affect the 20-year-old band where we’re doing most of the comparison. In any case, he includes a “couple sharing unit” graph that avoids this problem: …and it still shows every generation doing better than the last, albeit by a smaller amount. Joel Long
Mika
I hadn’t considered the bad experience → complain online → algorithm shows you pessimistic content 9: The Parable Of Calvin’s Grandparents… Calvin Blick
I like this comment for putting the “your life really is different from and better than past generations’ in ways that are invisible to you” argument in stark relief. But… Liface
…I also like this one for how it turns Calvin’s comment on its head and makes me more sympathetic to the cultural proxy argument. But… Calvin
…I really like this one because it helps show how dubious and contingent the cultural proxy argument is. Aella If it were as easy to quantify the intangibles as it is to quantify GDP, would we find that we’re in a cultural vibecession, where the intangible parts of life are also getting better and we’re just ignoring it out of the same pessimistic bias which is confusing our view of the economy? J Nicholas
If you disagree and think this sounds like a great offer, you can And J has written more about what he calls 10: Updates / ConclusionsMy strongest update is on the stories about vibecession-like sentiments in China, where incomes clearly, obviously, grew by a factor of 5-10x in the past generation. This demonstrates that vibes can be totally divorced from the real economic situation, and makes me less neurotic about searching for some way that the US vibes could be correct. My second strongest update comes from Alex’s chart showing wild swings in partisan ratings of economic health when a president from a different party gets elected, which again show vibes totally divorced from reality. The strongest counterargument is that the housing (not rent) situation has genuinely been awful since about 2020. If you want to argue that the bad vibes began then, and are entirely about not-yet-homeowners despairing at their chances of ever owning a home, then those bad vibes would be fully justified. I’m also more open to taking the consumer confidence charts seriously, limiting the vibecession proper to ~2022 - 2024, and saying it was mostly about inflation, plus a side of high housing prices. All of the pessimism before 2022 was something else, mostly coming from a few disenfranchised or chronically pessimistic groups and not having as much to do with the economy in particular. I would like to see someone seriously investigate an average 1955 couple’s budget vs. an average modern couple’s budget, discuss how far each one would go, and do a more careful analysis of who was getting the better deal, and by how much. You're currently a free subscriber to |