---
subject: "The Network State Conference"
from: "Balaji <balajis@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-10-15 22:30:51
labels: ["Balaji", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_3304713803370614215", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX"]
---
The first And tickets are only $99, meaning that the only real cost is your time! So stop reading right now. Go reserve your seat at Ok, done? Now here’s why you should come. This isn’t just another tech conference. Those are fine, but I wouldn’t see any point in organizing another just for the sake of it. No, this is a meeting of all the people building the parallel establishment. That’s more than parallel money. It’s parallel media, parallel education, parallel science, parallel construction, and even parallel cities. It’s a gathering of the aspiring Satoshis creating Internet First alternatives to the current system and the aspiring Let me explain. The Limits of TechnologyTechnology is hitting the limits of what it can do solely with technology. Because the traditional vehicle of the last few decades — the startup company — assumes a stable political environment that is no longer in evidence. For example, our literature on competition Even more fundamentally, if you’re in the West, you can no longer assume the At a fundamental level, the political environment we grew up with is transforming from constant to variable. So the model of ignoring politics to focus on technology is no longer applicable. That model Internet ValuesThere are three main responses to the decline of Western institutions. Establishment. Deny that anything much is [broken](https://substack.com/redirect/f49b92cc-f295-410a-92b6-5d2e643be556?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). And for those “minor” problems that do exist, trust existing institutions to fix them.Dissident. Prepare for collapse by tweeting, praying, prepping, holding Bitcoin, and/or moving to the safest place you can. Hope for the triumph of your favorite ideology, without much of a plan. Communist. Capitulate to our new Chinese overlords. Join the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere 2.0, willingly or grudgingly.
The first option is common among the establishment. The second option is common among Western dissidents of all stripes. And the third option is already quite popular outside the West, where many countries large and small are Technologist. Build parallel societies and parallel institutions, based on Internet values, starting now.
Why “Internet values”? Well, the solution to the collapse of Western institutions won’t be found entirely within the West. The decline would have been arrested long ago if it were that simple. Some new idea is needed, some new blood, some new energy. And the most obvious source is the Internet. After all, Musk used the Internet to The Internet has thus succeeded where the Western political process has failed. Moreover, the Internet is the basis for an entirely new global political coalition. It won’t be based on “Western values”, for the simple fact that (a) too many in the West itself reject those values, (b) most population, time, and even capital is increasingly on the Internet rather than in the West itself, (c) a huge proportion of technical talent nowadays actually comes from a background of Eastern values, and (d) the premises that underpin our most successful new institutions like Bitcoin are in fact I mean, if you think about it, when you attend a tech conference in India or Dubai or Japan, invoking “Western values” doesn’t really make sense. Yet when people use this phrase they are gesturing at something real: the common culture the global tech community shares, namely Internet values. The concept of building our new institutions on Internet values makes everything clear. Only by drawing on the global Internet can we summon the requisite capital, talent, and moral authority necessary to compete with powerful-but-failing Western institutions. This is both completely obvious — Twitter and Bitcoin are of course Internet First global networks! — and yet quite non-obvious. The Parallel EstablishmentOK, so if we’ve set ourselves the immense task of building alternatives to declining Western institutions on the basis of Internet values…how exactly do we go about it? That’s the focus of the At a high level we’re building the parallel establishment, which can be divided into physical parallel societies and digital parallel services. The Parallel Societies. The physical parallel societies are the most novel part of the Network State Conference. They’re startup cities like [Culdesac](https://substack.com/redirect/e2bff1c2-9576-496d-9288-e0fda2770f97?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)and[Prospera](https://substack.com/redirect/948a810d-1fe3-4c4d-a39c-a7e7c289d00c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), local communities like the[Neighborhood NY](https://substack.com/redirect/4e2948a1-40f5-4c9a-8210-606bd9489e67?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)and[SF](https://substack.com/redirect/1d4f1a7b-4c52-4626-91e0-b98d1b4afbba?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), and digital organizations like[Vibecamp](https://substack.com/redirect/ae9e5127-672e-4a5b-9840-bc0667587d32?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)and[Metacartel](https://substack.com/redirect/96d59c31-1a84-443d-83c2-0d5dd7280439?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). These all have in-person components, ranging from meetups to buildings to full real estate developments. As these communities get larger, they’re setting up budgets for public goods, appointing their equivalents of mayors and governors, and in general engaging in de novo political innovation on a fully opt-in, Internet First basis.The Parallel Services. The digital parallel services are more familiar, but we’re thinking about them in a new way. You can conceptualize many crypto protocols and tech companies as fixing individually failing Western institutions. For example, Ethereum and Solana are building parallel financial systems, [Synthesis](https://substack.com/redirect/c1bb3ad3-9afa-4179-b464-dc6cefe8152b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)and[Replit](https://substack.com/redirect/79ce1c87-ad42-4f3f-8968-15249132cfbd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)are providing parallel education, and[Farcaster](https://substack.com/redirect/81213cec-ad63-42b3-a2cc-3a72bdadf430?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)and Substack are developing parallel media ecosystems.
The Parallel Societies and the Parallel Services combine in interesting ways. Suppose you found a new startup society like Culdesac on the basis of car-free living (see below), which is an innovation in parallel transportation. You could import a parallel educational service (like Synthesis) to improve your K-12 education, or a parallel medical service (like By proving this out at small scale, and working out all the bugs before attracting large numbers of residents, we aren’t (a) blindly trusting the Western establishment, (b) passively waiting for the revolution, or (c) grudgingly capitulating to China, but (d) actively building the Internet-values-based future of society. If that feels like something you’re interested in, you should come to Amsterdam on October 30 and check it out for yourself. Go get your tickets Discuss this article with Balaji and your fellow subscribers at |