---
subject: "Vanishing post boxes"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2019-12-15 03:31:05
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031"]
---
As I’m writing this mail that will hit your inbox at 9 am-ish, I can’t help but think—when did post boxes really disappear?
I am trying to remember which year the red things jutting out of sidewalks in awkward angles simply vanished. The gentrification has been so gradual that I never even noticed that post boxes have been all but completely uprooted from where I live.
But somehow I still keep getting letters.
I have an uncle who lives in the hills who still writes to us regularly. Sometimes in the powder blue inland letters, shorter snappier messages in yellow postcards, and for some special occasions, he sends us one-sided postcards—the other side has a reprint of gorgeous oil paintings.
I save each one of them. I especially savour the neat scrawl and the perfectly crafted sentences that have been written without hitting undo or backspace a million times.
As for me, I write to him too. In handwriting that’s hard even for me to read at times.
But that’s not the worst part. I now find no post boxes around me to post letters to my uncle on time. Courier is an option, sure. But I’ve found a more straightforward hack. I take a picture of what I write and send it to him on WhatsApp. Sad, right? I blame it on the messaging apps that have taken over all personal communication.
That’s why, in a way, writing these weekly notes to you is special.
Now that we have gotten that wave of sentimental outpouring out of the way, here is some fodder for that left-brain of yours.
Disappearing post boxes are a sign of the internet-hooked times we live in. So its only natural that the cars on the roads kept up with the internet era. And who but the Chinese carmakers to [make the most of it](http://link.the-ken.com/uni/wf/click?upn=HQSq6eeRV1xAVaGuFOahuNCZVVXPeP-2FJpSqxhvIUDrlwGLeZVkTpBsSuZTbCBkx67kgiLyotuS-2BqlKbJCCMDxg6ovdC3RLl5r7LjH3NZDJacWvjqryq6L1AIPNbVvNJv5rT-2FeqB4z1flkCM46vp1Zzqcfiy93qUC3v78JO5IO35uWdKsFP-2F8wENvYJVZV65G_S4jLOsNx-2Fv6Jev2nvow8b7P9pBCWGd8KNZfb200gkZLQNlXQHio0noZzXtsWoloZmPWeyZsh7a4QCV9ufwCUKi00jlBT0uEdvwYDMuVuqcM8gl0OVz4Uyv-2BwJQHXK4ERtyEovT4GllNIUbnnJmFrhXJd50aDmoAYdCcBm4oK079f5NJYtP3XU84-2F5CqurRH-2B59FZYgwHgrl97Id-2FptkMFavP9DzFW8x2WQZsvtmZ1YNrg32FJ2G5d1h8Pf2K0nRspXfXHVmfJ1XX-2BPjqp-2B0EJkAsGZokuvD8h2FfRFt8vrnH831iHRSqsJVfed8lBPJTJXeTjt3sKYAPz-2FLY4bWGD-2BPCHqGshXYW0uoj9j-2Bd-2B9E6P6bU7A9KqmDP4rPrd8MopE84edT33iGf65R-2Fb-2Fs60FU6uPtRJTml2qqtdfzlU8TjYgUnwtKo1qqjpEJydzlt)? The Pranavs of The Ken—Pranav Balakrishnan and Pranav Shankar—teamed up for a story on how Chinese automakers like MG Motors have pulled into that big empty spot in the Indian automobile sector. That of features laden Internet-connected cars. So much so that MG’s SUV Hector is already India’s 10th top-selling car brand in six months. This is inspiring other Chinese carmakers to do the same. Chinese auto in India wants to pull a Xiaomi it seems.
Reporting from Malaysia on Tuesday, [Ka Kay got the real story](http://link.the-ken.com/uni/wf/click?upn=HQSq6eeRV1xAVaGuFOahuNCZVVXPeP-2FJpSqxhvIUDrln5N49l28lKnZe8eEIVpGSJuC3zja9HYl-2FU-2BSpAzySHHfszCweGcH5yS-2Bn6927xkH8gPhqgrj1SQe41t1k5jmZrgyzB6YojmfWYmeCgHHOJ86ODrTiNVSDDbkcbAMSXYyeGLevU3vhbpvQ5awIDQDnRzY6hijb-2BOgvkNKbU-2FZkew-3D-3D_S4jLOsNx-2Fv6Jev2nvow8b7P9pBCWGd8KNZfb200gkZLQNlXQHio0noZzXtsWoloZmPWeyZsh7a4QCV9ufwCUKi00jlBT0uEdvwYDMuVuqcM8gl0OVz4Uyv-2BwJQHXK4ERtyEovT4GllNIUbnnJmFrhXJd50aDmoAYdCcBm4oK079f5NJYtP3XU84-2F5CqurRH-2B59FZYgwHgrl97Id-2FptkMFavP9DzFW8x2WQZsvtmZ1YNB-2BSaByvn-2FLS6c-2FiR5bcIpfdne9d8y0D6nrtv14wgL1n5CFLuBXRCif2I-2Bu-2BxS2oxpNF-2BXmNKoXFum2p1Du8z6Emz18hcccntayFGtVW9lAn6NIrQVVzVoFkT-2B32C7mqFG-2BU2yxKWWG7gy3ggNNPaLOfYOGRplMbbgm-2BYwouLNo0NIOvZG3Y-2FinKMxO6mplEcKH8npM4DyLaXmhJiVOccY) about why South East Asia’s largest property classified business, PropertyGuru pulled the plug on its IPO two days before its listing. Sure, co-working company WeWork’s IPO disaster continues to have a drag effect on listings, but there were also fundamental issues with PropertyGuru. Like for starters, how about the fact that the company is not actually as profitable as it claimed? Kay says PropertyGuru’s aggressive accounting practices made the company look better than it actually was. To add to that, the Australian Securities Exchange, where the company filed the IPO, is going through some rough times too. Goes to show 2019 has had a way with companies that had IPO plans.
Last-mile delivery is the one problem many Indian startups want to solve. It really is a head-scratcher. Mainly because all the companies uniformly struggle with the amount of money it takes to do this business. Imagine, the last-mile logistics alone comprises almost 40-60% of the cost of delivering an item. On Wednesday, [Abinaya wrote](http://link.the-ken.com/uni/wf/click?upn=HQSq6eeRV1xAVaGuFOahuNCZVVXPeP-2FJpSqxhvIUDrkRparPQ4K3hzexyZ5hUiyvJ5mopmkuYB6GpQwdwPEX-2F1KI81-2BB68XPCpL-2BYejfoMyo0fobntfHV9RkB2jwA70yn-2B78o2SxGd-2BGBRw-2Bu6B6bu1csczboFZcOxXFsr1iEW15xE8emjpIdloRBojL4SrG_S4jLOsNx-2Fv6Jev2nvow8b7P9pBCWGd8KNZfb200gkZLQNlXQHio0noZzXtsWoloZmPWeyZsh7a4QCV9ufwCUKi00jlBT0uEdvwYDMuVuqcM8gl0OVz4Uyv-2BwJQHXK4ERtyEovT4GllNIUbnnJmFrhXJd50aDmoAYdCcBm4oK079f5NJYtP3XU84-2F5CqurRH-2B59FZYgwHgrl97Id-2FptkMFavP9DzFW8x2WQZsvtmZ1YP1c-2FnD60DC76sitK-2FpQ5U7KnanC7h1DRw-2B6mLEIbBjCDmwm3ltgx7pYLxKDq1-2FXwq6EjjhZSw98DGxGqisIAApxEQmeatTCZFkrMMQcV4sio8P9BIJ-2BHE3h8-2FTcx4gFArLYONzZDlX-2BpQogXMxyOm37aJR-2FHELv7K8sbz9xhp0lrL6MDgDJiuzk9AfQBq9S0EpJ-2BlnKuS9ckirArjwAOZ3) about this one company called Shadowfax, which claimed to have found a fix for this problem. Yes, the company is named after the wizard Gandalf’s horse in Lord of the Rings, and it is using the local Kirana stores—the mom-and-pop stores—to optimise on the cost of delivery. That’s one of the reasons why Walmart-owned Flipkart has an eye on Shadowfax and led a $60 million funding round in the company, valuing the startup at about $250 million.
The type of person a company chooses to appoint as its head says a lot about the company’s plans. [On Thursday](http://link.the-ken.com/uni/wf/click?upn=HQSq6eeRV1xAVaGuFOahuNCZVVXPeP-2FJpSqxhvIUDrkAau3twz-2FxEcTU3FwTzbaWrMUYCPbjLEWKdccP9dJDMOd-2FrKaz0-2Bkz-2FhvYRwddcll8udWzN14rxjrpn3pwzW8TQbR8VLEI-2FP-2BEJj8AqqGLB9grKGyodEVYtrITgiuoKS8q9eYfkVjBPX5IE5uj1iSX_S4jLOsNx-2Fv6Jev2nvow8b7P9pBCWGd8KNZfb200gkZLQNlXQHio0noZzXtsWoloZmPWeyZsh7a4QCV9ufwCUKi00jlBT0uEdvwYDMuVuqcM8gl0OVz4Uyv-2BwJQHXK4ERtyEovT4GllNIUbnnJmFrhXJd50aDmoAYdCcBm4oK079f5NJYtP3XU84-2F5CqurRH-2B59FZYgwHgrl97Id-2FptkMFavP9DzFW8x2WQZsvtmZ1YPxckVT6T4kUWbIAsnbo9-2Bfqn6QHGo-2Bkx3fa7LT62UdB8u3wrBEcsVse5QxFCGDTOmNloX3IQIc4Dude3Oj1iiEvNN3eiisi2DrApPy7F5Rpnx8km-2Fb-2FwvmBsRvdg32qf2JNnr03LdwL6RL4pOIwIErWUvTmTfpNfFQvTLB5ErD7cWcrpTvCllKwe0f900-2BmaQ1yzAB4BBnh8XhEvDzqxRH), Jon and Pranav (Shankar) did an intercountry collaboration to figure out what Google had in mind when it got Sanjay Gupta, the head of streaming platform Hotstar to head Google India. YouTube has been the crown of Jewel of Google’s operations in India and Gupta, while helming Hotstar, kept snapping at YouTube’s heels. Google can now use Gupta’s expertise to stay ahead of a very competitive Hotstar. But Gupta has other businesses to focus on where it is a very close race—like payments.
On Friday, Sumanth and I [looked at](http://link.the-ken.com/uni/wf/click?upn=HQSq6eeRV1xAVaGuFOahuNCZVVXPeP-2FJpSqxhvIUDrln2FLj2OKcjdyEapax2NGcXfxye-2Boigjzbg2H8CZ5HqLDbrHNKYSBIp108JTxEfNkyXNjeES9jLD-2BI5ywpAN57qk8y5sdXbDRxLMS9BxE2yHNiBspphHibN-2BlZz8hH-2F61cwTGmvgtR-2FOXJjYUCpUmlOtCNb3r-2FOOnvRa-2FlicCDAg-3D-3D_S4jLOsNx-2Fv6Jev2nvow8b7P9pBCWGd8KNZfb200gkZLQNlXQHio0noZzXtsWoloZmPWeyZsh7a4QCV9ufwCUKi00jlBT0uEdvwYDMuVuqcM8gl0OVz4Uyv-2BwJQHXK4ERtyEovT4GllNIUbnnJmFrhXJd50aDmoAYdCcBm4oK079f5NJYtP3XU84-2F5CqurRH-2B59FZYgwHgrl97Id-2FptkMFavP9DzFW8x2WQZsvtmZ1YNYbyeX7Z4Kdooo4KHB6Zv4em0TycavxFByjk7jxTcv-2F0TIHCTe7SIdGp6Q-2BHFrtn8dUhfwHAE2n2peYYiEbWA0tyV453z8gcMMTS4kBdsd4aSG-2FHYcZCiVTc4tw-2F3KzcYuFiGox7sH9IDVcxe9Bb91n4tydx1w0wehabuml-2FnoTsSJQt4cghKRpYslKCucQ5ltFZPeSJbQyM-2BOU-2FjOQBOX) what xto10x is really all about. The less-than-a-year-old company was founded by Flipkart’s co-founder and former CEO Binny Bansal and two of his colleagues at Flipkart. They found a business opportunity in the fact most growth-stage companies face similar challenges—from organisation design to performance management, especially when it comes to scaling. So xto10x set up a 6-month boot camp program to mentor startups. But what it ultimately wants to become is a SaaS company that helps startups solve their operational challenges with software. A space that is littered with many free tools and many failures. We look at what xto10x is and whether it can make that 10X leap itself.
That’s all for this week. If you remember your last sighting of a post box do let me know. Even better. Write a letter to us (if you find a post box that is). I promise I’ll reply in my poor handwriting.
Sincerely,
Arundhati Ramanathan