---
subject: "Economics Roundup #3"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-09-10 13:44:48
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
I am posting this now largely because it is the right place to get in discussion of unrealized capital gains taxes and other campaign proposals, but also there is always plenty of other stuff going on. As always, remember that there are plenty of really stupid proposals always coming from all sides. I’m not spending as much time talking about why it’s awful to for example impose gigantic tariffs on everything, because if you are reading this I presume you already know. The Biggest Economics Problem
In my world the two are correlated. If you care about improving the world, you invest in learning about markets. Alas, in most places, that is not true.
Yep. There are often market failures, and a lot of the time it will be very obvious why the government is intervening (e.g. ‘so people don’t steal other people’s stuff’) but if you see a government intervention that does not have an obvious explanation, your first thought should not be to assume the policy is there to sensibly correct a market failure. No Good Very Bad Capital Gains Tax Proposals
All of this seems like a huge unforced error, as the people who know how bad this is care quite a lot, offered without much consideration. It effectively invokes what I dub Deadpool’s Law, which to quote Cassandra Nova is: You don’t f***ing matter. The most direct ‘you’ is a combination of anyone who cares about startups, successful private businesses or creation of value, and anyone with a rudimentary understanding of economics. The broader ‘you’ is, well, everyone and everything, since we all depend on the first two groups. One might think that ‘private illiquid business’ is an edge case here.
As in, 64% of gains for those worth over $100m are in shares in private business, versus only 26% public stocks.
Also untold unrealized gains that turned into losses. Easy come, easy go. Certainly the distortion here is massive. I do agree this is a problem. I like the realistic solutions even less, especially as they would effectively make it impossible for founders to maintain control. Perhaps in some narrow circumstances there is something that could be done, and one could argue for taxing unrealized gains on some highly liquid and fungible investment types, so you avoid perverse outcomes including sabotage of value (e.g. in the hypothetical ‘harbinger tax’ world, you actively want to sabotage the resale value of everything you own that you want to actually use). But would that come with a reduction in the headline rate? Here, clearly that is not the intention. So the compounding of the taxes every year would mean an insane effective tax rate, where you lose most of your gains, and in general capital would be taxed prohibitively. No good. Very bad. And also of course if you tax liquidity you get a lot less liquidity. Already companies postpone going public a lot, we have private equity, and so on. You have lots of reasons to not want to be part of the market. What happens if you add to that bigly? We should not be shocked that Silicon Valley talked about the consequences of a proposal while hallucinating a different proposal. They have a pattern of doing that. But it is not like the details added here solve the problem.
Tyler Cowen successfully persuaded me the proposal is worse than I thought it was, which is impressive given how bad I already thought it to be. Alex Tabarrok throws in the distortion that a lot of valuation of investments is a change in the discount rate. The stock price can and sometimes does double without expected returns changing. And he emphases Tyler’s point that divorcing the entrepreneur from his capital is terrible for productivity, and is likely to happen at exactly the worst time. Many have also added the obvious, which is that the entrepreneur and investors involved can backchain from that, so likely you never even reach that point, the company will often never be founded.
The most ironic part of this is that the arguments for taxing unrealized capital gains are relatively strong among people with much lower net worths, if you could keep the overall level of capital taxation constant. You encourage someone like me to rebalance, and not to feel ‘locked into’ my portfolio, and my tax planning on those assets stops mattering. The need to diversify actually matters. Whereas it scarcely matters if people with over $100 million get to ‘diversify’ and indeed I hope they do not do so with most of their wealth. Also a 44.6% capital gains tax, or even the reduced 33% later proposal, is disastrous enough on its own, on its face. The good point Dylan makes here, in addition to ‘step-up on death is the no-brainer,’ is that currently capital gains taxes involve a huge distortion because you can indefinitely dodge them by not selling even fully liquid assets. I have a severely ‘unbalanced’ portfolio of assets for this reason, and even getting rid of the step-up on death would not change that in many cases. The good news is I don’t see this actually happening. The better news is that this could create momentum for the actually good proposals, like ending the capital gains step-up on death or taxing borrowing against appreciated stocks. I do think those wins could be a big deal. The bad news is that the downside if it did happen is so so bad, and you can never be fully sure. The other bad news is that there are lots of other bad economic proposals, including Trump’s tariffs and Harris’s war on ‘price gouging,’ to worry about. The more I think this, the issue is we fail to close other obvious tax loopholes that are used by the wealthy. In particular, borrowing against assets without paying capital gains, and especially doing this combined with the step-up of cost basis at death. In today’s age of electronic records, asking that cost basis be tracked indefinitely for assets with substantial cost basis seems eminently reasonable. So I see two potential compromises here, we can do either or both. Backdate this responsibility to a fixed date, and say that you can choose the known true cost basis or the cost basis from a fixed date of let’s say 2010, whichever is higher, to not retroactively kill people without good records. If we want to exempt family farms up to some size limit or whatever special interests, sure, I don’t care. Set a size limit. Your estate can only ‘step up’ the cost basis by some fixed amount, let’s say $10 million total. If you’re worth more than that, you’re worth enough to keep good records or pay up.
Then we can combine that with the obvious way to deal with loans against assets, which is to say for tax purposes that
And we should also say that if you donate stocks or other appreciated assets, you can only claim the cost basis as a deduction unless you also pay the capital gains tax on the gain. We might also have to do something regarding trust funds. In exchange, lower the overall capital gains rate to keep total revenue constant. Scott Sumner uses this opportunity to ask I’ll stop there rather than continue beating on the dead horse. Hot TipWe can now move on to talking about ordinary decent deeply stupid and destructive ideas, such as the Trump proposal, now copied by Harris, to not tax service tips.
The potential catch on total compensation is if the minimum wage binds. If tips are untaxed, the market wage for many jobs would presumably be actively negative. So even limiting it at $0 would cause an issue. That’s a relatively small issue. The straightforward and obvious issue is this is stupid tax policy. Why should the waiter who lives off tips and earns more pay lower taxes than the cook in the back? This does not make any sense, on any level, other than political bribery.
I see this as asking the wrong questions. You do not need to know the elasticity of labor supply to know not taxing tips is bad policy. No one involved is thinking in these economic terms, or cares. Bribery is bribery, pure and simple. Also one can make a case that this will increase tipping. If people know tips are untaxed, then this is a reason to tip generously. Perhaps this increases total amount paid by consumers, so there is room for both employee and employer to benefit? But it would do so by being effectively inflationary, if this did not go along with lower base prices. The bigger and more fun to think about issue is: What happens when there is a very strong incentive to classify as much of everyone’s income as possible as tips? What other jobs can qualify as offering ‘service tips’ versus not, and which can be used to effectively launder pay? As an obvious example, a wide variety of sex workers can non-suspiciously be paid mostly in tips, and if elite can be paid vast amounts of money per hour, and it is definitely service work. Who is to say what happens there? What you’re into? Could be anything. The case for not taxing tips is that if honest workers declare tips while dishonest workers are free not to and mostly suffer no consequences, what you are actually taxing is honesty and abiding by the law. I do find this unfortunate, and the de facto law here is to not report tips up to some murky threshold, and similar to the rule for gamblers, that if you want to conspicuously spend the money then you have to declare it. Alas, there are many such cases, where you need a law on the books to prevent rampant abuse. Gouging at the GrocerOn the question of food and grocery prices,
I sympathize. It gets to me too, when I see the prices of staples like milk. Yet I also know that those additional costs are trivial, and that the time I spend to get good prices is either spent on principle, or time wasted. I do not sympathize with those warning about ‘price gouging’ or attempting to impose anything remotely resembling price controls, especially on food. If this actually happens, the downside risk of shortages here should not be underestimated. John Cochrane fully and correctly bites all the bullets and writes These two paragraphs are one attempt among many attempts to explain why letting prices adjust when demand rises is good, actually.
The post contains many excellent arguments, yet I predict (as did others) this will persuade approximately zero people, the same way John failed to persuade his mother as described in the post. People simply don’t want to hear it. Noncompetes Nonenforcement Cannot Compete With Courts
We Used to Be Poor
Even if that was typical, that sounds to me like one person earning income and two people working. Except the second person’s job was optimizing to save money, and doing various tasks we now get to largely outsource to either other people or technology. A lot of that saving money was navigating price discrimination schemes. All of it was extremely low effective wage for the extra non-job work. People went to extreme lengths, like yard sales, to raise even a little extra cash because they had no good way to use that time productively, and turn that time into money. As usual, a lot of responses are not aware that home ownership rates are essentially unchanged, both overall and by generation by age, versus older statistics, and despite less children the new homes are bigger. So, once again: We are vastly richer than we were. We consume vastly superior quality goods, in larger quantities, with more variety, even if you exclude pure technology and electronics (televisions, computers, phones and so on), including housing. An hour of work buys you vastly more of all that. Those who dispute this are flat out wrong. The part I most appreciate: All things entertainment and information and communication, which are hugely important, are night and day different. You can access the world’s information for almost free. You can play the best games in history for almost free. You can watch infinite content for free. Those used to be damn expensive. However, the ‘standard of living’ going up also means that what we consider the bare necessities, the things we must buy, have also gone way up. As Eric points out, we would not find what those ‘comfortable’ families of yesteryear had to be remotely acceptable, in any area. In many cases, it would be illegal to offer something that shoddy, or be considered neglect to deny such goods. In others, you would simply be mocked and disheartened or be unable to properly function. Then there are the things that actually did get vastly worse or more expensive. Housing (we end up with more anyway, because we pay the price), healthcare and education are vastly more expensive, and all mostly to stay in place. On top of that, various forms of social connection are much harder to get, friendship and community are in freefall and difficult to get even with great effort, atomization and loneliness are up, attention is down while addiction is up, dating is more toxic and difficult, people feel more constrained, freedom for children has collapsed, expectations for resources invested in children especially time is way up, and as a result of all that felt ability to raise children as a result of all of this is way down. As a result, many people do find life tougher, and feel less able to accomplish reasonable life goals including having a family and children. And That’s Terrible. But we need to focus on the actual problems, not on an imagined idyllic past. In particular, we need to be willing to let people live more like they did in the actual past, if they prefer to do that. Rather than rendering it illegal to live the way Eric Nelson grew up, we should enable and not look down upon living cheap and giving up many of the modern comforts if that is their best option. Everywhere But in the Productivity StatisticsThe Revolution of Rising Expectations, and the Revolution of Rising Requirements, are the key to understanding what has happened, and why people struggle so much.
The big problem is that most of the examples here are also examples of new stuff that raises our expected standard of living. We went from torture root canals to painless root canals, that is great, so is the better food and entertainment and phones and so on, but that does not allow us to make ends meet or raise a family. Whereas other aspects that are not our ‘stuff’ have also gotten worse and more onerous, or more expensive, or we are forced to purchase a lot more of them. I would definitely take 2024 over any previous time (at least ignoring AI existential risks), but the downsides are quite real. People miss something real, but they don’t know how to properly describe what they have lost, and glam onto a false image. That’s why I emphasize the need to consider what They Don’t Make ‘Em Like They Used ToAnd that’s more often than not a good thing. We instead get this persistent claim that ‘we don’t make things like we used to,’ that the older furniture and appliances were better and especially more durable. J.D. Vance is the latest to make such claims. Is it true?
There are many valid complaints about 2024. Our appliances are not one of them. Furniture might be one area where the old stuff is competitive, but my guess is this is also a failure to account for real prices, or how much we actually (don’t) value durability. Disclosure of Wages Causes Lower Wages
I continue to think this gets the mechanism wrong. Wage disclosure does not primarily assist employers in suppressing wages. What it primarily does, as I’ve discussed before, is give employers much stronger incentive to suppress wages. Everyone is constantly comparing their salary to the salary of others, and comparing that to the status hierarchy (or sometimes to productivity or market value or seniority or what not). Thus, before, it often would make sense to pay someone more because they were worth the money, or because they had other offers, or they negotiated hard. Now, if you do that, everyone else will get mad, treat that as a status and productivity claim, and also use that information against you. This hits especially hard when you have a 10x programmer or other similarly valuable employee. People won’t accept them getting what they are worth. I first encountered this watching the old show L.A. Law. One prospective associate asks for more money than is typical. He’s Worth It, so they want to give it to him, but they worry about what would happen if the other more senior associates found out, as they’d either have to match the raise, or the contradiction between wages and social hierarchy would cause a rebellion. Exactly. It is because wage disclosure allows comparison and coordination on wages, and allows employees to complain when they are treated ‘unfairly,’ that it ends up raising the cost of offering higher wages, thus suppressing them. Chalk up one more for ‘you can make people better off on average, or you can make things look fair.’ In Other Economic News
National industrial concentration is up, in the sense that within industry concentration is up,
New study on
It is not a strong as it looks, because in this case everyone knew to fire the CEO. I knew the market wanted this CEO fired, and I don’t care at all. Still, a strong case.
So first off, yeah, can’t leave, the vibes would be off. Classic California. Second, obviously there are other good reasons to want to live somewhere else, and 10%+ of gross income is a huge cost, especially if you do plan to earn a lot more. Of course it is a good reason to leave. Roon is essentially assuming that one can only make money in California, that it would obviously be a much bigger hit than 10% (really 15%+ given other taxes) to be somewhere else. Why assume that? Especially since most people do not work in AI. The Efficient Market Hypothesis is (Even More) False
The Efficient Market Hypothesis is Now More False. I find the evidence here for less efficient markets unconvincing. I do suspect that markets are indeed less long-term efficient, for other reasons, including ‘the reaction to AI does not make sense’ and also the whole meme stock craze. You're currently a free subscriber to |