---
subject: "The Amsterdam Retail Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-03-02 15:36:07
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "STARRED", "WITI", "YELLOW_STAR"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "STARRED", "Label_5752899537867939131", "YELLOW_STAR"]
---
Amber here. As a follow-up to the Amsterdam A smallish shop that gave me This shop has a few locations in Amsterdam; I visited the women’s shop on Oude Spiegelstraat and then their dedicated BLACK Commes Des Garçons space, a few doors down from Patta on Zeedijk. As a CDG collector, I was obliged to buy (more) black pants. I heard from my colleagues that the men’s shop was amazing as well—all around, they have a really good edit of Lemaire, CDG, Craig Green, Junya Watanabe, and Dries Van Noten. (I‘m always disappointed that I haven’t made it to the Dries Want to run a WITI classified? Want to reach 20,000 brilliant readers? WITI classifieds start at $250, and The Mandate is a newsletter on topics men don't like to talk about. Written by Olympic Medalist & NYT/Men's Health contributor, Jason Rogers. The OG sneaker culture/streetwear retailer in Amsterdam—can’t miss it. The story of Patta’s founders, I walked by this place, then turned right back around and walked into it because I absolutely love Delft tiles. I didn’t buy any, but I'll be back as soon as I have a backsplash to tile. I compensated with some Delft fingernails. Paris I was only in Paris for about 36 hours, but I managed to pack a lot in. Beautiful shop with a wide-ranging edit of lines that sort of sit on the streetwear/outdoor spectrum, with some art and ceramics (!), as well as the most beautiful yoga studio I have ever seen on their top floor. I got some Opium is a Paris OG sneaker shop that opened in 2001 specializing in basketball, with an entire side of the shop dedicated to Jordans. The timeline mural depicting the shop's journey is heartwarming and captures the best of sneaker culture. Wherever you fall on the Kith barometer, their new Paris flagship is incredibly beautiful and worth seeing. This is Kith’s first multi-brand location-they carry lines like Balmain and Raf Simons alongside Stone Island and other streetwear brands, as well as a shocking amount of fine jewelry and accessories. In addition, they brought Sadelle’s in as a permanent restaurant within the space (I’ve never been to Sadelle’s in Soho, but I was told the menu is pretty much the same). It was pretty funny to see people eating bagels & schmear in Paris.
A bit of a wild card at the end here. I got the Happy shopping! (AF) Quick Links: Spots I didn’t get to this trip 🙁
— Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Amber (AF) —
|