---
subject: "The Weirdness of Ferns Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-07-25 10:30:52
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Anita Schillhorn van Veen (ASVV) is a friend of WITI, executive director of strategy at ad agency McKinney in Los Angeles. She writes her own newsletter on marketing and culture, which you can read What I discovered as I dug them out was a whole other world: a system with matted layers about 4 inches thick of thready roots that stretched all the way across the bottom of my window box, with hundreds of nodules that looked like tiny kiwis, or alien eggs, or hairy grapes. What were these odd things? I consulted Google, and found that the internet is full of fern-growers mystified by them. It turns out that a few fern species, including Boston ferns, have a node called a bulbil that stores hydration and nutrients and protects the vigorous fern against drought, or human negligence. (I cut one open, and found a light green interior with the texture of a dense fruit, smelling deeply vegetal.) WITI Classifieds: We are running some weekly classifieds in WITI again. If you’re interested in running an ad, Feel here. We build brands that real people find interesting. Why? Chat with us and find out. These bulbils look prehistoric, and they may well be. Ferns existed before dinosaurs, and have been credited with creating an environment with enough oxygen for animal life. Since then, they’ve come up with new methods time and again to ensure their survival, from their 10k+ species to their promiscuous spore droppings to their ability to grow from leaf clippings, roots, or rhizomes. The mysteries of ferns fascinate not just houseplant buffs, but also climate scientists. One group at UC Santa Cruz is exploring My own ferns have also survived and thrived even with their transfer to indoor pots, where they have a little less sun and far fewer plant-friends. Scientists approve of this move too; Boston ferns have also been found to be one of the — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Anita (AS) —
You're currently a free subscriber to |