---
subject: "WTF Happened to Nike?"
from: "Trung Phan <trungphan@workweek.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-08-03 06:01:12
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Trung Phan", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_7971156048460647958", "UNREAD"]
---
Giunco says that Nike’s current plight is the result of [three decisions Donahue made in 2020 as the new CEO](https://link.workweek.com/click/36285736.54357/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cubGlua2VkaW4uY29tL3B1bHNlL25pa2UtZXBpYy1zYWdhLXZhbHVlLWRlc3RydWN0aW9uLW1hc3NpbW8tZ2l1bmNvLWxscGxmP2hhc2hlZF91c2VyPTBlYmVmMTJjNDI5MTE4NDU2MmRhYzA5OTY1YmNlODA4/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B2e93dc9d):
1. Eliminate Categories: McKinsey apparently advised Nike to get rid of categories (e.g. running, basketball, soccer, hiking) and to classify every product as either “Women”, “Men” or “Kid”.
The logic was that Nike was duplicating resources and a pivot to DTC would provide enough customer data to inform product decisions instead of relying on the category experts. Hundreds of such experts were fired and “Nike lost a solid process and thousands of years of experience and expertise in running, football, basketball, fitness, training, sportswear, etc.”
I remember when this news came out and immediately thought it was dumb. When I go to a Nike store, I always check the basketball section first. It’s because I love basketball and want to window shop for stuff I probably won't buy (but will bother the staff to get me 10x different pairs to try on). I’m sure people are the same for their favourite sports. Don’t just mash it all together.
If Nike’s products feel uninspired in recent years, I think it makes sense that taking away category experts is a root cause. I can’t confirm if McKinsey was behind this move but it sounds like the most McKinsey move ever.
This was such a clear L that Nike quietly brought back categories at the end of 2023 but now call the classification system “Fields of Play” (seems like they don’t want to fully own the mistake).
2. End Wholesale Leadership: Nike cancelled hundreds of relationships with wholesales partners and prioritized the Nike website over retail stores.
The change looked genius during COVID as shopping moved online. But as customers returned to brick ‘n mortar, Nike’s product were nowhere to be found. It had burnt bridges with retail partners, who were happy to give shelf space to upstart competitors (this wasn’t covered in Giunco’s post but I think On and Hoka stepped into the running void for a lot of stores).
There was also a lack of feedback from retailers, which led to inventory issues because the shoes put on the market did not sell as well as expected (the “data-driven” insights from online sales proved to not be a silver bullet).
3. Prioritize Digital Marketing: Nike changed its marketing budget to focus on driving users to Nike digital properties and membership platforms.
For decades, Nike spent 10% of sales on brand advertising to create an aspirational halo. The prioritization of direct response programmatic ad spend meant Nike went from “create demand” (new customers) to “serve and retain demand” (re-targeting existing ones).
The strategy meant Nike wasn’t attracting new people and probably annoying existing customers with non-stop promotions. It’s poor stock performance has a lot to do with slowing sales.
As Giunco puts it, “Because of that, Nike invested a material amount of dollars (billions) into something that was less effective but easier to be measured vs something that was more effective but less easy to be measured. In conclusion: an impressive waste of money.”
Of course we should take Giunco’s diss track with a few grains of salt. He knew a lot of Nike people that were fired and clearly has quasi-beef with the new management. He’s also a brand guy, which competes with direct response ads if the marketing budget is largely fixed.
But every point that Giunco makes sounds reasonable. Nike’s digital focus seems to have commoditized the product, impacted the brand perception and created an opening for competitors.
I recently wrote about how [Starbucks’ over-reliance on its app (31% of US sales) was compromising the in-store experience](https://link.workweek.com/click/36285736.54357/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cucmVhZHRydW5nLmNvbS9wL3N0YXJidWNrcy1kaWdpdGFsLWRpbGVtbmE_aGFzaGVkX3VzZXI9MGViZWYxMmM0MjkxMTg0NTYyZGFjMDk5NjViY2U4MDg/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Bcade4688) and the parallels with Nike’s slump is pretty clear. Both brands — founded in the Pacific Northwest — built their empires nurturing an elevated brand. Leaning too much into digital takes away from the halo.
Hilariously, both stories involve McKinsey (Starbucks current CEO Laxman Narasimhan is a former consultant from the firm) and Linkedin (former Starbucks CEO Howard Schultz cooked Narasimhan on the professional social network).
Giunco believes it’s fixable if Nike can re-balance its business, bring back some old school Nike brains and re-discover its marketing prowess. He thinks this will take years, though.
One sign that Nike is moving in the right direction is the much-talked about Olympics ad ([“Winning Isn’t For Everyone”](https://link.workweek.com/click/36285736.54357/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cueW91dHViZS5jb20vd2F0Y2g_dj1wd0xlcmdIRzgxYyZoYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B6aeadd6a)). The commercial talks up traits that are common among winners but are often socially frowned upon (selfishness, obsession etc). It’s edgy, risky and more memorable than anything Nike has done in recent years. It’s also narrated by Willem Dafoe, so you get a visual of the Green Goblin from Spider-Man while watching the ad.