---
subject: "Google and OpenAI Get 2025 IMO Gold"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-07-22 20:43:57
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Congratulations, as always, to everyone who got to participate in the 2025 International Mathematical Olympiad, and especially to the gold and other medalists.
Congratulations to Team USA, you did not ‘beat China’ but 2nd place is still awesome. Great job, China, you got us this time, three perfect scores is crazy. You’ve all done a fantastic, amazingly hard thing, and as someone who tried hard to join you and only got as far as the [****, year censored because oh man I am old] USAMO and would probably have gotten 0/45 on this IMO if I had taken it today, and know what it is like to practice for the USAMO in a room with multiple future IMO team members that must have thought I was an idiot, let me say: I am always in awe.
This Is About AI And It Is Kind Of A Big DealWhat matters is that Google and OpenAI have LLMs with gold medal performances, each scoring exactly the threshold of 35/42 by solving the first five of the six problems. This is up from Google’s 28/42 performance last year, which was previously achieved with a longer time frame. The methods used by both are presented as being more general, whereas last year’s version was a more specialized effort. The new scores were a 92nd percentile result at the event. Google did this under official collaboration with the IMO, announced on Monday as per the IMO’s request. OpenAI did it on their own, so they announced a bit earlier, so we are taking their word on many details. This was not expected. Prediction markets thought gold this year was unlikely. What matters more is how they did it, with general purpose LLMs without tools, in ways that represent unexpected and large future gains in other reasoning as well. The more I think about the details here, the more freaked out I get rather than less. This is a big deal. How big remains to be seen, as we lack details, and no one knows how much of this will generalize. Skeptics Prematurely Declare Victory
This was an early sign that problem 3 was easier than usual this year, and a strong performance by the release version of Gemini 2.5 Pro.
I disagree, I think this is a gotcha in the positive sense. People took ‘the AIs that weren’t aimed at this problem that are publicly released are only doing okay relative to the best humans, and have not proven themselves the best yet’ to be ‘look at the pathetic AIs,’ one day before we learned that, well, actually, in a way prediction markets did not expect. I do think people need to update their models of the future. Also, it’s kind of a full gotcha given this:
I don’t have time to investigate how ‘legit’ the Gemini 2.5 Pro solutions are, including in terms of how much you have to cheat to get them. DeepMind Declares Victory
Google’s answers were even in nice form.
What else did they say about how they did this?
That sounds mostly rather general. There’s some specialized IMO context, but orders of magnitude less than what IMO competitors devote to this.
Um, Elon, no, and I remind you that Grok 4 got 11.9%. Which for a human would be super impressive, but seriously, borderline trivial?
OpenAI Declares VictoryOpenAI claimed its victory first, right after the closing ceremony and before the party, whereas Google DeepMind waited to announce until the following Monday. The most impressive thing about OpenAI’s result is that they claim this is not an IMO-specific model, and that it uses only general-purpose techniques.
Indeed. Purely getting the gold medal is surprising but not that big a deal. The way they got the result, assuming they’re reporting accurately? That’s a really big deal.
Bro I Don’t KnowWhat about Problem 6? Did the programs submit incorrect solutions? Note that if you are maximizing, then when time runs out if you have anything at all then yes you do submit the best incorrect solution you have, because you might get you partial credit, although this rarely works out.
Not So Fast?If one person gets to say ‘Not So Fast’ about this sort of thing, Tao is that one person. It is entirely fair to say that if you don’t disclose conditions in advance, and definitely if you don’t disclose conditions after the fact, it is difficult to know exactly what to make of the result. Tao’s objections are valid.
The catch is that this is about grading the horse’s grammar, as opposed to the observation that the horse can talk and rather intelligently and with rapidly improving performance at that. Thus, while the objections are valid, as long as we know the AIs had no access to outside tools or to the internet (which is confirmed), we should seek the answers to these other questions but the concerns primarily matter for comparisons between models, and within a reasonably narro (in the grand scheme of things) band of capabilities. I also would note that if OpenAI did essentially do the ‘team thinks in parallel’ thing where it had multiple inference processes running simultaneously on multiple computers, well, that is something AIs can do in the real world, and this seems entirely fair for our purposes the same way humans can fire multiple neurons at once. It’s totally fair to also want a limited-compute or one-thread category or what not, but that’s not important right now. To use Tao’s metaphor, if you took 99.99% of high school students, you could fully and simultaneously apply all these interventions other than formal proof assistants and internet searches or hints so clear they give you the first point on a question, and you still almost always get zero.
As a former not only math competitor but also Magic: The Gathering competitor, absolutely all these details matter for competitions, and I respect the hell out of getting all of those details right - I just don’t think that, in terms of takeaways, they change the answer much here. In other words? Not Not So Fast. So Fast. Not Announcing So FastOpenAI chose not to officially collaborate with the IMO. They announced their result after the IMO closing ceremony and prior to the IMO 2025 closing party. Those who did collaborate agreed to wait until the following Monday, which was when Google announced. By going first, OpenAI largely stole the spotlight on this from Google, yet another case of Google Failing Marketing Forever. A question that was debated is, did OpenAI do something wrong here?
OpenAI’s Noam Brown replied that they waited until after the closing ceremony exactly to avoid stealing the spotlight. He said he was the only person at OpenAI to speak to anyone at the IMO, and that person only requested waiting until after the ceremony, so that is what OpenAI did. Not collaborating with the IMO was a choice that OpenAI made.
I have reflected on this. It is not the main thing, the results are the main thing. I do think that on reflection while OpenAI did not break any agreements or their word, and strictly speaking they do not owe the IMO or the kids anything, and this presumably net increased the focus on the kids, this still does represent a meaningful failure to properly honor the competition and process, as well as offering us the proper opportunities for verification, and they should have known that this was the case. I do get that this was a small team’s last minute effort, which makes me more understanding, but it’s still not great.
Thus, I was careful to wait to write this until after Google’s results were announced, and have placed Google’s announcement before OpenAI’s in this post, even though due to claimed details by OpenAI I do think their achievement here is likely the more meaningful one. Perhaps that is simply Google failing marketing again and failing to share details. Ultimately, the reason OpenAI stole my spotlight is that it harkens something general and new in a way that Google’s announcement doesn’t. Are We Still Waiting On Anyone Else?With Google sharing its results I don’t want to wait any longer, but note Harmonic?
This would be a weird flex if they didn’t also get gold, although it looks like they would have done it in a less general and thus less ultimately interesting way. On the flip side, they are not a big lab like Google or OpenAI, so that’s pretty impressive. This Was Not Widely ExpectedI think the failure to expect this was largely a mistake,
Final result, July 2025: 2025 (now). Buckle up, Dorothy. Some people did expect it, some of whom offered caveats.
Jevons Paradox Strikes AgainThe AIs took the IMO under the same time limits as the humans, and success was highly valued, so it is no surprise that they used parallel inference to get more done within that time frame, trading efficiency for speed.
Nothing To Worry AboutSure, you solved this particular problem, but that would never generalize, right? That part is the same hype as always?
A grand tradition is: AI can do a set of things [X] better than humans, but not a set of things [Y]. People say [X] and [Y] are distinct because Moravec’s Paradox and so on. AI lab announces that [Z], previously in [Y], is now in [X]. People move [Z] from [Y] to [X] and then repeat that this distinct category of things [Y] exists because Moravec’s Paradox, that one task was simply miscategorized before, so it’s fine.
Or: AI can do the things it can do, and can’t do the things it can’t do, they’re hard.
I mean, it probably can’t even do real math, right?
So yes, we still do not know for sure if being able to do [X] will extend to doing [Y], either with the same model or with a future different model, and [X] and [Y] are distinct skills such that the humans who do [X] cannot yet do [Y] and training humans to do [Y] does not give them the ability to do [X]. However please try to think ahead.
That is all entirely fair. An IMO problem is measured in hours, not months, and is bounded in important ways. That is exactly the paradigm of METR, and the one being talked about by Noam Brown and Alexander Wei, that we have now made the move from 10 minute problems to 100 minute problems. That does not mean we can yet solve 10,000 minute or 1 million minute problems, but why would you expect the scaling to stop here? As I discussed in the debates over AI 2027, it makes sense to think that these orders of magnitude start to get easier rather than harder once you get into longer problems. If you can do 100 minute problems that doesn’t mean you can easily go to 1000 or a million, but if you can go 1 million, I bet you can probably do 1 billion without fundamentally changing things that much, if you actually have that kind of time. At some point your timeline is ‘indefinite’ or ‘well, how much time and compute have you got?’
I am very confident we are not ready. If we are fortunate we might survive, but we definitely are not ready. So What If It Can Do The Math
Never confuse costs and benefits #RulesForLife, and never reason from a price change. (This defines ‘math’ rather narrowly as advanced Real Math that mathematicians and maybe quants and other professionals do, not the kind of math that underlies absolutely everything we do all day, since Fake Math is already mostly automated.) The value of automating is not determined by how much we spent on it before it got automated. The value is determined by how much additional value we get out of something when we automate it, which might involve a lot more production and very diffuse benefits. The Challenge BetBack in February 2022, Eliezer Yudkowsky
At this point, we have a lot of people who have updated far past 40% chance of transformational AI by 2040 and have 40% for dates like 2029. Actually This Seems Like A Big DealIf we take all of OpenAI’s statements at face value, think about what they actually did.
People On The Internet Sometimes LieGoing back to Tao’s objections, we know essentially nothing about this new model, or about what Google did to get their result. Given that P3 was unusually easy this year, these scores are perhaps not themselves that terribly impressive relative to expectations. Can we trust this? It’s not like OpenAI has never misled us on such things in the past. In terms of the result being worthy of a 35/42, I think we can mostly trust that. They shared the solution, in its garbled semi-English, and if there was something that would have lost them points I think someone would have spotted it by now. In terms of OpenAI otherwise cheating, we don’t have any proof about this but I think the chances of this are quite low. There’s different kinds of deception or lies, different parts of OpenAI are differently trustworthy, and this kind of lie is not in their nature nor do they have much incentive to try it given the chance it gets exposed, and the fact that if it’s not real then they won’t be able to pay it off later. The place where one might doubt the most is, can we trust that what OpenAI did this time is more general, in the ways they are claiming?
The 'barely speak English’ part makes the solution worse in some ways but actually makes me give their claims to be doing something different more credence rather than less. It also should worry anyone who wants to maintain monitorable chain of thought. Then again, one could say that the version that does it better, and more naturally, is thus more important, for exactly the same reasons.
We only have OpenAI’s word on the details of how this went down. So what to think? I am mostly inclined to believe them on the main thrust of what is going on. That doesn’t mean that this result will generalize. I do give them credit for having something that they believe came out of a general approach, and that they expect to generalize.
The thing is, to me this doesn’t feel like it is fake. It might not be a big deal, it might not transfer all that well to other contexts, but it doesn’t feel fake. To wrap up, another reminder that no, you can’t pretend none of this matters, and both the Google and OpenAI results matter and should update you:
You're currently a free subscriber to |