---
subject: "The first non-opioid painkiller"
from: "Works in Progress <worksinprogress+notes-on-progress@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-06-26 09:15:56
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Works in Progress"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_1644361085112560554"]
---
In the nineteenth century, the invention of anesthesia was considered a gift from God. But post-operative pain relief has continued to rely on opioids – derivatives of opium – the addictive substance employed since This all changed in January 2025, when the FDA Opioids are used primarily to treat Traditional opioids mimic opium, a compound found in the poppy plant that contains morphine. Opioids alleviate pain by acting on one of the three main opioid receptors, Our bodies naturally produce their own opioids – such as Crucially, opioids don’t just kill pain: they also incite pleasure. When the mu opioid receptors present in the reward center of the brain are activated, this reduces the secretion of a neurotransmitter called GABA, which works to With the body’s natural opioids, this is fleeting and unproblematic. When properly prescribed, even synthetic opioids are no issue for most patients: under severe post-surgical pain, opioids mostly function to normalize disrupted brain function, With chronic use, the body’s natural opioid system becomes dysfunctional. Fewer natural opioids are produced and opioid receptors become desensitized. As a result, the patient develops a The nineteenth century Peripheral solutionsUnlike opioids, which act within the central nervous system, Three sodium channels are found primarily on nociceptors: NaV1.7, NaV1.8, and NaV1.9. Suzetrigine selectively blocks NaV1.8, which stops nociceptors from sending pain signals to the brain. Rather than preventing your brain from receiving pain signals, as opioids do, it prevents your neurons from transmitting them. In essence, Journavx works from the bottom up to alleviate pain, rather than the top down. Critically, the NaV1.8 channel is largely At first glance, this may seem like a straightforward solution, especially given the urgent demand for non-opioid alternatives. So why did it take so long? Unlike diseases with well-defined biological causes, pain is a broad symptom rooted in complex and overlapping pathways. Many of these are deeply intertwined with vital bodily functions like A particularly good example of this predicament involves Another example involves nerve growth factor inhibitors like Men on fireVertex has historically focused on developing drugs targeting ion channels. These channels play a major role in cellular signaling, meaning that compounds that act upon them can produce large, rapid physiological effects. Ion channels are ‘really good drug targets’, Paul Negulescu, head of Vertex's pain program, says, ‘They just require a lot of care and attention to how you measure them’. The discovery of the NaV sodium channels, made independently in the early 2000s by two different researchers, opened a new frontier in pain research. Both observed that mutations affecting NaV1.7 caused abnormalities in the experience of pain, a major clue that pain might be mediated through that specific sodium channel. Stephen Waxman, a professor of neurology, neuroscience, and pharmacology at Yale’s medical school, This congenital insensitivity provided a particularly compelling genetic validation for a drug target, as the affected individuals were entirely normal except for their inability to feel pain, unlike prior similar cases. Related channels like NaV1.8 and NaV1.9 were also investigated by Woods’s team and found relevant for pain signaling. But despite the initial enthusiasm surrounding these discoveries, researchers soon encountered significant obstacles: NaV1.7 inhibitors So researchers turned their attention to the other promising sodium channel: NaV1.8. Again, research began with setbacks: in 2015, it was Despite this challenge, researchers still thought NaV1.8 had potential. Woods’ research genetically validated it, showing that mutations in NaV1.8 affect pain signalling. Researchers at the University of Alcalá confirmed that mice genetically engineered to lack Nav1.8 channels showed virtually no spontaneous nerve activity after injury – activity thought to underlie certain chronic pains. Additionally, NaV1.8's almost Ion channelsAs Vertex researchers searched for NaV1.8 inhibitors, they made use of Negulescu’s But even with this tool, Negulescu described the iterative learning process as ‘painful’. Vertex spent a decade screening millions of compounds before finding a promising class of molecules. Another decade was spent on optimization, conducting tens of thousands of screenings to maximize potency and selectivity (a drug is selective if it binds only to the target proteins and nowhere else). Vertex faced several failures in preclinical and clinical testing. Between 2018 and 2022, they terminated development for three generations of NaV1.8 inhibitors, Eventually, this iterative process produced VX-548, which was discovered to be many times more selective and potent than earlier candidates. In 2022, two On July 30, 2024, the FDA Pain pointsJournavx isn’t a silver bullet. It has not yet been tested or approved for treating chronic pain, from which over Journavx failed to outperform that opioid-acetaminophen combination in clinical trials. Todd Bertoch, an It will almost certainly improve: Vertex’s scientists are continuing their decades-long project to iterate and screen for even more potent and selective NaV1.8 blockers. They are also investigating complementarities with NaV1.7 inhibitors. A Phase III clinical trial of suzetrigine for diabetic peripheral neuropathy, which involves chronic pain, is currently underway. Journavx is the product of 27 Vertex chose to keep funding and pushing forward through decades of work that industry professionals describe as ‘ Michelle Ma studies economics at the University of Chicago. Thanks for subscribing to |