---
subject: "building community, followings, buzz"
from: "web3 newsletter from a16z crypto <a16zcrypto@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-08-06 11:55:55
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "a16zcrypto"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2535365729249697677"]
---
1. 📣 Talks track: On marketing, content, community building, moreWhether you’re interested in joining a web3 community, contributing to an existing project, or building something new, there’s lots to keep on top of in crypto. Over the last few weeks, we published This week we’re highlighting strategies for social media, content marketing, community building, and more. Web3 projects that are owned and guided by communities have created a new design space for marketers, from running discord channels to distributing rewards to community members. The question isn’t how can we adapt traditional marketing to web3? It’s how can web3 revamp traditional marketing? Speakers at this year’s Crypto Startup School distilled their expertise – across media, developer relations, community building, and more – into frameworks for companies of all industries, sizes, and stages. Watch these recently released talks to learn more: [Launching and marketing your project](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/ef889ded-74e9-49a4-a393-b198a0c63d91?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[(▶️)](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/9fc7931c-336b-4cb1-a6e9-ce27445fbefd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o): New opportunities and recurring themes in web3 marketing with Amanda Cassatt, founder and CEO of web3 marketing agency Serotonin.[Editorial content strategies and tactics](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/b755c741-b3d6-49d5-83c8-193ee2316f06?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[(▶️)](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/c212fe7e-b5f1-4480-bc41-af32121e4028?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o): Frameworks for crafting editorial content for teams of all sizes with a16z crypto editor-in-chief Sonal Chokshi.[How to build a social presence](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/a409d3ed-a54e-4ce7-8d4a-0ce2f2d4eebc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[(▶️)](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/0e65cfb5-ef2d-49bf-b4f2-030227198d3b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o): Building your social media following in web3 and beyond with a16z crypto social lead Ish Verduzco.[A conversation with Greg Solano, cofounder of Yuga Labs](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/27d9f5f4-056d-425e-811d-6e3e194915ae?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[(▶️)](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/88201795-0e41-49a2-9d47-80f8f9db6be1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o): A chat about the early days of Bored Ape Yacht Club and the development of its community.[A conversation with Kevin Rose, founder of PROOF](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/63c36368-8a90-4108-aba2-d68510c07f13?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[(▶️)](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/26332604-7012-4525-80a4-a3c19f43e18a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o): A Q&A on the challenges and opportunities of community engagement in web3.
Check out the rest of the CSS presentations 👉 👉 see also: 🎧 📝 2. 🔭 View from inside: Strategy and operations for web3MC Lader and Sonal Chokshi The latest episode of our web3 with a16z podcast sits down with Uniswap Labs COO Mary Catherine (aka MC) Lader to chat about decentralized finance (DeFi); business strategy in a world of open source; as well as organizational structure, hiring, metrics, community engagement, app store policies, and much more. 🎧 -- Stephanie Zinn, Robert Hackett, and a16z crypto teams You’re receiving this newsletter because you signed up for it on our websites, at an event, or elsewhere (you can opt out any time using the ‘unsubscribe’ link below). This newsletter is provided for informational purposes only, and should NOT be relied upon as legal, business, investment, or tax advice. Furthermore, the content is not directed at nor intended for use by any investors or prospective investors in any a16z funds. Please see a16z.com/disclosures for additional important details, including link to list of investments. subscribe to our podcast ' |