---
subject: "Highlights From The Comments On IRBs"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-04-17 23:10:42
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
[Original post: Table of Contents1: Comments From The Author Of The Book 1. Comments From The Author Of The BookSimon Whitney (author of the book!)
I did accidentally mess up the conclusion of the Lasagna and Epstein study¹ - the short consent forms were better, not worse. Most of you caught this from context, but sorry. 2. Stories From People In The TrenchesBladeDoc
This is one of my favorite stories. It perfectly captures the spirit of IRB requirements, and their exact flavor of “let’s make everything terrible for everyone because of something I can sort of imagining one person in an absurd scenario being psychologically harmed by” sclmlw
Thanks, this sounds like an interesting application of polycentric law. And spandrel
Regarding (2), see 3. Stories From People In Other IndustriesCinnabarTactician
I’m surprised by this, both because I thought tech had a reputation for “move fast and break things”, and because I would have expected the market to train this out of companies that don’t have to fear lawsuits. But playing devil’s advocate: at a startup, code changes usually have high upside (you need to build the product fast in order to survive) and low downside (if your site used by 100 people goes down for a few minutes it doesn’t matter very much). At Facebook, code changes have low upside (Facebook will remain a hegemon regardless of whether it introduces a new feature today vs. in a year) and high downside (if you accidentally crash Facebook for an hour, it’s international news). Also, if the design of one button on the Facebook website causes people to use it 0.1% more, that’s probably still a difference of millions of hits - so it’s worth having strong opinions on button design. Gbdub
Another situation where you would expect competition to train people out of this, but also another situation where a hegemon might feel tempted to rest on its laurels! Anya L
This is great, thanks. 4. Stories From People Who Use Mechanical TurkNoIndustry9653 from the subreddit
OwenQuillion
5. Comments About Regulation, Liability, and VetocracyCatCube
Meadow Freckle
I don’t know, and this seems like an important question. And Donald
I do want to slightly defend something IRB-like here. When a doctor asks you to be part of a study, they’re implicitly promising that they did their homework, this is a valuable thing to study, and that there’s no obvious reason it should be extremely unsafe. As a patient (who may be uneducated) you have no way of knowing whether or not this promise is true. Every so often, someone does everything right, and something goes wrong anyway. A drug that everyone reasonably thought would be safe and effective turns out to have unpredictable side effects - this is part of why we have to do studies in the first place. If every time this happened, a doctor had to stand trial for assault/murder, nobody would ever study new drugs. Trials are a crapshoot, and juries tend to rule against doctors on the grounds that the disabled/dead patient is very sympathetic and everyone knows doctors/hospitals are rich and can give them infinite money as damages. There is no way for an average uneducated jury to distinguish between “doctor did their homework and got unlucky” and “doctor did an idiotic thing”. Either way, the prosecution can find “expert witnesses” to testify, for money, that you were an idiot and should have known the study would fail. In order to remove this risk, you need some standards for when a study is safe, so that if people sue you, you can say “I was following the standards and everyone else agreed with me that this was good” and then the lawsuit will fail. Right now those standards are “complied with an IRB”. This book is arguing that the IRB’s standards are too high, but we can’t cut the IRB out entirely without some kind of profound reform of the very concept of lawsuits, and I don’t know what that reform would look like. 6. Comments About The Act/Omission Distinctionjumpingjacksplash
I want to stress how far we are away from “do experiments without patient’s consent” here - a much more common problem is that patients really want to be in experiments, and the system won’t allow it. This is most classic in studies on cancer, where patients really want access to experimental drugs and IRBs are constantly coming up with reasons not to give it to them. Jonas argued that all cancer studies should be banned because it’s impossible to consent when you’re desperate to survive, which isn’t the direction I would have taken that particular example in. But there are other examples - during COVID, lots of effective altruists stepped up to be in human challenge trials that would have gotten the vaccines tested faster, but the government wouldn’t allow them to participate. I would honestly be happy with a system that counts the harm of denying a patient’s ability to consent to an experiment they really want to be in as a negative, forget about any lives saved. And JDK
This seems to me to be a weird and overly metaphysical nitpick. Suppose a surgeon is operating on someone. In the process, they must clamp a blood vessel - this is completely safe for one minute, but if they leave it clamped more than one minute, the patient dies. They clamp it as usual, but I rush into the operating room and forceably restrain the surgeon and all the staff. The surgeon is unable to remove the clamp and the patient dies. I (and probably the legal system) would like to be able to say I caused the patient’s death in this scenario. But it sounds like JDK is saying I have to say the surgeon caused the patient's death and I was only tangentially involved. Here’s another example; suppose the US government bans all food production - farmers, hunters, fishermen, etc are forbidden from doing their jobs. After a few months, everyone starves to death. I might want to say something like “the US government’s ban on food production killed people”. But by JDK’s reasoning, this is wrong - the government merely prevented farmers and fishermen from saving people (by giving them food so they didn’t starve). I might want to say something like “Mao’s collective farming policy killed lots of people”. But since this is just a weaker version of hypothetical-Biden’s ban on food, by JDK’s reasoning I can’t do this. This seems contrary to common usage, common sense, and communicating information clearly. I have never heard any philosopher or dictionary suggest this, so what exactly is the argument? (JDK 7. Comments About The Applications For AIMetaphysiocrat
Zach Stein-Perlman
My take: my understanding is that the US can’t technically demand all doctors use IRBs. (Almost) al doctors use IRBs for a combination of a few reasons : The US government demands that everyone who receives federal funding use an IRB, and most doctors get some federal funding. Journals can demand that doctors use an IRB if they want to publish in the journal. The FDA demands that everyone who wants their studies to count for drug trials use an IRB. Most doctors are affiliated with a larger institution (eg hospital, university) that demands all their affiliates use IRBs.
When the book says “the government demanded that IRBs do X”, my understanding is that the government demanded that everyone who wanted to remain linked to the federal funding spigot and the collection of other institutions linked to the federal funding spigot do X. But I think a lot of AI development is genuinely not linked to the federal funding spigot. If the government passed an IRB law based off how things work in medicine, I think OpenAI could say “We’re not receiving federal funding, we can publish all our findings on the ArXIV, and we don’t care about the FDA, you have no power over us”. I don’t know if some branch of the government has enough power to mandate everyone use IRBs regardless of their funding source. 8. Other Interesting CommentsRbbb
I appreciate this correction - NIMBYs, whatever else you think about them, are resisting things they think would hurt them personally, whereas IRBs are often pushing rules that nobody (including themselves) wants or benefits from them. I still think there’s a useful analogy to be drawn in that they’re both systems designed to care about potential harms but not potential benefits, and so nothing can ever get done. And
I’d never heard of this before and would be interested in more information. 1 Thank you to everyone who pointed out that this study had a funny name. You're currently a free subscriber to |