---
subject: "Startup Prophecies"
from: "Not Boring <notboring@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-02-07 13:47:45
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Not Boring"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2982495070691762429"]
---
Welcome to the 746 newly Not Boring people who have joined us since last Tuesday! If you haven’t subscribed, join 184,867 smart, curious folks by subscribing here: Today’s Not Boring is brought to you by… Last week, I wrote about
But that’s only part of the story. Wander recently launched Plus, right now new Atlas investors may get the chance to invest in Wander’s next round of funding¹. You can learn more on their website: Hi friends 👋, Happy Tuesday! Let’s have a little fun today, shall we? Let’s get to it. Startup PropheciesI have a few core beliefs that animate Not Boring: Startups are key to solving really big challenges. More people should be able to invest in, and support, startups. We need more optimistic stories about technology.
I also have a few less-core-but-relevant-here beliefs, which I’ve written about: Bottoms-up narratives are a powerful way to build worlds. ( [Story Time](https://substack.com/redirect/e50ee1e2-d39a-4a99-a689-40917d3d6157?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o))
In Story Time, I wrote that “In a world of abundance, attention is the scarcest resource, and people’s attention is hard to earn.” I suggested that startups should shift from top-down storytelling to bottoms-up narrative building, in partnership with their fans and communities, and that they could take lessons from NFT projects, which create worlds and then largely turn narrative-building over to the people who own the NFTs. The connection between NFTs and startups in Story Time was loose, just a source of inspiration for the progressive decentralization of narrative. I wasn’t suggesting that startups should actually create NFTs or encourage their fans to do the same. Then, in October, I read Jacob Horne’s
In the spirit of Swirl all of that together, and here’s the idea: Startup Prophecy Markets. Startup Prophecy Markets let anyone timestamp predictions about the startups they believe in most by creating art, videos, stories, analysis, and more about the companies’ futures and minting them. Theoretically, if the predictions are bold enough, the content is good enough, and the startups they’re attached to are ambitious enough, those NFTs might be worth more in the future than they are today. A quick scan of eBay reveals a booming market for early memorabilia from today’s great tech companies. Even more interestingly, what does it mean to create a rich positive sum ecosystem around startups? Do more people start working together to help them succeed? Do NFTs associated with startups tackling the most important problems become more than those associated with startups that merely become valuable? Does it encourage founders to make bolder bets, and provide them with an army of supporters when they do? That’s what we’ll explore today. To start, let’s dive into the details of Prophecy Markets. Prophecy Markets
The core idea in Horne’s October essay is that it might be possible to create positive sum prediction markets by using NFTs to capture “equity in a moment.” Traditional prediction markets are zero sum. A prediction market ends in a binary outcome - $0 or $1. Right now on Equities, on the other hand, are positive sum. You don’t need someone to take the other side to invest in a startup, for example, and the upside is uncapped. Sequoia made $3 billion from its $60 million investment in WhatsApp. Accel’s 15% Series A stake in Thefacebook was worth roughly $9 billion when Facebook IPO’d in 2012. Masa Son’s $20 million investment in Alibaba was worth an eye-popping $60 billion when the Chinese ecommerce giant went public in 2014. No one lost money when those companies succeeded (although the outcomes must have been painful for investors who passed), but early believers were rewarded enormously. Of course, many venture investments go to $0; the difference is that they’re not capped when they succeed. What would it look like to design prediction markets that behave more like equities? Horne proposes minting predictions as NFTs. But he starts the thought exercise crypto-free. He gives an example of an artist who predicts that an alien spacecraft will visit humanity for the first time on December 1, 2025 by hovering over the Eiffel Tower. The artist paints 10 pictures of the spacecraft floating above the Eiffel Tower, asks a journalist to timestamp in print, sells two copies for $100 each (one to the journalist and one to an amused reader), and locks the rest in storage. Lo and behold, against all odds, on December 1, 2025, there it is: an alien spacecraft hovering over the Eiffel Tower. What would those original paintings be worth?
“NFTs?!” you might be asking yourself. “Aren’t those dead? JPow gets a little dovish and we’re back to talking about NFTs?” Horne anticipates your pushback (emphasis mine):
The Official Not Boring Take™️ on NFTs has always been that they’re an incredibly useful primitive that will get more useful with time. As I wrote in
Even now, the NFT market is coming back to life, seen more clearly in the number of trades than in the dollar volume: And it’s evolving. Prophecy Markets is one of those “ Because the real value isn’t in the price of the predictions, but in the rich worlds that can develop around them. What would happen to the startup ecosystem if we introduced Startup Prophecies? Startup PropheciesStartup Prophecies are a derivative of Prophecy Markets that let anyone permissionlessly create and mint predictions, art, analysis, code, videos, stories, and more around startups. These Startup Prophecy NFTs can be traded, creating a 3D market on top of the more linear venture funding market. The thing that excites me about this idea is that, unlike alien landings, people can actually influence startup outcomes. They can tell stories, spread awareness, call their Senators, make customer introductions, and build a richer world around the missions they believe in. This is decentralized storytelling or web3 media that is company-centric but not company-directed:
What does Web3 media look like?
Community-centric, not company-centric.
A group of people organized around a common cause, which creates content that advances that cause. |