---
subject: "Become a better investor – one email at a time."
from: "The Generalist <thegeneralist@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-10-29 17:08:05
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Generalist", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8815311452832858585", "UNREAD"]
---
Friends, Last week, we took the wraps off of Generalist+, our new premium newsletter designed to make you a better investor and technologist. It’s proven to be a hit with many of you already, and I’ve been so excited to see the enthusiasm for what’s to come. To make it as easy as possible for you to join us, we created a quick investment memo to outline the pros and cons :) Our mission with Generalist+ is to bring narrative intelligence to the modern investor. We believe that better inputs lead to better outputs and that the information we consume colors our thoughts and decisions. Through Generalist+, you’ll unlock access to insights designed to improve your investing decisions. You’ll learn from experts, better understand how to deliver value to your portfolio, and have a first look at the startups we think are most promising. Here are five ways Generalist+ levels up your investing:Learn from legendary investors. Our “Letters to a Young Investor” series unlocks the insights and stories of Silicon Valley greats. Discover how they’ve honed their practice, the mistakes they made along the way, and where they see opportunity today. The remarkable Reid Hoffman is headlining Season 1. Understand the practices of great founders. “The Braintrust” series surfaces the practical advice of 8 unicorn founders who have created businesses valued at over $35 billion combined. How do the best CEOs make decisions? What do they do during the challenging moments? How do they attract top talent? Learn from the best and bring the lessons to your company or portfolio. Find new promising startups. Amidst a sea of startups, which ones should you pay the closest attention to? In January, we’ll unlock “The Watchlist” – a database of 50 startups we think are especially compelling. Improve your market intelligence simply and economically. Get your questions answered. Want to talk about Elon’s latest changes to X? Trying to make sense of a recent AI mega-round? Thinking about raising a fund of your own and not sure where to start? I’m excited to answer your burning questions through subscriber-only Q&As. Get sharper, one email at a time. By subscribing, you’re unlocking access to investing insights, wisdom, and strategies delivered straight to your inbox. It’s a no-stress way to improve your inputs and invest in yourself.
As mentioned, we’re running early bird pricing of $19/month and $200/year – but it won’t last much longer. Prices will increase soon, so it’s worth jumping aboard today to lock in that rate. Come join us! Mario |