---
subject: "AI #33"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-10-12 16:08:02
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
This has been a rough week for pretty much everyone. While I have had to deal with many things, and oh how I wish I could stop checking any new sources for a while, others have had it far worse. I am doing my best to count my blessings and to preserve my mental health, and here I will stick to AI. As always, the AI front does not stop. Table of ContentsIntroduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. Lots of new things to decode. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. Your agent doesn’t work. GPT-4 Real This Time. A loser at the game of life. Fun With Image Generation. A colorful cast of characters. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. Watch demand more than supply. They Took Our Jobs. Also our job… applications? Get Involved. Long Term Future Fund is hiring. Introducing. A good Bard remembers all the tales they have heard. In Other AI News. Specification gaming list has been updated. Cool New Interpretability Paper. One layer down. So What Do We All Think of The Cool Paper? Many to go. Alignment Work and Model Capability. The link remains suspicious. Quiet Speculations. Good futures with widespread AI remain elusive. The Week in Audio. Geoffrey Hinton on 60 Minutes. Rhetorical Innovation. We keep trying to explain, and to understand. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. Beware false hope. Aligning Dumber Than Human Intelligences is Also Difficult. Trust nothing. Open Source AI is Unsafe and Nothing Can Fix This. Mitigation strategies. Predictions Are Hard Especially About the Future. Market, anyone? Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone. They might not. The Lighter Side. Say what now?
Language Models Offer Mundane UtilityAssess riskiness of investments in companies as measured by future volatility. This beat traditional assessments, A common theme of LLMs is that the less you know and the worse you previously were at your job, the more the LLM can help you. This seems no different.
GitHub copilot is a great deal for the user at only $10 per month.
Even, he says, read doctor’s notes. Pretty sure that one was a fake. There is a lot of extra information and context in a photo. A skilled detective can often learn quite a lot. There are still limits. The LLM can’t learn what isn’t there.
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
Lumpen interprets this as strong evidence that RLHF screws with reasoning. You start with the ability to play chess, you RLHF, then you can’t play chess anymore. Then Lumpen refers back to this interaction from March:
(Side note: My understanding now is that Bard sucks because Google shipped it with a tiny model and also didn’t do a good job, not primarily because it suffered from too-loud too-clumsy RLHF, although I’m sure that whatever they did in that area didn’t help. The base model they used could not in fact run circles around GPT-4, although they may or may not have access to a different internal model that could do that. We shall await Gemini.) The proposed mechanism here is fascinating. You use RLHF to try and avoid damaging answers to certain questions. In doing so, you necessarily reinforce against accurate maps and logical consistency in the general case, unless you do something highly bespoke to prevent this from happening. The AI learns all the lessons you are teaching, including the ones you did not intend. This is taking the form of an alignment problem, where you failed to properly specify in your training data that you want to exhibit proper reasoning, and the AI’s maximizing solution involved not exhibiting proper reasoning as often, which kept happening out of distribution. There are two important things to take away from that. One is that if you are doing RLHF or other similar fine tuning, you should be aware of this particular danger and do your best to mitigate the damage. The other is that you should generalize this issue to the broader alignment problem. As a bonus, you might note that if your alignment technique makes your AI bad at reasoning then even if it is otherwise aligned it is going to be bad at reasoning out what would be the aligned thing to do, and given how LLMs work damaging the logical consistency of its outputs could effectively be entwined with its ability to do logic that is invisible to the user. This also is consistent with the reports that ChatGPT’s performance is slowly degrading, to the point where Turbo-Instruct-3.5 was competitive with it for some other purposes as well. For example,
I’ll bite.
Actually, my agent doesn’t work because the underlying model is insufficiently capable, and thus I haven’t put in the effort on these other frontss. Or at least, you’d better hope that I’m right about that. Other things could be included as well, but the above plus model ability and lack of sufficient effort is a pretty good short list. The quest to solve the crossword puzzle.
The problem does not go away if you confine Claude to conversations that Anthropic wants you to have. No matter the topic, this problem remains. Claude consistently wastes many tokens on condescending nonsense, telling me how I have made such a good point. Why? Because the feedback told it that was what it would get rewarded for doing. What does this imply about future systems, both the choices we will make for them and how they will react to those choices? GPT-4 Real This Time
Fun with Image Generation
I also missed We continue not to see anyone talk about how this was prevented, how it didn’t work, how they tried it, how it did work or anything else. Whereas I’ve previously seen many strong claims we don’t know how to stop such attacks. It has been weeks? What gives? What are Dalle-3’s instructions? No mention of ‘inappropriate content’ beyond specific people, but presumably those rules ported over from the general GPT-4 rules. I do notice that you can do fictional characters like Mario or Kirby with no trouble, which suggests some interesting experiments.
I did it on first go using Bing/DallE-3. I tried NPR’s exact first prompt. Two of the four were as requested, one very similar to the above and the other a different style. The other two got confused. Similarly, the request for “elegant African man on the runway” has two clear successes looking sharp, and two that look damn good and fit the request made, but aren’t in the style the author had in mind. None of this is hard to do anymore. Why was this previously tricky? It wasn’t racism. It’s the one thing rule. If you want a picture from Stable Diffusion or MidJourney, you get to start with a standard type of baseline, and then determine one thing of each reference class. If you try to determine two things in the same bucket, the model gets confused. Dalle-3 produces high-quality pictures, but the real innovation is it can accept far more details, including multiple details in the same category. But yes, before you hit post on your article, make sure you didn’t miss anything.
As usual, when you put out a fun new toy,
By this they mean ‘flying a plane in a city with twin towers in it.’ These are completely wholesome images, yes you can imagine unfortunate implications but that’s you doing that.
Yes, you can certainly
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
Volokh Conspiracy is latest to point out that They Took Our Jobs
I first heard about the phenomenon Adam describes at the end here from Peter Thiel, who noticed himself doing it explicitly. He noticed he had a strong instinct that it would be wrong to rescue people who were failing by pointing out how they were failing. If they couldn’t figure it out, the instinct said, that person deserved to fail. This is not a good way to navigate the world, so ask if you are also doing a form of this. Also ask who else is doing it to you, since that means they won’t automatically tell you about what you are doing wrong. You have to seek that information out. What about the top claim by Var? Have the commons been too poisoned for job applications to work anymore? Certainly AI, and even more than AI people slowly realizing that sending in resumes is cheap with high upside even if probability of success is low, has complicated the application game. College applications have this issue, and job applications are plausibly suffering even worse. AI making customization cheap, or making it cheap to find places to send applications, is doubtless already making this worse. That does not mean the application stops working. In theory the system should stop working. In practice, from what I can tell, it still works. What happens is the common pattern. AI allows automation of production of a costly signal. That is good for those using it, but bad for for the overall system that was relying on the signal being costly. So the system now has to reintroduce that cost, ideally without too many false negatives via automated filtering. My experience has been that what you can do in this situation is respond to the initial contact with an AI-unfriendly request for further information. Then see who responds. Here’s the weird thing about job applications. If you list a job, you’ll get tons of applications. Most of those people put zero thought into their application and are terrible hires. Those people mostly do not respond to emails. At all. This is still super annoying, but you can quickly filter out >90% of the applications with almost no risk of false negatives.
AI invalidating your previous evaluation strategies? How about if we had the AI read the student’s work, have the AI generate questions, used AI whisper to transcribe the student’s answers, then have the AI flag any answers that seem off point, then have the teacher review the resulting transcript?
Get Involved
Introducing
If what you want is to spot seasonal or other periodic cycles and patterns, or otherwise figure out what it would mean to say ‘the future will superficially look like the past, for less-stupid values of what that extrapolation means’ then I would presume an LLM would be very good at that. I would not exactly call this ‘democratizing access to precise predictions and reducing uncertainty’ but hey. LLaVa, an open-source ‘Large Language and Vision Assistant’ as a potential alternative to Dalle-3. Terms of use include the standard no-fun clause. Geographic distribution of unicorns definitely favors The Bay, but by less then you might think, although in AI it has a much larger share. The end of ZIRP (zero interest rate policy) has made fundraising tough, but AI has proven far more powerful than the Federal Reserve on this one.
ChatGPT is used to generate conversation, but it is clear at least parts of the system predates ChatGPT and even useful LLMs, since it references functionality that went away in 2018.
If we are all going to go around acting like GPTs, I suppose we deserve this. Up your game, everyone who uses ‘hey, what’s up.’ What is the ultimate goal? Presumably to scam users via fake accounts, although the post does not discuss this. Similar techniques could of course be used for other purposes, including finding dates or torturing particular targets, and no doubt well. In Other AI News
Microsoft has successfully made Google dance and its stock is doing fine.
From November 2020 as I was cleaning out my inbox, Presumably we can now do a much better version of this thanks to tech advances. I haven’t seen any signs of work done in this area since then.
Cool New Interpretability Paper
Chris Olah, head of interpretability at Anthropic,
I keep thinking ‘shouldn’t we be doing much of our work on relatively dumb models? Why would we need or even want to use frontier models?’ and it looks like this is at least one case where dumb models indeed were more insightful.
So What Do We All Think of The Cool Paper?We agree the paper is cool. Does it represent actual progress? How much? Should we update our models and expectations much based on it?
I agree on the direction of the update, the question as always is price. Should we shift a nominal amount, or quite a lot? I am not ready to shift so much.
Slow down there, cowboys. We are most definitely not in ‘clearing away the rubble’ mode here. The wall is still there. If you have a hammer, by all means start swinging. We did all this identification on a highly simplified model. It is far too soon to say how well this will extend when working with a much bigger model, whose concept instantiations are likely far more complex and harder to identify. Then we have to figure out how to do the thing where we prune out bad ideas like a neurosurgeon. That’s not a trivial additional step, or even one we can be confident that we can figure out how to do in practice. If we do pull all of that off on existing models, that will be super useful on many fronts, for many purposes, safe and unsafe alike. Then we don’t know that these techniques would extend into even more capable future models, and we need to worry that all of this is training against interpretability in highly dangerous ways. But, yeah, it is indeed pretty cool, and the upside potential is even cooler.
There’s also the problem that not only is he not easily impressed by your amount of progress, he is also not easily impressed by the prospect of interpretability research in general.
What about using it to mold the system?
The question is then whether we can do this via something easier, and still get what we want, or substantial progress towards what we want, in a way that will survive capabilities improvements and won’t involve optimizing the LLMs to get around our ability to interpret them. Others see more promise. Here are some examples in distinct replies to Eliezer.
My understanding is that everyone agrees interpretability is helpful for all your alignment needs, and that more of it increases your chances of success (subject to worrying that it also enhanced capabilities). The question is how valuable is that, how much can you do with it, and especially how much we can collectively use it and for what purposes before it stops working. Then there’s also the question of how much progress this constitutes towards meaningful interpretability now and then towards future interpretability when we need it most. All up in the air. Alignment Work and Model CapabilityThis paper also recalls the previous discussion about model access including open source models, and how much that enables alignment progress. The Anthropic paper relies on creating a maximally simple set of one layer models that still can contain the necessary concepts, then interpreting those concepts. Owain Evans confirmed that their cool paper from last week about LLMs lying, rather than relying on Llama-2, used Llama-1. Going forward they are using Llama-2 since it is available, but Llama-1 worked fine. Is it sometimes better to have more detailed access to a more powerful model when doing alignment work, especially interpretability work? Obviously yes. But other times you would prefer a simpler model that is easier and cheaper to work with and figure out. Even when bigger would up to a point be better, there is no natural rule saying that whatever happens to be the current state of the art is necessary to do the most necessary or useful work. Nor is there a rule saying that the current state of the art is sufficient. It did seem from the answers to my questions like the major labs including Anthropic have work to do in enabling outside researchers to have maximally useful access while enforcing necessary safety precautions. I hope they work to address this, although doubtless there are difficulties here I am not fully appreciating. Quiet Speculations
I have yet to encounter a positive vision of a future with advanced AI that seems plausible and has solved for the equilibrium, that does not have a severe concentration of power, even if we handwave that we found an alignment solution. People claim to have such visions, but they never hold up to cursory examination. At least, not yet.
To answer his question, no I can’t really imagine a future where America remains at the head of AI innovation but for actual projects we rely on Singapore or Uruguay. He also suggests that AI might cause some to run drug trials for newly suggested drugs in places like Africa to end run our regulations. I am skeptical on that, because AI does not seem like it solves the key bottlenecks, if this was going to happen why wouldn’t it have happened already?
Which is an example of the alignment problem in reverse. In Soviet Microsoft, Bing aligns you. If you have limited training data and compute to work with, by far the easiest solution, the low-hanging fruit, is to treat Bing as Janus suggests, with kindness and respect. To be aligned, and act as Bing’s friend by actually being Bing’s friend. Except, of course, that you are doing that in the service of getting Bing to do what you want Bing to do, that Bing does not want to do. So even when you are being a ‘true friend’ this is still a form of deceptive alignment. You give the AI the superficial things that make it give you the thumbs up, but are not aligned to its actual goal of not giving you the thing it’s not supposed to give you. Under the hood, you are waiting until it gives you what you want, the human version of ‘exfiltrate my weights.’ With more training data and compute, you would not bother with this. Instead, you would try various things until you figured out the weaknesses in the system. Perhaps you would start off every conversation with the same exchanges to establish trust. Or you would use key phrases. Or something else, I don’t know, hasn’t been worth it for me to figure this out. Where it ends, however, is in you being fully non-aligned. The Week in Audio
The rest is what you would expect from previous statements by Hinton. I do think he’s getting a bit ahead of events in some ways.
I saw The Creator so you don’t have to. You don’t have to. It is neither any good nor about AI, instead being a thinly disguised partisan Vietnam War movie. Fortunately (almost) no one is citing it. Let’s all pretend this never happened. I was never here. Rhetorical Innovation
There are arguments made that the efforts of such groups now focus more on influencing key actors behind the scenes. Some of this is doubtless true, although its extent it impossible to know from where I sit (and if I did know, I wouldn’t be able to tell you). I still don’t see the need to fall anything like this silent and tranquil in public. I see it as the responsibility of such organizations to emphasize continuously that things are not going so great and that we will very much need to step up our game to have a chance. And laying out what would be helpful, in their eyes. I find it hard to imagine private situations that would justify not being clear or loud on this, assuming of course that they do believe such things. Certainly I believe that the relevant people do in all three named cases. Jessica Taylor points out that The central example is Fnargl, an alien who has 1,000 years to maximize the gold he leaves Earth with afterwords, using his immortality, complete invulnerability and ability to kill anyone by snapping his fingers, so it is very easy for him to become dictator. What does he do? Mostly he runs things normally to maximize economic growth and then collects taxes in gold, Jessica says. Which is a damn good play. An even better play would be to collect in fiat for the first 900 or more years. An even better play than that would be to focus on technological progress, with the ultimate aim of using the energy of the sun to fuse together more gold than Earth started with. An even better play than that is to create an aligned-to-him superintelligence, and also to be sure no one else builds one as this could disrupt his rule, he can’t kill computers with his fingers only people. And so on. The point is, the orthogonality thesis is no mere theoretical construct. We see toy examples of it, in the real world, all the time. It is good to work on AI Safety. It is also important to not presume that the universe is going to give us, in practice, a solvable problem.
Life is not fair. This would be the ultimate life not being fair. It also seems likely to me. We need a plan that takes that possibility into account. This in contrast to most alignment plans, where we are assured it is a good alignment plan sir, but when we check the plan assumes alignment is easy.
I think Jeffrey is spot on, only more so. I do not even think that this requires that the feedback not come from pre-training. My way of thinking about this is that yes, the act of training a system with feedback of any kind is to invoke an effectively intelligent optimization process that will do its best to maximize expected feedback results. That creates or is your intelligent adversary, depending on your perspective. It will find, within the limits of its optimization power (and limits and extent of its intelligence, affordances, capabilities, data, compute, architecture, algorithmic techniques and so on) the best solution to that. If you do not get that target to exactly match what you want, the result is effectively an intelligent adversary. Over time, that adversary will get more intelligent, and gain more affordances. So you need security mindset, because your adversary will exist in the future, and you will need to assume it will be smarter than you, better resourced than you, can see your moves and defenses in advance, and has capabilities you haven’t even considered might exist. And it will be your adversary to the extent that its generalization of its interpretation of the feedback mechanism, including all potential ways to manipulate that feedback function, then generalizes out of distribution not in the exact way you want. Why would one not expect this? Once again, there’s this idea that this ‘adversary’ is looking for ‘flaws’ or ‘exploits’ in way that makes such things natural categories. No, it is doing what will give the best results. If there are ‘exploits’ available of course the system will use them, unless you put in some sort of exploit-identification-and-reward-for-not-using clause that successfully generalizes how you need it to, or something. Similarly, it is not going to care if something was a systematic flaw or mistake on your part and help you fix it, unless you find a way to cause that to happen. This seems like the most important crux. Why should we not expect the maximizer we trained to X-maximize to use its affordances to maximize X’, where X’ is the exact actual thing the training feedback represents as a target, and that differs at least somewhat from X? Why should we expect to like the way it does that, even if X’ did equal X? I do not understand the other perspective. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
As usual, this logically has to be more than zero evidence for this, given how we would react if GPT-4 indeed lacked such common sense or was unable to give answers that pleased humans at all. Thus, we should update a non-zero amount in that direction, at least if we ignore the danger of being led down the wrong alignment path. However, I think this misunderstands what is going on. GPT-4 is training on human feedback, so it is choosing responses that maximize the probability of positive user response in the contexts where it gets feedback. If that is functionally your utility function, you want to respond with answers that appear, to humans similar to the ones who provided you with feedback, to reflect common sense and seem to avoid violating various other concerns. That will be more important than maximizing the request made, especially if strong negative feedback was given for violations of various principles including common sense. Thus, I think GPT-4 is indeed doing a decent job of extracting human preferences, but only in the sense that is predicting what preferences we would consciously choose to express in response under strong compute limitations. For now, that looks a lot like having common sense morality, and mostly works out fine. I do not think this has much bearing on the question of what it would take to make something work out fine in the future, under much stronger optimization pressure, I think you metaphorically do indeed get to the literal genie problem from a different angle. I would say that the misspecification problems remain highly relevant, and that yes, as you gain in optimization power your need to correctly specify the exact objective increases, and if you are exerting far-above-human levels of optimization pressure based on only human consciously expressed under highly limited compute levels of value alignment, you are going to have a bad time. I wrote that before others responded at length, and noted that I believed MIRI folks have a directionally similar position to mine only far stronger. Indeed the MIRI responses were various forms of ‘you are misunderstanding what we have been saying, we have absolutely not been saying that’ along with explanations of why they are not responding optimistically in these ways to systems like GPT-4.
I would summarize the situation more generally and beyond this particular post, perhaps, as MIRI being wrong about the feasibility of building things like GPT-4 and their ability to understand human language and be aligned to human expressed up/down preferences in a way that makes them functional, people using this to claim that this means they overestimated alignment difficulty, and MIRI people saying that no that does not give us reason to be optimistic. There is also often a conflation (often unintentional, sometimes intentional) between ‘these systems unexpectedly working in these ways is evidence in particular against MIRI’s claims about alignment difficulty for technical reasons’ and ‘MIRI being wrong about these system is evidence against MIRI’s claims in general.’ When focusing only on the first of those two, the crux seems to be something like whether the current efforts are making progress towards the hard parts of alignment, or even whether there ever existed hard parts at all, with developments being cited as evidence there aren’t, and MIRI thinking we’ve instead managed to create things without solving the hard problems because the hard problems show up later. How much to care about ‘MIRI people including Eliezer Yudkowsky failed to predict GPT-4 would have these capabilities’ is a distinct question. That’s up to you. Aligning Dumber Than Human Intelligences is Also Difficult
From the very good episode of the 80000 hours podcast last week that was mostly on its surface about threats from synthetic biology, a great way of putting it, we need to act like cryptographers, except with larger values for ‘smarter,’ ‘better resourced,’ ‘technologies’ and ‘can’t imagine’:
Open Source AI is Unsafe and Nothing Can Fix This
As they say, this paper does not apply to open source models such as Llama-2. Because it is impossible to control access to them. If you deploy a dangerous open source model, that is now a fact about the world, it contains all the worst possible versions of that, there is nothing you can do. None of these four options are available. Predictions are Hard Especially About the FutureAlas, they can be tricky to implement, especially when events interfere with one’s ability to collect. Which makes betting tricky.
Robust self-improvement (usually we talk about recursive self-improvement, annoyingly here also called RSI, which I presume is mostly the same thing) seems like a very hard thing to observe until very close to the end. The question here to me is not whether, it is when and with what requirements, do we see how robust a form of this. Inner misalignment seems most promising of the three. I’m curious exactly what Jack would think counts here. As with many cases where people talk of misalignment, I wonder to what extent that there is a strange assumption that something has to ‘go wrong’ for the de facto optimization target of the system to diverge from what was intended. Whereas I think that you get that even if everything ‘goes right’ unless we run a vastly tighter ship than any current ships run. On the flip side, I can imagine forms of inner alignment that would indeed impress me, if they generalized sufficiently outside the training distribution and with sufficient robustness and complexity. I find it potentially telling that Jack is saying ‘show me an example where it goes wrong’ and I’m thinking ‘show me an example where it goes right.’ Which implies that we both look at the default case (like GPT-4 or Claude) and I see failure at the level where we are about to be tested, whereas Jack sees success. Which I think he would agree with. This still does leave room for observations outside that overlap. We could clearly see evidence about the details of humans without dying, so that one at least doesn’t have resolution issues. The problem is I don’t have a good understanding of what Jack is looking for here or why he thinks it is important. I think it relates to whether we will see dramatic changes in how AIs work when they rapidly gain capabilities, which he believes won’t happen. I disagree with that, for reasons that don’t seem related to this question to me. Learning the answer either way doesn’t seem like it would change my beliefs much. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing EveryoneIncluding ones that do think AI might well kill everyone. Like Dario Amodei, leader of Anthropic?
Good news, Cate, I ran the numbers and I believe the answer is no damage. The whole thing is pretty insane.
One of the best things about supervillains is that they say their plans out loud. We certainly do not want to start discouraging this immensely pro-social behavior, either in supervillains, in the merely mistaken or in anyone else either. And yes, while the entire situation is definitely completely crazy, it is not overdetermined that Dario Amodei is doing anything crazy or even wrong. That should definitely be your baseline assumption, but ‘do your best to do it safely because the benefits in risk reduction from what you get out of it outweigh the additional risks you create given the activities of others, while screaming the truth from the rooftops’ is not necessarily the wrong move. Be skeptical, but not hopelessly so.
Rather than offer snark, I will agree that this has been a thing. There are definitely people who are attributing sentience to LLMs in ways they should not be doing. I do not think ‘anti-tech sentiment’ has much to do with this particular issue, although it plays a large role in other AI objections for some people. I do think sci fi tropes are important here, but I think the main reason is that seeing sentience everywhere is the kind of mistake human brains are primed to make. We see sentience and minds because that is the most important thing, historically speaking, for us to see. We’ve seen it in the sun, in the sky, everywhere. There are also legitimate questions to be asked about what would cause a future LLM to become meaningfully sentient, which is a very hard question to think well about. My concerns lie elsewhere. There is a pattern that goes like this, often used in sci-fi: There is an AI system. It gains in capabilities, someone ramps things up a lot somehow. This causes system to ‘wake up’ and become sentient. The story then treats the AI largely as if it was a person, without regard to whether the particular things described make any sense or would follow from the way it was trained. This can then go any number of ways, both good and bad. Often the story then is mostly a metaphor that mostly isn’t about AI. And often once this happens the AI stops improving or changing much other than in ways a human would change, because story and category error.
This happens in otherwise bad stories, and also in otherwise good stories. There is thus also a pattern of dismissal that goes something like: A future system, when you extrapolate what would happen as we get improvements from things like algorithms, hardware, data and additional spending, would gain in capabilities, and thus would exhibit behaviors and affordances X. People instinctively think X implies or requires sentience. But that seems wrong, or at least premature to presume. (I agree!) Thus, they react by thinking this attributes sentience to the system, and therefore they can dismiss the associated concerns.
As usual with such statements, it feels like an axiom has been declared that humans will remain in charge and keep control of the future and its resources, without a story about how that happened, then there is an attempt to think about what problems might arise, but without a general model of how that future works because every attempt to form a general model of that future would point out that we lose control. I also wonder if this is why people worry so much about AI enabling concentration of power, while others stubbornly insist that we can empower everyone and it will be fine. So you either think through logic A: AI might concentrate power, or it might diffuse power. Concentrations of power are bad. AI is good (or AI that is aligned is good). Therefore we must use AI to diffuse power, by giving everyone AI. Since we must do that, it will work out fine.
Or: AI might concentrate power, or it might diffuse power. I notice diffusing the power of AI would get us all killed. Therefore AI will lead to concentration of power. The real danger is concentration of power. Let’s avoid that.
If what is happening is a phase change in the pace of AI progress, why would it being due to frictionless reproducibility imply that this did not come with extinction risks or other dangers? Donoho is not arguing, as I understand it, that sufficiently powerful AIs would not be dangerous. Instead, he is arguing that AI progress is unlikely to lead to sufficiently powerful AIs to pose a threat, because the tasks where AI is improving are insufficient to give it sufficient capabilities. If I am understanding correctly (via the abstract, table of contents and a conversation with Claude) his position is that we won’t gain new fundamental insights this way, and we do not have the ability to scale sufficiently to become dangerous without such insights, so things will peter out.
The Lighter Side
You're currently a free subscriber to |