---
subject: "Ed Set Go: A shrinking world for India’s students, and the edtechs that send them there"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-10-21 01:32:20
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
Ed Set Go
Mon, 21 Oct 24
Your weekly newsletter on the most critical pivots in edtech and education in India
Good Morning Ishan,
Not too long ago now, as the pandemic’s debris settled on the edtech sector, one particular type of “edtech” came into sharp focus. Their main product wasn’t test prep, online tutors, or animated videos. In fact, their main product had little to do with learning. I’m talking about the era of the “study-abroad” edtech.
The idea was simple: aggregate the disparate, small-time, and offline study-abroad consultants into one online platform, layer that with some personalised tech features, and charge students a hefty sum to match them with a select group of colleges. On the other side, these platforms collaborated with universities abroad to bolster their international student pipeline. It also seemed like an enduring business—just like tuition, Indian students would always seek guidance about what international destinations were best suited to them.
We wrote about the model a year ago, when business intelligence firm Tracxn reported that while funding in all other sectors of edtech had tanked, higher education—which includes the study-abroad space—was drawing funders’ attention.
Companies such as Leverage Edu, AdmitKard, and Applyboard have quickly become funding favourites, even as traditional edtechs (well, they’re traditional edtechs now) bled out. Leverage Edu raised US$40 million in July 2023 , AdmitKard raised US$6 million a few months before that, and ApplyBoard, which was created by a trio of Iranian brothers in Canada, now has a global footprint in over 30 countries—including a swanky Gurugram office.
Even traditional edtechs (ugh, there’s that term again) caught on quickly, like when Upgrad acquired a “study-abroad” firm based in Australia. In parallel, there were already a slew of ed-fintech-type companies such as Avanse and Leap that were doling out cheaper and hassle-free study-abroad loans.
Bharat’s edtech industry has a “study abroad” engine, [Ed Set Go by The Ken](https://the-ken.com/edsetgo/bharats-edtech-industry-has-a-study-abroad-engine/)
In that edition, we explored the idea that the definition of edtech had stretched just enough to include these types of new-age consultancies. Over time, companies like Leverage Edu also added services that could help students find housing in these countries and facilitated education loans by signing up with financial institutions.
Most countries that were on these edtechs’ radars had been popular destinations for decades, with the United States leading the charge, followed closely by Canada and the United Kingdom. For medical aspirants, destinations such as Ukraine, Poland, and other countries in Central Asia were also gaining traction. Basically, once the pandemic ended, the floodgates opened, with a record 1.3 million students going abroad to study in 2022.
Well, a sector like study-abroad services either has few headwinds to contend with or just one big massive hurricane that could snuff it out. And that second thing just happened with Canada.
When international relations between countries sour, it’s far outside the capabilities of a small business to change the course of history. This isn’t about a bankrupt founder, a truant VC, or unpaid debt.
We’ll come to the burning issue of India’s soured relations with Canada in a minute, but I want to draw attention to Ukraine first. When war between the country and Russia flared up in 2022, close to 18,000 Indian medical students had to stop pursuing their degrees midway. A small number—4,000—were allowed to complete their internships in Indian hospitals. Many of the others are waiting for a chance to get out again to places such as Poland, Serbia, and Georgia, to name a few. But the channel to Ukraine, and the business of sending medical students there, is now completely halted. And its revival is dependent on the outcomes of a war that shows no signs of abating.
Ukraine was a fell swoop. The Canada situation has been much more of a slow burn.
To the uninitiated, the Canadian government [alleged recently](https://www.livemint.com/news/world/tensions-between-india-canada-mount-amid-fresh-allegations-in-hardeep-singh-nijjar-death-case-what-happened-this-week-11729241170463.html) that the Indian government masterminded a criminal conspiracy to target and kill Indians critical of the Indian state within Canada’s borders. The drama has unfolded like the plot of a bad espionage movie, with each side making claims the other has rejected.
No edtech sending Indian kids to study in Canada could have foreseen such a quick escalation in the last few days, though. With diplomatic ties now all but cut, students who’ve already applied to Canadian universities are stuck in limbo. Here’s what two students [told](https://www.indiatoday.in/india/story/india-canada-diplomatic-row-indian-students-ielts-foreign-education-2617557-2024-10-16) India Today:
“I’m preparing for my IELTS to study in Canada next year, but this sudden tension between the two nations has made me anxious,” said Simran, a student from Chandigarh. “A lot of money and career opportunities are tied to this decision. I hope relations improve soon”.
[…]
“I had always aimed to study in Canada for my bachelor’s program. But now, with the current strain in relations between India and Canada, I am afraid. Canada has always supported Indian students, and many of us aspire to build a career and life there. I just hope both governments resolve this quickly so that our education plans are not disrupted.”
Between 2015 and 2024, about 1.3 million Indian students were issued study permits for Canada. Over that same period, of all Indian students studying overseas, the percentage of those studying in Canada jumped from 14% to 40%. That’s a huge jump, and one that probably spawned a study-abroad model focused on Canada.
But a [cap on student permits](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/nri/study/canadas-latest-policy-shift-comes-as-fresh-dampener-for-students-from-india/articleshow/107161197.cms?from=mdr#google_vignette) instituted last year, plus the rising pitch of geopolitical tensions, will hit businesses that have relied on Canada as a safe haven.
Edtechs in the space must be concerned. Akshay Chaturvedi, the founder of Leverage Edu, even made an impassioned statement on his [Linkedin page](https://www.linkedin.com/posts/akshaychaturvedi_lots-been-happening-on-the-canada-front-since-activity-7157407802548789249-XUwM/) earlier this year directed at the Canadian authorities:
“…These limits suggested by 🇨🇦 are pretty misdirected, they don’t solve the housing crisis, or address the matched-to-right-job issues that have a different fix. You have been wanting to solve the ‘diploma mills’ problem – I get it ✅ – BUT a vast majority of private institutions not being able to give students a PSW Visa will mean big dropoffs. You are, at this very moment, doing things that’d make you lose your lead. I personally see little value in advising thousands of our students to choose Canada versus other English-speaking democracies that at this very moment are becoming more welcoming than ever 🇺🇸…”
Finding new destinations for Indian students will be a complicated calculation of language needs, affordable tuition and housing, and specialised degrees that Indians are interested in. Plus, there has to be a clear path to staying on after graduation in whichever country it turns out to be. Before the geopolitical scenario soured, this had been Canada’s main attraction.
Edtechs that have study-abroad businesses, like Upgrad, have already started to put out “[surveys](https://www.business-standard.com/education/news/germany-overtakes-canada-as-premier-study-abroad-destination-upgrad-report-124021401018_1.html)” that indicate a shift away from Canada. In February 2024, the company authored a trends report that stated that Germany has “surpassed” Canada as a preferred destination for Indian students.
The report found a decline in Canada’s popularity, with only 9.3 per cent of respondents expressing interest in the country. Instead, EU countries have emerged as favoured destinations, capturing 48.8 per cent of respondents’ preferences, followed by the US (27.6 per cent) and the UK (9.5 per cent).
A few more contenders—Australia, Philippines and Ireland—have entered the fray as Canada has exited. But as study-abroad edtechs turn the page on Canada, albeit slowly, to newer destinations, they should potentially keep in mind that the headwinds they face aren’t very simple.
India’s emerging position in the world could put these country-specific collaborations to the test. There isn’t an infinite supply of host countries to cycle through, after all.
That’s all for this week, folks! Write to [edsetgo@the-ken.com](mailto:edsetgo@the-ken.com) with your thoughts and suggestions, or leave a comment on our onsite edition.
Regards,
Olina
Got a tip? If you have a lead for a great story that The Ken can pursue, please send it to [tips@the-ken.com](mailto:tips@the-ken.com) or share it through this [form](https://theken.typeform.com/got-a-tip). To find out more about how to do this securely, read [our blog post](https://the-ken.com/blog/help-the-ken-tell-the-next-big-story/) about sharing tips with The Ken.