---
subject: "Retro Recomendo: Destinations"
from: "Recomendo <recomendo@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-01-05 10:01:06
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Recomendo", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8455078693589186571", "UNREAD"]
---
Our subscriber base has grown so much since we first started eight years ago, that most of you have missed all our earliest recommendations. The best of these are still valid and useful, so we’re trying out something new — Retro Recomendo. Once every 6 weeks, we’ll send out a throwback issue of evergreen recommendations focused on one theme from the past 8 years. Intimate boat toursA tour in the Galapagos was one of our best vacations ever. There are no hotels so you live on a boat, which travels during the night so you wake up in the cove of a different island each morning. Each island is a different biome (inspiring the idea of evolution for Darwin). You spend the day actively hiking around the islands encountering a myriad of perfectly tame animals and birds. While there are large cruise boats, the key is to sail on a small boat to minimize transit times ashore. Go to Explore cities by bikeI used the Find street food toursBefore I travel to new city X, I search for “street food tour for city X.” Almost every interesting city these days has someone offering this inside look. I find it a quick, fun, inexpensive, exhilarating way to get to know a place. — KK World’s cheapest destinationsSo much to see, so little money. Why not maximize your travel by getting the most per dollar? Room of SilenceOne of the most profound experiences I've had while traveling was visiting the Coolest nature museumThe world’s coolest nature museum: Recomendo is an authentic, hand-crafted, human-written weekly newsletter that is free, but not cheap. Consider supporting our work with a paid option, now at the low price of $45 per year. Paid subs enable us to keep making it free for others. Recomendo is published by Cool Tools Lab, a small company of three people. We also run the Recomendo Unclassified Ads work! UNCLASSIFIEDS See Product Scores Based on Millions of Reviews! Tired of reading product reviews using multiple tabs? Get all relevant reviews directly on the product page! Have big creative goals? Feeling stuck? Ignite your motivation. Define your 2025 vision. Design personalized strategies to actually make it all happen. This free comprehensive guide, Recomendo is copyrighted by Cool Tools Lab, LLC. Commissions may be earned from the links above. |