---
subject: "Legend of Hayao Miyazaki"
from: "Trung Phan <trungphan@workweek.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-12-06 05:55:14
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Trung Phan", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_7971156048460647958", "UNREAD"]
---
Hayao Miyazaki: 9 Creative Lessons |
PLUS: Netflix's $83B Deal For Warner Bros and Charlie Munger's Last Years. |
|
|
Thanks for subscribing to SatPost.
This will be my final e-mail of the year. I appreciate all you readers and will be back in the first week of January 2026 (ugh, can't believe it's already January 2026) with my Best of 2025 round-up.
For the holidays, I'll be leaving you all with an 8,000 word deep dive on Hayao Miyazaki, the legendary Japanese director and co-founder of Studio Ghibli. Also this week: |
Hayao Miyazaki: 9 Creative Lessons
The 4-part documentary "10 Years With Hayao Miyazaki" is my favourite examination of the creative process.
Over the course of a decade, Japanese director Kaku Arakawa was given full access to Miyazaki and the legendary film studio he co-founded, Studio Ghibli.
The sole condition was that Arakawa was the only person filming the project and I’m so happy they came to an agreement on the terms because the everyday footage is just glorious (even the smallest, most boring detail).
Miyazaki is now 84 years old and one of film’s towering giants. The driving force behind 20+ animated classics and arguably Japan’s most successful film studio. He is the Japanese Walt Disney and Steven Spielberg rolled into one (probably Martin Scorsese too based on his glasses and hilariously blunt curmudgeonly takes).
I re-watched the documentary to extract as many lessons as possible and ended up [writing 8,000 words about his genius](https://link.workweek.com/click/42905291.61013/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cucmVhZHRydW5nLmNvbS9wL2hheWFvLW1peWF6YWtpLTktY3JlYXRpdmUtbGVzc29ucz9oYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B11e42934). For this e-mail, let me share one banger anecdote that highlights his dedication to the craft.
It's based on this clip in his 2013 film The Wind Rises. |
This 4-second clip took the Studio Ghibli team 15 months — yes, FIFTEEN MONTHS!!! — to animate.
In the documentary, we get to see Hayao work on one character from the crowd; he re-draws someone’s back to make sure the tension and physics look just right.
After watching the completed scene during a group screening — again, after FIFTEEN MONTHS!!! — Miyazaki talks to one of his animators (Eiji Yamamori) and their exchange is unreal:
Miyazaki: “Good job.” Yamamori: “It’s so short, though” Miyazaki: “But it was worth it.” Yamamori gets a few seconds of joy (he’s pumped) but has to move on to the next frame. Unreal. To read the whole Miyazaki deep dive, smash this blue button. |
Netflix $83B Deal For Warner Bros (?)
Apologies for the all caps but NETFLIX HAS AGREED TO AN $83B DEAL TO ACQUIRE WARNER BROS!
Before we get into the details, this is far from a done deal. David Ellison and his father's $250B fortune are backing a potential hostile takeover attempt by Paramount Skydance. Also, there will be serious antitrust heat with the largest streaming service acquiring the 4th largest streaming service.
Here are the high-level details of Netflix's [mostly all-cash offer](https://link.workweek.com/click/42905291.61013/aHR0cHM6Ly9hYm91dC5uZXRmbGl4LmNvbS9lbi9uZXdzL25ldGZsaXgtdG8tYWNxdWlyZS13YXJuZXItYnJvcz9oYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Baf5daba8): - enterprise value of ~$83B
-
equity value is $72B (~20% premium on stock).
- deal closes in Q3 2026 after Warner Bros. Discovery spins off its cable assets (CNN, Food Network, TNT) into a separate public company called Discovery Global.
-
Netflix will keep HBO Max around and theatre releases will also still happen (we will talk more on this point, which Hollywood is very worried about).
- HBO could become part of an up-sell bundle (and, potentially, start of Netflix turning into a cable channel provider similar to Amazon Prime Channels)
-
Netflix will own the Warner TV/Film studios adding IP such as The Big Bang Theory, The Wizard of Oz, DC Universe, Harry Potter and all the incredible goodies from HBO (The Sopranos, Game of Thrones, Succession, The Wire, Silicon Valley).
- Netflix expects $2-3B cost savings per year.
- Both parties know that an antitrust case is likely, which is why Netflix has agreed to pay Warner Bros. a $5.8B breakup fee if it fails (Paramount offered a $5B break-up fee but believes its much better positioned to close the deal because of the Ellison family's closeness to President Trump...and how the $8B Paramount and Skydance merger in the summer was a proven test case).
Netflix fell 3% on the news. Why? Well, the market probably thinks Netflix is running out of ways to squeeze ARPU from its existing subscriber base. This is a company that does not do large M&A deals and now it's doing one of the largest media deals ever. Historically, Netflix is build over buy.
To be fair, Warner Bros. (which is an OG studio and home of Casablanca) and HBO are some platinum IP. Warner-related deals have been cursed (think AOL's $165B Time Warner merger in 2001 or the $85B acquisition of Time Warner by AT&T in 2018). That's why this is such a wild outcome.
Back in 2012, Netflix's current co-CEO Ted Sarandos said that its goal was “to become HBO faster than HBO can become us.” Now it may own the damn thing (I was going to put his quote in all caps spared your eyes, you're welcome).
Another incredible oldie quote going viral is former Time Warner head Jeff Bewkes in 2010 saying that Netflix was not a threat: "It's a bit like, is the Albanian army going to take over the world? I don't think so." (hence, The Hollywood Reporters headline about the deal ["How the 'Albanian Army' Took Over the World".](https://link.workweek.com/click/42905291.61013/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuaG9sbHl3b29kcmVwb3J0ZXIuY29tL2J1c2luZXNzL2J1c2luZXNzLW5ld3MvbmV0ZmxpeC13YXJuZXItYnJvcy1kZWFsLWFsYmFuaWFuLWFybXktaG9sbHl3b29kLWdhdGVzLTEyMzY0NDMxMTgvP2hhc2hlZF91c2VyPTBlYmVmMTJjNDI5MTE4NDU2MmRhYzA5OTY1YmNlODA4/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Bbeae3d0c)
Can the Ellisons pull a rabbit out of their hat? They already sent a letter to independent board members at Warner Bros basically threatening litigation and saying that the board (specifically Chair and CEO David Zaslav) is prioritizing itself over shareholders.
Paramount argues that its offer of [$30 a share](https://link.workweek.com/click/42905291.61013/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuY25iYy5jb20vMjAyNS8xMi8wNS9wYXJhbW91bnQtZGF2aWQtZWxsaXNvbi13YmQtYmlkZGluZy13YXItaG9zdGlsZS1iaWQuaHRtbD9oYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Beb499724) for everything (including the cable assets) is higher than Netflix's ~$28 offer for just HBO Max and the Warner TV/Film studio (and whatever shareholders would get from Discovery Global). The Ellisons could really up the offer and — who knows, he is friends with Larry — Elon posted on the news two 🍿 emojis. If Warner Bros takes a different offer, it'll have to pay Netflix $2.8B if it calls off the original deal.
On the antitrust front, Netflix has long said its competition is "sleep" not other streaming services. It pretty has already won the streaming wars, so any antitrust case would have to bucket as only a streamer (and not consider TikTok, YouTube, Fortnite etc). Meta basically won its recent antitrust case because it (rightly) convinced the judge that its competition wasn't with only social networks (eg. Snap) but all types of entertainment.
There's even talk that Netflix is willing to pay the $5.8B break-up fee just to stop Paramount from becoming a true peer competitor (if the Warner Bros asset gets held up for a few years).
The vibes on film Twitter are very bearish and reflect James Cameron's belief that Netflix will be a ["disaster"](https://link.workweek.com/click/42905291.61013/aHR0cHM6Ly94LmNvbS90cnVuZ3RwaGFuL3N0YXR1cy8xOTk3MDAwMTIzMjE4NjQ1MzcyP3M9MTAmaGFzaGVkX3VzZXI9MGViZWYxMmM0MjkxMTg0NTYyZGFjMDk5NjViY2U4MDg/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B294e93e9) for the theatre business (which Sarandos has previously said is "outdated"). Cameron says Netflix promising to keep theatrical is “sucker bait” and believes they’ll do short theatre runs just for Academy Awards consideration (which he thinks should be reserved only for legit large multi-thousand theatre film releases).
I think Cameron is probably overly bearish here. Netflix has pulled a 180 degrees on a lot of things it said it would "never" do such as gaming, ads, live events, sports and — in a huge blow to your sister's coworker's GF's uncle —end widespread password sharing (the official Netflix account once literally tweeted [once](https://link.workweek.com/click/42905291.61013/aHR0cHM6Ly94LmNvbS9uZXRmbGl4L3N0YXR1cy84NDAyNzYwNzMwNDAzNzE3MTI_aGFzaGVkX3VzZXI9MGViZWYxMmM0MjkxMTg0NTYyZGFjMDk5NjViY2U4MDg/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Be53c86fb) "Love is sharing a password").
A potential bull case is that Netflix is a much better fit for Warner Bros. assets as compared to AT&T, AOL and the Warner Bros. Discovery monstrosity. It has a very healthy business and its content spend is massive. Bill Simmons and Matt Belloni walk through a potential Netflix deal and make some interesting points (it starts at [68-minute mark](https://link.workweek.com/click/42905291.61013/aHR0cHM6Ly9wb2RjYXN0cy5hcHBsZS5jb20vdXMvcG9kY2FzdC90aGUtYmlsbC1zaW1tb25zLXBvZGNhc3QvaWQxMDQzNjk5NjEzP2k9MTAwMDczOTgwMTE2NyZyPTQxMzkmaGFzaGVkX3VzZXI9MGViZWYxMmM0MjkxMTg0NTYyZGFjMDk5NjViY2U4MDg/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B85648aac)): -
Netflix may push theatre to capture the zeitgeist. The streaming platform's most-viewed films (eg. Red Notice, Bird Box, The Gray Man) have basically zero cultural impact. The hype is just different from having people all go to the theatre at the same time. Netflix has started moving in that direction by allowing the latest Knives Out to have a 2-week theatre run and it agreed to let Greta Gerwig do Chronicle of Narnia with IMAX before hitting the app. K-Pop Demon Hunters also got a theatre run after blowing up on the platform. Now, Netflix gets some iconic IP that could create some buzz (Harry Potter, Superman, Batman, Dune). It's still an open question how committed Netflix is to theatre, but there are signs they are willing to make it work.
-
Paramount is the ideal acquirer to maintain competition. While Netflix has use for the IP, this move does look defensive. Paramount Skydance owning all of the Warner Bros. Discovery assets would be nearly on par with Disney, Netflix and Amazon Prime in terms of clout, IP, subscribers and financial firepower. Paramount swallowing Warner Bros would reduce big studios from 5 to 4, but David Ellison is very pro-theatre and said he'd spend to increase the film slate.
- Comcast takes a major L. This was the third major bidder. It owns NBCUniversal, which has the Peacock streaming app. But that is domestic only. HBO Max would have given Comcast an international streaming business and IP for Universal Studios.
-
Why would Zaslav steer the deal to Netflix? He's set to make $500m+, which would happen with any acquirer. But it seems likely that Netflix will let him stay as a studio head and Zaslav enjoys the spotlight. The Ellisons would probably limit his role quite a abit.
Matt Stoller breaks down all of [Netflix's anti-trust hurdles](https://link.workweek.com/click/42905291.61013/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cudGhlYmlnbmV3c2xldHRlci5jb20vcC9uZXRmbGl4LWlzLXRyeWluZy10by1idXktd2FybmVyLWJyb3M_aGFzaGVkX3VzZXI9MGViZWYxMmM0MjkxMTg0NTYyZGFjMDk5NjViY2U4MDg/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Bf7e32346). I previously wrote about [3 wild Netflix what-ifs from pre-2002 days](https://link.workweek.com/click/42905291.61013/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cucmVhZHRydW5nLmNvbS9wL3RocmVlLW5ldGZsaXgtd2hhdC1pZnMtYmV6b3MtYXJuYXVsdD9oYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Bbe60fd69) (Bezos and Blockbuster tried to buy; Bernard Arnault saved it with $30m investment).
And, of course, enjoy some Netflix memes after this advertising plug. |
This issue of SatPost is brought to you by Bearly AI Are you looking for a no-logging, encrypted and anonymized AI chat tool?
Then try the Bearly AI research app, which provides an easy-to-use UX for the newest models from OpenAI, Anthropic, xAI, DeepSeek, Gemini and more.
While some AI providers keep chat logs indefinitely even after a user deletes them...Bearly AI has a default no-logging policy and user chats are encrypted while requests to LLM providers are completely anonymized.
Try one month FREE of the Pro Plan using the code BEARLY1. | |
|
Charlie Munger's Last Years
Gregory Zuckerman dropped a doozy last week for the WSJ titled ["The Untold Story of Charlie Munger’s Final Years"](https://link.workweek.com/click/42905291.61013/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cud3NqLmNvbS9maW5hbmNlL2ludmVzdGluZy9jaGFybGllLW11bmdlci1saWZlLWZpbmFsLXllYXJzLWJlcmtzaGlyZS03YzIwYzE4ZT9oYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B4e542930) (Warren Buffett's long-time partner at Berkshire Hathaway passed away at 99 years old in November 2023).
Usually when someone sends me an article and says "hey, you got to read this", I reply with a 👍-emoji and there's a 78.9% chance I never read it.
This was an immediate read, though. To the point that I cut short a Nikola Jokic YouTube highlight package, which I typically only do when my wife calls. Some takeaways: -
Munger stayed curious until the end: The legendary autodidact who popularized the idea of "mental models" – which have unfortunately been corrupted by LinkedIn influencers – was learning new subjects up to nearly 100 years old.
-
Excerpt: “Even a week or two before passing away, he was asking questions such as, ‘Does Moore’s Law apply in the age of AI?’” recalls his friend Jamie Montgomery, referring to whether artificial intelligence would see exponential gains like those experienced in computational power.)
-
Still investing (with an unlikely win): Munger wasn't investing much with Berkshire despite his $2.2B stake in the company. But he was still making bets on his own. He gave money to hedge fund manger Li Lu and, in 2005, started mentoring a high school dropout from his neighbourhood in LA (Avi Mayer). He started advising Mayer on real estate and then co-invested in properties including a unit with 10,000 garden apartments, becoming "one of the largest owners of these low-rise apartments in the state." Mayer now runs Afton Properties and has $3B+ assets under management, including one property that is across the street from a Costco (Munger loved the company and owned $100m of stock in the retailer while also being a board member for 20+ years). Munger's final stock W was investing in coal. He long shunned the industry but as everyone became bearish, he went contrarian and made $50m on energy stocks.
-
The Tuesday Meeting: Munger's wife passed away in 2010 and Munger "feared loneliness and irrelevance". So, he spent more time with friends and, every Tuesday, had breakfast at the LA Country Club with a cast of business folk. They'd start at 7:30am and talk for hours. Uber Chairman Ron Sugar and former Activision CEO Bobby Kotick were regulars. One lesson imparted on the group was that you only need a few big wins in life (he told them, "take out Berkshire’s top five investments and its returns are pretty middling"). Meanwhile, Munger stayed sharp as a tack and unafraid to cook people:
- Excerpt: Munger retained a bit of an edge, though. When a senior Ford executive joined the breakfast club one time, Munger surprised the group by outlining the carmaker’s profitability—by product line—over the previous 25 years. Then, Munger hit him with a zinger.
“I don’t know why you guys bother making cars,” he said, noting that the bulk of Ford’s profits came from trucks.
He started getting into food and would indulge himself, even as his family wanted him to eat healthy.
Munger had "fond memories" of Spam from his army days and Spam fried rice became a thing (this used to be a staple in the Phan household, too). Meanwhile, his final delivery meal was a full Korean fried chicken, kimchi fried rice and waffle fries (this is a current staple in the Phan household).
And here are the details of the final conversation Charlie had with Warren: By the last decade of his life...He spoke with Buffett every week or two. Buffett was based in Omaha, Neb., and Munger lived in Los Angeles, and they both had hearing issues, making communication more difficult. “They would scream to each other,” says Whitney Jackson, the wife of Munger’s grandson and a frequent visitor to Munger’s home in his last years. “It was likely meant to be confidential, but anyone within a mile’s radius could hear them.” [...] Munger was counting down to a 100th birthday party on Jan. 1, 2024. Friends and longtime business associates including Jim Sinegal, Costco’s co-founder, planned to fly to Los Angeles for the festivities. Munger’s health was faltering, though. He sensed the end was near. When a friend asked how he was feeling, he replied: “There’s a lot wrong with me.” When he discussed his legacy, he said he was comfortable with his accomplishments and optimistic about Berkshire’s future.
“Once it’s built, you don’t need to be Warren and Charlie,” he told a friend. “What we have is a framework for looking at investments.”
Near the end of life, Munger leaned on humor for strength. He told family members that Diet Coke was responsible for his longevity, lightening the mood. And he shared a wish with a visitor.
“Oh, to be 86 again,” he said.
Late on Thanksgiving evening two years ago, days before his death, Munger was admitted to a hospital near Montecito. He asked family members to leave the room so he could call Buffett one last time.
They shared a last farewell. |
Links and Memes
Google's AI Comeback: Alphabet is up 69% YTD (to ~$4T) and is looking like the AI frontrunner heading into 2026. Its competing with OpenAI at the app layer (Gemini), Nvidia at the chip layer (TPUs) and Amazon/Microsoft in the cloud (Google Cloud Platform). All while owning 9 properties with over 1B users including Search, Maps, Android, Drive, Photos, Play Store, Chrome and YouTube's triple back-to-back-to-back unskippable ads.
Google had all these assets when ChatGPT launched in November 2022, but it fumbled out the gate with the Bard chatbot then the ridiculous Woke Gemini image generator (which led to someone wearing a ["Boob Shirt" asking Sergey Brin](https://link.workweek.com/click/42905291.61013/aHR0cHM6Ly94LmNvbS90cnVuZ3RwaGFuL3N0YXR1cy8xOTkyOTc5NzEyNzA1MjA0MzM0P3M9MTAmaGFzaGVkX3VzZXI9MGViZWYxMmM0MjkxMTg0NTYyZGFjMDk5NjViY2U4MDg/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Bea108791) about why Google was fumbling). According to Alex Kantrowitz, Google has been able to turn it around behind solid leadership from Sundar Pichai (who many thought wasn't a "wartime CEO"), including these [key decisions](https://link.workweek.com/click/42905291.61013/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmlndGVjaG5vbG9neS5jb20vcC9ob3ctZ29vZ2xlLXB1bGxlZC1vZmYtaXRzLXN0dW5uaW5nP2hhc2hlZF91c2VyPTBlYmVmMTJjNDI5MTE4NDU2MmRhYzA5OTY1YmNlODA4/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B1424d600): -
Combined Google Brain and DeepMind into Google DeepMind
- Empowered Demis Hassabis to lead unit and focus on making world-class AI tech stack (model to TPUs to cloud integration)
- Google DeepMind became “engine room” for company and farmed the core AI tech to other product areas (Search, Gmail etc)
- 100s of engineers moved from Search to Google DeepMind team
- Streamlined the process to add new features to Search (AI Mode and AI Overview rolled out fairly quickly)
- Pichai has been personally involved at every step for AI (product reviews, performance analysis, product analysis etc)
- He created 6-week product sprints (to supplement annual flagship product launches)
It probably also helped that Sergey Brin —who together with Larry Page control 51%+ of Google's voting share — is back at the company working everyday and providing cover behind-the-scenes.
Somewhat unfortunately for OpenAI, Brin came out of retirement and got back in the game because someone at [OpenAI asked him a few years ago why he wasn't working on generative AI](https://link.workweek.com/click/42905291.61013/aHR0cHM6Ly94LmNvbS9ZdWNoZW5qX1VXL3N0YXR1cy8xOTkxNzMzMzM5NDczMjExNjE1P2hhc2hlZF91c2VyPTBlYmVmMTJjNDI5MTE4NDU2MmRhYzA5OTY1YmNlODA4/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Bc9c81e01), the "greatest transformative moment in computer science" (Brin, of course, is a computer science PhD).
Things are getting so real on the competitive front that Sam Altman sent a memo last week saying that OpenAI had to go into "code red" to respond to the Google threat. OpenAI is doing everything it can to make the same vertical AI stack that Google has had for the past decade. But it's doing so without the money-printing gusher known as the $250B+ a year search advertising business. For real, that "Boob Shirt Guy" video may be the definitive before and after moment of the AI race. ***
Speaking of Demis Hassabis...check out the new documentary The Thinking Game about the founding of DeepMind. My favourite part is Hassabis recounting the exact moment he realized he wanted to dedicated his life to research.
At 12, he was the world’s 2nd best chess player for his age. He went to a tournament and lost to a 30-year old player, who was overly happy beating a kid.
Demis loved chess but [realized all the brainpower in that room (300 top chess players) could accomplish so much more than just mastering a game and he decided to not pursue chess as a career](https://link.workweek.com/click/42905291.61013/aHR0cHM6Ly95b3V0dS5iZS9kOTVKOHl6dmpiUT9zaT1lc0JLQ0tYXzM5T1o5V281JnQ9MTM5OSZoYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B4ac45aca).
*** Some other content for your weekend consumption: -
An incredible Gemini Nano Banana Image Prompt...makes a cool
[weather app visual for any city (real or fictitious)](https://link.workweek.com/click/42905291.61013/aHR0cHM6Ly94LmNvbS9UcnVuZ1RQaGFuL3N0YXR1cy8xOTk1NjQwNzc5OTg2MDg0MDgwP3M9MjAmaGFzaGVkX3VzZXI9MGViZWYxMmM0MjkxMTg0NTYyZGFjMDk5NjViY2U4MDg/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B252825a2).
-
Mad Men is being ported over to 4K...and they missed some post-production edits, resulting in some
[incredible puke machine footage](https://link.workweek.com/click/42905291.61013/aHR0cHM6Ly94LmNvbS9UcnVuZ1RQaGFuL3N0YXR1cy8xOTk1ODk0MjMyNTI4MzU1NDY5P3M9MjAmaGFzaGVkX3VzZXI9MGViZWYxMmM0MjkxMTg0NTYyZGFjMDk5NjViY2U4MDg/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B900811e8).
-
Zootopia 2 is probably the most valuable Hollywood IP in China...the film set a record 5-day box office haul of
[~$560m](https://link.workweek.com/click/42905291.61013/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuaG9sbHl3b29kcmVwb3J0ZXIuY29tL21vdmllcy9tb3ZpZS1uZXdzL3pvb3RvcGlhLTItcnVsZXMtdGhhbmtzZ2l2aW5nLWJveC1vZmZpY2UtMTIzNjQzNzg1MC8_aGFzaGVkX3VzZXI9MGViZWYxMmM0MjkxMTg0NTYyZGFjMDk5NjViY2U4MDg/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B17ba9edd), including $272m from China (already the most for an American animated film in the country). Zootopia is so popular in China that the only Zootopia-Land in the world is at Shanghai Disneyland. The Imagineering video for Zootopia-Land is a solid watch, [mostly because the comments are full of people angry that they haven't brought the attraction to America](https://link.workweek.com/click/42905291.61013/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cueW91dHViZS5jb20vd2F0Y2g_dj1YZldkSUk0eTh3MCZoYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Be03c8318) (which is, fair enough, since the reputation of Disneyland in America is turning into a price-gouging and long-line having experience).
- OpenAI's research head Mark Chen...went on Ashlee Vance's podcast and talked about the recruiting war with Meta, including how Zuck tried
[woo-ing researchers by making homemade soup and delivering it to them](https://link.workweek.com/click/42905291.61013/aHR0cHM6Ly94LmNvbS9iZWFybHlhaS9zdGF0dXMvMTk5NTk0ODYyOTI5NTc3MTkyOT9zPTIwJmhhc2hlZF91c2VyPTBlYmVmMTJjNDI5MTE4NDU2MmRhYzA5OTY1YmNlODA4/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Bb4924237).
-
Speaking of which, Apple lost one of its top designers to Meta...Alan Dye (who did Liquid Glass, Vision Pro UX) will lead Zuck's Reality Labs and eyewear projects. Wonder what soup Zuck made Dye. New England Clam Chowder? Manhattan? Chicken Corn? Anyway, some frame this as a coup for Zuck
[but many inside Apple were very happy to see Dye leave per John Gruber](https://link.workweek.com/click/42905291.61013/aHR0cHM6Ly9kYXJpbmdmaXJlYmFsbC5uZXQvMjAyNS8xMi9iYWRfZHllX2pvYj9oYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B6392f994)...and the [old Liquid Glass memes came back](https://link.workweek.com/click/42905291.61013/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cucmVkZGl0LmNvbS9yL2lwaG9uZS9jb21tZW50cy8xcGV2b3pnL2Ffd29uZGVyZnVsX3F1b3RlX3RvX2NvbW1lbW9yYXRlX2FsYW5fZHllcy8_aGFzaGVkX3VzZXI9MGViZWYxMmM0MjkxMTg0NTYyZGFjMDk5NjViY2U4MDg/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B21bd6989).
-
RIP architectural legend Frank Gehry: He passed away at 96. His Guggenheim Museum in Bilbao, Spain is perhaps the most influential building of the 1990s. The structure was a computer-designed breakthrough and revitalized the region (which had de-industrialized from a once thriving shipbuilding economy). Many city's tried to copy the "Bilbao Effect" to bring energy back to an area. Notable examples include Tate Modern (London's South Bank) or Riverside Museum (Glasgow) Centre Pompidou (Metz, France) and Wendy's 10 blocks from my house.
B1M has a good [30-minute video on the pretty bonkers structure (it does not look like it should work)](https://link.workweek.com/click/42905291.61013/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cueW91dHViZS5jb20vd2F0Y2g_dj1GbnJQWnVOMG0tMCZoYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97D36566777).
|
...and them wild posts (including Gemini going off the rails making [memes](https://link.workweek.com/click/42905291.61013/aHR0cHM6Ly94LmNvbS92YXN1bWFuL3N0YXR1cy8xOTk1MjQ0MTI0NDIxOTAyMzk3P3M9MTAmaGFzaGVkX3VzZXI9MGViZWYxMmM0MjkxMTg0NTYyZGFjMDk5NjViY2U4MDg/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B49a6a940)): |
Finally, Spotify Wrapped came out on Wednesday and the posts were juking...especially about a new feature that told ever user their "listening age" based on songs that were streamed. |
|
|
Written by me, [Trung Phan.](https://link.workweek.com/click/42905291.61013/aHR0cHM6Ly90d2l0dGVyLmNvbS9UcnVuZ1RQaGFuP2hhc2hlZF91c2VyPTBlYmVmMTJjNDI5MTE4NDU2MmRhYzA5OTY1YmNlODA4/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Cd3ba51be)
Workweek Media Inc. 1023 Springdale Road, STE 9E Austin, TX 78721
Want to ruin my day? [Unsubscribe.](https://link.workweek.com/click/42905291.61013/aHR0cDovL2xpbmsud29ya3dlZWsuY29tL21hbmFnZS83Ym8vcHJlZmVyZW5jZXMtdHJ1bmc_ZW1haWw9aXNoYW4ubWFpbCU0MGdtYWlsLmNvbSZoYXNoPTYyYzNmM2E3N2MwNmU3ZTcxMTk0NzdmY2YwYjM2OTczJmhhc2hlZF91c2VyPTBlYmVmMTJjNDI5MTE4NDU2MmRhYzA5OTY1YmNlODA4/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Bba75caa5) |
|
|
|