---
subject: "The Monday Media Diet with Bijan Shahvali"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-08-01 09:18:22
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Bijan Shahvali (BS) was introduced to us by the great Sam Valenti. He runs Tell us about yourself. Born in Los Angeles and now based in New York City. I founded Describe your media diet. For current events and news, it's usually the New York Times or BBC Newshour on WNYC in the morning. After that, I’ll look to the My favorite ‘newsletter’ comes each morning to my inbox in quantities of approximately 60-80. That newsletter is, of course, my eBay saved searches, which compile all results from the previous day into an email for each individual search. After I go through all of those, it’s I do a good amount of driving for sourcing and most trips are around 1-2 hours so it’s pretty perfect for podcasts. I’m not so much into the storytelling ones, typically it’s interviews/conversations - What’s the last great book you read? My friend Jacob recommended to me What are you reading now? I am about to start What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication? My approach is similar to when I am looking for parking in my neighborhood, where you usually have to do at least two laps around before finding a spot. It’s very visual, I take mental notes for cues of a potential space - who is walking and has keys in their hand, which car looks like it is just doing a delivery, etc. When I pick up a print copy, it's the same approach - I will thumb through the whole thing at least twice taking mental notes for a potential starting place - who/what is in the photograph, who took the photographs, headlines, etc. In my vintage sourcing efforts, I come across a lot of the older print magazines, which I typically go through to look through and collect for any style inspiration in the advertisements or art direction that might be interesting visual reference material. More recently, out of curiosity, I have been reading more of the articles in an effort to get a better sense of the zeitgeist of that particular time. Who should everyone be reading that they’re not?
What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone? I’m not a big app guy, but one of my favorites is Plane or train? Plane. I very much would like to be a train guy, it sounds very sophisticated. Sort of like the travel equivalent of “I liked the book better than the movie.” However, at this point in my life, I guess I am more interested in getting to places faster and spending more time in the destination. Also, the entertainment options on planes are just so much better. You mean to tell me I can watch 5 straight hours of Impractical Jokers on JetBlue and then end up in LA? Sign me up. What is one place everyone should visit? Toronto. I was there last March to set up and launch a month-long pop-up I was doing with Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into. My friend Alex runs an instagram account called — WITI x McKinsey: An ongoing partnership where we highlight interesting McKinsey research, writing, and data. Lead like a girl. In this new interview, corporate consultant Dalia Feldheim says managers and executives, regardless of gender, can combat widespread burnout by embracing conventionally feminine leadership traits. Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Bijan (BS) —
You’re a free subscriber to |