---
subject: "52 Surprising Things / Watchable American history / See yourself as a verb"
from: "Recomendo <recomendo@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-12-14 10:02:06
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Recomendo", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8455078693589186571", "UNREAD"]
---
52 Surprising ThingsEvery December, writer Tom Whitwell publishes an eclectic list of Marchetti’s Constant is the idea that throughout human history, from cave dwellers to ancient Greeks to 21st century Londoners, people tend to commute for about an hour a day — 30 minutes out, 30 minutes home. So faster travel leads to longer distances, not less time. [ [Cesare Marchetti, plus a 2025 update](https://substack.com/redirect/c7b114bb-ae3b-43f1-8c53-83f5ecf9ab1a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)]The Casio F91W — the ubiquitous digital watch, worn by Osama Bin Laden, costing just £12 — has been faked for years, and the fakes are getting better and better. [ [Andy C](https://substack.com/redirect/125345b3-86f7-410e-b110-cb02f6074d82?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)]Childhood peanut allergies are falling dramatically, perhaps because advice to avoid peanuts was reversed. [ [Simar Bajaj](https://substack.com/redirect/247987fc-1dbd-4a26-a3b1-1e9b482022e3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)]
Browse his previous Watchable American historyI believe every American should be required to watch Ken Burn’s Civil War series to understand their country today. Ken Burns has done it again with his new series on See yourself as a verb“ Sharpen dull Airbnb knivesI’ve stayed in Airbnbs in many different countries, and have learned one universal truth: the kitchen knives are invariably dull. As a service to myself and future guests, I’ve started bringing a small knife sharpener with me when I travel. The Freak Pages
Quotable quotesHere are some quotes I gathered recently: It takes a lot of work to make something simple. — Steve Wozniak One of the most realistic parts of Lord of the Rings is that almost no one wanted to get involved, until it was very nearly too late. — Ricki Tarr Everyone searches for opportunities while running from problems, missing that they’re the same thing. Problems aren’t obstacles to opportunity, they ARE the opportunity. — Shane Parrish Without data, you’re just another person with an opinion. — W. Edwards Deming When people ask me if I went to film school I tell them “No I went to films.” — Quentin Tarantino Thinking small is a self-fulfilling prophecy. — Jeff Bezos The three lenses of opportunity cost: (1) Compared with what? (2) And then what? (3) At the expense of what? — Shane Parish You never know what worse luck your bad luck has saved you from. — Cormac McCarthy Everyone driving slower than you is an idiot, and everyone driving faster than you is a maniac! — George Carlin
I find witty quotes sharpen my thinking and help me pay attention. — KK THIS ISSUE IS SPONSORED BY MARKETING IDEASGrowth hacking gems from top marketer Tom Orbach in his weekly Recomendo Unclassified Ads work! UNCLASSIFIEDS We’ve got your UNIQUE gift. Personalized weight loss plans starting at $89/mo with oral medication kits or $199/mo for GLP-1 injections through Hims & Hers. Licensed providers, unlimited check-ins, meal planning—all 100% online. 9 Hidden Perks of Your Amazon Prime Membership. Are you taking advantage of your Amazon Prime perks? If you’re already a Prime member or thinking about joining, be sure to Playa-side Living w/Hot Well: 5+ac ranch & guest house in Surprise Valley CA at base of Warner Mtns. 90mi N of Black Rock Desert. 3 cold and 1 hot well. Silence. Dark sky. See at Solve a 1920s mystery! June’s Journey is a Playa-side Living w/Hot Well: 5+ac ranch & guest house in Surprise Valley CA at base of Warner Mtns. 90mi N of Black Rock Desert. 3 cold and 1 hot well. Silence. Dark sky. See at Recomendo is an authentic, hand-crafted, human-written weekly newsletter that is free, but not cheap. Please consider supporting our work with a paid option, now at the low price of $45 per year. Paid subs enable us to keep making it free for others. Recomendo is published by Cool Tools Lab, a small company of three people. We also run the Recomendo is copyrighted by Cool Tools Lab, LLC. Commissions may be earned from the links above. |