---
subject: "The $140K Question: Cost Changes Over Time"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-12-17 14:02:11
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
In The calculations behind the claims were invalid, the central claim (that the ‘true poverty line’ was $140k) was absurd, but the terrible vibes are real. People increasingly feel that financial life is getting harder and that success is out of reach. ‘Real income’ is rising, but costs are rising even more. Before we get to my central explanations for that - the Revolution of Rising Expectations and the Revolution of Rising Requirements - there are calculations and histories to explore, which is what this second post is about. How are costs changing in America, both in absolute terms and compared to real incomes, for key items: Consumer goods, education, health care and housing? That’s a huge percentage of where we spend our post-tax money. And how is household wealth actually changing? The economists are right that the basket of goods and services we typically purchase in these areas has greatly increased in both quantity and quality, in spite of various severe supply side problems mostly caused by regulations. That is not what determines whether a person or family can pay their bills. The Debate ContinuesPeople keep saying and feeling that the cost of living is going up and things are getting harder. Economists keep saying no, look at the data, you are buying better goods, so you are wrong. Both things can be true at once. It also means people talk past each other a lot. There was an iteration on this back in May, when
As with the $140,000 question, many of the specific cost claims of the various Guys here will be wrong, but their life will be hard, and they will be unhappy. And vote. Evaluating and often refuting specific claims is a necessary background step. So that’s what this post is here to do. On its own, it’s a distraction, but you need to do it first. The Cost of Thriving Index ReduxTwo years ago I covered the debate around Cass’s The Cost of Thriving Index is an attempt to assemble the basket of goods required for ‘thriving’ in each era and then compare combined costs as a function of what a single man can hope to earn, without regard to the rising quality of the basket over time. The post covered the technical arguments in each area between Winship and Cass. Cass argued that thriving had gotten a lot harder. Winship argued against this. My conclusion was: Cass’s calculations were importantly flawed. My ‘improved COTI’ shows a basic basket was ~13% harder for a typical person to afford in 2023 than it was in 1985. Critics of the index, especially Winship, misunderstood the point of the exercise and in many places [trying to solve the wrong problem using the wrong methods based on a wrong model of the world](https://substack.com/redirect/c4ee41df-3dfa-46a7-ba43-fe13dfeb8a07?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)derived from poor thinking. Unfortunately all their mistakes failed to cancel out.You had to consume goods that cost ~75% more ‘real income’ in order to thrive in 2023 than you did in 1985. ‘Real income’ went up 53%. Are you better off in 2023 or in 1985? It is not obvious. One effect does not negate the other.
This calculation left out at least one very important similar consideration in particular that neither side considered: The time and money costs of not The two sides continue to talk past each other. Before we can do a synthesis, we need to cover the actual cost details. The Housing Theory Of Everything Remains UndefeatedI don’t quite fully buy the Housing Theory of Everything. But is close. House prices have risen quite a lot, as have interest rates. So did incomes. If you’re okay living where people don’t typically want to live, then things aren’t bad. However, people are less accepting of that, which is part of the Revolution of Rising Expectations, and opportunity has concentrated in the expensive locations.
I would instead say, if housing was legal, there would be a lot less unhappiness. More precisely: If building housing was generally legal, including things like SROs and also massively more capacity in general in the places people want to live, then housing costs would be a lot lower, people would have vastly more If you look at median home prices, things actually look like they’ve always been pretty terrible, as in this is a share of 200% of median income: The median household, with a median income and no outside help, does not by default buy the median house at today’s interest rate. Houses are largely bought with wealth, or owned or acquired in other ways, so by default if you’re relying purely on a median income you’re getting a lot less than the median house. Which is totally fine, the median house is historically huge, you can notch down a bit. Also, when rates go down we refinance and when they go up we delay moving, which lowers costs. But if we suppose you’re a median income earner trying to buy the median house today. If you believe the above graph, it’s going to cost you 70% of your income to make a mortgage payment, plus you’ll need a down payment, so yeah, that’s not going to happen. But that number hasn’t been under 50% in fifty years, so people have long had to find another way and make compromises. The graph does seem like it has to be understating the jump in recent years, with the jump in mortgage rates, and here’s the Burns Affordability Index, which divides the median monthly housing cost (all-in including insurance) for a 10% down, 30-year-fixed mortgage at current rates versus 125% of the median income (seriously, guys, 100%, use 100% and we can adjust for dual incomes): I’m willing to believe that this jump happened, and that some of it is permanent, because interest rates were at historic lows for a long time and we’re probably not going to see that again for a while even if AI fizzles. That 42% buys a lot more house than the 33% did in 1986. Compared to the early 1970s (so when interest rates hadn’t shot up yet) That doesn’t make the new house you need any easier to pay for. More people are working and paying a higher percentage of income in order to pay for that house, again especially in the places with futures (which also are the sources of media). Things will look worse if you look at the major cities, where there is the most opportunity, and where people actually want to live. This is NIMBY, it is quite bad, and we need to fix it. That includes increasing unwillingness to live far away from work, and endure what is frankly a rather terrible commute, Tristan’s here is relatively light.
Did We Halt the Rise in Healthcare and Education Costs?For a while a lot of the story of things getting harder was that healthcare and education costs were rising rapidly, far faster than incomes. Did we turn this around? He starts off with the famous Mark Perry price changes chart.
The story of healthcare and education goes beyond not getting the discounts on manufactured goods. It extends to a large rise in the amount of goods and services we had to purchase, much of it wasted -
Step back to first principles. This can’t happen purely ‘because cost disease’ unless the total labor demanded is rising. You provide one person-unit of labor. You buy [X]-units of labor to get [S] services and also buy [Y]-units of goods. That only gets harder for you if either: The required quality or quantity of [X] or [Y] is rising. The cost of a unit of goods is rising relative to incomes. The labor you need is rising in cost faster than your own labor.
Which is it? I assert that the primary problem is that [X] is rising, without much benefit to you. The secondary issue is a fixed supply of healthcare-relevant [X]s via occupational licensing. Relative to required services, labor productivity and supply are falling.
The ‘failure of online education’ so far has been due to trying to duplicate that 20-30 kid classroom over zoom. That was always going to be a dystopian nightmare and wouldn’t save on labor anyway. Why is a class of the same size so much more expensive in units of middle class labor? Noah focuses on higher education later in the post, but as an obvious lower education example: The New York City DOE school system costs $39k per student. You think that mostly pays for the teachers? If all we do is hold the basket of required services [S] constant, we should require less labor units [X] to meet our needs as productivity improves, at least due to technology. Instead, we need more labor. Noah then covers attempts to solve the cost issues via policy, or at least to stop making the problem worse via policies that restrict supply and subsidize (and I would add mandate) demand, and instead move around taxes and subsidies in smarter ways. The solutions he seems to favor here still mainly continue to look a lot like subsidizing demand and using transfers. Healthcare CostsBut, behold, says Noah. Health care costs have stopped increasing as a percentage of GDP. So Everything Is Fine now, or at least not getting worse. The ways in which he argues things are doing fine helped me realize why things are indeed not so fine here. This chart represents us spending more on health care, since it’s a constant percentage of a rising GDP. That’s way better than the previous growing percentage. It is still a high percentage and we are unwise to spend so much.
Importantly, no. We do not primarily care about how much health care an average American can buy and what it costs them. We primarily care, for this purpose, about how much it costs in practice to get a basket of health care you are in practice allowed or required to buy. That means buying, or getting as part of your job, acceptable health insurance. The systems we have in place de facto require you to purchase a lot more health care services, as measured by these charts. It does not seem to be getting us better health. Noah even says, look, healthcare is getting more affordable overall, even accounting for all the extra healthcare we are forced to buy: This chart does not reflect true personal consumption expenditures. As a person forced to buy insurance on the New York marketplace, I do not notice things getting more affordable. Quite the opposite. If you don’t get the subsidies, and you don’t have an employer, buying enough insurance that you can get even basic healthcare services costs an obscene amount. You can’t opt out because if you do they charge you much higher prices. There are two ways out of that. One is that if you are sufficiently struggling they give you heavy subsidies, but you only get that if you are struggling, so this does not help you not struggle and is part of how we effectively trap such people in ~100% marginal tax brackets as per the discussions of the poverty trap. Getting constant government emails saying ‘most people on the exchange pay almost nothing!’ threatens to drive one into a blind rage. The other way is if you have a job that provides you insurance. Securing this is a severe distortion in many people’s lives, which is a big and rising hidden cost. Either way, you’re massively getting distorted, and that isn’t factored in. This thing is obscenely expensive and is de facto mandatory. Then we offer various conditional subsidizes and workarounds does not make the cost non-obscene. Then even after you pay you have to navigate the American Healthcare System and force it to provide the healthcare you bought. The average cost is holding steady as a percentage of income but the uncertainty involved makes it much harder to be comfortable.
I believe the American people mostly would prefer to buy less rights to health care, especially if they don’t get insurance through their work and also even if they do. But the system won’t allow that and their major life choices get distorted by the need to not get crushed by this requirement. It’s an insane system but we’ve given up on fixing it. It’s not that much worse than it was in the 1990s, but in the 1990s this was (as I remember it) the big nightmare for average people. It isn’t getting better, yet people have other bigger complaints more often now. That’s not a great spot.
|