---
subject: "The ECM Sound Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-07-02 11:31:19
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Jason Boog leads editorial at Jason here. One night in January 1975, the jazz pianist Keith Jarrett showed up late and exhausted for a sold-out solo show at the Köln Opera House in West Germany, only to discover that the stagehands had delivered him a busted piano. “It was a Bösendorfer whose tones could not be played in the upper and lower octaves,” the mortified concert promoter recalled after the debacle. “In the middle, the black keys clamped, the pedals did not work, and the strings were torn.” Jarrett was a 29-year-old pro who had played with legends like Art Blakley and Miles Davis, so he made the last-minute decision to play this damaged instrument for 1,400 audience members, improvising an hour of the loveliest music I’ve ever heard. As he plays, Jarrett hums, wails, and stomps along with the notes, channeling a cosmic composition through that broken piano. The visionary producer and ECM Records founder Manfred Eicher recorded the performance, and soon released it as the now-immortalized two-record “ For decades to come, this record helped define the elusive but distinctive style of Manfred Eicher’s label, now known as “the ECM sound.” That label has been my soundtrack these last few months, playing on my headphones while I’m working or spinning on my record player when friends visit. With more than 2,000 albums, the ECM catalog contains equally creative feats by masters of almost any instrument, from Why is this interesting? “There are people who feel that the best music is the most boring music, which allows them to go about their business and not have to listen with any amount of energy,” Keith Jarrett After spending too much of my Spotify era consuming playlists on the “boring music” side of this spectrum (albeit with occasional forays into “ultra-interesting” through the guidance of trusted sources like Although the ECM sound cannot be labeled with algorithmic precision, the industrialization of creativity has accelerated these last few years. Someday soon, Spotify will serve me AI-generated songs that noodle at the same tenor and pitch as an ECM artist. I already wonder about the humanness of the lo-fi beats and atmospheric piano playlists I used to listen to on a daily basis. Most of that music is now packaged with photos of landscapes, sunsets, or AI-generated art instead of human faces. With the music labels already
Quick Links: If you’re looking for a very ancient way to get into the creative flow, try my favorite [I Ching app](https://substack.com/redirect/25d5e951-b1d3-40d5-b880-592dff99fe4d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). It’s a simple way to shake things up and see your world from a different angle.WITI writers James Cooper and Rick Webb turned me onto “ [The KLF: Chaos, Magic, and the Band Who Burned a Million Pounds](https://substack.com/redirect/610f9657-70b0-471f-b7df-3e39c060834d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)” by John Higgs, both a super well-reported work of rock history and a handbook for harnessing chaos in creative ways.Ted Gioia’s The Honest Broker newsletter is always worth reading, but everybody should check out [his essay about the songwriter behind “Nature Boy,”](https://substack.com/redirect/4720b96a-0ab6-4313-9de4-9b78f81db45f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)a strange and wonderful song with a bittersweet story behind it.
Piano of the Day: Before his fabled concert, Keith Jarrett had been promised a gleaming Bösendorfer Model 290 Imperial, one of the greatest pianos ever crafted (with a $200,000-$300,000 price tag these days). Thank goodness he got that broken old piano instead. (JB) Invite your friends and earn rewardsIf you enjoy Why is this interesting?, share it with your friends and earn rewards when they subscribe. |