---
subject: "Why Is Fertility Down, and How Much Should You Worry About It?"
from: "Tomas Pueyo from Uncharted Territories <unchartedterritories@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-07-21 08:02:06
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tomas Pueyo", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_28238133486362596", "UNREAD"]
---
Fertility around the world is plummeting. We’re at 2.3 children per woman, closing in on 2.1, because most countries’ fertility rate is going down, including that of virtually all high-fertility countries:¹ Because of this, the population of some places is already shrinking, such as Eastern Europe, Italy, and Japan.² South Korea is on track to lose 70% of its population every generation, so in two generations, it could go from the current 57 million people to 5 million, for a loss of 91% of the population in ~65 years.³ Globally, population will soon start to shrink: As we noted in Fewer humans means fewer people to enjoy the world. More old people to support means more taxation and an increasingly stagnant economy. A shrinking population further shrinks the economy, which shrinks investments. This means a much less innovative world: We’re used to a growing world where everything gets better, but we won’t witness that in a shrinking world. Everything will become old, stagnant. Innovation will grind to a halt. No more constant progress on things from TVs to cures to cancer. When the economy shrinks, new economic opportunities don’t exist, so existing owners of capital tend to become rentiers and cling to their power. The envy of others translates into anger, and then into conflict. The only upside people consider is for nature, but that positive impact won’t even be that high, because: First, a shrinking population will [barely make any positive impact on climate change](https://substack.com/redirect/25714c62-74e5-4dd4-9e75-3bc0e0245871?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).⁴Second, a poorer world means a world that cares less about the environment. Fourth, less investment also means less green investment, like slowed down solar transition and electrification of the economy.
On top of that, fertility is highly unbalanced: Which adds another problem because some regions are still growing while others are shrinking, which means there will be population pressures, immigration, and ethnic conflict. So low fertility is bad. It’s very bad. It ushers a world of conflict, poverty, and decline. And yet we don’t know how to solve the problem! It’s happening around the world at the same time, the transition can be dramatically fast, and the potential culprits include everything from urbanization to female education, better sanitation, later marriage, feminism, contraception, secularization, cultural expectations, the increased cost of educational signaling, increased cost of childrearing, disconnection of retirement from childrearing… This list is not just long. It’s bad. Are we supposed to reverse feminism? Ban contraceptives? Expect abstinence? Tell parents to stop educating their children? Push people out of cities and into rural areas? Welcome diseases again? Force people to marry younger? Force religion down on them? Spend one million dollars per child? No, most of these changes are good for quality of life, and most would be impossible to revert even if governments tried. Between the fact that we can’t diagnose the problem, and that many of these potential problems are nearly impossible to revert, the vast majority of countries that have tried to reverse this trend have failed (with This is why so many people freak out about fertility:
I used to be in this camp, but now I’d say I’m worried about fertility, rather than desperate. Why? Because of timelines and technology... Keep reading with a 7-day free trialSubscribe to Uncharted Territories to keep reading this post and get 7 days of free access to the full post archives. A subscription gets you:
|