---
subject: "Why Should Intelligence Be Related To Neuron Count?"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-03-07 00:43:44
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Intelligence seems to correlate with total number of neurons in the brain. Different animals’ intelligence levels Humans with bigger brains Finally, AIs with more neurons (sometimes described as the related quantity “more parameters”) seem common-sensically smarter and perform better on benchmarks. This is part of what people mean by “scaling”, ie the reason GoogBookZon is spending $500 billion building a data center the size of the moon. All of this suggests that intelligence heavily depends on number of neurons, and most scientists think something like this is true. But how can this be? You might expect people with more neurons to have more “storage” to remember more facts. But a typical IQ test question looks like this: …and you have to solve it in one minute or less. How does having (let’s say) 150 billion neurons instead of 100 billion help with this? One possibility is that you have some kind of “pattern matching region” taking up some very specific percent of your brain, and the bigger the brain ,the bigger the “pattern matching region”. But this is just passing the buck. Why should a big pattern-matching region be good? If we focus on the AI example, we might be tempted to come up with a theory that you store some huge number of past patterns in your brain. If you can exactly match a new pattern to one of those, great, problem solved. If not, you still try your best to find the one that it’s most like and try to extend it a little bit. Then the number of neurons determines the number of patterns you can store. But this doesn’t really seem right - endless practice on thousands of Ravens’ style patterns helps a little, but a true genius will still beat you. But by the end of your practice, you will have far more patterns stored than the genius does. So what do they have that you don’t? Maybe it’s not just patterns stored in the sense of “math problems you’ve seen before”, but in the sense where the text of Paradise Lost is a “pattern”, and somehow by learning the text of Paradise Lost deeply, you learn impossibly deep patterns that you could never describe in so many words, but which help with all other patterns, including those on IQ tests? And the genius is only a genius because they have a natural skill for absorbing and storing very many of these deep patterns, more than you will ever match? I like how mystical this one is, but I just don’t think the connection between Paradise Lost and math puzzles is that deep. The best real answer I can come up with is I think that brings us back to all those other things - speed, accuracy, number of connections. When you try to solve that problem, you’re trying to explore/test a very large solution space before the I asked a friend who thinks about these topics more than I do; here’s their answer:
You're currently a free subscriber to |