---
subject: "Advisory Futarchy"
from: "Robin Hanson from Overcoming Bias <overcomingbias@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-05-11 16:44:48
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Overcoming Bias", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8616244883382228708", "UNREAD"]
---
Me
Another way to make decision markets more appealing to executives wary of ceding power is to make markets advisory. One need be less confident in the value or reliability of markets that only make suggestions. Decision makers could initially mostly ignore such advice, and then slowly put more weight on them as the proved themselves with concrete track records. Yes, advisory markets require that the decisions that are to be advised be made visible to market participants, who need to know which options will be considered, what outcome metrics are seen as relevant, and roughly when those decisions will be made. Such markets would be seen as less valuable than markets which directly decide, and would thus justify smaller budgets and attention, at least at first. And it would be a bit harder to judge how much to reward those who made policy proposals approved by such markets. But the biggest problem is likely to be A) Declare at time T1 that the decision time T4 will be made within a particular period [T2,T5], with price averages over [T2,T4] considered as advice. The shorter is duration T5-T2 and the longer is T2-T1 the better, though 48 and 24 hours respectively seems sufficient. B) Allow and encourage key decision makers and advisors who have access to inside info relevant to the decision to trade in the markets during [T1,T4]. Or at least allow associates of theirs to whom they can reveal such info. Decision selection bias is caused by the fear of a trader at T3 that the actual decision will be made at T4 based on info unavailable to this time T4 trader. So including key informed parties should ensure they reveal their info to the markets at some point, subsidizing to make these markers thicker during [T1,T2] than [T2,T5] should induce all to reveal what they know by T2, and a short duration [T2,T5] should insure that little new info becomes available during that period. (Market manipulation attempts would thicken markets during [T2,T5], so the extra subsidy for [T1,T2] should be big enough to compensate for this.) You're currently a free subscriber to |