---
subject: "The Route of History"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-02-01 12:00:31
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
This is the final post in our series on rivers. So far, we’ve looked at how rivers like the If your email provider cuts off this post, You can subscribe to this newsletter by clicking below — and, if you want the warm feeling of supporting something you enjoy, consider becoming a paid subscriber: The so-called Venus of Willendorf is one of the best-known prehistoric artifacts in the history of the world. The little sculpture is 30,000 years old — made during the last ice age, before agriculture, before cities, before writing — and it is one of many very ancient “Venus figurines,” all depicting naked, full-figured women. Archaeologists have speculated about its purpose. Was it a fertility goddess? A self-portrait made by an empowered woman? A sculpture commissioned by an admiring lover? Nobody knows, and we probably never will. But I have a simpler question, one that’s a little more answerable: Where the hell is Willendorf, and why were prehistoric people living there? Willendorf, it turns out, is a sleepy village in the Austrian wine country; it lies in a scenic valley called the Wachau, along the Danube River. Whoever carved the Venus was almost certainly there because the river is there. This opens up another question: why is the river there? It makes sense that some of the snow that melts in the Alps would become water, flow east, and find its way to the Black Sea. But had the Danube found a different path to the sea, Venus wouldn’t be from Willendorf, and perhaps she wouldn’t exist at all. The precise path of the Danube, in fact, determined a great deal about history, and that path was the result of complex geological processes. Before there was a Danube River, there was the Pannonian Sea, which filled a large area of Eastern Europe between the Alps and the Carpathian Mountains twenty million years ago. About 11 million years ago, the basin began to drain, leaving behind fertile sedimentary soils and, eventually, a river. We can see the route of what became the Danube on this lovely 1843 map: If you look at the map carefully, you will notice that the Danube’s route to the sea is anything but straightforward. Each twist and turn of the river’s route determined the course of history. You may notice, for example, that the river gets, well, interesting near Vienna. There are more islands and alternate routes, and there’s a secondary course of the river just east of Pressburg (modern-day Bratislava), which is the next major city downstream from Vienna: Here, the river is entering the Pannonian Basin from the foothills of the Alps; Vienna serves as the gateway to a flatter and more fertile area for farming. The Romans recognized the strategic and economic value of the area when they founded Vienna’s precursor, a military outpost called Vindobona on the empire’s frontier. The flatter geography found east of Vienna allows the river to avulse, or change its route, because there aren’t any geographical features forcing it in a particular direction. Near Vienna, the river’s path used to be quite complicated: Avulsions happened with greater frequency during the Little Ice Age, a period when changing weather patterns put the river system under stress. It was colder and wetter, and, during a particularly wet period between 1768 and 1789, there were So the Habsburg rulers of the region tried to manage the river. They built dikes to constrain it, keeping the Danube’s waters from spilling out into the low-lying plains. These dikes were destroyed in flood after flood, and modern Another set of floods in 1847 made poverty and social tensions worse, contributing to the revolutions in 1848: Ironically, the flooding was also part of the government’s solution to the 1848 revolution. The Habsburgs tried to solve their social problems by You may also notice that, downstream from Bratislava, the river makes a dramatic turn to the south just north of Budapest: Here, the river collides with the horseshoe-shaped This turn is not just beautiful: But the bend is also quite strategic. It’s a great spot for a castle: Visegrad Castle was first built in the aftermath of the Mongol invasion of Hungary, and was a key strategic location in the centuries that followed. In their bitter struggle against the Ottomans, the Habsburgs spent more than a decade fortifying the site only to lose it in a few months to the superior Ottoman force. This was one of many river fortresses to be conquered by the Ottomans, but the protracted battles over each of these strongholds exhausted the Ottoman army. This meant that, by the time they reached Vienna, the Ottomans no longer had the strength to take the city. The great Turkish sieges of Vienna were partially lost downriver at castles like these, where the Austrians took advantage of all of the geographical chokepoints that the river could provide. In Serbia, carved into the cliffs alongside the Danube, there’s a large inscription decorated with dolphins and an eagle dating to the period when Roman power was at its absolute peak. It’s called the Tabula Traiana, and it announces that the emperor Trajan built the road that follows the course of the river around the year 100 CE. You can see it in this photo from 1908 (the “TABULA TRAIANA” was carved above it at a later date): The inscription (and the road) are examples of impressive engineering because they’re located in a gorge called the Iron Gates, where the Danube twists and turns through the Carpathian Mountains: The Iron Gates gorge is the Danube’s most forbidding bottleneck, as this illustration from a Jules Verne book shows: Here’s another 19th-century view of the approach to the gorge: The Roman Emperor Trajan, like most people who fought in this part of the world, understood the strategic importance of this geographical feature. He built a famous bridge across the river nearby, which was important enough to be commemorated on his column back in Rome: The bridge was a symbol of Trajan’s audacious military achievements, chief of which was pushing beyond the Danube, which had long served as the effective border of the empire. Roman leaders had envisioned conquering Dacia, the land across the river, for more than a century, but success there had eluded them. When Trajan finally conquered Dacia, he signaled the importance of his achievement by holding games that lasted more than 100 days, involving more than 10,000 gladiators. But the Dacian conquest didn’t last. The Danube had been the empire’s natural border for a reason. Realizing this, later emperors built a series of The Iron Gates represented the eastern end of the Roman network of fortifications. It would later become a key strategic location in many other wars between the Serbians, Hungarians, Ottomans, Russians, and others. The Danube has been shaped by human history, and it has shaped human history. Its peculiarities — the direction of its flow, the behavior of its waters, and the geography that borders it — have determined the borders of empires, the winners of wars, and the stability of governments. By the time it flows into the Black Sea, it has passed through ten countries, traversing gorges, plains, mountains, and more. Shaped by ancient geological forces, the Danube has passed through and helped to determine human events for tens of thousands of years. This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: Or you can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading! There are a few little extras for paid subscribers below the paywall:... Keep reading with a 7-day free trialSubscribe to Looking Through the Past to keep reading this post and get 7 days of free access to the full post archives. A subscription gets you:
|