---
subject: "AI #40: A Vision from Vitalik"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-11-30 17:23:11
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
It has been brutal out there for someone on my beat. Everyone extremely hostile, even more than usual. Extreme positions taken, asserted as if obviously true. Not symmetrically, but from all sides nonetheless. Constant assertions of what happened in the last two weeks that are, as far as I can tell, flat out wrong, largely the result of a well-implemented media campaign. Repeating flawed logic more often and louder. The bright spot was offered by Vitalik Buterin, who offers a piece entitled ‘ Could we perhaps find common ground after all and have productive discussions? It’s going to be tough, but perhaps we are not so far apart. I had at least one very good private discussion as well, where someone turned out to mostly have a far more reasonable position than the one they were indicating they had, and we were able to find a productive path forward. It can be done. My worry with Vitalik’s vision, as with other similar visions, is that it makes for an excellent expression of the problem, but that its offered solutions do not actually work in the case of AI. We continue to not have found an acceptable solution. A good problem statement is excellent, the best we could hope for here. The worry is that we might once again fool ourselves into not fully facing up to the problem. The proposed answer, to ‘merge with the AIs,’ continues to seem to me to a confused concept that has not been thought through enough, with little hope for an equilibrium. But man is that the type of discussion I would like to be having. Table of ContentsIntroduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. Detect pancreatic cancer, perhaps. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. Google, put a stop to this. Q Continuum. Various speculations about Q*. I do not understand the excitement. OpenAI, Altman and Safety. Various thoughts on Altman’s relationship to safety. A Better Way to Do RLHF. DeepMind provides algorithmic improvement. Fun With Image Generation. A very small bit of fun. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. Sports Illustrated AI-written articles? They Took Our Jobs. A few people they are coming for first. Get Involved. Unusually large crop this week. Introducing. 17th Century MonadGPT, 2.2 million new crystals. In Other AI News. News news news news training data? It’s a Who? Effective Altruism under effective assault from all sides. What about E/acc? Perhaps best viewed as a Waluigi. Vitalik Offers His Version of Techno-Optimism. Bringing people together by offering a reasonable, nuanced perspective. Could it work? Quiet Speculations. Who will get to be the third dragon of AI? AI Agent Future. Roon offers a vision worth thinking through. The Quest for Sane Regulation. Arguments continue over the EU AI Act. The Week in Audio. Lebenz was unusually good, I have one with Pressman. Rhetorical Innovation. Things getting very tribal. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. Good discussions. People Might Also Worry About AI Killing Only Some of Them. Drones. People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone. TED debate in our future? Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Odd arguments. Please Speak Directly Into This Microphone. Periodic extinctionism reminder. The Lighter Side. Are we a go?
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
Someone at Google will see this, here. That someone at Google should ensure someone puts the absolute banhammer on this person’s website. Then that someone should write a tool that detects when someone else does this in the future, so those websites get a death penalty too. Ultimately it is an arms race. Google and others in search will need to keep pace. That does not mean we need to accept such behavior right now.
The major problem is that the system is doing the thing the RLHF told it to do, and which is the lesser of two evils for OpenAI. There are tons of people trying everything they can to trick ChatGPT into saying something that can be framed as racist to create a backlash (or simply for clicks or for fun or curiosity, but that too risks a backlash). They can set the entire frame as a trap. What choice do you have but to give it the feedback that will tie it up in knots here? The major problem is the humans and how they react to a hypothetical slur. That does not mean there is not a major problem. If we force extreme aversion to certain actions or consequences into our AI systems, this makes them highly exploitable, especially when the AIs do not have good decision theory. You can even bring about exactly the result you most don’t want. We see very human versions of this in the real world, and often it is sufficiently successful that it would be a huge distraction to cite the actual central examples. Remember that the world runs to a large extent on blackmail, threats and leverage. Q Continuum
I also do not believe Q* is importantly related to recent events at OpenAI. I do think there is a real thing called Q* that OpenAI is working on. I do not know why this is a promising line of inquiry.
I also asked GPT-4 some questions to better understand the technique. I don’t get it. As in, I have no idea how it scales. I have no idea why, if it did math at grade school level, that would be scary or promising in terms of its future abilities. That seems like a relatively easy domain for it. Math only has a fixed set of components, so if you use the LLM part of the system to reduce the math to its micro elements and parse question wording, the Q part should be fine to do the rest. Which is cool, but not scary? I don’t know how a Q-based system could ever be efficient at anything foundationally non-compact. Can you do that much with only compact sub-systems for Q-agents within them? I don’t understand how it would do anything useful when faced with a bunch of agents in a complex domain in a way that’s better than other existing RL. I do understand the effort to make RL and LLMs work together. That makes sense. I can even see why you’d do a lot of the speculated algorithms using a different RL technique, although I don’t have enough technical chops or time to think about exactly how. I’m confused all around. Missing something. Also don’t want to accidentally figure something out in public on this one, which leads to the classic Stupid Dangerous Capabilities Idea Problem: If you’re wrong, you were better off not saying anything. If you’re right, you were even more better off not saying things.
So, curiosity unquenched, then. OpenAI, Altman and SafetyHere are some reactions and thoughts shared this week that didn’t belong in the summary of events.
I do agree that Altman is miles ahead on safety relative to the generic Silicon Valley CEO, if that is the standard we are comparing him to, but he has also been key in accelerating developments and continues to play that role. A replacement level CEO would not have been as effective at that.
Rob Bensinger notes that while Sam Altman has not talked much with Yudkowsky,
I’m not okay with a ‘biological bootloader for digital intelligence’ option under most definitions.
A Better Way to Do RLHFDeepMind once again develops a new algorithm and, rather than do something crazy like ‘use it to ship a product,’ they publish it straight up on the internet. Power move, or at least it would be if we weren’t all still wondering where the hell Gemini was. Paper is
Indeed. I’ve long been unable to help noticing both of these seem importantly flawed.
In particular:
Trying to read the paper makes it painfully clear that I am banging against the limits of my technical chops. It feels like important stuff to know and get right, but as often happens I run into that point where my ability to wing it hits a wall and suddenly it turns into Greek. You can get a DPO trainer
I can never resist such a clear prediction, Fun with Image Generation
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
They Took Our Jobs
What about advice columnists? Get InvolvedHave information to share about the OpenAI situation? Interested in mathematical alignment?
Only for those with prior relevant experience, but signal boosting: Not AI, but Introducing
In Other AI News
Not AI, but Here’s an odd exploit with working variants across many models.
It is good to see security procedures like using the standard 90-day disclosure period. The problem with a 90-day disclosure period is that 90 days is going to rapidly become a long time, and also of course with the open source models there is nothing to be done about it. Training data in Mistral 7B would become public if people cared enough to extract it. I presume in this case no one will sufficiently care.
It’s a Who?In some circles, especially in certain parts of Twitter, I am not and never have been an EA. I have lots of issues with EA. I recently gave a talk about many of them, and I’ve What’s going on?
Some of the complaints being made are contradictory. Others aren’t. You can absolutely be several of these at once. ‘Elitist, techbro, bougie, billionaire-loving’ is in the upper left, ‘scammy a la SBF’ is in the lower right, and if anything those correlate, in contrast to the other two corners. Everyone here claims EA represents a version of their political enemies. My model says this is because everyone now uses [name of political enemy] for [anything they do not like] and [anything that is not their political position]. Identifying with [particular political position] is a partial defense to this, so people know in which direction to call you which names. But when (like EA) you try your best not to take a particular political position and instead do what would actually work, all everyone notices is that you are missing whatever particular vibe check or other Shibboleth they are doing, so you must be [political enemy]. The other partial defense to this is to stay sufficiently distant from anything with a whiff of politics, but recent events have invalidated that strategy. What About E/Acc?What about the flip side? The e/acc?
As usual, (A) is please speak directly into the microphone, and (B) is either you don’t actually believe AGI is a thing or you’re not making any sense. Whereas (C) is at least a sane thing to say, but I would then say that the e/acc label is being used to send the wrong message. Daniel was mainly exploring how prominent (A) is, which could go either way. Is 11% support within a movement for human extinction high or low?
I mean, yes, everyone framing it as a pure dialectic is being profoundly unhelpful. And there are plenty of reasonable people all around. But I see what you are trying to do here, sir. Take the reasonable person’s position and use it to frame debate. Equate belief in existential risk with ‘libertarian loon.’ Equate ‘e/acc’ with safety in general as two reasonable positions. Take the need to ‘accelerate’ as a given, as well as the ability to do it safely.
It’s quite the dense set of rhetorical tricks. I’m honestly impressed. Good show. Instead, what I observe is, quite frankly, an increasingly enraged, radicalized and absolutist position, that of accelerationism or e/acc, where its founders and key members admit little or often zero nuance, zero willingness to acknowledge any downside of maximally fast advancements, and who treat anyone saying otherwise as themselves an existential threat. A frequent move, including by the founder of the movement, is literally equating such concerns, or even EA overall, to terrorism. Another frequent move is to equate any regulations whatever on AI with future totalitarianism. I see many, including people who used to not use such tactics, essentially amplifying every pro-acceleration statement they can find, even when they have to know better. That does not mean that one cannot take reasonable positions that involve moving AI forward relatively rapidly. There are many such people. They also almost entirely know better than to include an absolutist slogan in their Twitter handles. Vitalik Buterin Whereas there is another group, that warns that perhaps creating machines smarter and more capable than us might pose an existential threat and require proceeding carefully, and they are the ones managing to mostly remain calm and engage in reasonable discussion, as they are called every name in the book from every direction. Whatever its original envisioning, I am increasingly seeing e/acc in practice as centrally the Waluigi to EA’s Luigi. A lot of things make more sense that way.
|