---
subject: "The (Truly) Greatest Hits Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-01-23 11:01:59
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Sam Valenti (SV4) is an old friend of WITI. He’s the founder of Ghostly International and runs the essential music Substack Sam here. A few years ago, Patrick Adams, a music producer I love, passed. While he received a kind Why is this interesting? I've been thinking about the death of the pop culture canon as we know it and If, in the streaming age, we've seen the venerable Best Of and Greatest Hits compilation fall away, is there still use in the canon-defining package? DSPs might say yes. “Where we see the most engagement with fans around Essentials is with artists that are extremely popular and don't have a compilation of studio hits," a representative for Apple Music These generative playlists are helpful primer guides but lack something vital for canon formation: a curator’s touch. Consider the most controversial GH of all time: In the 2022 memoir The Islander by Island Records founder Chris Blackwell, he breaks down the origin story of Legend as the vision of then recently hired Dave Robinson (co-founder of legendary label Stiff Records), which sent the posthumous Marley brand into a supernova. “Dave also shrewdly and actively chased a wider audience for Bob Marley, even though we thought we had already reached a wider audience. He wanted to get to an audience that maybe bought only one or two albums a year, who weren’t interested in fashion or the latest hip sound. ...He wasn’t emotionally as close to Bob as we were at Island, and he started to do some market research both with white suburban record buyers and the faithful followers, just to make sure he didn’t go too far. The market research group asked three different age cohorts for their thoughts.” Legend has since sold over 12 million copies worldwide, not including the millions of other cassette and CD bootlegs that abound. A renewed GH campaign, with video or written liner notes from one of the many talented music journalists in the game righ now, could also help chip away at a mountain of resurgent music and add another path to discovery akin to sync licensing (Kate Bush I’m now of the mind that all artists should be making these Best Ofs, even if just as an edited playlist, ideally made by the artist or group themselves. As much as I know that I can go to the DSPs for this purpose, I like the idea of the artist choosing the songs and the flow of these cuts to help guide me through their catalog. Given my love for the trusty Greatest Hits, I was pleased when I saw the band Spoon The album was conceived and compiled by Spoon lead singer Artists can control their image and story more than we may realize and maybe better enabled to do while active and engaged with their audience. (SV) — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Sam (SV4) —
You're currently a free subscriber to |