---
subject: "The Annoying Path to Privacy Herd Immunity"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <the-diff@ghost.io>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-18 15:52:08
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
In this issue: - The Annoying Path to Privacy Herd Immunity—The problem with privacy-preserving technologies is that they're often inconvenient, and this means that using them indicates having something to hide. So the best public service you can perform, if you care about privacy on principle, is to arrange your digital life as if you have more secrets worth keeping than you really do.
- Robots—Humanoid robots have been a sci-fi trope for a while, but one reason they're interesting is that by default they gather information about the real world from a human perspective.
- Competition—Brutal competition in the delivery app business.
- Model Moderation—OpenAI promises a less fussy model.
- Eggs—A market with fewer speculators is a market with more volatility.
- Sentiment—xAI demonstrates how fast companies can catch up in AI, but also demonstrates why catching up is different from getting ahead.
The Annoying Path to Privacy Herd ImmunityOnline privacy was very nice while we had it, and is, for the most part, something that no longer exists for economic, social, and technological reasons. To the extent that it does exist, it's the result of ongoing inconvenience, and it has an annoying decay function—information-leaking behaviors get retroactively more irresponsible as long as analysis tools improve faster than the rate of link-rot, and for the last few years, that's been the case. Talking about privacy means talking about the perception of privacy. Ask someone how much they'd have to be paid in order to share detailed information about their likes, dislikes, or interests with a stranger who's trying to make a buck, and you get a high number. Give people the opportunity to barter exactly the same information away in exchange for getting access to a search engine, a social network, or endless short videos, and you get the real market price of privacy. But that perception argument cuts both ways: we mostly don't feel like we're always being watched. There are a few edge cases like seeing an ad for a product you were just talking about but hadn't searched for. But there are some cases where privacy is hard to preserve, slightly by design, and there are inconvenient countermeasures people can take to achieve it anyway. If you really don't want anyone knowing what you're up to, you can use PGP, only communicate on end-to-end encrypted apps, only browse while running Tor, etc. The problem with this approach is that you basically fit the profile of a drug dealer or terrorist. You also fit the profile of a political dissident, but some of the time the "dissident" versus "terrorist" continuum is blurred, at least in the eyes of the political establishment. All of these privacy-preserving behaviors end up being red flags; But that standard, broadly applied, makes it very hard for people who have a legitimate interest in privacy and good reasons to stay cautious: political activists, people fleeing from abusive situations, journalists working on a big story, the whistleblowers in communication with them, people dealing with potentially embarrassing mental or physical health issues, etc. There is a form of herd immunity for these groups, and it comes from a different set of people: the ones who insist on maintaining incredibly tight opsec as a matter of ideology or personal preference rather than any legitimate reason to hide things. It's an archetype that's existed for a long time; a decade ago Early 2025 is an absolutely fantastic time to talk about political dissidents, since the perceived political affiliation of tech has flipped so recently, and because norms about what speech gets people fired have flipped, too. So it's a lot easier to see pseudonymous political speech as a general principle rather than something that happens to be to the advantage of one side for the moment. They're useful, and one of the reasons they're useful is that the market for information about optimal policy is inefficient, and the reason for that is that supporting specific policy proposals is a way to signal membership in political coalitions, and that criticizing these proposals as bad means to achieve desirable ends sounds a lot like criticizing the intended ends. That's not true, of course. There's broad agreement about many end goals: people want poor people to have more material wealth (and disagree over whether the best way to do that is a generous safety net or a more fluid labor market); people want nice neighborhoods (and differ over whether that means single-family homes with big yards and ample parking or apartment buildings that can cram far more families into a given desirable area). It even applies to social issues, where the steelman of each side is "let them do what they're in a position to know they want to do" and "set up broad incentives to cooperate rather than defect." All of this gets more important in an environment where tools for analyzing text at scale are more widely available. It's harder than it used to be for someone to maintain pseudonymity, or to get away with being a little more freewheeling in some of their earlier podcast appearances. All of those comments are part of the corpus that models are trained on, and it will only get easier to identify linguistic quirks. The saving grace for privacy is that increasingly, big corpuses of text or images are valuable assets whose owners auction them off to the highest bidder, so different models will be trained on different texts. So preserving privacy will mean having different personae that participate in different ecosystems: you might live your professional life on OpenAI-aligned LinkedIn, your family life on Llama-friendly Instagram, and your slightly embarrassing hobby on Gemini-ready Reddit. This is a weirdly feudal way to think about the world, but feudalism is a system that made more sense when property rights were unstable and needed to be actively defended, and AI certainly has that effect. Which has some reasonably innocent explanations: friends are very similar, and purchase data or models thereof is very effective for targeting ads. So if your friend talks about a new set of bluetooth headphones they love, and suddenly you see an ad for the same headphones, there's a decent chance that their purchase informed the ad, and a good chance that you and your friend are in similar enough demographic buckets that you're both more likely to see the same ad in a different context. It's possible that some knowledge about human behavior exists entirely as a feature of some ad-targeting system, and isn't explicitly known by anyone. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/9d1d6e97?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)This is a neutral in the sense that whether to cooperate or defect depends very much on whether the equilibrium you're in is good or bad. But it's worth biting the bullet and saying that the rules social conservatives push are only worth pushing if there's an incentive not to follow them, so you are defecting and it's important to recognize this—a lot of harm has been done by elites realistically assessing the personal impact they'll face from e.g. divorce or drug use, and extrapolating this to people who simply have less margin for error. The behaviors that can ruin your day when you have a trust fund can ruin your life when you live paycheck-to-paycheck, but the people more in a position to set norms and narratives about life decisions tend to skew towards the trust fund set. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/2f5b1049?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
The Diff’s trade/investment-pitching contest is coming up soon. If you’re interested, please You’re on the free list for The Diff. This week, paying subscribers read about Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. See a sampling of current open roles below: - A diversified prop trading firm with a HFT bent is looking for experienced traders. (Singapore or Austin, TX preferred)
- A premier proprietary trading firm is looking for smart generalists to join their investor relations team, working with external investors, rating agencies, and the internal finance team. Investment banking and/or investor relations experience preferred. Quantitative background and technical aptitude a plus. (NYC)
- Ex-Ramp founder and team are hiring a high energy full-stack engineer to help build the automation layer for the US healthcare payor-provider eco-system. (NYC)
- An OpenAI backed startup that’s applying advanced reasoning techniques to reinvent investment analysis from first principles and build the IDE for financial research is looking for software engineers and a fundamental analyst. Experience at a Tiger Cub a plus. (NYC)
- A hyper-growth startup that’s turning customers’ sales and marketing data into revenue is looking for a forward deployed engineer who is excited to work closely with customers to make the product valuable for them. (SF, NYC)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. ElsewhereRobotsMeta is Disclosure: Long META, though I admit that "Let's make I, Robot real" was not a key part of the thesis. CompetitionIn a two-sided network, one of the risks that early winners run is that they'll charge high prices to connect each side, those prices will induce friction, and someone else will beat them on price and rebuild the same network. Uber is Model ModerationIn the last few months, a few companies have vocally adopted a more relaxed attitude towards moderation. One place this hadn't extended to was AI models, where the market was 1) the big US labs, which had fairly consistent restrictions on which questions they'd answer, 2) DeepSeek, which had a different set of taboos, and 3) Grok, which ostentatiously ignored them. OpenAI EggsEgg prices have been spiking recently, which has been an especially popular topic because they went up about as much during the post-Covid inflation, so a lot of people have, well, egg on their faces because of things they said about how responsible the President is or isn't for the price of eggs. (The actual reason they're up this time has little to do with policy and a lot to do with avian flu-induced culling.) One reason egg prices have such extreme moves is that eggs mostly aren't traded on speculative exchanges, with the vast majority sold on long-term contracts and SentimentxAI has |
||||||||||
|
|
|
||||||||||
|