---
subject: "Search Remains the Best Business in History"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <the-diff@ghost.io>"
to: ""
date: 2025-06-09 14:17:57
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
In this issue: - Search Remains the Best Business in History—The search business illustrates several different kinds of scale economics at once, and many of these have positive feedback loops with one another. That doesn't mean it's an easy business, because the prize is so valuable.
- Equity Market Vigilantes—Are investors reacting to the prospect of Trump punishing Musk, or are they trying to help Trump do so?
- Scale—When a business with monopolistic characteristics gets excited about buying a commodity, it's a bet that demand for a commoditized input is about to go up.
- Volatility—High-yield bonds are still getting issued, but borrowers are paying more.
- Tariff Impact—And a reason for this is that the direct impact of tariffs is hard to predict as it propagates through supply chains.
- Splits and Synergies—One business's synergy is another one's needlessly annoying complexity.
Search Remains the Best Business in HistoryThe status of "best possible business" is a moving target. "Put a stamp of approval on structured products that were basically designed around getting your stamp of approval" made Moody's and S&P lots of money in the 2000s, with the added benefit of continuously reinforcing their brand name. As it turned out, associating their brand name with these products eventually backfired. Fannie and Freddie also had a very nice business back when the implicit government guarantee was a hypothetical and the resulting cost of capital was very real. Transforming assorted commodity food products, like corn syrup, food coloring, and caffeine, into Coca-Cola, If you're trying to find an enduringly good business, you want one that tends to get better over time. There are plenty of ways that can happen: you could high fixed costs and low marginal costs, such that with enough scale you can undercut any competitor; you might have compounding data (and marketplace) advantages, where usage of your product makes it better for the next user; and it would be nice if you had some kind of scale-driven form of price discrimination, where paying customers are encouraged to pay roughly what they think the product is worth. Best of all would be if this business were simultaneously positioned to take advantage of some secular economic or technological trend, and were also able to accelerate some of those trends. As a bonus, it would be great if this business led to good distribution for ancillary businesses, maybe creating opportunities to commoditize various complements and use them to accelerate the core business. General-purpose web search has all of this. To build a search engine, the first thing you need to do is grab the results, i.e. download a copy of the entire Internet, so you know what the content is at every URL and can thus start to think about ranking them. But wait! That's a somewhat sloppy description of crawling: some kinds of content aren't searchable, or at least weren't very searchable when the search business got started: you don't need a copy of every video or audio file, nor do you necessarily start with every image. But "every" is actually harder to define even if we restrict ourselves to text: suppose someone created a page called And then there's the question of how often to do this. Getting a one-time snapshot is one thing, but figuring out the cadence with which to visit different pages—or to check whether a temporarily-unavailable one is back again—is nontrivial. But that's a tiny sample of the tricks you can do once you have a basic ranking system and you start putting it in front of users. Everything they do gives you some information about what to do next. Ironically, the worst search engine, as a business, would be the one that perfectly solved search on the first try: everyone clicked the number-one result and never had to do that search again. That search engine doesn't collect any new information from users, but only because it already knows everything. There are two main angles for solving this one: - Better user-level data helps predict whether an ambiguous "bass" in a search query is something that goes well with rhythm or with white wine, or whether "polish" is a food or an ethnicity.
- Autocomplete is powerful not just because it speeds up search queries but because it provides real-time feedback about ambiguous searches.
Yet again, both of these work better with more users: you'll have more ways to quickly cluster them based on interests and behaviors, using a few hints from new users to quickly map them to the tendencies of established ones. And for autocomplete in particular, it helps to have a wealth of search data (or even to reach meta-conclusions like "how many related queries do we need to look at before the first two words or so a user gives us will let us predict which queries they're going to end up making with 99% confidence?") A better search product is one that changes behavior, both for users and for site owners. The site owners, for example, want to be as explicit as possible to search engines about what they're offering, so search imposes a sort of bland but direct form of copyrighting, where every restaurant menu that used to be called "our seasonal selections" or something is now just "menu." But that also means that people know what to look for: SEO actually standardizes idioms! Every search engine will benefit from this kind of thing, but at scale there's more room to detect the behaviors that are too on-the-nose and thus probably attempts to game the system. Higher expectations about what information will be available online also means that more of it is—it's pretty hard, at least in big cities in the US, to find a business that does have steady opening hours but doesn't have those hours easily available online. Of course, all this is just a curiosity if there isn't enough money for the increasingly expensive task of actually getting this information, running a search algorithm, serving its results to customers, and continuously increasing the extent to which you do all of the above. Fortunately, search is an unbelievably great place to run ads because the entire product is basically users telling the platform exactly what they're interested in at this precise moment, giving the platform an opportunity to sell that traffic to the highest bidder. Search naturally imperils some of the incentives around responding to searcher behavior—any change that makes the organic results better now competes with the ads! On the other hand, the categories where ads make the most sense are the ones where the organic results are already heavily commercial: there just aren't that many hobbyists dedicated to listing all the available flights between two cities on a given date, or carefully enumerating the best credit card offers. So early on, advertising ends up minimally affecting the user experience, except that the commercial intent behind the information they're being presented with is made explicit in the search result interface. Over time, there's naturally a broad tradeoff between commercialization and user experience, albeit one that funds other products that are relevant to the user. And the exchange rate for that tradeoff varies enormously from one query to another, and is always evolving. Over time, there's implicit pressure to increase ad load from the organic search side: an under-monetized search query is an arbitrage opportunity, so the extent to which companies can build their business purely by ranking well for search terms is the baseline extent to which the search engine can go ahead and charge for that traffic without materially changing what users see. One way to look at this model is that the search business is a way to create a consumer and producer surplus by connecting people to the information they're looking for and collecting a cut of whatever wealth gets created this way. Which is obviously the ideal business to run in a world where GDP is still rising, data created per unit of GDP is still rising, and economies of scale on many dimensions still persist. Search is the prototypical platform business, but it’s a partly invisible platform—businesses and habits get built on the existence of search, and that’s self-reinforcing for a long time. Obviously, the unit economics [deteriorate after a while](https://www.thediff.co/r/7531fca8?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99).[↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/69a08cb5?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)Consider that second case, where a page used to have content, but on the next visit it returns a 404, times out, etc. One possibility is that it's really meant to be the most poignant HTTP response code: 410 Gone. But it might also mean that a page or an entire site happens to be in the middle of an update, which, especially in the early days of search, might have been done sloppily. So the right time to revisit that page is either very soon or never again. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/f4d62768?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)This curse of perfection shows up in a few other places. If you make a trade that plays out absolutely perfectly—you read the tea leaves and figured out that a company had put itself up for sale or that a central bank had finally decided to devalue—then in a sense this idea was an asset on your balance sheet and making money just turned it into cash. You didn't know anything after the catalyst that you hadn't figured out beforehand. [You learn the most from good businesses and bad trades](https://www.thediff.co/r/0dd89e4a?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99).[↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/7daaaa29?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. See a sampling of current open roles below: - A well-funded startup ($16M raised) that’s building the universal electronic cash system by taking stablecoin adoption from edge cases to the mainstream is looking for a senior full-stack engineer. (NYC, Singapore)
- YC-backed startup using AI to transform how companies quantify and optimize engineering productivity is hiring formidable full-stack and AI engineers. Experience with React + Typescript, Go, or Python on the ML side a plus. (SF)
- Well-funded, fast-moving team is looking for a full-stack engineer to help build the best AI powered video editor for marketers. Tackle advanced media pipelines, LLM applications, and more. TypeScript/React expertise required. (Austin, Remote)
- A Google Ventures-backed startup founded by SpaceX engineers that’s building data infrastructure and tooling for hardware companies is looking for a product manager with 3+ years experience building product at high-growth enterprise SaaS businesses. Technical background preferred. (LA, Hybrid)
- An OpenAI backed startup that’s applying advanced reasoning techniques to reinvent investment analysis from first principles and build the IDE for financial research is looking for software engineers and a fundamental analyst. Experience at a Tiger Cub a plus. (NYC)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. ElsewhereEquity Market VigilantesOne feature of the Musk/Trump kerfuffle is that the market is both a referee and a participant in the match. There are two ways to look at Tesla's 14% drop in response to the breakup last week: - This was fundamental analysis: 14% of the present value of Tesla consisted of some combination of favorable treatment from the federal government and the absence of gratuitous fines.
- This was expressive, ESG-style investing. Tesla's shares had been pushed up by people who liked Elon because of Elon's new association with Trump, and are happy to punish him by selling down the stock.
That second possibility is interesting because it's another tool Trump has: some of his associates have been happy to ScaleWhy is Meta VolatilityHigh-yield bond issuance is Tariff ImpactA good case study in this generalized increase in default probability: it turns out that Splits and SynergiesWarner Brothers and Discovery Communications merged in 2022, betting that their combined libraries of prestige TV and various flavors of background music-style viewing could be bundled in a way that kept cable revenue alive a little longer and made streaming take off a little faster. Now, |
||||||||||||||
|
|
|
||||||||||||||
|