---
subject: "Help me build a media empire - become my COO"
from: "Dwarkesh Patel from Dwarkesh Podcast <dwarkesh+blog@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-09-11 19:34:43
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Dwarkesh Patel", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_1252705944156122219", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
I started my podcast 4 years ago because my college classes went online and I was bored. To my surprise and delight, it’s absolutely blown up. The podcast often hits a million+ listens per episode, growing >10x a year. I need the help of someone exceptional to take it to the next level. I want you to help me build a media empire, where we make (formerly) obscure scholars famous, compile the real time history of ASI, and produce the very best intellectual content in the world. My role: Read, write, record. Your role: Build a media empire. The following is what you’d do now, but I want to emphasize that I’m looking for someone who can run this business when it’s 10x bigger (and 10x after that, and so on). Sponsorships: Explain our value, and deliver that value. Content: You will direct my truly amazing team of editors based on your phenomenal taste, and your ability to craft a story that gets people excited about our content. Logistics, management, hiring, events, other media empire stuff: Can you find the best people and stay on their ass until we achieve our goals? Scheming: We have close to a million of the world's smartest people listening to us (and rapidly growing). What kinds of cool shit can we do with this platform? The right person for the role will have lots of interesting answers to this question. But one in particular I’ve been thinking about: How do we find and support the best up-and-coming writers, podcasters, etc?
Comp: I need an exceptional generalist to help me build a media empire. I’m happy to pay well to get the right person. Location: In person at our awesome office in San Francisco, with lots of interaction with past and future guests, and other interesting people. Who I’m looking for: An amazing operator, storyteller, and strategist¹. Phenomenal intuitive understanding of how to promote high quality intellectual content. Someone who’s great today and it’s obvious they’re going to get better. You’d run a business growing 10x a year - are you the kind of person that can improve and take charge as fast as this enterprise explodes? Unapologetic micromanager and obsessive attention to detail. Believes in the mission of producing the highest quality intellectual content in world.
If you want to help me build a media empire, please fill out this And please refer people who you think would be a great fit! 1 I’m not looking for a researcher. If you’ve read a lot of books, I won’t hold it against you - but that’s not the skillset I’m evaluating for to find the best candidate to build a media empire. You're currently a free subscriber to |