---
subject: "The Nutgraf: The beginning of India’s elite, rich, tech class"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-11-16 04:32:40
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
Last week, a Bengaluru tech company finally went public.
I’m glad for Swiggy. It’s about time. In the past, we’ve discussed [how Delhi companies have gotten ahead of Bengaluru companies](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/two-by-two/delhi-pricked-the-bangalore-bubble/) in an episode of Two by Two. I’ve been [somewhat](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/swiggy-and-timidity/) critical of Swiggy of late. But it doesn’t change my broader, more long-term view that Swiggy is earning its place after spending the last ten years locked in quiet, disciplined execution. There are much worse outcomes.
But while I’m happy for Swiggy the company, I also encountered another somewhat peculiar phenomenon. Over the last few days, I met people who expressed opinions that were variants of: “Isn’t this wonderful news? It’s really good for the tech ecosystem.”
How so?
Their thinking goes something like this—tech companies like Zomato, Swiggy, Paytm*, and others going public is a net positive for everyone, because it encourages more entrepreneurship, and makes employees at startups believe that great outcomes are possible. It makes more people want to work at startups. The word ‘wealth creation’ is thrown around liberally.
One supporting argument for this line of thinking is usually driven by stories published by business media lauding the number of ‘crorepatis’ that are created with a liquidity event like an acquisition or going public. Like most things involving the business media, there’s little innovation and almost no maturity. When Flipkart got acquired by Walmart a decade ago, the stories that were [written then](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/services/retail/about-400-flipkart-employees-with-stock-options-become-crorepatis-in-less-than-a-decade/articleshow/40209385.cms?from=mdr) are practically identical to the ones [published last week](https://www.livemint.com/market/stock-market-news/from-staff-to-millionaires-swiggy-ipo-to-make-500-employees-crorepatis-11731478370460.html). All that has changed is the name of the company. There were similar stories published when Flipkart’s employees got some of their ESOPs vested [back in 2018](https://www.hindustantimes.com/business-news/flipkart-share-buyback-to-turn-hundreds-of-employees-into-crorepatis/story-iK1LIxhzO8iJbK7j8DshKK.html), and even as recently as 2023 when the company [did a buyback of shares](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/tech/startups/flipkart-to-make-phonepe-buyback-payments-today/articleshow/101757500.cms?from=mdr) after the split from Phonepe.
The thing that’s less written about is what all these people becoming millionaires means to everyone else.
We’re seeing the emergence of a new class of people—the tech elite. This is new to India, particularly to Bengaluru. Sure, the city has always had the tech people with lots of money, but not this kind of money, at this level. The tech elite until now were the few dozen top-echelon people who worked at service companies, or the people right at the top of startups. The new tech class that is the result of companies like Flipkart and Swiggy is younger, with very different aspirations. This is the tech elite who have probably made more wealth in a day than everyone in the FIRE subreddit combined.
Again, we’ve seen this before in the Bay Area when Google went public back in 2004, and a lot of people speculated on what this new set of “nouveau riche” would do. As a CNET article [noted](https://www.cnet.com/tech/tech-industry/life-after-google-with-millions/), some of them moved on from the company, others bought rich toys for themselves, and some others tried to “change the world”.
In Bengaluru though, one specific area is where most of the money went—real-estate.
With e-commerce giant Flipkart deciding to pay out $700 million (around Rs 5,600 crore) to almost 19,000 employees, real estate experts say that there is a possibility that a few of these employees may end up buying properties worth Rs 2,800 crore in Bengaluru alone in the next few months.
“The real estate market in Bengaluru is expected to get a major share of this investment, given that the Flipkart office is located in Bellandur. Major premium housing projects in and around Bellandur are expected to receive an impetus in demand and may push property prices northwards,” said Vikram Reddy of ORO PropTech, a real estate consultancy based in Bengaluru.
Usually these buyers want to buy homes because they wish to offset the capital gains tax by purchasing property. “A higher ticket size leads to more savings. It makes sense for them to buy a larger house rather than pay tax on the amount received from the company,” he added.
Flipkart’s Rs 2,800-cr realty check in Bengaluru: ESOP payment to trigger home buying, [Moneycontrol](https://www.moneycontrol.com/news/business/real-estate/flipkarts-rs-2800-cr-realty-check-in-bengaluru-esop-payment-to-trigger-home-buying-10990571.html)
Ironically, the intersection between the people who believe that tech companies going public is good for the ecosystem and the ones who complain about how unaffordable rent has become in the city is a perfect circle.
We’ve seen a similar story play out in the Bay Area—the tech elite didn’t just throw things out of whack for the non-tech people, it even affected people working in tech at the lower levels (or newer startups). I think people in India, too, will understand this soon.
The best houses are no longer affordable, not even if you work as a mid-level position in a successful startup. In the US, maybe ten years ago, young, junior people entering startups believed that companies going public or getting massive rounds of funding was good for the ecosystem. Not anymore. Now, it’s largely viewed as a fairly disruptive event that affects their rent, and makes finding houses harder.
The reason why this will happen soon is because it’s become apparent that the tech elite are elite because, well, very few can make it to that level. Not all startups can become successful—in fact the vast majority will either fail, or be stuck at a static, predictable point unable to break out. A tiny minority will go up and become powerful, Big Tech companies, whose employees will make several hundred crores. I think this is when some resentment will kick in. It’s harder to celebrate the ecosystem when your landlord calls you to say he’s raising the rent by 50% this year because that’s the going rate these days in Bellandur.
The biggest reason why gains are capped in tech is because the market itself is capped. Like I’ve written before, increasingly, tech companies are becoming successful in India not by building mass-market products, but by focusing [on the top of the pyramid](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/fortune-at-the-top-of-the-pyramid/), i.e., getting those with people who have money to pay more through a combination of premiumisation, loyalty, and products.
This story of the emerging gap between the tech elite and the rest of tech in cities like Bengaluru is a mirror of the story of what’s playing out in India as a whole.
Here’s Rathin Roy, former member of the Economic Advisory Council to the Prime Minister, breaking it down in his latest column:
For the past 15 years, incomes of ordinary Indians – those between the top 15% and 50% of the population – are stagnating. (The poorest 20% see a rise in incomes due to growing subsidies and handouts.) Over 120 mn people between 18 and 35 are neither in education nor looking for employment. The population ‘employed’ in agriculture is at its highest level, even as the share of manufacturing in GDP is at the lowest level in 30 years.
This reveals a malaise that, if untreated, will land India in the middle-income trap into which many countries have fallen. I have previously argued that India faces a structural demand constraint that can only be addressed by producing what the top half (not just the top 15%) of Indians wishes to consume, and by creating employment by producing these things in poor geographies, where those poorer than Bangladesh and Nepal live.
India shows all the signs of a failed middle-income country—first face them to fix things, [The Economic Times](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/opinion/et-commentary/india-shows-all-the-signs-of-a-failed-middle-income-country-first-face-them-to-fix-things/articleshow/115189279.cms?from=mdr)
Essentially, Roy argues that India’s economy is “like it was during the Mughal empire—it produces bespoke goods at high markups for the rich, but is unable to service the mass-market demand of the ordinary Indian due to low productivity. Rent-seeking, not profit maximisation, is, therefore, the goal of most entrepreneurs.” His point is that India has gotten really good at creating and making products for the top of the pyramid, and has started ignoring the needs and aspirations of the vanishing middle class.
The reduction of the Indian [middle class’s purchasing power](https://www.businesstoday.in/latest/corporate/story/nestle-india-feels-the-middle-class-pinch-451182-2024-10-23) is a theme that [multiple](https://www.cnbctv18.com/photos/market/fmcg-earnings-hul-nestle-india-pidilite-united-spirits-share-price-demand-weakness-rural-urban-middle-class-19498311.htm) business leaders have found the courage to voice of late. The drivers for the reduction of the purchasing power is driven by the usual factors, i.e., a stagnation of income coupled with rising inflation. In a way, this is a macro version of what will soon play out in cities like Bengaluru—the reduction of the relative purchasing power of India’s tech middle-class driven by the new tech elite.
It’s still some way away, but it’s coming.
And when it does, I wonder how many people will still believe that this is good for the ecosystem.
Regards,
Praveen Gopal Krishnan