---
subject: "AI #25: Inflection Point"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-08-17 14:28:50
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Inflection.ai is the latest AI lab whose CEO is advocating for regulation of AI. I discuss that under the Quest for Sane Regulation. Amazon and Apple are incrementally stepping up their AI game. Hotz and Yudkowsky debate whether AI is existentially risky, cover all the usual bases with mixed results but do so in good faith. We have more discussion about whether GPT-4 is creative, and whether it can reason. Mostly we get the exact opposite of the title, more of the same. Note: My posts get made into audio form via AI, for now Table of ContentsIntroduction. [Language Models Offer Mundane Utility](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/4df8771c-e6fe-4ee3-83a7-e4e20b7ae0f3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Creativity is hard to pin down.[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/740e5610-54a7-4ab5-a242-2cf2f48130d8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). It’s the other way.[GPT-4 Real This Time](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/3f34502e-40d0-4d26-9fc8-24161b3b3275?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). An easy way to prove ability to do something is to do it.[Go Team Yeah](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/eb1fcd4a-458b-4445-855b-965a02e26ffc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). If you organize the events and award points, they will red team.[Fun With Image Generation](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/6a22fb88-2d62-4706-b3da-1f8504dea33c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Some have fun, others have less fun.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/713b740f-3d8e-4665-9d31-ccbdc666e597?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Doesn’t have to be this soon.[They Took Our Jobs](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/93537b5b-297c-4c63-b795-3d4ce90e02ec?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Low estimates of economic impact, strange metaphors.[Get Involved](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/0d11e495-6b94-4091-a200-3bdc44ef296b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Anthropic is hiring for comms positions.[Introducing](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/e18fe095-9d34-4669-96ab-ae18439c8494?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Amazon AI customer review summaries, private-GPT, AI town.[In Other AI News](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/9de55269-b2d8-4bea-b4ef-87ab05dd82b3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Apple joins the AI chorus, questions on influence functions.[Quiet Speculations](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/492763e2-bfbf-4fb4-9b00-26169c57b7e7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Let’s play the straight line extrapolation game.[The Quest for Sane Regulation](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/605f863a-bd9f-4c76-91bd-362d650b0be7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Inflection.ai’s CEO steps into the arena.[The Week in Audio](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/6be8e3e8-aa85-4099-a70a-743c2139c25c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Hotz and Yudkowsky debate.[People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/a251f5e9-a06f-4b4d-9793-64ff94fee4d6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Quite a lot of people.[Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/ceea90d3-aae1-4e2e-ac56-4782151d1874?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). All wrong anyways.[The Lighter Side](https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/f7d9966f-f737-43ad-a475-05960beaabbf?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). A well-deserved break.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
GPT custom instructions now available to everyone except in the UK and EU.
When I look at the creativity test questions that seems entirely fair to the creativity tests. That does not mean that the LLMs aren’t doing something else as well, or that they are not creative, but it does show what our current tests measure.
The conclusion observes that the Replika AI does not exactly pass the test:
Human and AI advice had similar effects, so this does seem like a warning that humans become less honest when given advice. The implication is that advice can in expectation be bad. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
Beyond that, what interventions are suggested here? Nothing concrete.
Unfortunately it is the other way. We do not have the option to not develop such extremely dual-use techniques, once the models capable of developing them are released onto the public. That is not a choke point to which we have access. Thus, our only local play here is to find and patch the vulnerabilities as quickly as we can, before someone less noble finds it. That is exactly the type of dynamic we want to avoid, and why we should be careful which systems get thus given to the public. GPT-4 Real This Time
Gary Marcus then must pivot from ‘this shows GPT-4 can’t reason’ to ‘this doesn’t shot that GPT-4 can reason.’
If you are asking if a system can do something, then showing it doing the thing is sufficient. You do not need to show that you succeeded on the first try. You do need to show that you did not tie yourself up in knots or try a thousand times, if that is in question, but this does not seem at all like an unnatural custom instructions - it is so generic that it seems reasonable to incorporate it into one’s default set. Nothing here is weird or new. When Gary Marcus says this doesn’t pass the snuff test, that is him saying essentially ‘well obviously they can’t reason, so showing them reasoning must be wrong.’ Rather circular. There is no particular detail here that is sniffing wrong. Saying that ‘the answer changes from time to time so it isn’t reasoning’ seems to ignore the obvious fact that humans will change their answers to many questions depending on when and how you ask the question - are we also incapable of reason? Presumably not all of us.
Pool A here are well-trained human moderators, Pool B is humans with light training. This suggests a mixed strategy, where well-trained moderators handle difficult cases, and GPT is mostly good enough to filter cases into (good, bad, unclear) first. They note that content moderation policies are evolving rapidly. There are several reasons this is true. One of them is that users will attempt to iteratively find the best way to navigate around the moderation policy, while others will seek to use it to censor rivals by extending it. That doesn’t make GPT-4-style automation not useful, it does mean that ‘the hard part’ lies elsewhere for now. A funny alternative strategy that admittedly offers less customization might be a variant of ‘ask GPT-4 to quote you back the original passage, if it will do so then the message passes moderation.’ But oh no! (I mean, no, but the attempt to propose this is fun.)
Microsoft’s net profits in 2022 were $72.7 billion dollars. With a b. Their market cap is over a trillion. Does anyone think for a second they would not happily keep funding OpenAI at a billion or two a year in exchange for a larger profit cap? Inflection AI raised $1.2 billion in investment with mostly a story. Any investor not concerned about increasing existential risk would kill to invest in OpenAI. These costs are also voluntary, some combination of marketing plan, giant experiment, red teaming effort and data gold mine. OpenAI could choose to put ChatGPT fully behind a paywall at any time, if it actually couldn’t afford not to. Go Team YeahWhat does it take to get a lot of people to red team language models? Not much, it turns out.
Certainly lots of people have tried at home to get ChatGPT to tell them how to build a bomb or say a bad word. Mostly they try the same things over and over with variations. That is very different from attempting to see how deep the rabbit hole can go. Thus, organize an event that gets people to try more seriously, and you get results.
Reading the NPR story made me more worried about red teaming and vulnerability patching. If we assume a power law distribution of different attempt frequencies, and we also presume that the response to red teaming is not so general and instead targets specific failure cases and modes, then your system will remain vulnerable to those who are sufficiently creative and resourceful, or who can exert sufficient optimization pressure. This will include future AI systems and systematic searches and optimizations. It is the opposite of ‘get it right on the first try.’ Red teams are great for figuring out if you have a problem, but you have to be wary that they’ll prevent you from ever solving one. Fun with Image Generation
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
This matches my experience. I briefly forgot my Steam password, and failed something like 10 times trying to pass the Captchas to reset it. Instead I finally… figured out what the password was. We need to stop using Captcha.
The bots on Twitter mostly continue to send many copies of exactly identical messages, that are obviously spam and clearly often reported. If you cannot under those conditions make the problem mostly go away, that is on you, sir. That does not mean that future bots won’t be a trickier problem, but we could at least try some tiny amount. They Took Our Jobs
I disagree with this metaphor in several places. First, that extra talent very much obviously did create a lot more wealth, formed new ideas and caused a lot more things to happen. If you think it did not raise growth rates in America, then you are saying that those gains were captured by East Asia. In the case of AI, that would mean the gains would be captured ‘by AI’ in which case that would either indicate a much bigger problem, or it would go directly into GDP. Also note that much of the new talent was necessarily devoted to East Asian problems and opportunities, and duplicating past work, in ways that will not apply to AI, and also that AI will involve orders of magnitude more and more easily available talent. Second, the extra talent brought online was largely duplicative of existing talent, whereas AI will bring us different affordances. Tyler would happily agree that bringing together diverse talent, from different sectors and places and heritages, produces better results, and AI will be far more different than different countries, even in the most mundane situation. Third, I question the example. What would the American economy look like if we had not developed South Korea, India and China? Counterfactuals are hard and yes other headwinds slowed our economy even so, but I would hope we would agree we would be much worse off. Claude 2 estimates that if those three nations had not developed, current American GDP would be 10%-20% lower, without even considering the impact on innovation at all. This also ignores all compound effects, and the geopolitical effects. The world would be a radically different place today. GPT-4 gave a lower 3%-5% estimate, so give this round to Claude. I think what Tyler predicts here is on the extreme low end, even if we got no further substantial foundational advances from AI beyond the GPT-4 level, and even if rather harsh restrictions are put in place. The comparisons to the Industrial Revolution continue to point if anything to far faster growth, since you would then have a metaphorical power law ordering of speed of impact from something like humans, then agriculture, then industry. Get Involved
Introducing
This seems like an excellent feature if the reviews used as inputs are genuine and not trying to game the AI. Otherwise, adversarial garbage in will mean adversarial garbage out. The more people rely on the summaries, the more effective fake reviews get and the less people will sniff them out, creating dangerous incentives. There is especially incentive to push specific messages into reviews. Meanwhile AI makes generating plausible fake reviews that much easier. The question then becomes whether Amazon can keep the reviews real and honest enough that the AI summaries can work. In cases with tons of sales and thus tons of legitimate reviews tied to sales, I have confidence. In cases without that, by default I expect things to go downhill. Wondering WWJD? Or WWJS? Now you can
In Other AI News
I got a chance to read One thing that struck me early on, although mostly unrelated to this particular paper, is this idea that ‘deceptive alignment’ is some strange result.
Why would we think the default would be that the AI is ‘aligned with human values’? The AI learns first to predict the next token and then to give the responses humans will like as reflected in the fine tuning process via RLHF and other similar techniques. Full stop. We then select, use and reproduce the AIs whose outputs we like more generally. Again, full stop. Why would such a thing be ‘aligned with human values’ on some deeper level, as opposed to being something that more often produces outputs we tend to like? Humans have this feature where our outputs modify our inner preferences as the most efficient way to update, but my understanding is that is about quirks in our architecture, rather than inherent to all neural networks. What is the core idea of influence functions?
It certainly does seem worth trying. The examples we saw last week illustrate how conflated all of this can get, so it won’t be simple to disentangle it all. First, though, we have to solve the technical problem so we can examine the largest LLMs. Which the paper suggests we have now made a lot of progress on.
Once again, when you ask the big model if it wants to be shut down, its top influence is literally the scene with Hal from 2001. The others are people struggling to not die. Whereas the smaller model seems to be grabbing the words ‘continue’ and ‘existing.’ They note that this approach is used on pretrained models, whereas for practical safety we currently rely on fine tuning.
Quiet SpeculationsArnold Kling predicts
It is consistently impressive to watch the various groups super strongly double down, again and again, on different intuitions. The anchors group that says scale (aka compute, effectively) is all you need think this is obviously the default path, that the particular lines they have drawn will keep going straight indefinitely and those who question that have the burden to explain why. Others think that is absurd.
This is why I refuse to believe that there can be zero bogus AI start-ups at YC. Are there enough potential ideas for everyone to have a non-bogus company? Obviously yes. Is everyone going to find and pick one of them under these circumstance? Oh, heavens no.
He’s continuing to believe that YC filters out all the bogosity.
What my original claim should have said was that I take this to mean ‘even Paul’ cannot tell which ones are bogus. Alternatively, one can interpret this as the meaning of bogus in the VC/YC lexicon. A bogus thing is by definition something that appears bogus upon examination by Paul Graham, or someone with similar skills. If it turns out later to not work, and to have never been capable of working, even if it would have been possible to know that then that’s only a failed hypothesis. Another way to think about this is that almost everyone needs AI, that does not mean that they are in position to actually benefit, and that in turn does not mean you can have a company by helping them do so. A third potential definition of bogus that Paul might endorse is ‘does not provide value to the end user,’ he’s huge on focusing on providing such value. I can believe that every AI company in YC can identify at least some set of users that would get value out of a finished product.
AI is the new The Quest for Sane RegulationsIs Inflection.ai worried at all? The above post points out Inflection.ai has similar funding to Anthropic, and has a truly epic amount of compute headed their way thanks to that funding. Their flagship LLM is claimed to be similar in quality to GPT-3.5, although I am skeptical. What they do say are things such as: What about their safety team? They do not seem to be hiring even the nominally necessary safety team you would need to handle mundane safety, let alone anything beyond that.
Calling it ‘the containment problem’ is a big hint that it is likely no accident he does not mention the difficulties of alignment. Still, a book is coming in a few weeks, so we should reverse judgment until then. Suleyman also
The section that outlines the core issues is called ‘too powerful to pause,’ which indeed is essentially accepting defeat out of the gate. They say that ‘rightly or wrongly’ the USA and China view this as a zero-sum competition for decisive strategic advantage. They do not mention that both sides point at the other to justify this, and no one bothers to actually check, or do much to attempt to persuade, despite a deal being in everyone’s interest, or explore alternative paths to influencing or overriding or replacing those who have these viewpoints. Later they acknowledge that any solution involved overcoming this intransigence and getting both nations to the table. Meanwhile, Suleyman continues to ask questions like whether the AI will bolster or harm which state’s power, questions of relative power between humans, rather than the risk that humans will all lose everything. He seems early on to be calling for something much harder than international cooperation - getting the voluntary buy-in of not only every dangerous AI lab, but also every such lab that might form. Then it seems like they mostly back away from this? It’s a strange mix.
The focus seems to be on proliferation, not on development. The concern is that too many different groups, or the wrong person with the wrong intentions or lack of responsibility, might get their hands on the dangerous system. What does not seem to be considered at all here is that the systems we develop might be inherently dangerous, an extinction risk to humanity, something that does not require proliferation between humans to be dangerous. Thus, he is making the case for worldwide strict regulation of future AI systems despite, as far as I can tell, not believing in extinction risks other than perhaps those from human misuse. He is arguing that, even without such extinction risks, the tail risks are already large enough that open source or general proliferation would be a disaster. I still don’t see how one can believe that premise on reflection, but I do not think this is an obviously incorrect position given the premise. I do think that this is much more a potential case of someone talking their book and own self-interest than the statements we have seen from OpenAI or Anthropic.
Quite so. International cooperation can hope to buy in all the major players and then enforce via various mechanisms including control of the supply chain and global trade. Cooperation among all corporations does not work that way unless governments are willing and able to crack down on those who are not party to the agreements, including future yet-to-be-founded companies, and the corporations that want to be responsible know this. The bigger issue is that Suleyman’s framework does not treat non-malicious extinction risk as a thing. He is doing a good job of getting to a similar place without it, but without it the calculus would be very different.
It certainly takes more than that now. I expect it to take more than that for a while and perhaps forever, but I agree one cannot be super confident that this will hold indefinitely as algorithms and scaffolding improve. In Time magazine, Jan Brauner and Alan Chan point out the obvious, that The Week in AudioThere was a debate between George Hotz and Eliezer Yudkowsky.
I mostly agree in the end - there were a few places where Hotz got a new response and had an opportunity to provide an interesting response, but he did not take advantage, and in many places he was badly mistaken. It was still interesting to hear his views and what he thinks is important, and I once again applaud him for being genuine and approaching this all in good faith. People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone
His conclusion is worth qouting.
This does not directly mention AI, but the principle is the same. If we create new entities that are more capable and intelligent, more efficient, that apply more optimization pressure and are better at resource acquisition, that do a better job when given authority over decisions and so on, which can be freely copied by themselves and others, then nature will take its course rather quickly and you should solve for the equilibrium rather than looking for some way to wave your hand and pretending it would not lead to the obvious outcome.
Only after you know the rules can you then throw them out. If you have the proper respect for doing a utilitarian calculus, and you understand why and how to do that, and feel in your gut that the path that leads to better outcomes is the better path even if it superficially does not seem like that, then and only then should you trust your instinct that the calculus is wrong. Or: It needs to be ‘the calculus is wrong’ rather than ‘how dare you do a calculus.’
Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing EveryoneI wouldn’t generally pick on people like this, Melinda Chu: Why do some people listen to him? He’s already proven to be bad at predicting the future when he puts his own money on it. e/acc 🚀✨💫
Thus we hear the bold tale of, yep, Timnit Gebru, and the women who were the ones who warned us about the true racist and sexist dangers of AI before it was too late, dastardly men only started warning after white men created these just awful systems. How awful? Existentially awful, you see, there are no words such folks will let be.
It’s one thing to (culturally?!?) appropriate the word safety. It’s another to attempt to steal the word existential. Then again, this is what such folks actually think life is about. They do not simply talk the talk, they walk the walk. Which is why, as much as I really wish I could fully ignore such articles, I did appreciate the straightforward and refreshing honesty of ‘that’s in the future and thus we do not care’ attitude towards existential risks. It is great to have someone skip the usual gaslighting and rationalizations, look you straight in the eye and say essentially: I. Don’t. Care. It was framed as ‘look at this horrible person’ but I am confident that honestly reflects the worldview of the author, that anyone caring about such things is bad and should feel bad and we should heap shame upon them. The claims regarding AI bias and harm site all the usual suspects. I could not find any new evidence or examples. The article also profiles a few other women who take a similar position to Gebru. The requested intervention seemed to mostly be government restrictions on use of AI. Here is an interesting example of
My understanding is that The New York Times would have required at minimum for this to start ‘Gebru says that she was.’ You can imply causality and leave out important details. What you can’t do is claim one side of a factual dispute as fact without other evidence.
Once again, I point out that this is only a zero-sum fight over funds because certain people choose to frame it as that. This is private money trying to prevent large harms that would otherwise go to other causes entirely, not a fight over a fixed pool. If you think mundane AI harm mitigation deserves more funding? Great, I have no problem with that, go get yourself some funding. There are plenty of other worthy causes that deserve more funding, and less worthy causes that have too much funding. Even in the silly metaphor of the industrial revolution, suppose someone had decided to spend some effort guarding against a machine uprising. I don’t see why they would have, that would not have been a coherent or reasonable thing to do and that does not require hindsight, but I don’t see how such efforts would have taken away from or interfered with things like improving working conditions? The Lighter Side
You're currently a free subscriber to |