---
subject: "Educational for-profit charter schools do worse in Sweden"
from: "Marginal REVOLUTION <donotreply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-11-09 07:37:09
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tyler Cowen", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2466199532210586699", "UNREAD"]
---
I estimate the long-run earnings impacts of for-profit and non-profit charter high schools in Sweden. Since the 1990s, privately managed schools have expanded dramatically—driven entirely by for-profit providers—and now enroll nearly half of urban high school students. Unlike in many other settings, there are no schools operating outside of the public system: all schools rely on equal public funding, cannot charge top-up fees, and are subject to the same regulation. Using a combination of value-added and regression discontinuity methods, I find that charter school attendance reduces long-run earnings by 2% on average—comparable to the returns to half a year of schooling in similar settings. For-profits generate these losses by hiring less-educated, lower-paid teachers, consistent with concerns around cost-cutting. By contrast, non-profits reduce earnings by specializing in arts programs: conditional on such specialization, they perform as or even better than public schools. In a discrete choice framework using rank-ordered school applications, I show that students’ preferences are weakly related to schools’ earnings impacts. Most of the for-profit market share is explained by student demand for attractive locations and study programs, presenting a trade-off between satisfying short-run demand and boosting long-run economic outcomes.
That is the [job market paper](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=dc057487caa248cdaec1aa050d9d907a649b6a25d4275d205496ba390a1b530f&blog_id=42693868&post_id=91828&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=6cf43e23ccec5668e21ab83b974f61fb&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly9wZXR0ZXJhbmRlcnNiZXJnLTkzLmdpdGh1Yi5pby9tYWluL3BiX2ptcC5wZGY&email_id=41af89e9c5478f1e598742661445c33e) from [Petter Berg](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=f2040367b8d68f856e79fd520d5dec58250c8811bd41def6afd091c9b9dc3397&blog_id=42693868&post_id=91828&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=57d5db488f55b78e3b2446fed08867b7&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly9zaXRlcy5nb29nbGUuY29tL3ZpZXcvcGV0dGVyYmVyZw=&email_id=41af89e9c5478f1e598742661445c33e), from Stockholm School of Economics.