---
subject: "Argentina Could Be a Superpower"
from: "Tomas Pueyo from Uncharted Territories <unchartedterritories@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-10-16 15:22:47
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tomas Pueyo", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_28238133486362596", "UNREAD"]
---
Argentina used to be rich: Its capital, Buenos Aires, was “the Paris of South America”. For decades, Argentina (which means “the country of silver”) was among the richest countries on Earth—richer than France, Germany, Japan, or Italy: Millions of Europeans flocked there during its Belle Époque, dreaming of being “as rich as an Argentine”. But then, this happened: Not only did the Western world leave Argentina behind. Traditionally poorer countries like Chile and China are now richer! And Brazil is catching up! How is this possible? 1. SizeThe US is big, but Argentina isn’t too far behind—they’re the world’s 4th and 8th biggest country respectively. Argentina is much bigger than most people realize! It can easily contain France, Spain, Italy, Germany, and over 20 more European countries.¹ Argentina claims to be quite a bit bigger, though. With such a great size comes massive resources and defensibility. DefensibilityThe defensibility of the US and Argentina are surprisingly similar. One advantage that Argentina has is that it’s even more isolated than the US. 2. OceansThe Pacific is too big for any threat trying to cross it, and Argentina’s western neighbors are even farther than the US’s (Japan is much closer to the US than New Zealand is to Argentina). And of course, Australia and New Zealand are more culturally aligned (and hence less threatening) than the US’s “neighbors”, Russia and China. The Atlantic Ocean is not as big as the Pacific, but nevertheless much too vast for big powers to threaten Argentina from afar. Again, the US is close to the action (to Europe and Russia), while Argentina’s neighbors on the other side of the Atlantic are much poorer and weaker African countries. As a result, there have been very few naval battles on the coasts of Argentina. 3. IceArgentina has no neighbors to its south, and no threat can come from frozen Antarctica. Plus, the Antarctic Ocean is one of the coldest, windiest, most inhospitable oceans in the world. Argentina is safe there. 4. MountainsTo its west and northwest, one of the tallest mountain barriers on earth protects Argentina from Chile and Bolivia, the Andes: That mountain range is pretty desertic, too. No army can pass to invade Argentina from there. 5. Weak neighborsTo the north, the border with Paraguay is quite flat, but if anyone should be afraid, it’s Paraguay, as Argentina’s economy dwarfs its own. Paraguay already experienced this in the Argentina only has one threat, but it’s significant. Argentina’s Achilles HeelCan you guess? Brazil is much bigger than Argentina, in surface area (3x), population (4.5x), and economy (3.5x). This means Argentina’s first (and nearly only) geostrategic priority is a good relationship with Brazil. The Argentinian MississippiIn Since the entire Mississippi river basin is quite flat, it doubles up as an amazing irrigation field for crops and the perfect highway to bring produce to world markets, as it’s the biggest network of natural navigable waterways in the world. Well, Argentina is the same! It has a huge flat plain in warm and temperate climates, which is ideal for growing lots of food. It’s flanked by two mountain ranges that concentrate water into a navigable river basin that reaches the ocean and makes transportation dirt cheap.
And if you think it’s a coincidence, think again, for both lateral mountain ranges have the same origins in the US and Argentina! On the western side, we find the tall mountain ranges. That’s because they’re young, the product of the ongoing subduction of oceanic plates (the Pacific plate is pushing Cocos and Nazca eastwards) under continental plates (the North and South American ones). Meanwhile, to the east, the Appalachians, the And in between? Both North and South America had inland seaways in the past! And this is why both areas are low-lying flat plains, with similar soil quality: They formed the same way! A sea formed in between mountain ranges, sediments accumulated, and after the sea receded, rivers and wind slowly deposited more sediments. 6. Amazing FarmlandHere are the resulting soils in North and South America: This is the result of these amazing soils: Of course, for this type of agriculture, you need more than flat terrain full of sediments and great rivers. You need the right climate, including proper temperature and precipitation. 7. The Perfect ClimateNot only do the US and Argentina have a similar geography for the same geological reasons. They’re also at similar latitudes, just on opposite sides of the equator! Let’s fold the map around the equator: This is the key reason why the main climates of these countries are so similar: Due to the rotation of the Earth, the prevailing winds around the globe look like this: This makes the US West Coast, the Amazon, and southern Chile very wet. But these rains also affect the north of Argentina, feeding the Río de la Plata basin, and dropping tons of water on the eastern Andes: And that’s why northern Argentina gets a lot of rain (and is therefore much greener), while the south is drier and is browner, with more grasses. The US has a sea to its south that affects the rains,² so instead of a north-south difference, it has an east-west one. This determines the type of food it produces: The equivalent for Argentina is agriculture in the north and ranching in the south: And that’s why you get cowboys in both the US and Argentina—gauchos! In other words, the US has the Great Plains, Argentina has the Pampas. And with their similar soils and climates, they can produce and export inordinate amounts of food. Compare Argentina’s farmland with the rest of South America’s! 8. Cheap ConstructionEach dollar invested goes much further in Argentina than anywhere else in South America, because it’s much easier and cheaper to build on flat land. You don’t need to level the ground, build retaining walls, fill slopes, displace much soil, build deep, deal with uneven foundations, break hard stone, spend a lot to ship materials and machinery, risk landslides, or pay high insurance premiums to cover for natural risks. 9. The River HighwayAs a reminder, water transportation is This is why it’s so important that the Río de la Plata system is so navigable: This is crucial in this area, which produces lots of agricultural and mining products that cost little but are heavy—therefore expensive to transport by road. Without this river system, it’s possible that none of these products could be successfully exported. Compare this to Russia, the biggest country in the world with some of the best farmland. It should be the biggest exporter of food in the world. Instead, it sometimes runs out of food because it spoils due to bad weather and transportation! 10. Political HarmonyArgentina, Paraguay, Uruguay, and Brazil fought over their borders after the independence of Latin America in the first half of the 1800s. But after the War of the Triple Alliance, they were done. The countries haven’t gone to war with each other in over 150 years, and a key reason for this is the Río de la Plata system. As we discussed in The Río de la Plata is the same, a single river system that promotes trade, cultural exchange, communication, and cooperation. It’s the second biggest interconnected navigable river waterway in the world after the Mississippi, and Argentina holds the key to the system: Buenos Aires. 11. Unbelievable PortLook at the Río de la Plata: It is not a coincidence that Buenos Aires, Argentina’s capital, is found right where the Paraná and Uruguay rivers meet to form the Río de la Plata: It’s the perfect hub to trade all the products from the north of Argentina, Paraguay, southern Brazil, and Uruguay. This gives Buenos Aires an incredible economic clout and lots of leverage on all its northern neighbors, who must go through Argentinian waters and the Buenos Aires port to trade with the world. 12. Mining PotentialChile is one of the biggest exporters of minerals (copper, lithium, silver, iron), but Argentina is not. Yet they’re both on the same mountain range! Chile has been a bit luckier here, because the rains on their side have created more erosion and exposed more ores, which are easy to transport to the nearby coast. Argentina needs more prospecting and infrastructure to bring trains, roads, and water to its mining regions. This is possible but it requires more investment. Untapped PotentialWith all these assets, Argentina could be a world superpower. But it’s not. What happened? We saw that Argentina’s GDP per capita is much lower than the US’s despite having a similar geography. But it’s not the only difference. Here is Argentina’s population density: You can notice a few things: See that huge spike? Buenos Aires concentrates a huge share of Argentina’s population: 38%! The dark circle represents the Pampas, with the good climate we saw. But it has very few big cities. Look how it compares to the US’s Midwest.
Outside of the Pampas, you can see population along the fall line of the Andes mountains
This is very typical of cities: People live on flatlands because it’s easier and cheaper, but stay close to mountains to benefit from their resources. Outside of Buenos Aires and the Andes’ foothills, there is very little population, even in areas that have a similar climate in the Northern Hemisphere and are more populated there! The US is not very densely populated: Germany hosts Why so unpopulated despite ideal land? Over the last 250 years, while immigrants were pouring into the US, Argentina was only growing as fast as What can we make of all of this? Argentina’s Potential as a SuperpowerArgentina is basically the US of the Southern Hemisphere: Very similar defensibility, with oceans, mountains, and ice on three sides, and weak neighbors on the other The huge exception is Argentina’s neighbor, Brazil.
Very similar land and climate, allowing for a world-class agriculture industry and cheap infrastructure. A very similar navigable river basin in the heartland, helping reduce transportation costs, and creating wealth and political harmony, all controlled from Buenos Aires. Huge, untapped mineral deposits.
Despite these striking advantages, Argentina has not been able to translate them into immigration and wealth. Geography is not destiny. One way to put it: Geography is the hardware, our institutions are the software. When both work well, a country is unstoppable. With bad hardware but intelligent software, a country can go far. But it’s easy to waste good hardware with very bad software. This is what Argentina has done. Another way to put it: Geography is 1 I played around to see how many European countries I could fit in Argentina, comparing its landmass of ~2.8M km2 to the European countries ranked from smallest to largest. I took 2 To be equivalent, Argentina would need a sea to its north, since it’s on the other side of the equator. You're currently a free subscriber to |