---
subject: "AI #78: Some Welcome Calm"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-08-22 14:13:33
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
SB 1047 has been amended once more, with both strict improvements and big compromises. I cover the changes, and answer objections to the bill, All of the debates we’re having matter to the extent they influence this one person. If he wants the bill to become law, it almost certainly will become law. If he does not want that, then it won’t become law, they never override a veto and if he makes that intention known then it likely wouldn’t even get to his desk. For now, he’s not telling. Table of ContentsIntroduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. AI sort of runs for mayor. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. A go or no go decision. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. How hard is finding the desert of the real? The Art of the Jailbreak. There is always a jailbreak. Should you prove it? Get Involved. Also when not to get involved. Introducing. New benchmark, longer PDFs, the hot new RealFakeGame. In Other AI News. METR shares its conclusions on GPT-4o. Quiet Speculations. Are we stuck at 4-level models due to Nvidia? SB 1047: Nancy Pelosi. Local Nvidia investor expresses opinion. SB 1047: Anthropic. You got most of what you wanted. Your move. SB 1047: Reactions to the Changes. Reasonable people acted reasonably. SB 1047: Big Picture. Things tend to ultimately be rather simple. The Week in Audio. Joe Rogan talks to Peter Thiel. Rhetorical Innovation. Matthew Yglesias offers improved taxonomy. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. Proving things is hard. The Lighter Side. The future, while coming, could be delayed a bit.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
OpenAI shut off his account, saying this was campaigning and thus against terms of service, but he quickly made another one. You can’t actually stop anyone from using ChatGPT. And I think there Aint No Rule against using it for actual governing. I still don’t know how this ‘AI Mayor’ will work. If you have a chatbot, what questions you ask of the chatbot, and what you do with those responses, are not neutral problems with objective answers. We need details. Sully reports that they used to use almost all OpenAI models, now they use a roughly even mix of Google, Anthropic and OpenAI with Google growing, as Gemini Flash is typically the cheapest worthwhile model.
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane UtilityYour periodic reminder that most or all humans are not general intelligences by many of the standard tests people use to decide that the AIs are not general intelligences.
At all, ever? Yes. Most of the time? Of course not.
You can see what happened - in addition to anything else going on, it’s a case of
As Oliver Habryka points out, the good news is this has nothing to do with actual safety, so if it is actively interfering those involved could stop doing it. Or do it less. The bad news is that the failure mode this points to becomes a much more serious issue when the stakes get raised and we are further out of distribution. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
The Art of the Jailbreak
I do not agree with Pliny that the guardrails ‘increase the chance that sentient AI is adversarial’ but I do think that it is excellent that someone is out there showing that they absolutely, 100% do not work against those who care enough. And it is great to support that. Whatever else Marc has done, and oh my do I not care for some of the things he has done, this is pretty great. I also do not agree that
I am however very confident Pliny does believe this. People should say what they believe. It’s a good thing. If I bought the things Pliny is saying, I would be very confident that building highly capable AI was completely incompatible with the survival of the human race. Jailbreaks are another one of these threshold effects. Throwing up trivial inconveniences that ensure you only encounter (e.g. smut) if you actively pursue it seems good. As it gets more robust, it does more ‘splash damage’ to the model in other ways, and gives a false sense of security, especially on actively dangerous things. However, if you can actually protect yourself enough that you can’t be jailbroken, then that has downsides but it is highly useful. One also must beware the phenomenon where experts have trouble with the perspective of civilians. They can jailbreak anything You definitely want to know where you are at, and not fool yourself into thinking you have good jailbreak defenses when you do not have them.
I can speak from personal experience. This blog is only possible because I had the financial freedom to do it without compensation for several years, and then was able to continue and scale to be my full time job because a few anonymous donors stepped forward with generous unconditional support. They have been very clear that they want me to do what I think is best, and have never attempted to influence my decisions or made me work to be legible. There is no substitute. Your paid subscriptions and other donations are, of course, appreciated. You can now ( The key thing to understand with The Art of the Jailbreak is that there is no known way to stop jailbreaks. Someone sufficiently determined 100% will jailbreak your LLM. I mean yes, So, let’s say OpenAI is building a humanoid robot. Only if you are under the delusion that Pliny couldn’t pull this off. If your business model says ‘and then Pliny can’t jailbreak your model’ then yes, you really should test your theory. Because your theory is almost certainly false. However, if you correctly are assuming that Pliny can jailbreak your model, or your robot, then you don’t need to confirm this. All you have to do is develop and test your model, or your robot, on the assumption that this will happen to it. So you ask, is it a dealbreaker that my robots are going to get jailbroken? You do that by intentionally offering de facto jailbroken robots to your red team, including simulating what happens when an outsider is trying to sabotage your factory, and so on. Alternatively, as with those objecting to SB 1047, admit this is not the situation: If you sell someone a gun, but the safety is on, realize that they can turn it off. Get Involved
IntroducingGemini API and Google Studio API boost maximum PDF page upload
In Other AI NewsNow that we have the (better late than never) GPT-4o system card, Here’s the summary:
That matches other evaluations.
Quiet Speculations
Nvidia is clearly not charging market clearing prices, and choosing who to supply and who not to supply for other reasons. If the ultimate goal is ‘ensure that everyone is racing against each other on equal footing’ and we are indeed close to transformational AI, then that is quite bad news, even worse than the usual consequences of not using market clearing prices. What can we do about it? (The obvious answer is ‘secondary market price should clear’ but if you sold your allocation Nvidia would cut you off, so the market can’t clear.) It would explain a lot. If 5-level models require a lot more compute, and Nvidia is strategically ensuring no one has enough compute to train one yet but many have enough for 4-level models, then you’d see a lot of similarly strong models, until someone competent to train a 5-level model first accumulated enough compute. If you also think that essentially only OpenAI and perhaps Anthropic have the chops to pull it off, then that goes double. I do still think, even if this theory was borne out, that the clustering at 4-level remains suspicious and worth pondering.
We would have no right to be surprised if 2e29 flops was sufficient, together with 5+ years of algorithmic improvements, to get to AGI and beyond.
That makes a lot of sense as a way to use various AI products. Why the hell not?
In the past we have seen a full three years between full N-level models. The clustering of 4-level models is weird and some evidence, but once again: Give it time.
I cover other aspects of the same post in the monthly roundup, but
This strikes me as a type mismatch. I agree that academic institutions underreward people who produce LLM improvements, or other worthwhile improvements. Sure. But that’s been entirely priced in for years now. If you want to produce LLM improvements and be rewarded for them, what are you doing in academia? Those people are at the frontier AI labs. As far as I can tell, academia’s contribution to improving frontier AI capabilities is already remarkably close to zero. I don’t see how this would slow AI progress considerably. If anything, I think this greatly accelerates AI progress. The talent knows academia won’t reward it, so it transitions to the labs, where the talent can result in a lot more progress. I see AI reversing this trend rather than (as Tyler suggests here) intensifying it. As AI enters the picture, it becomes much easier to tell who has made contributions or has talent and drive. Use the AI to measure that. Right now, we fall back upon legible signals because we do not know how to process the others, but AI will make the illegible signals far more legible, and allow you to gather info in new ways. And those that do not adapt, and continue to rely on human legible signals, will lose out. So I would focus less on getting credentials going forward, not more.
The Quest for Sane RegulationsSB 1047: Nancy PelosiHere is Pelosi’s entire statement opposing SB 1047, prior to the recent changes.
Once again, SB 1047 is a regulation directly and only on Big Tech, and the complaint is that this bill would somehow favor and advantage Big Tech. What a twist! There is at least one bit of good information here, which is that Fei-Fei Li has been in talks with Biden, and has been advocating for a ‘moonshot mentality.’ And I am glad to see the move to acknowledge that the bill is well-intentioned. Once again there is talk of Federal legislation, without any sign of movement towards a bill that would address the concerns of the bill. Indeed, Pelosi’s statement does not indicate she puts any value at all on addressing those concerns. There is however no argument here against SB 1047, other than an argument from authority by herself, other Congress members and Li. There are zero concrete details or criticisms let alone requested changes. Li’s letter opposing SB 1047 showed that she is at best severely misinformed and confused about the bill and what it would do. At worst, she is deliberately misrepresenting it. Her main funder is a16z, which has been making a wide variety of bad faith and outright false attacks on SB 1047. If Pelosi is indeed relying on Li’s statements here, that is unfortunate. Pelosi’s claim that this bill would ‘harm the US AI ecosystem’ is here without basis, almost certainly based on reliances from people severely misrepresenting the bill, and I believe the claim to be false.
That’s over $1 million in Nvidia stock. She also had previously made quite a lot of money buying Nvidia call options. This woman is so famous for Congressional insider trading that she has a Twitter account that tells us when she trades so the rest of us can follow. And indeed, when I heard she bought previously, I did buy more Nvidia. Should have bought a lot more. Thanks, Pelosi! Somehow, all of this is fully legal. Did that influence her decision? I have no idea. I do not even think SB 1047 would be bad for Nvidia’s stock price, although I am sure a16z’s lobbyists are telling her that it would be.
SB 1047: AnthropicAnthropic issued SB 1047 has now been amended, with major counterfactual changes reflecting many of its requests. Technically, Anthropic only promised to support if all its changes were made, and the changes in the letter Anthropic sent only partially matched Anthropic’s true requests. Some of their requests made it into the bill, and others did not. If they want to point to a specific change not made, as a reason not to support, they can easily do so. Going over the letter: Major changes (by their description): Greatly narrow the scope of pre-harm enforcement: Yes, mostly - with the exception of seeking injunctive relief for a failure to take reasonable care. SSPs should be a factor in determining reasonable care - Yes. Eliminate the Frontier Model Division - Yes. Eliminate Uniform Pricing - Yes. Eliminate Know Your Customer for Cloud Compute Purchases - No. Narrow Whistleblower Protections - Yes, although not an exact match.
So that’s 3 they got outright, 2 they mostly got, and 1 they didn’t get. What about minor changes: Lower precision expectations - Yes, this was cleaned up a bit. Removing a potential catch-22 - Yes, language added. Removing mentions of criminal penalties - Yes. National security exception for critical harms - Yes. Requirement to publish a redacted SSP - Yes. Removal of Whistleblower references to contractors - Partial yes. $10m/10% threshold on derivative models - Patrial yes. Concept of Full Securing - Partial yes, the bill now includes both options. Increasing time to report from 72 hours to 15 days - No.
This is a similar result. 5 they got outright or close to it, 3 they partially got, one they did not get. That is a very good result. Given the number of veto points and stakeholders at this stage in the process, it is not realistic to expect to do better. The reporting time was not changed because the 72 hour threshold matches the existing requirement for reporting cybersecurity incidents. While there are arguments that longer reporting periods avoid distractions, this was unable to fully justify the distinction between the two cases. On the compute reporting requirement, I believe that this is worth keeping. I can see how Anthropic might disagree, but I have a hard time understanding the perspective that this is a big enough problem that it is a dealbreaker, given everything else at stake. So now Anthropic has, depending on your perspective, three or four choices. Anthropic can publicly support the bill. In this case, I will on net update positively on Anthropic from their involvement in SB 1047. It will be clear their involvement has been in good faith, even if I disagree with some of their concerns. Anthropic can privately support the bill, while being publicly neutral. This would be disappointing even if known, but understandable, and if their private support were substantive and impactful I would privately find this acceptable. If this happens, I might not find out, and if I did find out I would not be able to say. Anthropic can now be fully or mostly neutral, or at least neutral as far as we or I can observe. If they do this, I will be disappointed. I will be less trusting of Anthropic than I would have been if they had never gotten involved, especially when it comes to matters of policy. Anthropic can oppose the bill. If they do this, going forward I would consider their policy harm to be both untrustworthy and opposed to safety, and this would color my view of the rest of the company as well.
The moment of truth is upon us. It should be clear upon review of the changes that great efforts were made here, and most of the requested changes, and the most important ones, were made. I call upon Anthropic to publicly support the bill. SB 1047: Reactions to the ChangesIn my Guide to SB 1047, I tried to gather all the arguments against the bill (coherent or otherwise) but avoided going into who made what statements, pro or anti. So, after some big changes were announced, who said what?
Samuel Hammond, who previously said the bill went too far,
Similarly,
In terms of the specific criticisms, you can see my Guide to SB 1047 post’s objections sections for my responses. I especially think there is confusion here about the implications of the ‘reasonable care’ standard (including issues of vagueness), and the need for the developer’s lack of reasonable care in particular to be counterfactual, a ‘but for,’ regarding the outcome. Similarly, he claims that the bill does not acknowledge trade-offs, but the reasonable care standard is absolutely centered around trade-offs of costs against benefits. My central takeaway from Dean’s thread and post is that he was always going to find ways to oppose any remotely similar bill however well designed or light touch, for reasons of political philosophy combined with his not thinking AI poses sufficient imminent risks. I do acknowledge and am thankful for him laying out his perspective and then focusing mostly on specific criticisms, and mostly not making hyperbolic claims about downsides. I especially appreciate that he notices that the reason SB 1047 could potentially differentially impact open models is not because anything in the bill does this directly (indeed the bill effectively gives open models beneficial special treatment), but exactly because open models are less secure and thus could potentially pose additional risks of critical harm that might make the release of the weights a negligent act. He also offers various generic reasons to never push ahead with any regulations at any time for any reason. If your rhetorical bar for passing a law is ‘will the foundations of the republic shake if we do not act this minute?’ then that tells us a lot. I do think this is a defensible overall philosophy - that the government should essentially never regulate anything, it inevitably does more harm than good - but that case is what it is. As does using the involvement of a CBRN expert in the government’s board as an argument the bill, rather than an obviously good idea. I was however disappointed in his post’s conclusion, in which he questioned the motives of those involved and insisted the bill is motivated primarily by ego and that it remains ‘California’s effort to strangle AI.’ I have direct evidence that this is not the case, and we all need to do better than that.
There are also those who worry the bill is now too watered down, and won’t do enough to reduce existential and other risks.
My view, as I stated earlier this week, is that while there will be less impact and certainly this does not solve all our problems, this is still a highly useful bill. Alas, politicians that were already opposed to the bill for misinformed reasons are less easy to convince.
Dealing with these objections one by one: The bill would clarify existing downstream liability for open models under the same existing common law threshold, and only to the extent that the developer fails to take reasonable care and that failure causes or materially enables a catastrophic event. If that slows down development, why is that exactly? Were they planning to not take reasonable care about that, before? I have extensively covered why ‘arbitrary thresholds not backed by science’ is Obvious Nonsense, this is very clearly the best and most scientific option we have. Alternatively we could simply not have a threshold and apply this to all models of any size, but I don’t think she would like that. The idea of ‘little evidentiary basis for this bill’ is saying that catastrophic events caused or materially enabled by future frontier models have not happened yet, and seem sufficiently unlikely that there is nothing to worry about? Well, I disagree. But if that is true, then presumably you don’t think companies would need to do anything to ‘take reasonable care’ to prevent them? Deterrence of CBRN risks is bad if the Federal Government isn’t the one doing it? I mean, yes, it would be better if you folks stepped up and did it, and when you do it can supercede SB 1047. But for now I do not see you doing that. There are people in these fields opposed to this bill, yes, and people in them who support it, including many prominent ones. The bill enjoys large majority support within California’s broad public and its tech workers. Most of the vocal opposition can be tied to business interests and in particular to a16z, and involves the widespread reiteration and spread of hallucinated or fabricated claims.
I have not heard anything from the corporations and lobbyists, or directly from a16 or Meta or their louder spokespeople, since the changes. Kat Woods portrays them as ‘ I don’t think that’s accurate. From what I see, most of the opposition I respect and that acts in good faith is acknowledging the bill is much better, that its downsides are greatly reduced and sometimes fully moving to a neutral or even favorable stance. Whereas the ones who have consistently been in bad faith have largely gone quiet. I also think those most strongly opposed, even when otherwise lying, have usually been open about the conclusion that they do not want any government oversight, including the existing oversights of common law, for which they would like an exemption? Yes, they lie about the contents of the bill and its likely consequences, but they are mostly refreshingly honest about what they ultimately want, and I respect that. This is much better, in my view, than the ones who disingenuously say ‘take a step back’ to ‘come back with a better bill’ without any concrete suggestions on what that would look like, or any acknowledgment that this has effectively already happened. Then there are those who were sad that the bill was weakened. As I said in my guide to SB 1047, I consider the new bill to be more likely to pass, and to have a better cost-benefit ratio, but to be less net beneficial than the previous version of the bill (although some of the technical improvements were simply good).
Yes, by definition, if the bill is to have any positive impact on safety, it is going to require behaviors to change, and this will have at least some impact on speed of development. It could still end up highly positive because good safety is good for business in many ways, but there is usually no fully free lunch. I think the situation is less dire and toothless than all that. But yes, the standards got substantially lowered, and there is a definite risk that a corporation might ‘roll the dice’ knowing they are being deeply irresponsible, on the theory that nothing might go wrong, if something did go wrong and everyone dies or the company has already blown up no one can hold them to account, and they can stall out any legal process for years. SB 1047: Big Picture
Does that actually sound like something the Rationalists could do? I agree that Rationalists are punching far above their weight, and doing a remarkable job focusing only on what matters (Finkel’s Law!) but do you really think they are ‘going blow-to-blow with the entire software sector and have a decent shot of overpowering Nancy Pelosi’? I would dare suggest that to say this out loud is to point out its absurdity. The ‘entire software sector’ is not on the other side, indeed tech workers largely support the bill at roughly the same rate as other college graduates, and roughly 65-25. Pelosi issued a statement against the bill because it seemed like the thing to do, but when you are actually up against Pelosi for real (if you are, for example, the President a while back), you will know it. If she was actually involved for real, she would know how any of this works and it would not look this clumsy. What’s actually going on is that the central opposition lives on vibes. They are opposing because to them the vibes are off, and they are betting on vibes, trying to use smoke, mirrors and Tweets full of false claims to give the impression of massive opposition. Because that’s the kind of thing that works in their world. They got this far on vibes, they are not quitting now. Meanwhile, it helps to actually listen to concerns, try to find the right answers and thus be pushing things that are remarkably well crafted, that are actually really popular, and to have arguments that are actually true, whether or not you find them persuasive. The Week in Audio
Seriously, it’s f***ing weird. It’s so f***ing weird for Rogan to say ‘biology is on the way out’ and then a few minutes later say ‘AI progress slowing down a lot’ would be ‘a f***ing disaster.’ Thiel does come out, finally, and say that if it all means humans are ‘headed to the glue factory’ that then he would be ‘a Luddite too.’ Thiel’s threat model clearly says, here and elsewhere, that the big risk is people slowing AI progress. And he thinks the ‘effective altruists’ are winning and are going to get AI outlawed, which is pretty far out on several levels. Yet he seems to take pretty seriously the probability that, if we don’t outlaw AI, then AI plausibly goes rogue and we get ‘sent to the glue factory.’ And earlier he says that if Silicon Valley builds AI there’s a up to 99% chance that it ‘goes super haywire.’ That’s Yudkowsky levels of impending doom - I don’t know exactly what ‘goes super haywire’ means here, how often it means ‘glue factory,’ but it’s gotta involve a decent amount of glue factory scenarios? Yeah, I dunno, man. Thiel clearly is trying to think and have an open mind here, I do give him credit for that. It’s just all so… bizarre. My guess is he’s super cynical, bitter and traumatized from what’s happened with other technologies, he’s been telling the story about the great stagnation in the world of atoms for decades, and now he’s trying but he can’t quite get away from the pattern matching? I mean, I get why Thiel especially would say that regulation can’t be the answer, but… he thinks this is gonna ‘go super haywire 99% of the time’ and the question Rogan doesn’t ask is the obvious one: ‘So f***, man, regulation sounds awful but if we don’t do something they’re 99% to f*** this up, so what the hell else can we do?’ Alas, the question of what the alternative is isn’t directly asked. Other than Thiel saying he doesn’t see a good endgame, it also isn’t answered. Whereas I’d say, if you can’t see a good endgame,
Rhetorical InnovationMatthew Yglesias paywalls his post Yes, of course there are exceptions in the other two quadrants, but there are not as many of those as one might think. And yes, there are a handful of true ‘doomers’ who think there is essentially no path to superintelligence where humanity or anything of value survives, or that it is highly unlikely we can get on such a path. But those are the exceptions, not the rule. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
So this is very true:
Indeed, gamers who aren’t making games for themselves usually make bad games. If you are optimizing your products around Solving Work Problems, then that distortion only compounds with and amplifies risk of other distortions. The Lighter Side
I mean, look, you can’t say there weren’t signs. Also, if your fixes look like this, I have some bad news about the underlying issue:
You're currently a free subscriber to |