---
subject: "The Enchanted Notebook"
from: "Not Boring <notboring@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-09-26 12:46:23
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Not Boring", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2982495070691762429", "UNREAD"]
---
Welcome to the 1,184 newly Not Boring people 🤯 who have joined us since the last post I wrote in August — I need to take breaks more often! If you haven’t subscribed, join 154,543 smart, curious folks by subscribing here: 🎧 To get the essay right in your ears, listen on Today’s Not Boring is brought to you by…
With Secureframe, hypergrowth organizations can: Get SOC 2 audit ready in weeks, not months Stay compliant with the latest regulations Scale compliance with your business to meet ISO 27001, GDPR, HIPAA, PCI, and other requirements
Plus, Secureframe helps sales teams respond to RFPs and security questionnaires quickly and easily with AI so they can close more deals, faster. Click Hi friends 👋, Happy Monday! This is my shortest piece in a long time — it all fits in the email — on a topic that’s near and dear to my heart: the real and growing power of writing down the future you want to see exist. Let’s get to it. The Enchanted NotebookImagine that, sitting at your desk on a normal Monday, a Monday just like today, a wizard pops into your office and hands you an enchanted notebook. “Write any idea in this notebook,” the wizard whispers, “and it will show you how to make it real.” The notebook is fantasy, but one very real way to create the future is to imagine what it looks like, write it down, and then work backwards. On Thursday, I was walking through Soho and life was good. I’d just grabbed coffee with one of my favorite entrepreneurs, the sun was shining after a morning shower, I had a box full of Little Cupcake Bakeshop cupcakes for Dev in hand, and I was listening to Lex Fridman interview Ray Kurzweil.
Kurzweil wrote one of the first books that got me really interested in technology, The whole interview was fascinating – Kurzweil’s brand of hyper-optimistic futurism is catnip to me. His superpower is believing harder than anyone else in the power of exponential curves. His 2001 essay, Those ideas, and the idea of the Singularity, were so ahead of their time and out there that they’ve invited criticism from a host of Very Smart People. On the one side are experts, who understand the day-to-day difficulties of actually making Kurzweil’s predictions come true; on the other is Kurzweil, who looks at the curves and trusts that they’ll continue. Time will tell which side is right, and he’s missed on some predictions in the interim. But in the conversation with Fridman, Kurzweil makes a compelling argument that the consensus view on the timeline for artificial intelligence is coming back around to the timeline that he put forth in 1999, and has held to since: pass the Turing Test in 2029, Singularity in 2045. If Kurzweil is right, or even close to right, he may go down as the person with the greatest ability to predict the future in human history. So when Fridman asked Kurzweil about how he comes up with his ideas, I stopped walking, paused, rewound, and focused. Here’s the video, starting at the relevant point: I transcribed the key part here:
The way Kurzweil describes it, innovation is half storytelling. It’s our Enchanted Notebook, just with humans filling in the enchanted bits for now. Write a speech, or a story, about the thing you want to create or the future world you want to inhabit. Paint that world in detail so rich, using the present tense, that it feels like you already live there. Imagine the Then, reverse engineer it. What components go into that technology? When will which pieces be technically feasible? What machines need to exist to manufacture the technology? Where did you need to work with regulators to make sure people were allowed to use it? What will the unit economics look like? Which cost curves had to keep falling exponentially for those unit economics to make sense? How did they improve with scale, and which distribution channels did you use to sell the product? Kurzweil’s process is reminiscent of Rule 1. The goal must be stated at a future point in time at which success has been achieved and realized. Rule 2. Start with the customer. Rule 3. Set an audacious and clear goal. Rule 4. Outline the principles used that led to success.
In either case, Amazonian or Kurzweilian, the process of bringing a new thing to life requires a combination of dreams and details, in three parts: Imagine a future world and write it down. Fill in all of the details with as much technical and research-based support as possible. Execute on those details to make the thing real.
When I heard Kurzweil describe his process, I went through three emotional states: Excitement: Writing! That’s what I do! Depression: Oh… I’m not technical. I wouldn’t know how to reverse engineer something. Wonder: Wait… how long is reverse engineering going to require actual engineering knowledge?
I wonder how far off we are from the Enchanted Notebook: the point at which technology eliminates, or dramatically shrinks, the gap between imagination and reverse engineering. And from there, how much further we are from the point at which technology eliminates, or dramatically shrinks, the gap between reverse engineering and execution. One way to think about the Singularity is the point at which human-computer combinations do all three steps, pretty much in real-time, and carry out the execution with nanobots or something. But far before that point, it seems like we should be able to dream up those products, write them down, and let AI do the reverse engineering. Last week, Replit CEO Amjad Masad tweeted something to that effect: Caveats abound. Replit’s GhostWriter is still in beta and only helps humans write code. It can’t turn problem into product on its own yet, and that seems like a big bridge to cross. Plus, software engineering is likely an easier problem for AI to solve from a text input than mechanical engineering, if only because the amount of public code available to learn on is much larger than the amount of public CADs available, especially for sufficiently advanced designs, and is likely easier for AI to make sense of. And AI-assisted coding isn’t solving the kind of novel problems that AI-assisted physical product innovation would need to solve to be really magical. And and, there are likely a thousand things that I’m not thinking of here that make this harder than it seems to a non-technical, optimistically-minded person like me. BUT it seems almost certain that we’ll reach a point in the coming decades at which I’ll be able to write, “Single-person spacecraft capable of launching 500 pounds into orbit and sustaining life for up to six months” or whatever and get back a reverse-engineered CAD file, instruction set, and materials list with prices and suppliers. If the idea isn’t feasible yet, it might return a list of bottlenecks with best-guesses for when they’ll be solved, and all of those bottleneck lists might serve as a smorgasbord for researchers and entrepreneurs looking for big problems to solve. All of this seems infeasible and outlandish in the present. This current wave of AI innovation is creating a hype cycle, as every exciting technology does, and the reality likely won’t live up to the hype for a little while:
AI is too hyped right now.
The technology is will fundamentally change humanity for the better.
But the fever-pitch-excitement and every-VC-pivoting-to-AI will invariably lead to disappointment and a deflated hype cycle.
Let’s focus on the long game and real impact. |
If you liked this post from [Not Boring by Packy McCormick](https://substack.com/redirect/f3f0a892-6609-4f1e-8f74-c3507c4ea147?r=8o54n), why not share it?