---
subject: "Monthly Roundup #11: October 2023"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-10-03 14:05:54
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
It never stops. I’m increasingly building distinct roundups for various topics, in particular I’m splitting medical and health news out. Let’s get to the rest of it. Bad News
Could companies really be this stupid, so eager to chase the marginal user a little bit more that they cripple the functionality of their products? Very much so, yes, well past the point where it makes financial sense to do so. The metrics form a tyranny, invisible costs are increasingly paid on the alter of visible DAUs and cost of customer acquisition and 30-day retention, and that’s that. What is to be done about it? My proposed solution is to build interfaces, filters, recommendation engines and other such goodies on top of existing sucky products, probably involving the use of LLMs and other AI in various ways, to make the sucky products suck less. In many cases this seems super doable. With the rise of AI, the data you would gather along the way would potentially pay for the whole operation. I continue trying to make this happen low-key behind the scenes.
Hasan Minhaj has talent. His joke construction and delivery is spot on, despite a constant struggle with the axes he is constantly grinding. Now we know that he was cheating with the axes, which makes it much worse. Indeed, despite claiming he only lies in his stand-up, in a real sense his comedy was genuine the whole time, but he felt the need to mix it with deeply dishonest journalism.
DisunityUnity is a highly useful game development tool. If you program in Unity, the result will work across a wide variety of platforms. Emergents TCG was programmed in Unity, which solved some of our problems without creating any new ones. Then Unity decided to retroactively change its pricing to make itself prohibitively expensive to small developers. Including removing the GitHub repo that tracks license changes, and updating their license to remove the clause that lets you use the TOS from the version you shipped with, then insisting already shipped games pay the new fees. Whoops.
This is not the first such incident with Unity, they mention the 2019 incident. There are also many other incidents in gaming along similar lines. Some company makes a change to allow it to make more money, or control its brand, or what not, thinking it is harmless. The gaming community instead informs them as one voice that this is a massive breach of trust they will never forget, and that is if it is reversed. The most recent other examples involve Wizards of the Coast, which has done this multiple times. This comes from failing to think about how things will be seen by outsiders and your customers. In every such case, simply talking to a modest sample of such people would have revealed the issue. Sometimes it is not a change I would have personally minded or objected to, but in every case it is a change I can imagine someone else minding quite a bit. The trick is to ask. You do not have to f*** around this decisively in order to find out. Or in this case, Tom Francis says they knew exactly what was going to happen, their staff warned them, they did it anyway, presumably underestimating the sheer magnitude of the response. Wow. Tom Francis speculates that they could still fix this, if and only if they not only fully reverse the fee but they also put into the new EULA that you are allowed to keep current payment terms forever if you keep using the current version of Unity, in a way they can’t back out of later. That does sound both necessary and sufficient here. Otherwise, yeah, I don’t see how you could risk using Unity going forward. Ban Gain of Function ResearchThere seems to be a breed of dog that was bread to be more dangerous. As in ‘Half of all XL Bully dogs in Britain descend from ‘Killer Kimbo.’’ Five people have been killed by them in the last two years in the UK. Sounds healthy and wise. People are suggesting we ban XL Bully dogs. Seems right. We should at minimum be able to agree to ban owning as a pet that which we are intentionally breeding for unpredictably killing those around you. I would also be so bold as to suggest banning the breeding process itself, as well.
The AI metaphor can be whatever you would like. Tyler Cowen supports the ban for the UK, where the dogs have become a symbol of aggression, but says the case is weaker in the USA, where we have lower population density and more tolerance of risk and violence. I agree it is weaker in the sense that we are stupid about such things with talk about ‘our freedoms,’ which Tyler rightfully rejects as not a meaningful objection here. As he notes, a tax would not be sufficiently de facto enforced, or I would note be high enough to cover the negative externalities. We already ban a lot of far less dangerous pets. Dog lovers should support such a ban most of all. Allowing actively dangerous dogs ruins it for everyone. It is not reasonable to expect me to differentiate whether your dog in particular is harmless, or set a policy that relies on that distinction. And if someone has even one bad experience with any dog, they’re likely going to be poorly disposed on all dogs for a very long time. Meanwhile, here in New York, we cannot even do full genetic screening and embryo selection for traits that are actually good, because ‘ethicists’ say it would be ‘eugenics.’ The Right Price to Be Willing to Pay is Not $0Elon Musk floats charging a tiny amount to use Twitter, massive numbers of people say on Twitter they would leave in response,
Also many comparisons to other services or products, looking at relative rather than absolute value. People seem deeply confused about what Twitter is worth to them. My humble suggestion remains that if you would not pay a nominal amount to use a service where you spend hours of your life each week, your time is valuable so you should - for your own good, mind - delete your account now. That is not only about Twitter, or even only about online services. Think about anything you sink your time into on a regular basis. If it cost a nominal amount, would you stop spending your time there? If so, why are you spending time now? Opportunity Knocks
Government WorkingArizona As a reminder: Now that you have once again enjoyed my Ted Talk, what are we going to do about it?
Worthwhile Canadian Immigration
Are we using Canada partly as a filter here? Surely yes, and the O-1 is dramatically underutilized, but also the O-1 is dramatically underutilized and the percentage of even the best who end up ultimately making it to America is and will remain quite low. This is a drop in the bucket. The number of immigrants Canada is accepting is impressive. If properly filtered, supported and assimilated, ensuring the infrastructure is in place to support the growing population and that norms and culture remain protected, it is potentially a great move. It is not quite the full blown ‘Canada stops collecting taxes because it will grow so much faster than its debts’ gambit. The problem is that Canada is not a YIMBY paradise that is carefully planning how to incorporate its new citizens. There are many dimensions where trouble looms. For contrast, here’s
People Don’t Do Things
The political spectrum distribution is interestingly asymmetrical. Conservative Republicans and Moderate Democrats do a relatively good job of socializing and doing activities together. Liberal Democrats, Independent and Moderate Republicans do worse. I can come up with an obvious just-so story, but I would not have expected Moderate Democrats to be a peak here, so it would be post-hoc. The bigger issue is that this is not much socializing or doing activities, even in the categories doing relatively well. We need to figure out what to do about this. Worshiping together is an example of something that there are good reasons to want to move on from, but if you do not substitute other secular activities in its place then you lose a lot of important other benefits, in addition to the impacts inherent in that particular activity for better and for worse.
Thinking is HardPeople often really are hopeless. Alex Tabarrok notes,
Only 77% of people get this right when explicitly told what the answer is and to write it down. If you merely ask them to consider the right answer, it’s only 31%. This causes explicit cognitive dissonance:
As in, 76% of those who made the mistake - and most people make the mistake - then went on to say that $1.00 and $0.10 differed by a dollar. Ut oh. Also, yeah, people just do not read:
Le sigh. Seems hard to work with any of this. Satisfaction Guaranteed To Stay Around 83%
What about 2008? We had the great financial crisis. Life for many people got objectively far worse. Many people were ruined. Barely a blip. What about 2020? Covid seems like it was a pretty big deal. Seems like the life satisfaction rate is uncorrelated with how satisfying are the conditions of life. So my hypothesis is that this 83% satisfaction rate is a relative measure. People are evaluating their lives by comparing them to those around them. When things get worse, people say they are satisfied with less. So this tells us very little about anything that matters. Did you know that only 1% are in the top 1%? Good News, Everyone
The questions that I suspect matter are, is this taxing highly valuable state capacity in ways that we aren’t accounting for? And can this intervention be repeated at scale without losing effectiveness, or was this the ideal conditions and it will rapidly get less worthwhile if we branch out? I do not know. I do know that the use of lead seems pervasive, the impacts of poisoning are cumulative and these are true of many places. Someone should certainly be on this. But also, once it is demonstrated this works, shouldn’t plenty of people be happy to get on this? Lead is a classic villain at this point.
This is one of the most underappreciated moves out there - find someone who is creating something you love and want to have a bigger impact on the world, and pay them what they need to be able to focus on it.
Contrast this with
Mostly this is great. My main disagreement would be #7/#12, the concept that one should never give up and you only fail by giving up. Not so. It is very important to know when to quit. My biggest mistake as a founder was not knowing when to quit, and I very definitely had failed well before I did so. Also #14, which is true on many margins but very, very not true in general. Otherwise, endorsed. Full list not as reliable, but quite good. Incidentally, when I asked Bing to transcribe the list from an image, it instead generated a list of 20 completely different generic pieces of life advice. The Ancient Art of Getting Through a ConversationDon’t know what to say? Can’t handle five minutes on astrology or the Roman Empire? Jakeup: Guys, do you know enough about astrology to survive a 5 minute conversation? Girls, same for the Roman Empire? It's not that I do not know enough about astrology to survive a five minute conversation. It’s that I know too much about astrology to survive a five minute conversation. So what to do?
Do you want three hours to go by here? Which way, modern man? The good news is it leaves a good impression.
Do you have to mean it? Or can you do a good enough job of faking that? Money Stuff(Reminder: If you are not
It would lead to some highly interesting effects if China has decided that employees can be held criminally liable when their company goes bankrupt. Patrick McKenzie is going to have to reload the international popcorn reserve.
Strikes also destroy value, and are thus a failure mode where negotiations have broken down. Unions and management should be able to look ahead to the strike, see the result, and agree to a compromise without a strike. Which mostly they have done for many years now in America, It is kind of crazy that we used to lose over a day a year to this failure. In many other countries, it seems people still do, as it is seen as virtuous to strike and as likely to lead to superior outcomes to show them periodically that you mean business. Or perhaps general strikes are more about using unhappiness as a justification for time off. There’s that, too.
A potential hint is Dan’s observation that everyone expects PE takeovers to result in butchery and death, and they react badly to them. So if you are PE and take over, your customers and other key players will flee in anticipation of that, which destroys too much value, so perhaps you don’t try. Or perhaps it is one of those cases where the people who can pull off the takeover part are not also capable of understanding how to run the company. So you can see transformations that look like what you’d see in a PE takeover, but they only happen without PE involvement? It’s weird.
As Tim Cook points out in the clip at the link, China is not the low wage destination anymore. Taiwan certainly is not. America’s issues go far beyond high wages. He was always a businessman who loved the art of the deal. We could have made a deal. What would it have cost to get Trump to not run for President? It is claimed, admittedly not by the most reliable sources, that Musicians like Bob Dylan who sold their catalogues
Rohit: I think about this chart at least once every few weeks
That is how trading works. If others will react to the Zerohedge feed’s nonsense, then you want to know about that. It usually being nonsense does not change this. What does shock me is using an entire monitor. A Twitter feed should only need maybe a third of a monitor, tops. Those screens are valuable. Also, you don’t need to exclusively do one account there, form a list or something. Terrible screen game. David Brooks, longtime prominent NYT reporter, Very High Marginal Tax Rates
Note that the marginal tax rate rises again if you extend the graph to the right. That first huge drop is a pretty dangerous local maximum. It is very easy to see how someone might get stuck there.
Having trouble with your taxes? I’m almost disappointed that it looks like this isn’t a scam. So Cold, So AloneDo we have a loneliness epidemic? In the sense that we have always had a lot of loneliness, definitely yes.
So that seems like
That last one is weird, although less weird on a country level. Presumably on an individual level this does not hold?
This one I can explain. It is because their parents never leave them be.
While I Cannot Condone This
This matches multiple other experiences of myself and those I know.
From June:
Yep. Display enough competence and you have a form of power, which means people start ordering you to use it, start being worried about how you might use it, blaming you for not using it the way they would like, trying to take it away from you, and also putting you in charge whether you like it or not.
Arnold Kling speculates, in essence,
This skill also translates into what you can promise, and what to ask for or wait for versus what to do without. And it especially feeds into design, where you don’t need to know how to implement the design but you do need to know exactly how your design decisions impact degree of difficulty of implementation. When working on Emergents, it become very clear how valuable this skill was, and how expensive it was to not have it, depending on how it shifted who was effectively making various decisions. Queue Technology
The best known alternation is a variation on the Disney Fast Pass, where those who pay a premium get to stand on a second line. Similar systems work for boarding airplanes.
In a static situation, that is a tradeoff between preserving the sacredness of the queue plus transaction costs and imposing thinking and math and monetary questions on people in exchange for efficiency of results. In a dynamic situation, once you can sell your spot on a line, that spot becomes profitable. There is some hourly rate that you can expect for standing in that line. So more people do stand in that line. Those unwilling to pay are indeed worse off, perhaps much worse off. In the extreme, normal people would have no choice but to pay, while lots of time was wasted. This is not theoretical. When the award from the line can be resold, such as in-demand concert tickets or new video game systems in short supply, what happens? Everyone queues up at large cost, often overnight or more. Then they resell. Some fanatics still get in line for themselves, because transaction costs, taxes and sacredness and all that, but the lines are vastly longer than similar situations when the products cannot be resold. Gamers Gonna Game Game Game Game GameYC held a 1.5k premodern Magic tournament. I couldn’t play the whole thing, I did get to check it out for a few rounds. Deck diversity wasn’t quite where I’d like but still very good for a format this stable and old. People remain quite bad at Magic, alas myself included. Elves in particular seems like it offers large opportunity for much better play. Here are some decklist pics.
David Kaplan: T8’d Premodern event at As I understand it, Dreadnaught is the best deck, but it is highly beatable so it is fine. What I do not understand is leaving home without Wrath of God in the board. I get that you kind of think you do not ‘need’ it but so what? Seems so much better than Last Breath. I do love Armageddon.
I am pretty sure I understand all the decisions this list makes. Most of it seems fine.
Given that, he did an amazing job. Unfortunately, he had issues that generated two negative reviews out of the gate, and the game had and still has a bunch of severe problems because man this stuff is hard. Despite all that, I enjoyed the brief time I spent playing, and then I talked to him and tried to help him improve it, because that seemed like the thing to do here. I’m not going to pretend this is a game I would recommend in a typical context, but if you are willing to forgive its failings under the circumstances and want to help the guy out, it’s only $10, and it will improve over time if he keeps at it.
All right, that’s bizarre. I have no idea what to make of this.
Orb of Creation is a stunningly engrossing idle-style game. Jorbs gave it the Do Not Play label, which is appropriate. Exponential growth is fun, continuous new resources are fun, figuring out the fastest advancement path is fun.
The Lighter SideI did not realize this was possible but yes, you can create a worse airline than Spirit,
You're currently a free subscriber to |