---
subject: "Links For February 2025"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-27 22:55:43
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX"]
---
[I haven’t independently verified each link. On average, commenters will end up spotting evidence that around two or three of the links in each links post are wrong or misleading. I correct these as I see them, and will highlight important corrections later, but I can’t guarantee I will have caught them all by the time you read this.] 1: Which single individual has directly killed the most people (“directly” = with their own hands, not counting eg dictators)? It’s a surprisingly close race between 2: A Texas town is experimenting with 3: Net neutrality was a cause celebre in 2017, when the whole Internet seemed to join together in a rare moment of unity to warn of dire consequences from its cancellation. But it got cancelled anyway, and no consequences whatsoever materialized. Why? I’d assumed it was just hot air, but I recently heard 4: Jack Galler, who generated many of the images I used in the AI Art Turing Test, has a blog post on his experience: 5: 6: No Dumb Ideas: 7: Oliver D. Smith is an ex-Nazi turned social justice warrior. His MO was (is?) creating Wikipedia and RationalWiki articles on various IQ researchers/bloggers that portray them in the worst possible light (both sites tried to ban him, but he was able to come back with various sock puppet accounts). More recently, he’s become . . .famous? . . . for a very impressive litigation campaign to prevent anyone from naming him or mentioning any of his activities; this sort of thing usually doesn’t work, but he was able to at least City Journal to 8: Twitter user @fae_dreams asked the new generation of AI reasoning models to replicate Donald Trump’s challenge from You can see more examples and comparisons of different models 9: Related: 10: Last month I linked
And Desmolysium on 11: Intrinsic Perspective 12: Aella: 13: Nate Silver has 14: Sarah Constantin: 15: One of the more exciting psychiatric results (which I blogged about a long time ago) was the apparent finding that omega-3 supplementation could prevent high-risk people from having first break schizophrenia. A new RCT says 16: Claim that predictions of global warming magnitude are gradually going down thanks to successful pledges/action: Source is 17: I don’t know anything about 18: A reader asks House of Strauss (edgy sports Substack) whether the vibe shift away from political correctness threatens the edgy Substack business model - as the power of orthodoxy declines, can you still get rich and famous as a brave anti-orthodoxy critic? 19: Spectator: 20: Some friends including Kelsey Piper wrote an emergency
Some private donations are coming in but not enough and it’s not trivial to deploy them: The current status of PEPFAR is still unclear - people
By the way, during our previous debate about this, many people said they were sympathetic but that cutting the deficit was such a pressing issue that we would have to let go of good programs like this. I hope these people are paying attention to Trump’s new budget 21: Pope Francis 22: Hanania: And related Yglesias: I’m really pessimistic about all this. I think the main effect will be saving ~1% of the budget at the cost of causing so much chaos and misery for government employees that everybody who can get a job in the private sector leaves and we’re left with an extremely low-quality government workforce. I freely admit that DEI also did this, I just think that two rounds of decimating state capacity and purging high-IQ civil servants is worse than one round. In fact, this is what really gets me - both parties are careening towards destruction in their own way, there’s no real third option, and if I express concern about one round of looting and eating the seed corn, everyone thinks it means I support the other. I can’t even internally think about how I’m concerned about one of them without tying myself into knots about whether I have to be on one side or the other in my mind. Probably nothing catastrophic happens for the first few years of this. The cuts to clinical research mean we get fewer medications. The cuts to environmental funding mean some species go extinct. The cuts to anti-scam regulators means more people get scammed. But the average person has no idea how much medical progress we’re making, or how many species go extinct, or how many people get scammed in an average year. Maybe there will be some studies trying to count this stuff, but studies are noisy and can always be dismissed if you disagree. So lots of bad stuff will happen, and all the conservatives will think “Haha, nothing happened, I told you every attempt ever to make things better or dry a single human tear has always been fake liberal NGO slush fund grifts”. Or maybe one newsworthy thing will happen - a plane will fall out of the sky in a way easily linked to DOGE cuts (and not DEI?), or the tariffs will cause a recession, and then all the liberals will say “Haha, we told you that any attempt to reduce government or cut red tape or leave even the tiniest space for human freedom/progress has always been sadistic doomed attempts to loot the public square and give it to billionaires!” They’re already saying this! Everyone is just going to get more and more sure that their particular form of careening to destruction is great and that we can focus entirely on beating up on the other party, and we will never get anyone who cares about good policy ever again. Probably this isn’t true, and I shouldn’t even say it because everyone else is already too doomy. You’d be surprised how many basically sane people seem to expect they’ll be put in camps, or worry that Elon Musk sending people emails asking them what they’re doing is a form of fascism. I try to remind myself that if there had only ever been half as much government funding as there is now, I wouldn’t be outraged and demand that we bring it up to exactly the current level (and, once it was at the current level, become unoutraged and stop worrying). The current level is a random compromise between people who wanted more and people who wanted less, with no particular moral significance. This thought process helps, but I think that even in that situation one could justify a few really good programs like PEPFAR on their own terms (ie if it didn’t exist, I would be outraged until it did), and I still think that changing the size of government should be done through legal rather than illegal means, competently rather than incompetently, and honestly rather than lying about every single thing you do all the time. Whatever. We’ve gotten through a lot, probably we’ll get through this one too. 23: Sentinel (group with superforecasters monitoring world events) 24: Claim: 25: 26: Asterisk:
27: Cartoons Hate Her: 28: 29: I’ve appreciated some of Jeff Mauer’s posts recently, especially 30: Related: Kelsey’s 31: Related: this is all fun to think about, but 32: Related: 33: Congrats to Richard Hanania, whose policy prescriptions from The Origins Of Woke got adopted wholesale by the new administration, probably causally. And thanks to @ObhishekSaha for 34: The subreddit discusses 35: Related: L Rudolf L (author of the post on capital/labor in the Singularity that I discussed 36: Boaz Barak (friend of Scott Aaronson’s, now working on OpenAI alignment team) has 37: If you ask Grok 3 “who is the worst spreader of misinformation”, (also, there was a brief brouhaha when X.AI 38: Bulldog has 39: Police have finally arrested most of the Zizians, a murder cult with links to the rationalist social scene (though they broke connections and turned against us before the murders started). Congrats to Evan Ratliff of WIRED, whose 40: This month I learned about “anti-massing regulations”: Maybe unpopular opinion, but although I don’t like the building pictured, I think it’s better than if it were just a single very long gray box, so maybe the regulations are doing the best they can. 41: 42: The supplement experts at /r/NootropicsDepot folks are
43: Just as there are stock indexes like NASDAQ or Shanghai Composite to easily track questions like “how is tech doing?” or “how is China doing?”, Metaculus is 44: My list of links to publish today includes something like a dozen about DeepSeek, which now seems so thoroughly yesterday’s news that I’m tempted to throw them all out. But in case you still have questions about it, I felt most enlightened by takes from 45: Nils Wendel on 46: Gene Smith with 47: Twitter user @xlr8harder has The graph suggests that all AIs are pretty good, except that Chinese models refuse to criticize China and Claude 3.5 refuses to criticize anyone (though Claude 3.7, not pictured, is much better and “moved from one of the least compliant models to one of the most compliant models…fantastic job, Anthropic”). I’m not sure I take the US/China comparison exactly at face value, because I think Chinese free speech issues are closer to “can you criticize the government” and US free speech issues are more like “can you criticize certain ideological positions which play various roles in propping up the establishment?”, and this benchmark (question set 48: Manifold Markets cofounder James Grugett has 49: I’m increasingly sympathetic to the complaint that there’s little constituency for stories about things improving - the people who care about a problem want to scare you into action with stories of how bad it still is, and the people who don’t care want you to think that efforts to fight the problem are doomed / useless / counterproductive so there’s no point in trying. 50: Lots of buzz over Aella’s appearance on the Whatever Podcast. I haven’t seen it because I don’t watch podcasts, but relevant excerpt
Does this qualify as “markets in everything”? You're currently a free subscriber to |