---
subject: "The Nutgraf: The Gobi Manchurification effect"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-07-06 05:58:20
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
Our story begins four years ago in April 2020, when the Indian government issued something which was innocuously titled ‘Press Note 3’.
Don’t be fooled by the name. Press Notes are a big deal. It’s the vehicle through which the Indian government announces major policy decisions and amendments. And Press Note 3 in particular is quite significant, because it’s been a source of anxiety for several companies these past few years. Just ask Flipkart and Amazon. In late 2018, an earlier Press Note 3 was [updated](https://www.livemint.com/Companies/5t08JnDkEBZw9mXU1Pwd3I/What-new-FDI-guidelines-mean-for-the-ecommerce-ecosystem.html) to create stricter guidelines on FDI in e-commerce marketplaces, which practically forced both these companies to go back to the drawing board to rework the corporate governance structures of their firms. Even earlier, in 2016, Press Note 3 was the means through which the Indian government introduced restrictions on FDI in single-brand and multi-brand retail in India, effectively transforming the way Indians buy and sell products. Sector after sector has been transformed by the humble Press Note 3, the effects of which have reverberated to this day. Retail. [Energy](https://conventuslaw.com/report/india-press-note-3-of-2021-by-dipp-on-foreign/). [Defence](https://pib.gov.in/newsite/PrintRelease.aspx?relid=105881).
However, the Press Note 3 that the Indian government introduced in 2020 is the one that’s most momentous. The operative part is less than 150 words, and it reads thus (emphasis mine):
3.1.1(a) A non-resident entity can invest in India, subject to the FDI Policy except in those sectors/activities which are prohibited. However, an entity of a country, which shares land border with India or where the beneficial owner of an investment into India is situated in or is a citizen of any such country, can invest only under the Government route. Further, a citizen of Pakistan or an entity incorporated in Pakistan can invest, only under the Government route, in sectors/activities other than defence, space, atomic energy and sectors/activities prohibited for foreign investment.
3.1.1(b) In the event of the transfer of ownership of any existing or future FDI in an entity in India, directly or indirectly, resulting in the beneficial ownership falling within the restriction/purview of para 3.1.1(a), such subsequent change in beneficial ownership will also require Government approval. (emphasis provided)
Okay, perhaps you were expecting something much more dramatic, instead of something that reads like a boilerplate ‘Terms and Conditions’ extract. I get it. But the reason why this is significant is because these are the 150 words through which India cut-off Chinese capital and companies from India. Essentially, it required every single investment from China, regardless of the amount, to go through an approval process from the Indian government.
It’s unclear what prompted the Indian government to take this action. Some speculate that it was because China’s central bank had just declared a shareholding of ~1% in HDFC, India’s biggest housing mortgage lender. Others believe that it had something to do with Covid-19, which was now rapidly spreading across the world.
Anyway, while we can argue about the causes, there’s little debate about the effects of Press Note 3 of 2020. Chinese investment and capital practically stopped overnight. Several Chinese companies that were operating in India, like Xiaomi and Oppo, found [themselves](https://www.businesstoday.in/latest/corporate/story/india-tough-foreign-investment-policy-sours-xiaomi-oppo-consumer-finance-plans-258230-2020-05-14) in a place where they could neither move forward nor go back. Even startups, which had received [significant](https://www.businessinsider.in/business/startups/news/from-paytm-to-byjus-to-dream11-chinese-investors-have-big-money-in-india-biggest-startups/articleshow/76504194.cms) Chinese capital, had to figure out ways to manoeuvre around these restrictions. And a few months after issuing Press Note 3 (2020), India twisted the knife—it banned dozens of Chinese mobile apps, including Tiktok, Wechat, Weibo, and Shein. Anti-China sentiment was at an all-time high, precipitated by military [skirmishes at the border](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2020%E2%80%932021_China%E2%80%93India_skirmishes). Indians took to the streets to burn Chinese products as a sign of protest. Flipkart and Amazon decided to display the country of origin on all products on their websites, so that consumers could see which ones came from China.
That was four years ago.
Here’s the news from last week.
When it is facing heat in the US and Europe, a Chinese affordable fashion giant is headed to India, potentially a mammoth market for its cheap clothes. Four years ago, India banned Shein from selling products on its own app as part of a larger crackdown on Chinese apps following escalated border conflicts between the two countries.
Now, Shein has found a safe route to India: Mukesh Ambani’s Reliance Retail Ventures, which will launch the Chinese fast-fashion label in the coming few weeks, ET has reported based on information from sources. Ambani’s company will sell Shein’s products on its app as well as offline stores owned and operated by Reliance Retail.
It seems a safe India entry for Shein because this time the ownership and control of the platform will remain with Reliance Retail’s subsidiary; the platform will be hosted on infrastructure in India; and all platform data will remain in India, which Shein will not have access to, or rights over, ET has reported based on information from sources.
Once rebuffed, a Chinese company finds the Ambani route to India, [The Economic Times](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/services/retail/once-rebuffed-a-chinese-company-finds-the-ambani-route-to-india/articleshow/111483826.cms?from=mdr)
This isn’t just about Reliance. A few weeks ago, reports surfaced that the Tatas were figuring out a way to get a [majority stake](https://www.businesstoday.in/latest/corporate/story/tata-group-in-talks-to-acquire-majority-stake-in-vivo-india-unit-report-433260-2024-06-14) in the Indian unit of Chinese smartphone maker Vivo. The JSW group also [recently](https://www.thehindu.com/business/Industry/indian-investors-led-by-jsw-pick-up-51-stake-in-chinese-auto-major-saics-india-unit-mg-motor/article67972163.ece) took a controlling stake in the Chinese EV company MG Motors. Another smartphone company, Honor, which was formerly owned by the Chinese company Huawei, reentered India last September in [a new avatar](https://www.livemint.com/companies/news/honor-to-re-enter-india-under-strategic-jv-route-11692624719113.html)—as a brand that’s licensed by PSAV Global, a fully-controlled Indian company. Back in 2022, there were reports that Tiktok, too, was [exploring](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/tech/technology/bytedance-in-talks-with-hiranandani-group-looks-to-rehire-former-employees-sources/articleshow/91923365.cms) a way back into India through a partnership with the Hiranandani Group.
So what’s going on?
I call it the Gobi Manchurification effect.
Go to any... This is an abbreviated version of The Nutgraf emailed to Free Users. The Nutgraf is a weekly newsletter available only to paying subscribers. Upgrade to a paid subscription to get access to all newsletter editions and other premium benefits, including: Regards,
Subscribe to The Ken to unlock the full edition
[Upgrade now](https://the-ken.com/pricing/?utm_source=web&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=nutgraf)
Praveen Gopal Krishnan