---
subject: "Riches from the Mouth of Hell"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-02 14:03:17
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Thanks for reading! To support my work, please subscribe: If you want to help keep this project going, please consider purchasing a paid subscription. Paid subscribers — it’s only about 75 cents a week! — get access to the archives, the satisfaction of supporting work they enjoy, and my undying gratitude. Even before they realized they’d stumbled upon completely unknown (to them) continents, European explorers began to fantasize about the possibility that the New World held supernatural secrets. They first speculated that the Garden of Eden was somewhere in the Western Hemisphere. As historian A few years later, Ponce de Leon seems to have become obsessed with finding the Fountain of Youth. He and other Spanish explorers tended to believe that the magical waters of immortality flowed somewhere in Florida, while others spoke of curative waters in Bimini, somewhere near the Bahamas. Other Spaniards settled for more worldly rewards. Conquistadors searched far and wide for El Dorado, the city of gold, a magical land where the king was so wealthy that he covered himself in resin and gold dust and then swam in a lake to rinse off his skin. Some speculated that El Dorado was only one of the legendary Seven Cities of Gold. Meanwhile, Gonzalo Pizarro, the half-brother of Francisco, the conqueror of the Inca Empire, sacrificed thousands of lives in a vain pursuit of La Canela — a legendary valley of cinnamon. The Spanish didn’t find any of these places, but they did manage to stumble across a place so supernaturally terrible that it seemed to be the “mouth of hell.” In 1550, Father Domingo de Santo Tomas
On the edge of the desert in Bolivia, standing at dizzying altitudes, Father Domingo was looking up at a mountain that would shape the history of the world. The peak would come to be called, straightforwardly, Cerro Rico — “rich mountain.” Potosi, the name of the city that grew up around it — one of the highest-altitude urban areas in the world — would, for centuries, inspire fear in some and avarice in others. This wasn’t a magical location — it was, instead, a place where man and nature combined to inflict immense suffering on some people for the enrichment of others. First, we have to get a sense of the place. Father Domingo described it as godforsaken:
Sounds pretty bad! Today, the mountain, when covered with snow, is forbidding but beautiful. But a picture from warmer months gives us a sense of just how desolate this landscape must have seemed in the 1500s. There’s very little there to support human habitation or to make life comfortable: The only thing that made it worth settling in this place was silver — veins of the stuff coursed through the mountain. This is some of the metal extracted from Cerro Rico: Before they found the mountain at Potosi, the Spanish had been tantalized by the amount of silver they encountered in South America. Items like this silver alpaca were everywhere — but where was the silver from? Conquistadors searched far and wide for the source of the precious metal. How did they find it? The initial Spanish histories of the site tell a just-so story: in 1545, a local man (an indigenous “servant” of the Spanish) named However they found out about Potosi, Spanish settlers couldn’t believe it — according to one
Things moved quickly from there. After less than a year, there were People flocked to this rapidly growing city — above 13,000 feet in elevation! — for only one reason: to extract the mountain’s riches. This was no easy task. Father Domingo gives us some sense of the labor involved:
In 1611,
Two years later, Father
The images we have of workers in the mountain probably can’t quite capture the nature of the work: It was dark, dangerous, and claustrophobic. People had to risk cave-ins and carry more than a hundred pounds of metal on their backs up unreliable ladders through tiny tunnels lit only by candles strapped to their foreheads. The altitude — 16,000 feet at the top of the mountain — took a toll, as did the constant transition between the heat deep underground and the frigid temperatures at the surface. The huge quantities of Who would sign up for such a job? Well, many of the miners didn’t have a choice in the matter. The Spanish adopted the Inca mita forced-labor system for their own purposes, forcing thousands of local people to migrate to Potosi and work there. The practice By 1650, there were 160,000 people living in Potosi. Some images of the city make it seem downright charming: Some Spanish sources speak this way of the city, as well. In 1611,
Some portrayals of Potosi emphasized local people and customs: But almost all of them put Cerro Rico front and center: Only a few of them centered the actual work that gave Potosi a reason to exist, or the workers who did it, as this image does: What was it all for? Coins like this one, minted at Potosi in 1770: Potosi produced more than three-quarters of the world’s silver between its discovery and the end of the 1700s. The amount of precious metal coming out of that mountain was enough to briefly make Spain the richest and most powerful nation in the world, then to throw its economy into inflationary turmoil. Potosi’s silver traveled the globe — much of it eventually settled in China, as European aristocrats used Potosi silver to purchase goods from Asia. Some of the mountain’s wealth stayed in Potosi. You can see some of it on display in this 1716 painting of an archbishop’s arrival in town: The place became so synonymous with money that some people argue that Potosi’s mint mark (the letters PTSI on top of one another) inspired the $ symbol we now use for the dollar. You can see the mint mark at 4 o’clock and 8 o’clock on the coin below: But the frenzy for riches at Potosi eventually came to an end. By the late 1700s, silver mining at Potosi was in decline. The easy-to-get silver was gone, tunnels kept collapsing, and Mexican mines were more efficient. Now, the mountain is mostly a tin-mining site. I’ll leave you with three quotes that encapsulate the experience and impact of Potosi. The city’s coat of arms, established in the 1500s, Around the same time, Spanish King Felipe II sent a
But the local people — both then and now — have used a simpler saying. They call Potosi “ This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: Or you can share the newsletter with others: Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week! You're currently a free subscriber to |