---
subject: "The Cooking Time Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-02-07 11:01:18
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Matt here. It’s been a very cold January here in the UK, something that compels me to make stews and casseroles, dishes that get their rich flavor and depth thanks to one of the most important ingredients in cooking: Time. Working in restaurants in my youth, one thing I learned was that understanding time is the key to truly excellent cooking, whether you’re turning out one, two, or dozens of complex dishes a night. Why is this interesting? Most cooks only think about time when browsing the intro to a recipe, or setting a timer for the oven. But understanding time as an ingredient in itself is a bit like learning scales on a musical instrument—it helps you move from the simple copying of an amateur to the improvisation of a master. If you want to start exploring just how significantly time affects your cooking, the best place to witness the changes is with the backbone of nearly all savory dishes - sauces and stocks. Just as there is a logic to the repeating scales on a keyboard or fretboard, there is a logic to the role that time plays in sauces - you could call it the sauce/time continuum. As the minutes go up, the interaction of heat, liquids, and ingredients creates different flavor profiles and textures. Here’s how much time you’ll want to allow for achieving maximum flavor across a variety of different dishes: Under 30 minutes Two of the five classic ‘ Complex, multilayered sauces like this are at the heart of French cooking, bringing deep complexity to pan-fried meat or fish dishes. Purely vegetable-based sauces get no real benefit from this length of cooking. It’s the rich collagen of animal bones that needs this amount of time to unlock. 8 hours and beyond Quick Links The ever-reliable J. Kenji Lopéz-Alt ran a [great experiment with time and cooking, testing a meat stock made three ways](https://substack.com/redirect/f42f0e4f-3db1-465d-867d-62369378382c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o); In a traditional stockpot, a pressure cooker, and a slow cooker. His write-up is a great further introduction to understanding how time and temperature affect your cooking.The Japanese dish [Oden](https://substack.com/redirect/6726adff-4717-4535-8e8d-99740ed8bdc6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)serves ingredients that are stewed in a long-simmering broth. At the Tokyo restaurant[Otafuku](https://substack.com/redirect/7c999f9f-5866-4a5b-8fc4-120dc2250863?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), the broth has been simmering since 1945. It would be older if a World War Two bomb hadn’t destroyed the restaurant and its broth that year.In summer 2023, a [perpetual stew made in a crockpot in Bushwick](https://substack.com/redirect/013f9c8d-4c95-4aa4-b4a5-6d2915be76b2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)became a minor social media star, running eventually for 60 days. That’s nothing compared to the[cassoulet served at Le Central](https://substack.com/redirect/56c2828b-8416-4be0-ba35-4fc756b1d1b7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)in San Francisco, which has, at the time of writing, been cooking for 17,698 days.
Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Matt (ML) —
You're currently a free subscriber to |