---
subject: "Meta/Google cut staff 📉, Tesla's solar neighborhood ☀️, OpenAI speech recognition 🗣️"
from: "\"TLDR 🤖\" <dan@tldrnewsletter.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-09-22 10:27:44
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "TLDR", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_795315172960844453", "UNREAD"]
---
[Facebook Parent Meta, Google To Cut Costs And Staff (3 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.cnet.com%2Ftech%2Ffacebook-parent-meta-google-to-cut-costs-and-staff-report-says%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018364bd3423-a53a3e39-829f-44a2-bb04-1ef9f66cfae3-000000/oOugDrTT89Zn0CPxJlwPaV8_guRr-M-oDNvx4VE2DPk=267)
Meta and Google are looking at ways to cut costs as the companies brace for an economic downturn. Both companies are reportedly cutting staff. Meta is reorganizing departments and giving workers a certain amount of time to apply for other roles within the company. Google is also requiring some employees to apply to new roles. Meta employees have about 30 days to find another job internally and Google employees typically have about 60 days to find another role in the company if their jobs are eliminated.
|
[The world’s first Tesla solar neighborhood is becoming reality (2 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Felectrek.co%2F2022%2F09%2F21%2Ftesla-solar-neighborhood-becoming-reality%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018364bd3423-a53a3e39-829f-44a2-bb04-1ef9f66cfae3-000000/8Rn4l5n6zzz27t3RM6lFNDwfr-9_kEWbLoGxMcqHKMg=267)
Tesla is deploying solar roofs and Powerwalls in a brand-new development in Austin, Texas. It has partnered with Brookfield Asset Management and Dacra to offer Tesla Solar Roofs and Powerwalls as a package on brand new houses. The project has been going on for a year and there are already quite a few houses in the development with the technology. Homeowners are able to sell excess energy back to the grid, earning them long-term passive income. The installations in the development could eventually be included in Tesla's upcoming Texas virtual power plant.
|
Science & Futuristic Technology
|
[OpenAI open-sources Whisper, a multilingual speech recognition system (2 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftechcrunch.com%2F2022%2F09%2F21%2Fopenai-open-sources-whisper-a-multilingual-speech-recognition-system%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018364bd3423-a53a3e39-829f-44a2-bb04-1ef9f66cfae3-000000/6THr2TMtrxnGWsFs7qyo58UQDvt5cD6bxlhPJ_o6_Kg=267)
OpenAI has open sourced Whisper, a speech recognition system that enables transcription in multiple languages as well as translation from those languages to English. Whisper was trained on 680,000 hours of multilingual and multitask data collected from the web. The model is particularly limited in the area of text prediction and it doesn't perform equally well across all supported languages. OpenAI hopes that Whisper will make automatic speech recognition technology more accessible.
|
[The controversial embryo tests that promise a better baby (14 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.nature.com%2Farticles%2Fd41586-022-02961-9%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018364bd3423-a53a3e39-829f-44a2-bb04-1ef9f66cfae3-000000/TCaCFx8uGAI76KjvuC7Q4ZwdDBEcduEEB5qw1Y3ejOc=267)
Some companies are testing embryos generated by in vitro fertilization to allow prospective parents to choose those with the lowest risks for disease. Pre-implantation genetic testing for polygenic conditions is a relatively new service, with only a small handful of companies selling it in a few countries. The genomic models used in most tests are too weak to predict disease risk in a meaningful way, so people may be misled by the information they receive. There are indications that people who aren't infertile will turn to IVF to take advantage of the testing.
|
Programming, Design & Data Science
|
[Hurl (GitHub Repo)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fgithub.com%2FOrange-OpenSource%2Fhurl%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018364bd3423-a53a3e39-829f-44a2-bb04-1ef9f66cfae3-000000/chVyI6xECBTdpr0chUnkd6eETYefmzIz3-Is5MOOk6w=267)
Hurl is a command line tool that runs HTTP requests defined in a simple plain text format. It can be used for fetching data and testing HTTP sessions. Hurl can perform requests, capture values, and evaluate queries on headers and body responses.
|
[q (GitHub Repo)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fharelba%2Fq%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018364bd3423-a53a3e39-829f-44a2-bb04-1ef9f66cfae3-000000/rSTwpej4ek2fs4JxFvhPn-_-5yCwzxOdQz7f5uthmbY=267)
q brings SQL's expressive power to the Linux command line and provides easy access to text as data. It can perform SQL-like statements directly on tabular text data and on multi-file sqlite3 databases without having to merge them or load them into memory. q treats ordinary files as database tables. It supports all SQL constructs, automatic column name and type detection, and multiple character encodings.
|
[I tried replacing Google with TikTok, and it worked better than I thought (7 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.theverge.com%2F23365101%2Ftiktok-search-google-replacement%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018364bd3423-a53a3e39-829f-44a2-bb04-1ef9f66cfae3-000000/RayEMRpLvr8sKeif5Sbpl9zaLe-nXced8nGY2mov6-o=267)
Google has identified TikTok as a possible existential threat to its search engine. Almost 40% of young people use TikTok or Instagram to discover places rather than using Google Maps or Search. This article looks at TikTok as a search engine and how it performs against Google Search. While TikTok excels at showing content related to searches, it isn't able to provide quick access to other sites or answer questions like Google.
|
|
What did you think of today's newsletter?
|
I also write a daily newsletter on crypto, if you'd be interested in receiving TLDR Crypto, [sign up here](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftldr.tech%2Fcrypto%3Femail=ishan.mail@gmail.com/1/0100018364bd3423-a53a3e39-829f-44a2-bb04-1ef9f66cfae3-000000/SMQQ7DW7kQHnXW4dphOBM-9FIs1QePWLoxIfMbuumUk=267)!
If you have any comments or feedback, just respond to this email!
Thanks for reading,
Dan
|
|
|
|