---
subject: "The Monday Media Diet with Sharon Machira"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-10-14 10:14:04
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
|
Sharon Machira (SM) is a Nairobi-based travel and lifestyle journalist. She previously worked for the BBC and Google. Her [pod is here](https://substack.com/redirect/040089b6-8c48-4eea-a0b4-45cd7849de7e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), and [drop her a note](https://substack.com/redirect/1766a874-153c-4f31-826c-043feca29c6f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) if you’re headed into Kenya anytime soon. Have a great week.
Tell us about yourself.
I’m a Kenyan Social Media Journalist, Influencer, Podcaster, and P.R. Consultant. Though I’m based in Nairobi, my work mainly focuses on travel and lifestyle, so I’m constantly on the move—especially around Africa and more recently, the Middle East. These regions are easier to access visa-wise, but don’t even get me started on ‘passport privilege’ and the struggle of being a travel influencer with a ‘weak’ passport, I’ll save that rant for another day! 😄
As a journalist and PR consultant, I’m all about storytelling—whether it’s about travel, arts, music, or contemporary African youth culture. My specialty is helping brands connect with Gen Z/ Millennials because we don’t just scroll, we scrutinize! So how brands present themselves online can make or break their sales & loyalty. Again, a topic for another time.
Outside of work, I’m a social butterfly I love meeting new people, and I’ve built an eclectic circle of friends from all walks of life, which keeps me curious and inspired. Most people describe me as warm, bubbly, creative, and chatty (hence the podcast). I see the world through a creative lens, and I’m always drawn to things that are unconventional—whether it’s music, fashion, design, or architecture. That mindset pretty much shapes everything I do!
Describe your media diet.
As a social media enthusiast, I get most of my news from platforms like Instagram & TikTok . Having worked as a journalist with the BBC World Service, I'm naturally drawn to their content, but I have a soft spot for journalist-led I.G/TikTok accounts. There’s just something more engaging about news delivered with a bit of personality, rather than the traditional, straight-laced approach. It keeps things real!
My go-to news platform? Vox News. I love their explainer format—they don’t just stop at the facts, they connect the dots and offer deeper analysis, making everything so much more digestible.
I’m also always in tune with social media trends, especially across Africa, Euorpe & America. You'll often find me catching up on alternative Gen Z publications like Native Magazine (Nigeria) and Kenga (Sub-Saharan Africa), ID,
As a PR consultant, I’ve earned the nickname ‘Gen Z Whisperer’ because I draw a lot of my insights from new-age media. It’s all about staying ahead of the curve and understanding the pulse of the younger audiences!
What’s the last great book you read?
The Girl Who Smiled Beads by Clemantine Wamariya. It’s a powerful memoir about war and survival, told through the lens of her experiences as a young girl fleeing the Rwandan genocide. Kigali is one of my favourite African cities, and reading her story gave me a deeper appreciation for how far the country has come since those dark times. Clemantine’s writing is both raw and beautiful, and her resilience is truly inspiring.
What are you reading now?
I’m currently reading Three Daughters of Eve by Elif Shafak, and as a cultural thinker and journalist, this novel greatly resonates with me. It intricately explores identity, faith, and the tension between tradition and modernity—issues I find especially compelling in relation to contemporary youth culture in Africa. I see a lot of myself in the main character– who shifts between Istanbul and Oxford, and her internal struggles as a well-educated woman who grapples with her identity in the context of a traditional cultural setting in Turkey.
What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication?
When I pick up a print copy of my favorite publication, I really focus on getting into the heart of it. I’m drawn to books that push me to think about complex issues like cultural conflict, survival, or personal growth. My approach is to dive deep into stories that offer rich, layered perspectives.
I also mainly read when i travel, which encourages me to travel more, so I catch up on my favourite book.
Who should everyone be reading that they’re not?
We should definitely be reading more female African authors!
Right now, I’m reading Love in Colour by Bolu Babalola. As a hopeless romantic, it really hits all the right notes for me. I also love Nanjala Nyabola (a fellow Kenyan), especially her book Travelling While Black. One of my favorite quotes from the book is, “Travelling while black looks like being inappropriately propositioned by men who imagine that travelling solo is a declaration of sexual availability.” I couldn't agree more!
I’d also love to highlight some fantastic African podcasts. First up is my own show, It’s Related I Promised—currently one of Kenya’s top podcasts (yes, that’s a shameless plug!). You should also check out AfroQueer Podcast, I Said What I Said, and So This Is Love, hosted by my co-host Julia. They all offer great content and insights into African perspectives on modern-day societal and cultural issues in Africa.
What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone?
Dazz Cam!!! Its a fantastic app for adding that retro, vintage vibe to your content. Pro tip: tapping into nostalgia is a guaranteed way to boost engagement and stay on trend. It’s a tried-and-true strategy for leveling up your social media game. You can thank me later! 😉
Plane or train?
For unique travel experiences, I’d choose classic trains like the Rovos Rail in South Africa. But for commuting, a plane is much more practical.
What is one place everyone should visit?
NAIROBI—are you kidding me? It’s hands-down the best city in the world! If you’re planning a visit and want some insider tips on hidden gems, drop me a message on Instagram. I’d be happy to share my recommendations! (@officialsharonmachira)
Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into.
As a history lover, I came across a book that pulled me into a fascinating deepdive into Kenya's colonial community in the 1930s. Turns out, there were some wild characters—British and American aristocrats who were basically exiled to the colonies for “character rehabilitation.” But once they got there, they continued their wild ways, throwing crazy sex parties, doing drugs, and even secretly funding guerrilla soldiers fighting for Kenya’s independence!
I’m now hooked on the idea of making a documentary that tells this story from a Kenyan perspective. The contrast between their scandalous lives and Kenya’s fight for freedom is both disturbing and captivating. I’ve spent months researching these characters, known as the “Happy Valley” set, and this is definitely a story I’d love to bring to life as a multimedia journalist! (SM)
You're currently a free subscriber to [Why is this interesting?](https://substack.com/redirect/8bb152ad-4eb4-4f9c-97b3-dac8e3eef632?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). For the full experience, [upgrade your subscription.](https://substack.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.yif-kH46W7ZERIdJlfKGfyuF1QnNNJi9FeY3A67Yqz4?&utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email&utm_content=postcta)