---
subject: "On the CrowdStrike Incident"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-07-22 12:37:17
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Things went very wrong on Friday. A bugged CrowdStrike update temporarily bricked quite a lot of computers, bringing down such fun things as airlines, hospitals and 911 services. It was serious out there.
What (Technically) HappenedMy understanding it was a rather stupid bug,
A non technical breakdown would be: CrowdStrike is set up to run whenever you start the computer. Then someone pushed an update to a ton of computers. Which is something CrowdStrike was authorized to do. The update contained a stupid bug, that would have been caught if those involved had used standard practices and tests. With the bug, it tries to access memory in a way that causes a crash. Which also crashes the computer. So you have to do a manual fix to each computer to get around this. If this had been malicious it could probably have permawiped all the computers, or inserted Trojans, or other neat stuff like that. So we dodged a bullet. Also, your AI safety plan needs to take into account that this was the level of security mindset and caution at CrowdStrike, despite CrowdStrike having this level of access and being explicitly in the security mindset business, and that they were given this level of access to billions of computers, and that their stock was only down 11% on the day so they probably keep most of that access and we aren’t going to fine them out of existence either.
Who to Blame?
Claude’s median estimate is roughly 1,000 people died due to the outage, when given the hypothetical scenario of an update with this bug being pushed and no other info. Where Claude got it wrong is it expected a 50%+ drop in share price for CrowdStrike. We should be curious why this did not happen. When told it was 11%, Claude came up with many creative potential explanations, and predicted that this small a drop would become an object of future study. Then again, perhaps no one cares about reputation these days? You get to have massive security failures and people still let you into their kernels?
I mean, sure, it looks bad, now, in hindsight. At this rate, the third time will be an AGI company. So do we blame George Kurtz? Or do we blame all of you who let it happen? How Did We Let This HappenAside from ‘letting a company run by George Kurtz access your kernel,’ that is. It happened because various actors did not do deeply standard things they should obviously have been doing. A fun game is to watch everyone say ‘the real problem is X and Y is a distraction’ with various things being both X and Y in different statements. It can all be ‘real’ problems.
The market did not think Microsoft would suffer especially adverse effects. The Wall Street Journal The Wall Street Journal also attempts to portray this as a failure of Microsoft to have a ‘closed ecosystem’ the way Apple does (in a limited way on a Mac, presumably, this is not a phone). This, they say, is what you let others actually do things for real on your machine, the horrors. There are a minimum of who ways this is Obvious Nonsense, even if you grant a bunch of other absurd assumptions. Linux exists. Microsoft is barred from not giving this access by a 2009 EU consent decree.
Did Microsoft massively screw up by not guarding against this particular failure mode? Oh, absolutely, everyone agrees on that. But they failed (as I understand essentially everyone) by not having proper safety checks and failure modes, not by failing to deny access. There was a clear pattern where ‘critical infrastructure’ that is vitally important to keep online like airlines and banks and hospitals went down, while the software companies providing other non-critical services had no such issues. ‘Too important to improve’ (or ‘too vital to allow?’) is remarkably common. Where you cannot f** around, you cannot find out. And where you cannot do either, it is hard to find good help.
Tech companies at least started out able to find out and hire good help, and built their engineering cultures and software stacks around that. Banks do not have that luxury. Regulatory ComplianceWhy else might we have had this stunning display of incompetence?
Yes. The problem is too much concentration in cloud providers, says Lina Khan. We must Do Something about that. I mean, how could this possibly have happened? That all the major cloud providers went down at the same time over the same software bug? Must be a lack of regulation.
Some disputed this. I checked with Claude Sonnet 3.5. It looks like there are plenty of functional alternative services, and yes they will work, but CrowdStrike does automated compliance reporting and is widely recognized, and this is actually core to their pitch of why companies should use them - to reduce compliance costs. I also checked with two friends who know about such things. It seems CrowdStrike did plausibly have a superior product to the alternatives, even discounting the regulatory questions. It was also pointed out that while a lot of installs were to please auditors, a lot of what the auditors were checking for was not formal government regulations, rather it was largely industry standards without legal enforcement, but that you need to do to get contracts, like SOC 2 or ISO 27001. In the end, is there a functional difference? In some ways, probably not. So given the increasing number of requirements Claude was able to list off, and the costs of non-compliance, everyone in these ‘critical infrastructure’ businesses ended up turning to the company whose main differential, and perhaps to them main product offering, was ‘regulatory compliance.’ That then set us up with additional single points of failure. It also meant that the company in charge of those failure points had a culture built around checking off boxes on government forms rather than actual computer security or having a security mindset. You know who did not use CrowdStrike?
Consequences
As George Carlin famously said, somewhere in the middle, the truth lies. Letting CrowdStrike off the hook because they ‘are the standard’ is insufficiently strong incentives. Taking everything involved down hard is worse. Careful With That AIWhat about the role of AI?
How about we use human software engineers to do the rebuild, instead? It is great that we can use AIs to write code faster, and enable people to skill up. For jobs like ‘rewrite the kernel,’ I am going to go ahead and say I want to stick with the humans. There are many overdetermined reasons.
There are two problems. This error should not have been able to bring down the system. This error should never have happened even if it couldn’t crash the system.
Either of these on its own should establish that we have a terrible situation that poses catastrophic risks even without AI, and which AI will make a lot worse, and urgently needs fixing. Together, they are terrifying. The obvious failure mode is not malicious. It is exactly what happened this time, except in the future, with AI. AI accidentally outputs buggy code. Human does not catch it. What do you mean ‘unit tests’ and ‘canaries’? Whoops.
Or the bug is more subtle than this, so we do run the standard tests, and it passes. That happens all the time, it is not usually quite this stupid and obvious. The next failure is that the AI intentionally outputs bugged code, or malicious code, whether or not a human instructed it (explicitly, implicitly or by unfortunate implication) otherwise. And of course the other failure mode is that the AI, or someone with an AI, intentionally seeks out the attack vector
Where should we worry about concentration? Is this a reason to want everyone to be using different AIs from different providers, instead of the same AI? That depends on what constitutes the single point of failure (SPOF). If the SPOF is ‘all the AIs turn rogue or go crazy or shut off at the same time’ then you want AI diversity. If the SPOF is ‘every distinct frontier AI is itself an SPOF, because if even one of them goes fully off the rails then that is a catastrophe’ then you do not want AI diversity. These questions can have very different answers for catastrophic or existential risk, versus mundane risk. For mundane risk, you by default want your systems to fail at different times in distinct ways, but you need to worry about long dependency chains where you are only as strong as the weakest link. So if you are (for example) combining give different AI systems that each are the best at a particular subtask, and cannot easily swap them out in time, then you are vulnerable if any of them go haywire. For existential or catastrophic risk, it depends on your threat model. Any single rogue agent under current conditions, be it human or AI, could potentially have set off the CrowdStrike bug, or a version of it that was far worse. There are doubtless many such cases. So do you think that ‘various good guys with various AIs’ could then defend against that? Would ‘some people defend and some don’t’ be sufficient, or do you need to almost always (or actual always) successfully defend? I am very skeptical of the ‘good guy with an AI’ proposal, even if such defenses are physically possible (and I am skeptical of that too). Why didn’t a ‘good guy with a test machine or a debugger’ stop the CrowdStrike update? Because even if there was a perfectly viable way to act responsibly, that does not mean we are going to do that if it is trivially inconvenient or is not robustly checked. Again, yes, if we allow it you are going to give the AI root access and take yourself out of the loop, because not doing so is going to be annoying, and expensive, and you are in competition with people who are willing to do such things. If you don’t, someone else will, and their AIs will end up with the market share and the power. Indeed, the very fact that these many AIs are allowed to be in this intense competition with each other with rapid iteration will make it all but certain corners will be cut to absurd degrees, especially when it comes to things like collective security. Another thing that can happen is the one dangerous AI suddenly becomes a lot of dangerous AIs, because it can be copied, or it can scale its resources with similar effect. Or by having many such potentially dangerous AIs, you place authority over it into many hands, and what happens if even one of them chooses to be sufficiently irresponsible or malicious with it? What about the risk of regulatory capture happening with safety in AI, the way it happened here with mundane computer security and CrowdStrike? What happens if everyone is hiring a company, Acme Safety Compliance (ASC), to handle all their ‘AI safety’ needs, and ASC’s actual product is regulatory compliance? Well, then we’re in very big trouble. As in dead. Every time I look at an AI lab’s scaling policy, I say some form of: If they implement the spirit of a good version of this document, I don’t know if that is good enough, but that would be a big help. If they implement the letter of even a good version of this document, and game the requirements, then that is worth very little if anything. If they don’t even implement the letter of it in the breach, it’s totally worthless. We cannot rely on their word that they will implement even the letter of this.
This is another reason most of the value, right now, is in disclosure and information requirements on the largest frontier models. If you have to tell me what you are doing, then that is not an easy thing to meaningfully ‘capture.’ But yeah, this is going to be tough and a real danger. It always is. And it always needs to be balanced against the alternative options available, and what happens if you do nothing. It can also be pointed out that this is another logical counter to ‘but you need to tell me exactly what constitutes compliance, and if I technically do that then I should have full safe harbor,’ as many demand for themselves in many contexts. That is a very good way to get exactly what is written down, and no more, to get the letter only and not the spirit. That works if there is a risk that can indeed be taken out of the room by adhering to particular rules. But if the risk is inherent in the system and not so easy to deal with, you cannot make the situation non-risky on one side of a line. One thing to note is that CrowdStrike was an active menace. It was de facto mandatory that they be given this level of access. If CrowdStrike was (for example) instead a red teaming service that attempted to break into your computers, it would have been much harder (but not, indirectly, impossible) for it to cause this disaster. Another key insight is that you do not only have to work around things that might go wrong when everyone does their jobs properly, and you face an actually hard problem. Your solution must also be designed anticipating the stupidest failures. Because that is what you probably first get. And saying ‘oh there are like 5 ways someone would take action such that this would obviously not happen’ is a surprisingly weak defense. Then, later, you also get the failures that happen when the AI is smarter than you. And again, then, whatever happens, there is a good chance many will say ‘it would have been fine if we hadn’t acted like completely incompetent idiots and followed even a modicum of best practices’ and on this exact set of events they will have been right. But that will also be why that particular set of events happened, rather than something harder to fathom. UnbankedAlso down were the banks.
It was only a single point of failure for Windows machines that trusted CrowdStrike. But in a corporate context, that is likely to either be all or none of them. That created some obvious issues,
Another obvious solution is ‘keep an emergency cash fund around.’ In a world where one’s bank accounts might all get frozen at once, or the banks might go down for a while, it seems sensible to have such a reserve somewhere you can access it in this kind of emergency. You are not giving up much in interest. This is also a damn good reason to not ban or eliminate physical cash, in general. You're currently a free subscriber to |