---
subject: "How to find beauty in your life"
from: "Utsav Mamoria <utsavmamoria@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-07-30 06:52:59
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Utsav Mamoria"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_7827265242986381917"]
---
March 1858, London William Gladstone, an MP and ex-Chancellor of the Exchequer of England, published three books. At seventeen hundred pages, the book was an in-depth dive into the life and work of his favourite philosopher, Homer, who wrote the books - Iliad and Odyssey. The publication was titled Studies on Homer and the Homeric Age. This publication quickly caught onto public imagination because it was so rare for a practicing politician to undertake such a monumental effort, especially in a field which would have no impact on his political candidature. And while some aspects of his writing and mastery of the subject were universally praised, most of the other parts had scathing reviews. One of them, after praising him for his erudition, lampooned his logic
Karl Marx wrote to Engels saying
The fundamental issue all these reviewers had was that Gladstone had interpreted Homer’s works, which were written at a time when paganism was at its peak in Greece, in a very Christian manner. He had made leaps of logic that were hard to digest. But this was not even the most outlandish thing he had written. One of the less discussed criticisms of the book was how he interpreted Homer’s writings on colour. Yes, colour. What is there to be discussed about colour? Red is Red and Blue is Blue. That is universal, right? Gladstone thought differently, because all through Homer’s writing, the two colours which dominated were black and white. Even when Homer talks about the sea, he calls it wine-dark in colour, which is hard to believe, even with a stretch of imagination. Theories were proposed and invalidated - Was he talking about a certain type of algae which made the sea look red, or the deep purple-crimson shade which can be seen at dawn or sunset? He was not using poetic license; there were no metaphors in this writing. Nobody believed him, so he presented 30 pages of examples, which established two essential things. The first was the vast predominance of the most crude and elemental forms of colour, black and white. The second was the use of the same word to denote colours which, according to us, are essentially different. E.g. in one passage, he would describe iron as violet, but in another, it would be grey. Everything could have been debated, but there was one piece of evidence that validated Gladstone’s point of view. Whenever Homer described the sky, it was starry or broad, or great or iron or copper, but it was never blue. And you thought the sky being blue was a settled question, huh? Gladstone’s theory was this - That the ability to distinguish colour had evolved from the time of Homer, and it was the reason why Homer’s world was predominantly crude shades of black and white. I know what you are thinking. How can evolution work so quickly that our perception of colour would change so rapidly over just 2 millennia? Evolution works at far slower timescales. But remember, dear reader, that this was 1858, and Charles Darwin’s seminal work, The Origin of Species, had just been published. Our understanding of evolution was rudimentary, and two millennia seemed like a long enough time. Over the centuries, a more reasonable perspective emerged - that Homer could have been colour blind. Gladstone did not have access to this information because, at the time of his writing, colour blindness had not been discovered. He got the diagnosis right, but the causation completely wrong. But even with all the headiness of Darwin’s work, Gladstone’s theory sat uneasily amongst people. A German philologist, Lazarus Geiger, was intrigued by it, and he did something few people from Europe ever did. He looked at cultures outside of his own. To see how colour had been described in other ancient texts. He looked at the Vedas (ancient scriptures of Hinduism, considered among the oldest religious texts in the world), and in particular, focused on their treatment of the sky. He noted
Ok, so the Indians were also not describing the sky as blue. And since the Vedas were not authored by just one single person, the colour blindness theory also went out of the window. He looked at the Old Testament written in biblical Hebrew, and found no trace of the word blue. So Gieger, too, had a diagnosis, but he did not have a cause. He dove into the world of etymology. He found that words for blue in the modern European languages derived from two sources: a minority from words that earlier meant ‘green’ and the majority from words that earlier meant ‘black’. The same thing would be found to be true for a set of Chinese languages. As he kept researching, looking at data across cultures, he realised that the colour green had this problem once, and it was subsumed into yellow. And yellow in itself was once subsumed into red. Take this idea further, and at some point, even black and red would once have been the very definition of ‘colour’. He then crystallised his theory and said
And if this sounds radical to you, Geiger set off an even more fundamental question - the relationship between what the eye can see and what language can describe. A decade after Gieger posited this, an ophthalmologist by the name of Hugo Magnus wrote a book titled On the Historical Evolution of the Colour Sense. His work seemed to support the hypothesis set about by Gieger, but it took a train crash between two Swedish express trains, which finally led to the discovery of colour blindness. Through a simple test of different hues of wool, he discovered that out of the 266 railway workers involved with Swedish trains, 13 were colour blind. And while it explained some of Gladstone’s findings, the fundamental question of the relationship between what the eye can see and what language can describe was unsettled. Two years after the publication of Gieger’s book, the German Journal of Ethnology published a short note by Adolf Bastian, an anthropologist and best-selling author. He argued that oddities in the description of colours were not confined to ancient epics, and people still thought of blue and green differently from Europeans. And this inspired the Berlin Society for Anthropology, Ethnology and Pre-History to understand how people across the world described colours. This became an all-around effort by the White Men, from Europe all the way to America. They looked at indigenous populations who had had little contact with other cultures. The Nubians, or people from Sudan, when shown a blue skein of wool, identified it as either black or green. Some of them did not even distinguish between yellow, green and grey. In America, the Klamath Indians in Oregon used the same term for the colour of any grass, weed or plant, despite the plant itself changing colours through seasons. The Sioux people from Dakota used the same word for both blue and green. The Chukchis in Siberia were quite content with using just three terms - black, white and red - to describe any colour. Similar understanding of colours was seen as far as Indonesia in the East.¹ Many could identify these different colours, but found it ridiculous that they should have different names for two shades of the same colour! So if the idea of colour, which we consider as truth, itself is so subjective, what about aesthetics? What about beauty? Of course, these are subjective, and if we were to find beauty in our lives, how would we go about it? To begin this journey, we move to an unlikely source, a game that took over the world. The 8-bit love affair On September 27, 1983, twenty trucks left a warehouse in El Paso, Texas, and made their way towards a landfill in Alamogordo, New Mexico. They then proceeded to dump the contents onto the site, crush it and pour concrete over it, to ensure that absolutely no one gets their hands on it. There were security guards hired to keep the locals from getting a close-up glimpse of the operation. What was being buried was far from dangerous; it wasn’t drugs, toxic chemicals or contraband. It was something far more mundane. In 2014, a documentary crew, with the support of Microsoft and the New Mexico government, excavated the landfill. They discovered what was initially considered to be an urban legend. Copies of video game cartridges and consoles, specifically E.T. (based on Steven Spielberg’s movie), but also other games (Pac-Man, Ms. Pac-Man, Raiders of the Lost Ark, etc.). The estimated burial was 3 million unsold cartridges. The company that buried the games was one of the most storied companies in the world of entertainment. At its peak in 1982, it had sales of $2Bn - Atari. There is a good chance that you have not heard of Atari. Because the burial signaled the demise of Atari, and with it began the funeral of the video game industry in the US. The entire North American video game industry crashed along with Atari, thanks to a combination of too much competition and a consistent release of poor-quality games, which eroded consumer trust. Industry revenues plummeted by 97% between 1983 and 1985, forcing many companies out of business. From across the Pacific, someone was watching. Someone who was on the brink of disaster themselves. Nintendo. Just before the crash, the company had introduced one of their iconic games to the US market - Donkey Kong. The game did well, and they wanted to make a bigger bet. With the crash and eroding consumer trust, they could not market their consoles as video games. Hiroshi Yamauchi, the company president and his son-in-law, Minoru Arakawa, had a trick up his sleeve - They launched their consoles with plastic guns (to play games such as Duck Hunt), and marketed them as a toy, rather than a video game. What worked in Nintendo’s favour was their uncompromising standards on quality, which ensured that anything they put out in the market would be of the highest standards (So much so, that when their early consoles had quality issues, they proactively recalled them, which hurt them in the short term, but cemented the trust in the brand.) But there was one other shortcoming of video games, which Nintendo worked upon. An aspect which revolutionized gaming, an aspect which we often don’t think about, especially as we play casual games on our phones. Sound. Throughout the 1970s and early 1980s, so-called video game composers were actually sound programmers. They had fluency in computer languages and not actual music composition. So they often relied on pre-existing classical melodies in their games. Nintendo thought differently. They wanted to hire a musician to compose sound for a new game they were developing. And with it began the era of Koji Kondo. Kondo was born in Nagoya, Japan and began studying music at the age of 5. As a teenager, he played in a jazz and rock music cover band, which included covers for one of his favourite groups: Deep Purple. However, despite studying at the Osaka University of Arts, he had no intentions of becoming a professional musician. He spent long hours playing arcade games at a local coffee shop, not drawn to the games themselves, but the music. This interest of his collided with Nintendo when they sent a recruitment message to his university. The company was making good on its intention to hire a musician, and without even submitting as much as a demo tape, he was hired. Having cut his teeth on modest games in his initial years at Nintendo, his breakthrough came when Shigeru Miyamoto (the man behind the successful Donkey Kong) was building a new, bold game. Miyamoto wanted to break all conventions of gaming. There was a fundamental philosophical shift: He wanted to move away from a system of merely accumulating points or gathering resources, to having narrative-driven tasks. He brought to the fore an idea that we today take for granted in our media diet. World Building. The new game he created was expansive, clever and downright quirky. He brought to the game the philosophy of Easter Eggs. Hidden throughout the game were coins, mushrooms, flowers, stars and beanstalks, for which the player would return, aiming to find previously unknown rewards. He also created an imaginative repertoire of enemies - Piranha Plants, Cheep-Cheeps, Bloobers and Spinys, which required the gamer to develop many different attack skills. And with this, he created four different worlds - The Overworld, Underworld, Underwater World and Bowser's Castle. And if you have not guessed the name of the game by now, this artwork should help. And remind you of your childhood, the lazy summer afternoons, that were filled with the genius of Miyamoto and Kondo. Super Mario Bros. Kondo had his task cut out - To match the detailed world Miyamoto had created. It was not just about writing a catchy tune. It was also about matching the music to the game environment and the experience of the player. So he set two goals for himself a. To convey an unambiguous sonic image of the game world b. To enhance the emotional and physical experience of the gamer. Kondo wanted to bring together atmosphere, movement and emotion. He had to contend with one problem, though. Hardware limitations. Take your wildest guess on the size of the game. How much space did it take on a cartridge? Whatever you guessed, reduce it 10x, and you may still be wrong (I certainly was!) 40 KB or the size of a simple text document today. The game was stored on a cartridge containing 32 KB of program code and data, and 8 KB of graphics data. The development team had to employ numerous space-saving techniques, such as reusing graphics (for example, clouds and bushes are the same sprite with different colours). For music, all Kondo had was 2 pulse wave channels for melody 1 triangle channel for bass 1 noise channel for percussion 1 delta modulation channel for pre-recorded samples.² With these constraints, he had to create a balance between repetition and variety. And with these limitations, Kondo gave us this
He went ahead and created a sonic binary - He used rhythm, harmony, melody and form in different ways to create two worlds of sound One, being bright and fluffy, like the one you just heard, the other being dark and heavy, like the one you would hear in World 8-4 (the artwork above). Kondo did not see the relationship between sound and physical movement being restricted to on-screen animation; he felt it should extend to the gamer herself. He wanted to lessen the gap between Mario and the hands that moved them, else the music was just background music. There was one more constraint he had to work with. As musicians, one has access to a richer vocabulary - articulation (e.g. staccato, accents), dynamics (e.g. piano, forte, crescendo), variety of texture and the ability to bring certain notes of a chord out more than the others (i.e. voicing). Kondo’s music was a struggle between man and machine, and from that emerged an experience that added beauty to millions of kids growing up in the 90s. In his book, The Beauty of Games, Frank Lantz says
Both these motions are necessary for us to experience beauty. With our backs straight, eyes focused, fingers glued to joysticks, we leaned forward into the world of Miyamoto and Kondo, and after innumerable cycles of failing, trying and failing again, arriving in World 8-4, beating Bowser, we bask in the glory of defeating an 8-bit monster, flooding our life with reflected joy and satisfaction.³ In that sense, games are like music. They have composition, performance, ritual and habit. Despite their constructed reality, our involvement with them exists outside the ordinary frameworks of explanation and purpose. Especially purpose, because consider the sub-culture of speedrunning in gaming. Speedrunning is the pursuit of completing the game as quickly as possible, and it has evolved into a global subculture with its own history, heroes, and technical innovations. This is a serious business - World records are tracked down to the millisecond, with each new record often shaving off just a single frame (1/60th of a second). Super Mario Bros. remains a speedrunning favourite due to its tight controls, short length, and deep technical complexity.⁴ The opposite of this subculture is completionist runs, which involve collecting every coin, finishing every level, and unlocking all secrets, regardless of how long it takes. There are no shortcuts allowed, and one cannot take advantage of any glitches in the game. So which one is a better way to play the game? Speedrunning is limiting because it does not allow you to appreciate the nuances of the game, for there is a single-minded focus on completing it. Every frame and every jump needs to be optimised. On the other hand, Completionist play is exhausting. In our desire to experience the multitudes the world contains, in our desire to get every coin and break through each brick, our attention is fragmented. We lose the ability to go deep into anything which interests us, because we find ourselves perennially short of time and mental space. And what is the point of being either a speed runner or a completionist, when you cannot focus your attention? What is the point of having access to deep and complex worlds, when you either see too little, too fast or too much, too slow that you are unable to absorb anything? So maybe that is why the majority of gamers fall under the category of ‘Casual Playthroughs’, where there is no pressure to finish quickly, break records, or even complete every objective. The journey and personal enjoyment are the main goals - something we must learn from the casual gamer The pursuit of beauty in everyday life requires us to build our own worlds. Worlds in which we take a sliver of reality, and go deep into it, experiencing it with all our senses, giving them the time and attention, and thinking of our lives not in terms of weeks or months, but decades. This decadel thinking is what will allow us to immerse ourselves into the world we build, and find beauty. So how do we build our own worlds? And how do we find beauty in everyday life?⁵ For that, we turn to a subject in mathematics, which is probably taught in the worst manner possible. The most beautiful curve in mathematics In Edinburgh, in the late 16th century, the owner of the Merchiston castle had a peculiar problem. His neighbor's pigeons repeatedly ate his grain, and there was no end in sight to his misery. He warned the neighbor he would keep any pigeons found on his land. Knowing it would be difficult to catch them, the owner soaked peas in brandy and scattered them in his field. The pigeons, after eating the brandied peas, became too drunk to fly, allowing the owner to easily scoop them up, much to the astonishment of his neighbor, who suspected sorcery. Such events did not help his reputation. He was said to have travelled with a black spider in a small box and was rumored to dabble in alchemy and necromancy. His black cockerel was considered to be his familiar spirit, and his neighbors sometimes accused him of being in league with the devil, largely because of the time he spent in his study and his unusual experiments and devices. But in reality, the owner, who went by the name of John Napier, was an amateur astronomer. And he was looking to solve one of the biggest problems astronomers of the time dealt with. Not just the orbits of planets, not just the structure of the solar system, but the plain, simple boring problem which surrounded them. Doing calculations with large numbers, which astronomy had plenty of. At the time, since calculations could only be done by hand, you’d find many astronomers, including the likes of Johannes Kepler (who eventually gave us the laws of planetary motion) bogged down with dealing with large numbers. Their mathematics was primitive - Trial and error married to brute force computation. One mistake in arithmetic could set them back by days or even weeks, because everything had to be checked by hand, and redone, if needed. In this milieu, John Napier, arrived at an idea, which was to change the face of science. And now, to understand this idea, we must turn to cats. The Cat-a-lympics Imagine a creature which sleeps for 16 hours a day. Now imagine a bunch of them getting together and deciding to compete in the Cat-a-lympics, a competition of physical and mental endurance. Things start simply enough. Each cat must jump off the floor, and the next cat has to jump twice the distance. So if Cat 1 jumps one feet, Cat 2 must jump two feet, Cat 3 must jump four feet and so on. But the cats have made a terrible miscalculation. By the time the 19th cat jumps, it has covered a distance of 328,084 feet. So what? At this height, the cat crosses the Kármán line, that marks the beginning of outer space. It is set at an altitude of 100 kilometers (62 miles or approximately 330,000 feet) above sea level. At this altitude, the atmosphere becomes too thin for conventional aircraft to generate enough aerodynamic lift to fly. But cats are above all this mere mortal physics (see Cat 19 is in outer space, and Cat 20 follows. The rest of the competition halts, and now we are in the Cat 20 is upset, and says that it is not interested in running any infinite space race. It has to catch up on its beauty sleep. Cat 19 was a lot more adventurous, and said, f**k it, You Only Live 9 Lives, and says it’s up for an infinite race. This puts the International Cat-a-lympics Committee (ICC) in a bind. How do they have a fair competition, when one wants to run a finite distance, and the other, an infinite one? So much like most international bodies, that serve no purpose, they are unable to arrive at a resolution. The race begins nonetheless. Cat 20 will run a distance of 10 million kms. Cat 19 will just run. Cat 20 decides to sprint to the end, but having been a chonky cat, it never got much exercise. It starts off quickly, but its speed decreases. And it decreases in proportion to the distance left to the end point. So when it is halfway across, it runs at half its original speed. When it is a quarter of the distance away, its speed is the quarter of its original speed Cat 19 is the Eliud Kipchoge of the cat world, and decides to run its infinite race with a constant speed. Now Napier starts to observe the race (Oh now you find it strange that Napier is here? The idea of Cat-a-lympics in space was somehow normal for you?) He notices something peculiar So when Cat 20 has run half the distance - 5 million kms, Cat 19 has run 6.9 million kms When Cat 20 has run the half of the remaining distance - 2.5 million kms, Cat 19 has run 6.9 million kms (because it runs at a constant speed) When Cat 20 has run the half of the remaining distance - 1.25 million kms, Cat 19 has run 6.9 million kms (because it is still running at the same speed) If he mapped the different points where each cat is at any given point in time, equal ratios on the first line correspond to equal distances on the second. So multiplying the ratios on the top line, is the same as adding distances on the bottom line. Turning multiplication into addition. By doing this for many different points on Cat 20’s track, we can find corresponding points on Cat 19’s track. But Napier also had to do all these calculations by hand, and if this method were to be useful, it would require him to do it for infinitely many numbers. Napier decided that he is only going to build this table for astronomers (and navigators), whose main calculations involved trigonometry. So he made his calculation tables consisting of sin values. So his tables had 5400 values, for each of the 90 degrees and 60 arc minutes. A much smaller number to compute vs the infinite values. Napier called his system, Ratio Numbers or Logo Arithmos. Today, we know them as Logarithms.⁶⁷ In 1614, Napier published his tables. By then, he had been working on his tables for over 20 years. However, he was absolutely clear that instead of guarding his work closely and making it accessible only to the highest bidder, he threw it open to the world. In the preface to the English translation of Napier’s Mirifici Logarithmorum Canonis Descriptio (translated by Edward Wright, 1616), he declared, as a dedication to the reader
In the coming centuries, everyone from Newton to Einstein to Oppenheimer embraced the log tables for their computations. The calculation power of the logarithm help us put a man on the moon.⁸ In principle, the idea of logarithms is the idea of reduction. In the choice of Napier to make his logarithms suited to astronomers and navigators, he chose to focus on a narrow set of ‘use cases’. In his idea of making the logarithms free for public use, he chose to reduce the gap between ignorance and knowledge. By adding to the world of knowledge, he multiplied the speed at which we understood the universe. And it was all made possible with a reduction of vast calculation to 5400 numbers. A minimalism that unraveled the mysteries of this universe. A minimalist idea of beauty. What if we applied this principle to our life? As we build our own worlds in the pursuit of beauty, we must strive to attain minimal beauty. Beauty that is accessible to us on a daily basis, in things - living and non-living which exist in our vicinity. There are two kinds of beauty which exist The beauty of depth, which comes with progressive unveiling, arrived at after intense periods of time and attention given to something. The beauty of frequency, which comes with progressive exposure, the everyday experiences which we allow into our life, our routines and our physical spaces The beauty of depth may occur only once in a while, but a beauty of frequency is readily attainable. This is not to say the two are distinct - Depth can only be achieved via frequency, progressive unveiling follows progressive exposure. But its the ready attainability of beauty we must aim for. And one of the best examples of this is the craft of Japanese woodworking. The Japanese temples built without a single nail In 1931, after earning a master's degree in architecture from M.I.T., a 26 year old man, sold his car and purchased a round-the-world tramp steamship ticket. He sailed to Paris, making a quick stop in London for some cheap dental work, since the British Pound had dropped by almost half in comparison to the dollar. In Paris, he found a room for eight dollars a month on the outskirts of Montparnasse. It had no heat, no inside plumbing and just one light socket. He had decided to stay in the city for a year, and the math that emerged was that he had eight dollars for rent, and another eight for expenses each month. Paris during the 1930s was the seat of great creative movement in art and literature. It was a time vibrant with excitement, as old forms were breaking. Polite starvation was a way of life, especially for the artists at the centre of the creative movement. He became interested in reading the German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche, and the book Thus Spoke Zarathustra especially gave him a sense of freedom. Despite being sucked into the headiness of Parisian cafe culture, where all talk was mostly on the new movements in art, which had a strong undercurrent of exhilaration, a fervid conviction that new concepts were being born and old forms were being torn asunder, this young man was dissatisfied. He was disenchanted with the structures and limitations of architecture. Despite making great friends and finding a very lucrative job in a music publishing firm of a one armed Frenchman who had lost an arm in World War I, he decided to move on from Paris. So, this 27 year old man, who went by the name of George Nakashima made a long sea voyage to the land of his ancestors, Japan. He landed in Tokyo, and stayed at his mothers’ ancestral home in Kamata, just on the outskirts of the city. The house was completely Japanese, with a wooden veranda running around the whole structure. Every morning, winter and summer, this veranda was wiped off with a damp cloth using scattered tea leaves from the day before to pick up the dust and dirt and for finish. But what also needed picking up was Nakashima’s career. He re-started work in the office of an American - Czech architect Antonin Raymond, that took him all over Japan, and even a stint in Pondicherry in India (to construct the main building in the Sri Aurobindo Ashram). And while he had a blissful time at the Ashram, things outside of it were difficult. Japan had already invaded China by 1939 and a larger war seemed imminent. He made his way back to Tokyo on a Japanese refugee ship from Shanghai to Nagasaki. He met his wife, and they moved to the United States, choosing to live in Seattle. And then Pearl Harbour broke. All people of Japanese descent were put in concentration camps. His wife, their newly born daughter and him were sent to Minidoka War Relocation Authority camp in Hunt, Idaho., where they met with Eskimos. Because those who had even a small percentage of Japanese blood were sent to the Western desert to die. At the camp he met Gentaro Hikogawa, a man trained in traditional Japanese carpentry. He had the discipline resulting from long years of experience in which each step was learned with consummate perfection. Under his tutelage, Nakashima learned to master traditional Japanese hand tools and joinery techniques. He helped him with many of the basic woodworking skills - the correct sharpening of a chisel with a traditional Japanese waterstone, sharpening a Japanese handsaw with its very deep gullet. The Japanese saw not only has saw teeth, but below each tooth, a further deep recess which takes away the sawdust without clogging. And although the incarceration restricted the freedom of the up-and-coming woodworker, it could not contain his passion for work and knowledge. One of his enduring passions became his love for the Yaku Cedar (Yakusugi) trees. These are extremely old Japanese cedar trees native to Yakushima Island, typically over 1,000 years old. These trees are prized for their tight grain, high resin content, and exceptional resistance to rot, making their wood highly durable and visually distinctive. But to Nakashima, it had a different meaning. In his part autobiography, part woodworking guide, The Soul of a Tree, A Woodworkers Reflections⁹, he says
Yaku cedar wood has historically been used in temple construction in Japan. Nakashima spent his holidays visiting historic temples in Nara and Kyoto, where he absorbed the aesthetics, construction techniques, and spiritual underpinnings of traditional Japanese architecture. One of these were the Miyadaiku are traditional Japanese carpenters who specialize in the construction, repair, and restoration of wooden shrines (jinja) and temples (tera). Becoming a miyadaiku requires years of apprenticeship—often 10 years or more—under a master carpenter. Training involves learning not just carpentry but also the spiritual and cultural aspects of the craft. Their methods are so exact that they can work to the accuracy of 30 microns - thinner than a human hair. But that’s not the only defining feature. One of the others ones is joinery without nails. Imagine entire buildings made of wood, without a single piece of nail in them. If you ever make a trip to Japan, head to the Kiyomizu-Dera Temple in Kyoto, which is best known for its wooden stage that juts out from its main hall, 13 meters above the hillside. The stage affords nice views of the numerous cherry and maple trees below. These trees erupt in a sea of color in spring and fall, as well as of the city of Kyoto in the distance. The main hall, together with the stage was built without the use of nails, and continues to stand 1300 years later. But the apex of this craft is to be seen in The Ise Grand Shrine (Ise Jingū) is renowned for its extraordinary tradition known as the Shikinen Sengū—the complete dismantling and rebuilding of its main structures every 20 years. All the twenty five hundred ceremonial objects and instruments within the shrine are carefully re-created. The wood for the new building comes from trees that are more than three hundred years old, the pillars from trees that have been standing for more than five hundred. Every twenty years, the shrine is made not new again, but old.¹⁰ At the heart of Miyadaiku, and in the writings and work of Nakashima, is the idea of impermanence. As Yaku Cedar trees witness the rise and fall of civilizations, they are used in the construction of temples of human faith, with the implicit understanding and need of being in line with nature. It is in their embracing of impermanence and need of renewal that their most salient lesson lives The surrender of our ego. As humans, we are too obsessed with the idea of legacy. Legacy is an act of ego, to be remembered for and as something, to this deep desire of wanting to mean something once the eventual march of time catches up with us. We forget that impermanence is the natural order, and the pursuit of legacy is against that natural order. And in this very pursuit that we often forget that beauty lies in the everyday, the moments which are slipping from our hands in our desire for legacy. The ability of the everyday to provide beauty, in a minimal, easily accessible way, in a tiny sliver of the world we craft for ourselves, is what we need. The pursuit of beauty is not in legacy, but in the acceptance that it is around us everywhere, in everyday moments. So how do we find this minimal everyday beauty in our life? Here are a few ways in which you could find it Curiosity Go and discover something new, expose yourself to novel ideas, put yourself into new situations. Add new layers to the portrait of your curiosity, and let all these choices and actions define you. You may find beauty in unearthing an aspect of yourself you had no idea lived within you. Do it without a goal, do it not as a means to an end, but as an end in itself. Self Overcoming Find a way to grow, modify or improve yourself. Do something which breaks an existing limit - It could be physical, mental, skill or emotion driven. Think about the kind of person you want to be, and then seek out things / experiences which allow you chance at becoming that person. Let that self overcoming be tiny, and not get walloped in the pursuit of some grand goal. Empathy Do something which involves other living beings. When you see your dog struggle to get down the stairs or a toddler unable to get up on the bed, you develop an empathy for their world and their challenges. When you involve yourself with people closely, you see them as people, complete in their own sense, and not just as those who are playing roles in the sitcom whose central character you are. Ritual and Tradition Either involve yourself with rituals and traditions which have been shaped by thousands of years of history, or build your own. Think about the beauty of frequency and progressive exposure, and how rituals and traditions can help you find them. Find a running group, or one who chants devotional songs. Build a tradition which only involves yourself - tending to plants every morning, reading a book at the same time everyday, speaking to a friend every week (or better a whole set of friends distributed across a week). You may be doing some of these already, but do it with regularity. Reflection and Insight Contemplate on all of the above away from the direct experience of them. It will give you new insights into yourself and the world you’ve built around you. It will provide you with a new language of expressing beauty - new metaphors, concepts and perspectives. If you’re at the point where you want to find something new (or rediscover something old) which can help you incorporate minimal beauty in your life, let me help you get started. Chausanthkala or The 64 Arts and Crafts It refers to the celebrated list of 64 traditional arts (kala) or crafts (vidya) in ancient Indian culture. These arts encompassed not only fine arts such as music, dance, and painting, but also practical, scientific, and vocational skills. They are revered as markers of a cultured and accomplished individual, historically essential in the upbringing of both men and women. A multi-disciplinary idea of human accomplishment. I was fascinated, and I embarked on my most ambitious art project yet. Illustrating all 64 of them. I put all these illustrations to good use. To help you find a new rabbit hole to go into and discover a new hobby, I built out this hobby explorer. Hobbies are a great way to incorporate curiosity, self-overcoming, empathy, ritual and tradition, and finally, reflection and insight. Hit the link and take it for a spin. You can not only see each illustration, but also find a video tutorial (or a video which has condensed knowledge about the art/craft) to get started. If you check out the tabs, you will find more resources and learning paths. You will find some of these to be anachronistic or even fantastical (Formulas for love potions!) and many completely new (for the non-Indian, the game of Antakshari). What I’d love for you to do is to just look at the world outside your usual influences and interests, and maybe find a new way to discover minimal beauty. Thank you for reading this far. I am grateful that you gave me 35 minutes of your time. I hope some part of this made you feel heard or helped you feel, think and live better. I have one last thing to say. I, along with a friend, 1 The story of Gladstone and his thoughts on colour has been sourced from Guy Deutscher’s book Through the Language Glass, which can be found 2 The research and story on the evolution of the Super Mario soundtrack is from the book Koji Kondo's Super Mario Bros. Soundtrack by Andrew Schartmann. You can find it 3 If you want to relive your glory days of Mario, you can play the game 4 If this fascinates you, check out this video about 5 The entire exploration of gaming, and its beauty would not have been possible without my conversations with 6 This basic principle was further refined by Napier and English mathematician Henry Briggs. Briggs, deeply impressed by Napier's invention of logarithms, traveled the long and arduous journey from London to Edinburgh to meet him. When Briggs arrived, the two men reportedly spent a quarter of an hour silently gazing at each other in admiration before speaking, a testament to the mutual respect between two great minds of their era. 7 I hope this help you made sense of why we studied logarithms in school. Those tables had their rationale, but somehow, it was never explained. 8 The video 9 An archived copy of The Soul of a Tree, A Woodworkers Reflections can be accessed 10 One other way in which once can see the importance of impermanence in Japanese culture is the Tea Ceremony. Rigorous conventions govern the utensils, the gestures , the flower arrangements and the nature and aspect of the tea hut. And because of these conventions, the areas of freedom - the movement of the guest and the host through the tea garden, the gestures and expressions as the tea bowl is offered and taken - take on a special significance and poignancy. The goal is precisely to capture the uniqueness and fleetingness of the occasion, as conveyed by the words, ichigo, ichie: one chance, one meeting. |