---
subject: "Links For November 2023"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-12-01 03:59:59
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX"]
---
1: The 2: Did you know: Hezbollah produced a video game, 3: Related to my …although I notice the poll doesn’t quite match the summary; it could also be that voters have changed their opinions about what level of liberalism/conservatism is “appropriate”. 4: 5: 6: 7: 8: 9: More on the Francesca Gino data fraud allegations: 10: 11: Dynomight: 12: Open Philanthropy
13: Catholic blog De Civitate 14: Study: teaching dialectical behavioral therapy (a set of emotional regulation skills) in school 15: In 1968, supporters of a one world government 16: A very old friend of mine now has a Substack: 17: 18: “As awareness of the global low fertility crisis has grown, many seem fatalistic, accepting decline because ‘no country has ever come back from below-replacement fertility.’ Actually, plenty of countries have done just that! 19: Dylan Matthews donated his kidney for charitable reasons, inspiring me to do the same. Apparently he has to keep one-upping me, because now he’s going to get 20: 21: 22: Related 23: “China’s GDP has slipped to 65% of the US level, from 74%” ( 24: Related, from Bloomberg: Sub-Saharan Africa was doing well ten years ago (probably mostly because of rising commodity prices, themselves probably due to the rise of China as a new commodity market). Now it’s doing badly, probably due to a combination of Chinese slowdown / falling commodity prices, rising interest rates, and the Ukraine War distracting all the countries that would otherwise have tried to help (though this explanation requires that other countries trying to help is a good thing, which has been controversial). 25: LW: David Gross I don’t endorse this, but I’ve linked it because I find it hilarious that the sovereign citizens come up with so many 5D chess theories that put them in jail when they’d be better off just not sending the money. Also, commenters discuss reasons it might not be this easy - for example, the government can refuse to renew your passport if you’re too far behind, and maybe the 26: TracingWoodgrains 27: Zan Tafakari has My own response is that “tech is usually good, trying to slow new tech usually puts you on the wrong side of history, but in fact AI will destroy the world” is a perfectly coherent way things can actually be. Having admitted this is a possible world, just saying “BUT TECH IS USUALLY GOOD! IN MOST CASES WANTING TO SLOW DOWN TECH WOULD USUALLY PUT YOU ON THE WRONG SIDE OF HISTORY!” in a louder and louder voice does nothing to prove this isn’t the world you’re in. I think it’s tempting, because usually heuristics form bright-line boundaries that save us from having to legislate each individual case. But when a specific individual case might destroy the world, I’m afraid you have to legislate it individually. See also For what it’s worth, I’d like to genetically enhance all humans into supergeniuses, geoengineer the atmosphere, build hyperloops (or even better, gravity trains) across every continent, approve new medications 10x faster, and give everyone hot and cold running semaglutide - but I still think we should go slowly and carefully with AI. 28: Related: “41% of French population 29: Related: Contra popular belief, regulations to prevent existential risk from AI I admit I’m surprised by this! The poll was funded by the AI Policy Institute, but it seems to have been conducted 30: A common cliche in mental health, used when anyone expresses concern about schizophrenics being violent, is that “schizophrenics are more likely to be the victims of violence than the perpetrators”. I’ve always hated this for being nonsensical: lots of groups are disproportionately likely to be both perpetrators and victims! Soldiers! Gangsters! Al-Qaeda second-in-commands! But I didn’t realize that along with being irrelevant, it’s substantively false: 31: Waterborne illnesses cause about 10% of child mortality in poor countries. But providing clean water 32: The old Minnesota flag 33: Although the all-time great state flag will always be 34: As Boomers age, die, and leave heirlooms that their children don’t have space for, the price of classy mid-20th-century goods on Facebook Marketplace is cratering. Here’s 35:
…while saying that we also need to make sure we don’t overshoot, never develop AI at all, and stagnate forever. This is my position too (see eg the second part of Part III I also think the rest of the Bostrom interview is great and (unsurprisingly) models a really thoughtful way of balancing these risks. 36: Related: 37: Cult of the month: the 38: 39: In 1788, word spread that doctors were illegally exhuming and dissecting corpses. The resulting outrage spurred 40: Last month I included a link speculating about whether a ban on sulfur aerosols had caused the recent acceleration in global warming. Here’s an essay arguing
Am I right in thinking that dust storms and wildfires are temporary, but sulfur aerosol changes are permanent, so if we get another record-breaking summer next year, it will be some extra evidence for the sulfur hypothesis? 41: One of the earliest “joke” political parties was the Austro-Hungarian Empire’s 42: Related to previous discussion on Twitter bringing in fewer links than it used to: 43: You might have heard that “every European alive today is a descendant of Charlemagne”. Not because Charlemagne was particularly fecund, but because the math of exponentially increasing ancestors per generation (ie 2 parents, 4 grandparents, 8 great-grandparents) means every European is descended from everyone who lived during Charlemagne’s era who left any descendants at all. This is true, but most Europeans don’t have any of Charlemagne’s genes. The genome isn’t infinitely divisible, and sometimes by coincidence a child will end up without any genes from one specific great-X-grandparent. This effect is strong enough that even though you might have ten million ancestors from Charlemagne’s era, you only carry genes from a few thousand of them! 44:
John Greenleaf Whittier wrote a poem about the incident, which can be found 45: I’ve written before about how most light boxes for seasonal affective disorder are much dimmer than the sun and would probably work better if they were brighter. A company called 46: How long do policy victories matter? That is, if some policy (let’s say marijuana decriminalization) is on your state ballot next year, you might think this determines your state’s marijuana policy forever. Or you might think that even if it loses, marijuana could get decriminalized next election cycle, and even if it wins, it might get rescinded later, so this specific vote only sets policy for the next few years, and after that it will be determined by broader trends. A new study ( 47: An attempt to put Israel-Palestine in context by mapping it onto the SF Bay Area at the same scale ( Aside from the educational value there are You're currently a free subscriber to |