---
subject: "Monthly Roundup #34: September 2025"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-09-15 12:22:46
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
All the news that’s fit to print, but has nowhere to go. Important Rules ReminderThis important rule is a special case of an even more important rule:
The general rule is to maintain good incentives and follow good decision theory. If someone is being helpful, ensure they are better off for having been helpful, even if they have previously been unhelpful and this gives you an opportunity. Reward actions you want to happen more often. Punish actions you want to happen less often. In particular beware situations where you punish clarity and reward implicitness. Another important rule would be Even more importantly: When someone disagrees with you, you don’t use the law to silence them and you most definitely don’t choose violence. Argument gets counterargument. Never bullet, no arrest, no fine, always counterargument. I don’t care what they are advocating for, up to and including things that could plausibly lead to everyone dying. It does not matter. No violence. No killing people. No tolerance of those who think they can have a little violence or killing people who disagree with them, as a treat, or because someone on the other side did it. No. Stop it. This seems like one of those times where one has to, once again, say this. Bad NewsThis seems like a lot of percents?
If that is who gets the most value out of meet and greets, okay then. It also presumably isn’t as bad as it sounds since it has been a long time since Buzz Lightyear has been so hot right now, I presume characters in recent movies have a different balance. The price sounds sufficiently high that they should add more copies of such characters for meet and greets until the lines are a lot shorter? How could that not raise profits long term?
I often hear discussion of ‘masking’ where autistics learn how to fake not being autistic and seem like normies, or similarly
Over time, if you don’t take credit for things, people notice that you silently fix or accomplish or improve things without taking credit or bothering anyone about it, and you get triple credit, for fixing things, for doing it seamlessly and for not needing or requesting credit. The problem is, you need a sufficiently sustained and observed set of interactions, and people sufficiently aware of the incentive dynamics here, so that you can move the whole thing up a meta level. There is also the reverse. If you know someone who will always loudly take credit, you know that at most they are doing the things they loudly take credit for. If that. Inequality Within Salient ComparablesI am generally skeptical that we should worried about inequality, as opposed to trying to make people better off. One danger that I am convinced by is that
Speaking from experience, it is quite the trip to be in regular contact and debates with various billionaires. It can definitely make one feel like a failure or like it’s time to make more money, even though I have enough money to not worry about money, especially when you think you definitely could have joined them by making different life choices, and there’s a chance I still could. Whereas, when in prior phases of life I was not in such contact, it was easy not to care about any of that. It helps to remind myself periodically that if I had a billion dollars, I could make the world a better place, but except insofar as I prevented us all from dying my own life would, I anticipate, not actually be better as a result. At that level, there isn’t that much more utility to buy, whereas Artful DodgeIt’s not easy buying art.
If it takes some expertise to buy art well, that is a real problem with buying art. The thing is, if you do not buy art well, you will lose most of the money you spent on art, and also you will look like a fool, and also the art will not make you feel better or much improve your living room. That leaves four options. The one these people and I have taken, which is to not buy art. Buy cheap art that you don’t mind looking at. Safe, but still annoying to do, and then you have to look at it, does it actually make you feel better? Spend a lot of time figuring out how to buy expensive art properly. Yeah, no. I understand that Paul Graham can be in renaissance man mode, but if you are coding at OpenAI at $500k+ per year the cost of this is very, very high, and also you probably don’t expect the skill to stay relevant for long. Find someone you trust to do it for you? Not cheap, not all that easy or quick to do either, and you are still the one who has to look at the damn thing.
Besides, who is to say that a constant piece of artwork actually helps, especially if it doesn’t hold particular meaning to you? I mean, yeah, in theory yeah we should get some artwork here, I suppose, but no one wants to do the work involved, also it should definitely be cheap art. At one point I bought some Magic: The Gathering prints for this but we never got around to hanging them. Also at one point I tried to buy the original art for Horn of Greed, which at the time would have cost like $3k. I say tried because my wife wouldn’t let me, but if anyone wants to buy me a gift at some point, that or another original Magic art I’d look back on fondly seems great. Whether WeatherIf there is one thing to learn from rationality: Peter Wildeford is 100% right here.
Colin Fraser is right if you effectively can only predict 0% or 100% rain, and the only purpose of predicting rain is that you take an umbrella if and only if you predict rain. Peter Wildeford is right that you can say ‘it will rain 40% of the time, therefore I should take an umbrella, even though more than half the time I will look foolish.’ The weather reports are assuming that people have a typical bias, that people respect 40% chance or more, but not 30%. Thus, there is a huge jump (AIUI, and Claude confirms). If the Google weather app says 30%, treat that as at most 10%, but the app doesn’t want to get blamed so it hedges. Whereas if it says 40%? That’s pretty much 40%, act accordingly. If you don’t know the way the conversion works, and you don’t have the typical biases, you’ll respond in crazy wrong fashion. The bias and nonlinearity become self-perpetuating. The right rule in practice really is to take the umbrella at 40% and not at 30%, almost no matter what the cost-benefit tradeoff is for the umbrella, since it is obviously wise at 40% and obviously unwise at 10%. The ‘predict 100% instead of 70%’ thing that other sources do is especially maddening. This means both that you can’t tell the difference between 70% and 100%, and that on the regular you notice things that were predicted as Can’t Happen actually happening. The weather forecaster is consigned to Bayes Hell and you can’t trust them at all.
|