---
subject: "Crime and Punishment #1"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-04-21 15:23:16
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
This seemed like a good next topic to spin off from monthlies and make into its own occasional series. There’s certainly a lot to discuss regarding crime. What I don’t include here, the same way I excluded it from the monthly, are the various crimes and other related activities that may or may not be taking place by the Trump administration or its allies. As I’ve said elsewhere, all of that is important, but I’ve made a decision not to cover it. This is about Ordinary Decent Crime. Table of ContentsPerception Versus RealityA lot of the impact of crime is based on the perception of crime. The perception of crime is what drives personal and political reactions. When people believe crime is high and they are in danger, they dramatically adjust how they live and perceive their lives. They also demand a political response. Thus, it is important to notice, and fix, when impressions of crime are distorted. And also to notice when people’s impressions are distorted. They have a mental idea that ‘crime is up’ and react in narrow non-sensible ways to that, but fail to react in other ways. One thing that it turns out has very little to do with perceptions of crime is the murder rate, which in most places has gone dramatically down.
If you go purely by state, if it counts then Washington DC is at the top, Of course, there is a lot more to being safe than not being murdered. San Francisco has a very low murder rate, but what worries people are other crimes, especially property crime - things are bad enough there, and enough people in my circles pay attention to it, that it gets its own section. It’s definitely not ‘down at 6’ on the chart. The thing is, property crime and other Ordinary Decent Crime went dramatically down too, in many ways, especially in these very blue areas. Crime used to be a huge portion of our cognitive focus in major cities. You who carry a $1k iPhone around in your hand do not remember how insane that would have been when I was growing up in New York City. As Dennis Leary used to put it, have you ever played ‘good block, bad block’? And we took levels of risk, and perception of risk, unimaginable today, both for children and adults. I was warned not to have a hundred bucks in my wallet, and not to walk along Amsterdam Avenue, and I took the ‘safer’ last two block route back to our apartment on the Upper West Side. Here’s some English data to go with the USA data.
Violent crime and physical assault has gone from being like car crashes, which are an actual danger you have to constantly worry about and that happens all the time (although with a lot fewer fatalities than they used to!), to something halfway to airplane crashes. A violent crime is often now news. Thefts can be news. That’s not to say that in particular places property crime hasn’t been allowed to spiral out of control, especially in particular ways. We forget how blessed we are. And it is very important to hold onto that. Trust is fraying in other ways, but that feeling of living in Batman’s Gotham, with violence around every corner even if you didn’t choose to get involved? Yeah, that’s gone. The whole trope of ‘vigilante hero fights crime in the streets’ feels like an anachronism. The Case Violent Crime is Up Actually
The other half of the post is that our criminal justice system is no longer effective, due to rules that now prohibit us from locking the real and obvious repeat criminals up, and those criminals do most of the crime and are the reason the system is overloaded. The obvious response is, we have this huge prison population, we sure are locking up someone. And yet, yes, we do seem capable of identifying who is doing all the crime, including the repeated petty crime, yet incapable of then locking them up. That does seem eminently fixable. George Carlin had a routine where everyone would get 12 chances to clean up their drug habits before being exiled (to Colorado, of course) and it seems like we could figure something out here, even if we think three strikes are insufficient? Threats of Punishment
So when you try to make shoplifting a felony punishable by three years in jail, what you’re actually doing is allowing that to be bargained down, and ensuring the punishment is ‘anything at all’ rather than cops arresting you on a misdemeanor only to have you released with a stern talking to, which means cops won’t even bother. Obviously it would be better to actually enforce laws and punishments, but while we’re not doing that, we need to understand how laws work in practice. We used to basically be okay with using this to give police and prosecutors leverage and discretion, and to allow enforcement in cases like ‘we know this person keeps stealing stuff’ without having to prove each incident. Now, we’re not, but we don’t know what the replacement would be. Property Crime Enforcement is BrokenThe most obvious types of crime that are up are organized property crimes. Why? I see two central highly related reasons. Our enforcement system is broken. That’s this section. We increasingly tolerate disorder. That’s the following section.
Problem one is largely caused by problem two, but let’s talk effects first, then causes. Essentially, in terms of my four categories of legality, we have moved much of property crime from its rightful place in Category 3 - where it is actively illegal and risks real consequences but we don’t move mountains to catch you - into at least Category 2, where it is annoying and discouraged but super doable with no real consequences. And in many cases, it is now effectively Category 1, where it might as well be thought of as fully legal without frictions. If you are an upstanding citizen and then decide to do a little property crime, as a treat, you risk your reputation, various unpleasant reactions, and getting an arrest record and dealing with the courts, and you don’t know how likely those outcomes are. Security can and will sometimes catch you, you have things to lose, and so on. So the deterrence works okay there. If you do a lot of property crime, however, you quickly learn that most of the risks and costs are kind of fixed, and often non-existent. Security guards and employees mostly won’t take any risk to interfere, police usually won’t be called. Even when police catch you, even repeatedly, they mostly let you go, often even after being caught an absurd number of times. The old ‘quietly use or threaten violence or to otherwise mess you up’ solution has also been taken largely off the table, for better and for worse. In each individual case, this is wise in terms of outcomes. But if you do it too often, eventually the criminal element or those considering such actions notices, and the problem snowballs.
If even reported burglaries only result in a suspect at all 17.6% of the time, and only have a charge 3.2% of the time let alone a plea or conviction, and presumably most burglaries don’t even get reported, and you don’t even make a point to arrest someone when they leave behind their literal bail notice, then you’re saying burglary is de facto legal. You can just take stuff. That will only get worse over time. The same goes for things closer to fraud, such as organized cargo theft. The latest incidents are in the Chicago area, where organized crime has run or taken control of motor carriers and uses them to enable cargo theft and demand de facto ransom payments. Ryan reports that Flexport has used a machine learning based fraud prevention technology (nicknamed ‘CURVE’) to spot and avoid such pitfalls. Essentially the criminals have learned to spoof commonly used indicators of trust, so the arms race is ongoing there same as everywhere else, and like many other places trust is declining. The costs of property crime, in terms of countermeasures, can get very high. Putting products behind locked display cases Eventually, we’ll have to react to all this. We’ll need to figure out how to enforce the law sufficiently that crime no longer pays, and it is at least somewhat obvious to the criminals that it no longer pays. At minimum, we should track when we arrest or otherwise identify criminals, or there are otherwise clearly related incidents, and do escalating enforcement against repeat offenders. The stories of ‘this person got arrested 35 times for [X] and was released each time’ should never, ever happen, nor should the ‘50 people are doing a huge percentage of the crime in [NYC/SF/etc].’ As noted in an earlier section, this makes one wonder, who are all the criminals we are locking up, in that case? The Problem of DisorderCharles Lehman convincingly I would draw a distinction between disorder in the sense of ‘not ordered’ versus antisocial disorder that degrades the overall sense of order or harms non-participants in the activity. All hail Discordia, hail Eris, but hands off my stuff, you know? Our academics have essentially delegitimatized disliking antisocial disorder and especially using authority to enforce against it, including against things like outright theft, and we’ve broken many of the social systems that enforced the relevant norms. If you do not enforce rules against antisocial disorder, especially laws against outright theft, while enforcing rules against insufficiently obedient and rigid order, you are not doing people any favors. People realize these rules against disorder are not enforced, norms erode, and you get increasing amounts of disorder. In particular, antisocial disorder becomes The Way to Do Things and get resources. If you can sell drugs openly without restriction, or organize a theft ring at little risk, but opening a legitimate business takes years of struggle and expenses and occupational licensing issues and so on, guess what the non-rich aspiring businesspeople are increasingly going to do? As I discussed in my We need to reverse this. We should apply the ‘let them cook’ and ‘don’t use force to stop people who aren’t harming others’ principles to productive and ordered activity, rather than to unproductive and disordered activity. At minimum, we should beware and track the balance of inconveniences, and ensure that we are throwing up more and more expensive barriers to antisocial disordered activities, versus pro-social or ordered activities. YIMBY for housing construction and doing business and working. NIMBY for noise complaints and shoplifting and cargo theft. Extreme Speeding as Disorder
My presumption is it is both symptom and cause when it gets this extreme. The Fall of Extralegal and Illegible EnforcementIn the Before Times, if you were up to no good as they saw it, and especially if you were committing crimes or interfering with the good citizens of the land, the law might notice, and in various ways make it clear you should stop. This often worked, and gave police leverage, but was illegal, and led to terrible abuses. So we decided that this was bad, actually, and moved progressively to cut off this sort of behavior. The problem is that this puts the system in a tricky position. It has only so many resources, and it is expensive and time consuming to actually enforce laws by the book, and often you don’t have the proof or there are technicalities so you can’t do it. We cannot go back, nor do we want to. But over time everyone is adjusting to and solving for the new equilibrium, and norms, habits and skills are also adjusting. The system was designed for one way and now it is the other way. A lot of what has been protecting us is inertia, and the instinct that there are forces waiting to keep things in line, and various norms that grew up over time. That will, over time, continue to fade, if don’t give it good reason not to. I worry about this. It is all the more reason that, now that we don’t have as much illegible enforcement, we need more legible enforcement, including for small offenses, for those things we want to actually prevent. In America You Can Usually Just Keep Their Money
My understanding is exactly Sarah’s. If someone simply keeps your money, or otherwise cheats you, what are you going to do about it? Even if you can prove it, it is definitely not worth going to court. Lawsuits are effectively nuclear weapons, the threat is far stronger than the execution unless scale is truly massive. Calling the cops for anything small is also not worth the effort and carries risk of backfire. Personal example: Someone rich (or at least spending as if they were rich, could be broke, who knows) promised, in writing, as part of resolving the situation at a company, to pay me six figures. Then they didn’t pay, then once again in person affirmed this and promised to pay, then didn’t pay. What am I going to do, sue them? When they have a history of vindictive behavior? Money gone. Mostly it works out fine. Credit cards are kind of an alternative to small claims court, and there are various reputational and other reasons that allow ordinary business to continue even if it is not in practice enforced by law. But also we all choose to avoid transactions that would depend on the threat of a small-stakes lawsuit. PoliceIf you’re wondering why we can’t go back? We’re not okay with things like this:
I wonder how much of this is ‘we can’t do other things we’d prefer to do so instead we do other things that are even worse.’
In an ACX comments highlight post linked earlier, One should also note that the three hours a day on paperwork is quite a lot - that’s a huge tax on the ability to actually Do Things. Can AI plus body cameras help here? Seems like you should be able to cut that down a lot.
If anything this seems advice rather willing to cooperate with the police?
One can summarize that as ‘be respectful and comply with their physical demands, but if they treat you like a witness (and you didn’t do anything illegal) tell the truth, but if they ever accuse you of anything, try to get you to change your story or ask you to repeat yourself or act like you are a suspect get a lawyer and never ever confess to anything even speeding and of course never sign away Miranda.’ That seems like the bare minimum amount of wariness? Probation
According to several commentators, probation is essentially a trap, or a scam. In theory, probation says that you get let go early, but if you screw up, you go back. Screwing up means violating basically any law, or being one minute late to a probation meeting, or losing your job (including because the probation officer changed your meeting to be when you had to work and got you fired), or any number of other rules. One can imagine a few ways this could work, on a spectrum. This is leverage, to be used for your own good and for police business, but everyone wants you to succeed. If the police need your cooperation, they can threaten to send you back. If the police think someone or some activity is trouble, they can tell you to not associate with or do them. And so on. The rules have to mean something, but if you’re clearly trying to turn your life around then they’ll cut you some slack. This is a test. The system is neither your friend nor your enemy, and actions have consequences. And yes, if we are pretty sure you’re up to no good we’ll go looking for a technical reason to violate you, but otherwise good luck. This is a backdoor and a trap, and the system will be actively attempting to send you back to prison as soon as possible.
The reports are that the point of probation is the third thing, that probation officers will actively seek to violate people and send them back to prison even if they’re not doing anything wrong. Thus probation is a substantial portion as bad as being in prison, and then you probably fail and go to prison anyway. In this model, the entire system is in bad faith here, and they’re offering you probation to avoid a trial knowing they’ll then be able to screw you over later. And that this is true to the extent that realistic criminals often turn down probation if the alternative is a shorter overall sentence.
This is offered as the reason people don’t accept GPS monitoring. If you have a GPS monitor, then it is easy to notice you’ve technically violated the terms, and since everyone involved wants to violate you, that means you’re doomed. Scott Alexander interprets ‘someone on probation got two years for driving the speed limit because it was technically a violation in context’ as a outrageous strictness. Which it is, but the two years was really for the original crime the guy got probation for, not for the technical violation. So it’s more like the system lying and being evil, rather than it being too strict per se. Genetic Databases
This is insanely strong evidence that the prediction of being caught is a huge driver of recidivism rates. A 42% drop in 1-year recidivism is crazy. The rate of being caught went up, but it didn’t go up that dramatically. America saw similar results, although smaller.
What we need to do is a study of criminals perceptions of likelihood of being caught with and without the DNA database, and in general, and how those perceptions predict their actions, so we can better establish the effect size here and what else impacts it. There are obvious libertarian objections to a universal DNA database. But if the upside was a 42% overall drop in crime, potentially a lot more since this would then change norms and free up police for other cases? It is very hard for me to make the case for not doing it. MarijuanaThe Biden Administration attempted to move I am libertarian on such matters, but also I am
I don’t think marijuana is typically good for those that use it, especially for those that use it a lot. I believe you are probably better off using it never ( Similarly to what I concluded about sports gambling, I don’t think we should make it effectively criminal, but I believe that there needs to be some friction around marijuana use. Another way to think about this is, you should ensure that your formerly illegal activities have at least as many regulatory barriers as your pro-social activities like selling food or building a house. Steve Sailer points out that one important risk of legalizing vice is that So yes, I think some form of ‘soft illegal’ or semi-legal is the way to go here. If you go fully legal, you get what we’ve been seeing in New York City. There is massive overuse, and a huge percentage of new leases on New York City storefronts have been illegal cannabis shops getting busted. They don’t cause trouble, but that leaves less room for everything else, and often the city actively smells of the stuff.
Seriously, it was totally nuts. Still is, although I report things are improving, and Eric Adams did indeed shut down a lot of the illegal places, eventually. Nature is healing.
Similarly The Economics of Fentanyl
One could model this as the cost of precursor goods being purely in risk of punishment during the process, with the dollar costs being essentially zero. Actually making the drug is dirt cheap, but the process of assembling and distributing it carries risks, and the street price (estimated at $0.50 per tablet) is almost entirely that risk plus time costs for distribution. If you fully legalized Fentanyl, putting it into Category 1, the price would go to almost zero, which would not be pretty. Enforcement and the Lack Thereof
So the punishment if you are caught riding without paying is you get off the bus? That doesn’t work. If I knew for sure that this is all that happens when you don’t pay, either you’re checking a huge portion of buses or I see no reason to pay the fare, given you’re not going to take this seriously.
One policy suggestion he makes is to devote more effort to solving non-fatal shootings, which he says are 50%+ less likely to get solved despite who survives being largely luck and shootings often leading to violence cycles of retaliation. Compared to what we pay for trials and prisons, the costs of investigation seem low, and the deterrence value of catching more suspects seems high. More strong evidence we are underinvesting in detective work. If you believe you can hire more police and then they will spend their days solving capital-C crimes like shootings, then it’s hard to imagine failing a cost-benefit test. How bad can non-enforcement get? I understand why the police in practice mostly ignore burglaries when they don’t have good leads, but when the case has essentially been pre-solved I find this rather baffling. It is impressive how long it is taking for criminals to solve for the equilibrium.
Sometimes I wonder how California still exists,
JailsIt has always been very bizarre to me the things we tolerate in prisons, including letting them be effectively run by criminal gangs, and normalizing rape, but also commercial exploitations like the
Even if prison isn’t purely rehabilitation, it shouldn’t be actively the opposite of that.
As in, if you give prisoners free audio and video calls, which costs you approximately nothing, you see dramatic improvements in prisoner behavior, and a far less toxic environment. The direction makes sense, the magnitude of the change is stunning. I don’t want to trust a single study, but also there is little downside here - introduce this in a bunch more places, and take advantage of the natural experiment, then go from there. If we want to do punishment for punishment’s sake, we have plenty of options for that. Cutting people off from the outside seems like one of the worst ones, especially since actual crime bosses can already get cell phones anyway. It also gives you powerful leverage - you default to calls for free, and have the power to take them away. Instead, we do the exact opposite. Not only are calls not free, we actively limit contact with the outside, especially the influences that would be most positive, in the name of extracting tiny amounts of money. Whenever I hear about such abuses, two things stick in my mind: The absurdly high amount we pay to keep people in prison, and the absurdly low amounts of money over which we torture the inmates and their families. I don’t ‘have a study’ but it seems obvious that allowing more outside communication would be good for rehabilitation, as well as being the right thing to do.
Criminals
Causes of Crime
Causes of ViolenceFrom Vital City, My instinct is to believe the second result directionally, while strongly doubting the magnitude of the intervention studies quoted. There is not as big a contradiction here as one might think. Violent crimes are typically crimes of passion, but even among those incidents, the circumstances that cause that, and the cultural conditions that cause that, are not randomly distributed. You can alter that. Unfortunately anti-poverty programs as such do not seem to move the needle on that in the short term. In the short term, my guess is that if you want to act at scale you must shift the social conditions more directly linked to violence triggers, or As for the first result, I can believe that the correlations and intervention effects are smaller, but I find the general claim of ‘prosperity and employment do not decrease violence’ as obviously absurd, especially when stated as ‘poverty and unemployment do not lead to increased violence.’ Homelessness
Yay Trivial InconveniencesFrom Scott Alexander’s report on the Progress Studies conference, it turns out
San FranciscoThe government of San Francisco has historically been the epitome of the pattern of putting up (Category 2) barriers to productive and pro-social activities like doing business and building housing, but giving de facto (Category 1) carte blanche to a variety of activities we would like to see happen less often. Thus,
It’s not only crime. What if it’s me, too?
When calculating crime in San Francisco, you also have to adjust for dramatically lower foot traffic,
I constantly hear that various nonprofit organizations working with the city of San Francisco are, rather than trying to help with social problems, very much criminal for-profit enterprises working to warp public policy to increase profits. Is the underlying situation quite bad? Periodically I see people say yes.
My experiences have not been this, but I haven’t been in the areas people claim this is happening. So yes, most of the city blocks were never like this, but that’s not good enough. The good news is things seem to be improving now. Closing Down San FranciscoOne option is to arrest people who commit crimes.
This is the pure version of enforcing the law against pro-social legible activity because you refuse to do so against anti-social activity, and thinking you’re helping. A San Francisco DisputeThere was
Cleaning Up San FranciscoThe good news is that this was ages ago. By ages I mean months. Everything escalates quickly now. At this point, I’ve seen Here’s some actually hard evidence that the San Francisco cleanup is working, presented in the absolute funniest way possible.
Perfect. We now have a highly reliable car theft index. We used to get 70 calls a day, now we get about 20. Combining this with other sources from both auto shops and other crime stats, we are likely looking at about a 65% drop in car break-ins, although only a 12% decline in whole-car thefts. This also can make us confident that other crime statistics are moving due to reduced actual crime, rather than due to reduced reporting of crime.
Portland
Those Who Do Not Help Themselves
That response is: If you are not allowing the police to enforce the law, the least you can do is stop whining about it.
This is so insane. How are you going to deter crime if you literally are afraid to have anyone spreading the word that those who rob your stores might face punishment? I hope we have now reached the point where ‘shoplifters arrested in your store by police’ is seen as a good thing? Solving for the Equilibrium (1)
Indeed, this only works if calling the police is worse than paying the fine. If the police wouldn’t do anything, then the threat is empty. The bigger issue is that if the chance of being caught is under 20%, or people think it is, then all you are doing is minimizing their risk. And indeed, it is widely believed that 5% or less of shoplifting attempts are caught. One can even see people treating this as an invitation as noted above - shoplifting is now a game, win one or lose five, not a hard line. Of course, they are not quite promising to make this offer to everyone, merely to do one action or the other. The obvious ethical objection is that those who can pay and really should therefore have the police called will pay, and those who cannot pay and thus have some real need get the police called. And the worries about where does it end. Where I do think this is good is as a way to use limited police resources to get full deterrence. You can’t call the police every time, it’s too expensive for everyone. But you can credibly threaten to call the police if the conditional means you rarely have to actually call them. The threat is stronger than its execution, but to make that work the threat needs to be credible. The other equilibrium is that shoplifters are essentially not prosecuted at all because there are too many of them, and this seems to be a case of
Then there’s the statistics on bike theft, which are even more dismal,
A simple heuristic needs to be ‘if you provide me with video evidence of the crime I will at least then actually look into it.’ If not, well, we should be thankful it’s taking so long to solve for the other equilibrium. Whereas this is your reminder that Solving for the Equilibrium (2)Here’s another, Lead
Law & OrderDo I feel this pain?
Look Out
This seems like a strong argument that you have an ethical obligation, as a potential client, to ensure that this isn’t happening.
You're currently a free subscriber to |