---
subject: "AI #77: A Few Upgrades"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-08-16 13:51:13
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Let’s see. We’ve got a new version of GPT-4o, a vastly improved Grok 2 with a rather good and unrestricted deepfake and other image generator now baked into Twitter, the announcement of the AI powered Google Pixel 9 coming very soon and also Google launching a voice assistant. Anthropic now has prompt caching. Also OpenAI has its final board member, Zico Kolter, who is nominally a safety pick, and SB 1047 got importantly amended again which I’ll cover in full next week once the details are out. There was also the whole paper about Table of ContentsIntroduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. Many quality of life improvements. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. If you look for failure, it’s there. GPT-4o My System Card. Better late than never, if a bit obsolete. 2 Grok 2 Furious 2 Quit. Welcome to Deepfaketown, population Twitter. Pixel Perfect. The first AI integrated phone is almost here. Fun With Image Generation. Two free DALL-E creations per day. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. How do you prove you are a real person? The Art of the Jailbreak. Anthropic offers bounties, make check out to Pliny. They Took Our Jobs. It gets lonely. Also see [that AI scientist thing](https://substack.com/redirect/94348d7b-ef9a-4c6c-884e-8521f3601ea2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).Obvious Nonsense. GPT-2 indeed poses no existential threat to humanity. Get Involved. SFF launching a new funding round, and a shameless plug. Introducing. New GPT-4o update, Anthropic offers prompt caching. In Other AI News. Zico Kolter joins the OpenAI board. Quiet Speculations. If you don’t see AI progressing you have no patience. SB 1047: One Thing to Know. The most basic thing. People don’t know. SB 1047 is Amended Again. Improvements, also big compromises. SB 1047 Rhetoric Prior to the Changes. Preserved for posterity. The Quest for Sane Regulations. Conditional commitments and partial progress. The Week in Audio. Zuckerberg, Russell and Hassabis. Rhetorical Innovation. Responses to Altman, and exploration on what works. Crying Wolf. AGI has not been achieved internally, who would believe you? People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Faster, better, stronger things. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Why versus what. The Lighter Side. We’re so back.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
Future tech when? A request to
If families are worried about the cost of groceries, they should welcome this price discrimination. The AI will realize you are worried about costs. It will offer you prime discounts to win your business. It will know you are willing to switch brands to get discounts, and use this to balance inventory. Then it will go out and charge other people more, because they can afford to pay. Indeed, this is highly progressive policy. The wealthier you are, the more you will pay for groceries. What’s not to love? What’s not to love is that this creates a tax via complexity, a reason to spend more time that is not especially fun and to no productive effect. Or to put it another way, this is the high tech version of coupons. Are not coupons price gouging and price discrimination? You charge an artificially high price, then offer those willing to do meaningless manual labor a discount. This is the same thing, except better targeted, and no one has to do the clipping. I call that a win.
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane UtilityAnother variation on the theme that you need to ask ‘what can the AI do?’ If you ask either ‘what can’t the AI do?’ or ‘can the AI do exactly the thing I’m already doing?’ you are probably going to be disappointed.
This all seems very right to me.
GPT-4o My System CardI thought the point of a system card was to put it out there at the same time as the model release. Instead, they waited until after they’d already put out a new version. But hey, better late than never, The rest of this section goes over the details. There are no surprises, so you can safely skip the rest of the section.
That seems right. Voice opens up new mundane issues but not catastrophic risks.
My understanding is it has advantages and disadvantages versus GPT-4 Turbo but that ‘matches’ is a reasonable claim.
That sounds like an admission that they indeed failed their voluntary commitments to the White House. GPT-4o was released on May 13, 2024. The system card was released on August 8, 2024. That’s almost three months later. I wonder if they were waiting for the METR evaluations that came out recently, and are included here? That highlights the timing issue. If those evaluations are part of your test process you can’t release the model and then do the tests. Their description of their training data sources doesn’t tell us anything new. Red teaming occured, there are some new details, the process is ongoing. They focused more on the consumer UI rather than on risks in the API interface, although API-based testing is ongoing. What mitigations did OpenAI take? Forcing model to use a fixed set of voices. Reasons should be obvious by now. Refusing to identify people based on their voice. I do not share the concerns about this modality. No one seems upset when a human does it. But others seem very upset when an AI does it, so shrug I suppose. Not generating copyrighted content. Sure. Not doing ‘ungrounded inference’ like how intelligent is the speaker?’ or things like race or occupation or sexual preferences while being willing to identify e.g. accents. These are always weird. There is a correlation, there is evidence and a proper Bayesian update. The model damn well knows it and is responding to it, but you train it not to say it too explicitly. Not allowing disallowed content. Okie dokie. Not allowing erotic or violent speech. This got its own category. I suspect this is because they damn well know these categories are different, and the prohibitions are kind of dumb.
Their argument on erotic and violent content is extremely lame:
So… have a system setting for that? I should be able to make that decision for myself. They raise the concern that you can get GPT-4o to ‘repeat misinformation’ and thus generate audio, which might be ‘more persuasive.’ I find this a pretty silly thing to worry about. It is way too late to worry that someone might have a good text-to-speech engine for a generic voice on arbitrary text. There’s very much an app for that. What about the preparedness framework tests? The cybersecurity test showed minimal capabilities. I worry that this methodology, testing the model purely ‘on its own,’ might fail to find important capabilities in the future. Here I am confident we are fine. For biological threats, they say ‘GPT-4o does not advance biological threat creation capabilities sufficient to meet our medium risk threshold.’ The dark blue bars are reliably noticeably higher than the turquoise bars. On ideation and also release and formulation, it let the novices do better than the experts, which is odd, sample sizes here are likely too small, or perhaps this means something? This chart shows that yes, GPT-4o and other similar LLMs are highly useful in enhancing our ability to learn and do various productive and scientific things. And that this carries over into biological threats despite the mitigations. Indeed, the mitigations seem to be doing little work here. Is this enough additional capability that I am worried something will happen sufficiently that I think OpenAI did anything wrong? No. However, this is not a negative result. For persuasion they found the text modality more dangerous than voice, and both less effective than human persuasion attempts. For autonomy they didn’t find anything, although the model did OK on coding interview questions. They then list the METR and Apollo evaluations, nothing surprising. They raise concern about potential ‘emotional reliance’ on and anthropomorphization of the model, based on some observed tester behaviors. I am not too concerned, but I agree it seems worth studying. Overall, I am very happy to have the system card, but like David Manheim I can’t help but notice the timing issues.
2 Grok 2 Furious 2 Quit
They say rather well.
With a small team plus a large amount of compute and GPUs, it seems you too can have a rather solid 4-level model. I no longer put as much weight on the details of the top of Arena since it seems effectively some combination of gamed and saturated, but it remains quite good at giving you a general sense. Here are some of them benchmarks. I notice I do not entirely trust xAI here, but I do trust that the numbers are solid. Grok hooks up directly to Twitter in real time. For many practical purposes, if it is ‘good enough’ then that will make it the best choice. I look forward to testing that out.
However essentially no one is talking about the text model, because they find it much more fun to talk about the image model. The image model seems pretty good.
It’s a good picture. So what if negative prompting doesn’t work with that wording? Wolfgang Blackwood: That’s not the grok llm but the image generator flux not having negative prompts. If you clarify your intent, it does as asked.
Also it was at least initially otherwise
This is a bit more extreme, but it isn’t new, see for example Also,
Pixel PerfectPixel 9 will be the first phone to fully feature Google’s new AI features. Like Apple Intelligence, they’re not putting the new features on older phones that can’t handle it. As a happy user of the Pixel 7, I am certainly intrigued. And he shows us some cool little AI features, like editing or merging photos, and mentions the screenshot analysis app. But all the Gemini voice chat with the full phone assistant feature gets is a little ‘that’s confusing,’ except when he notes the Pixel Buds will let you have a full conversation with the Assistant without taking out the phone. That seems exciting. I might well be in.
On a practical level, Fun with Image Generation
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
Huge if true. The discriminator doubtless costs much less compute to use than the picture does to generate. But that assumes you only have to use the discriminator once per fake, and that the discriminator is reliable. What if those are very false assumptions? Not only do you have to check every real image and video to also spot the fake ones, I can submit my fake any number of times, especially if there is an error rate. If you don’t have a reliable automated detector, you’re cooked. So far, no one has a reliable automated detector? Why do we assume the defense wins this arms race? I would also warn more generally of solutions that depend on some actor ‘doing their job’ in the sense this here is relying on various tech companies. Why do I get five identical spam messages from Twitter bots?
Sources whose judgment you trust seems exactly right, also AI will become increasingly good at evaluating the extent to which something should or should not be trusted, especially if it has web access, so you can ask it for help. Combine that with keeping track of which sources are trustworthy and invoking Bounded Distrust, and you should continue to be maybe not great, but mostly fine. The ‘good’ news is that the limiting factor has never been supply of misinformation. However much demand arises, there will always be supply. And most of that demand is for deeply low-quality misinformation. AI allows you to generate much higher quality of misinformation, but the buyers almost all demand very low quality. If no one is even looking at the video, who cares if the AI can make it look realistic?
Trivial inconveniences can matter in practice, especially if bots are trying to do things at large scale and fully swarm a network. However, it seems silly to think bots would be unable to get a human to give them a credential, if they cared enough about that, even if the system was designed well. And I expect that a lot of people will simply have an AI running their social media accounts either way, although that is in important ways still a ‘real person.’ Ultimately, if an account has a reputation and track record, or is claiming to be a particular person, you can look at that either way. And if that’s not the case, you’ll need to evaluate the output with caution. Which was mostly true before AI. The Art of the JailbreakAnthropic announces an expansion of their Find a jailbreak, get the cash.
Pliny’s reply made it clear he is on the case. That all sounds great.
Exactly. The true threat solves for anything at all.
Also, in other model behavior news, some strange behavior out on the 405.
I occasionally see people, Either find a way to have your model not be jailbroken, or ensure the jailbroken version is a responsible thing to release. Either find a way to not let your safety protocols be fine-tuned away, or be fine with that happening and accept the consequences, or don’t let people do the fine tuning.
They Took Our Jobs
All the good solutions recognize that if you are 10x as productive, you can afford to give some of that back to get more human contact. If that time is unproductive, that is still fine so long as it keeps you in the game.
Obvious NonsenseIn hindsight it is weird this has not been a regular section all this time.
Here is the key second half of their abstract:
This was the same week as the AI scientist paper. There are any number of practical demonstrations that the claim is Obvious Nonsense on its face. But never mind that. Seriously? You want to prove that LLMs are not existential threats to humanity, so you tested on… GPT-2? To be fair, also GPT-2-XL, GPT-J, Davinci (GPT-3), T5-large, T5-small, Falcon-7B, Falcon-40B, Llama-7B, Llama-13B and Llama-30B (presumably those are Llama-1). To be fair to the study authors, their actual statements in the paper are often far more reasonable. They do qualify their statements. Obviously the models they tested on pose no existential threat, so it is unsurprising they did not find evidence of capabilities that would represent one when looking.
The study claims in-context learning plays a greater role than we thought, versus emergent abilities, in LLM capabilities. Even if true at greater scales, I don’t see why that should matter or bring much if any comfort? It is trivial to provide the context necessary for in-context learning, and for the model to provide that context recursively to itself if you hook it up to that ability as many are eager to do. The ability remains for all practical purposes ‘emergent’ if it would then… ‘emerge’ from the model in its full ‘context,’ no? The practical impact remains the same? And certainly Yann Lecun’s above statements, as universal absolute general claims, are laughably, obviously false.
Get InvolvedA shameless plug: My entirely-not-AI 501c3, Balsa Research, In larger and more exciting funding news, SFF has a new round:
Based on my prior knowledge of SFF, your chances in this round will be much, much better than in the standard SFF round. If you are working on this, do not miss out. IntroducingA
Quick math says you reach break-even even if all you do is sometimes ask a second question, so basically anything that often has an follow-ups should use the cache. In Other AI News
Alex Irpan of Google DeepMind transfers from robotics into AI safety, His p(doom) seems unreasonably low to me at 2%. But even at 2% he then does all the highly reasonable things, and recognizes that this is a problem well worth working on - that 2% is presumably based in part on the assumption that lots of smart people will invest a lot into solving the problem.
Quiet Speculations
‘We are not the same.’
Despite this, and despite the standard three year product cycle being only 1.5 years old right now, it is a bit unnerving how many 4-level models we are getting without a 5-level model in sight.
It is not that troubling a sign for progress that we haven’t seen a 5-level model yet, because it has not been that long. What is troubling is that so many others (now at least Anthropic, Google, Meta and xAI, potentially a few others too) matched 4-level without getting above about a 4.2. That suggests there may be a natural plateau until there is an important algorithmic innovation. If you use essentially standard techniques and stack more layers, you get 4-level, but perhaps you don’t get 5-level. Or we could simply be impatient and unappreciative, or asking the wrong questions. I do think Claude Sonnet 3.5 is substantially more productivity enhancing than the original GPT-4. There’s been a lot of ‘make it faster and cheaper and somewhat smarter rather than a lot smarter and more expensive’ and that does seem to be what the market demands in the short term.
For any other product, a 10x+ cost reduction per year with modest quality improvement would be huge. Perhaps most people do not realize the change because for them the cost was never the issue? Long term, sufficiently advanced intelligence is (in a commercial sense, and barring catastrophic risks) Worth It. But if you can’t get it sufficiently advanced, people are asking relatively dumb questions, so on the margin maybe you go for the price drop.
A fun game when watching Star Trek: Next Generation in particular (but it works with other iterations too) is ‘should this or whatever caused this by all rights cause a singularity or wipe out the Federation, and why hasn’t it done either of those yet’? Another is ‘why didn’t they use the ship’s computer to use AI to solve this problem?’ although the answer to that one is always ‘it did not occur to them.’ Also see a certain room shown in Lower Decks. My head cannon is totally that Q and travellers and other cosmic entities and future time travelers and various temporal loops are constantly running interference to stop us and various others from being wiped out or taken over by AIs or causing singularities. Or it’s a simulation, but that’s no fun. Nothing else makes any sense.
A good idea with the wrong proposed name?
Our entire legal system is based on this principle, in both civil and criminal. The two sides look ahead to what would happen in a court, and they reach an agreement on that basis. Most preparations and costs and work are about getting the leverage to negotiate such deals. And indeed, the same is true all the way back to the original act. The threat is stronger than its execution. We would need to adjust our resolution mechanisms, but if AIs can simulate the process and handle the negotiations, that is your best possible situation. One twist is that AIs could also see your track record. So the wise are negotiating and acting with that in mind, even more so than today. Some (such as Trump) see value in credibly threatening scorched earth legal policies and never settling, and cultivate that reputation on purpose, so people are afraid to cross them or sue them. Others play the opposite strategy, so they will be good partners with which to do business. The argument ‘if I settle with you here that opens me up to infinitely more lawsuits’ becomes much stronger in an AI world. The game theory will get very interesting. Ignore the rhetoric and focus on direct impact of actions.
We see a version of this claim every few months, Dan Hendrycks said it in January. If we are focused purely on frontier lab progress, I do think that up until now a reasonable case can be made here that they are driving the costs up and benefits down. For AI not at the frontier, especially those looking to actively use Llama, this goes the other way, but (for now at least) all of that is mundane utility, so it’s good. A key issue is what this lays groundwork for and sets in motion, including potentially enabling AI progress on the frontier that uses Llama to evaluate outputs or generate synthetic data. At some point the impact will flip, and systems will be actively dangerous, and everything indicates that those involved have no intention of changing their behavior when that happens. The other is the obvious one, this intensifies the race, which potentially lowers profits but could also drive even faster development and more investment in the name of getting there first damn the costs and also the safety concerns. That includes all the players that this invites into the game.
I hope he is right, but I am deeply skeptical.
(I bet Taylor Swift absolutely outsources most of her negotiating, and also most of the dancing and related work. Even if she was good enough, there’s no time.) This scenario does not sound like a stable equilibrium, even if we assume the good version of this (e.g. alignment is fully solved, you don’t have an offense-defense crisis, and so on)? The humans who increasingly turn everything over to those AGIs win, in all senses. Those that do not, lose. The hope is that other humans will ‘reward authenticity’ here the way we reward Taylor Swift sufficiently to make up for it, and will retain in control sufficiently to do that? Or that we’ll use political power to enforce our edge? Won’t those who gain political power soon be AGI’s puppets? If you are counting on ‘AIs can’t sign contracts’ I assure you that they can find someone to sign contracts on their behalf. If you are counting on ‘only humans can make friends’ then you are not properly thinking about AGI. Those who lets their AGIs make friends will have better friends, and the AGIs will also outright do it themselves. They’re better at it. I don’t see an acceptable way to make this system work? What’s the plan?
The ‘legacy’ employed who can’t be fired are a temporary phenomenon, and in some places where this is too strict might essentially kill a lot of the existing businesses in this kind of scenario. The equilibrium question is to what extent we will force zero (or very low) marginal product people (since that’s now almost everyone) to be hired. And at what salary, since there will be far more supply than demand. If humans have pensions that take the form of jobs, especially ‘work from home’ jobs where they offer zero marginal product and thus are rarely asked to do anything, do they have jobs? Do the existing ‘no show’ jobs in many corrupt governments and corporations count as employment? That is an interesting philosophical question. I would be inclined to say no. In the long run equilibrium, this still amounts (I think?) to a claim that humans will retain political power and use it to become rent seekers, which will sometimes take the form of ‘jobs.’ If we are fine with this, how do we ensure it is an equilibrium? SB 1047: One Thing to KnowThe most important thing to know about SB 1047 is: SB 1047 has zero impact on models that cost less than $100m in compute to train. This almost certainly includes all currently available models. No one can lower the $100m threshold. The frontier model board can raise the compute threshold, and make some models no longer covered, if they want. But they cannot change the $100m threshold. No model that costs less than $100m will ever be covered. Period. I emphasize this because when asking about SB 1047, someone reported back that only 24% of respondents were confident that older models wouldn’t be impacted. The clause is written that way exactly to be able to make that promise. Of course, California can pass other laws in the future. But this one doesn’t do that. SB 1047 is Amended Again
Going by the summary announcement, many but not all of Anthropic’s changes were made. Some of the changes are clear Pareto improvements, making the bill strictly better. Others reduce the bill’s effectiveness in order to reduce its downside risks and costs and to make the bill more likely to pass. Many of the actually valid objections made to SB 1047 have now been fully addressed. Several less valid objections have also been explicitly and clearly invalidated. In particular: ‘Reasonable assurance’ has become ‘reasonable care,’ which is already required under the common law. Only harms caused or materially enabled by a developer are in scope. The frontier model division is gone. The perjury penalties have been removed. Civil penalties without harm or imminent risk have been limited. Hard $10 million threshold for automatically counting derivative models as distinct models. Removing the uniform pricing provisions.
Points one and two especially important in terms of overcoming commonly made arguments. Anyone who still talks about having to ‘prove your model is safe’ is either misinformed or lying. As is anyone saying the model could be incidentally used to cause harm similar to a truck one could fill with explosives. Also note that perjury is gone entirely, so you can go to jail for lying on your driver’s license application (don’t worry, you won’t) but not here, and so on. The full details have not been announced yet. When they are, I intend to cover the (hopefully and probably final) version of the bill in detail. I’m sad to see some of the provisions go, but clearly now: It’s a good bill, sir.
SB 1047 Rhetoric Prior to the Recent ChangesEverything here was written and responded to prior to the amendments above. I noted the changes in two places, and otherwise preserved the old version for posterity. There was clearly a big push by a16z and company to get people to object to the bill right under the wire, before many of the remaining valid objections are invalidated. The timing does not make sense any other way.
Arram Sabeti feels similar to many others, finding new regulations highly aversive in general
It makes clear that only $100m+ cost models are covered and it has so far faced little opposition, and that Newsom isn’t talking about whether he’ll sign. It quotes both sides and lets them give talking points (even if I think they are highly disingenuous) without letting in the fully false claims.
I wonder about these complaints: Do the opponents want the bill to specify what the tests are and name the people on the new commission, despite that never being how such bills work? Or do they say both ‘this bill is insufficiently flexible as things change’ and also ‘you did not exactly specify how everything will go’? Do they want the government to specify now, for the indefinite future, exactly under what circumstances they will face exactly what reactions, and actually face that, with no human discretion? Or would they (correctly) scream even louder to even higher heaven about that regime, as leading to absurd outcomes? There are several versions of this, of opponents of the bill saying versions of ‘I don’t know what to do here’ without offering opportunity for counterarguments. The most central counterargument is that they are basically lying. They absolutely know procedures they could follow to meet the standards offered here if their models do not pose large catastrophic risks, for example Anthropic wrote a document to that effect, and that there will be various forms of guidance and industry standards to follow. And that ‘reasonable’ is a highly normal legal standard with normal meanings. And that when they say compliance is impossible, they are hallucinating a different kind of law where the government including the judges and juries are a cabal of their sworn enemies completely out to get them on every little thing with every law interpreted literally even when that never happens. And so on. Another of which is that if you don’t know any reasonable actions you could take to prevent catastrophic harms, and are complaining you should be allowed to proceed without doing that, then maybe that should be a you problem rather than us letting you go ahead? What most of them actually want, as far as I can tell - if they can’t simply have the rule of law not apply to them at all, which is their first best solution - is to have the government answer every question in technical detail in advance, to have full safe harbor if they follow the guidance they get to the letter no matter the circumstances, to have that done without it being anyone’s job to understand the situation and give them well-considered answers (e.g. they oppose the Frontier Model Division). And then they want, of course, to have the benefits of common sense and nullification and ‘no harm no foul’ to their benefit, if those rules seem stupid to them in a given spot, and the right to sue over each individual answer if they disagree with it, either in advance or post hoc. Indeed, most of their objections to SB 1047 are also objections to the common law, and to how liability would work right now if a catastrophic event occurred. That is even more true under the new version of the bill. Back to the article: I especially appreciated the correct framing, that Big Tech including Meta and Microsoft, and various VC ecosystem players, are both lobbying heavily against this bill. I am so sick of hearing that a bill opposed by Google, Microsoft, Meta and IBM, that applies only to the biggest companies and training runs, is ‘ripe for regulatory capture’ and a plot by Big Tech. Or that talk of existential or catastrophic risk is some trick by such people to goad into regulation, or to build hype. Stop it. The Quest for Sane RegulationsA remarkably common argument is of the form: X is bad. Y only reduces, but does not entirely prevent, X. Therefore Y doesn’t work, don’t do it. (Optional) Instead do Z, which also doesn’t entirely prevent X.
If you want to go faster than your competitor and win a race, as every Mario Kart player knows, throwing obstacles that slow them down is highly useful. Speeding yourself up is not your only option. Also, yes, you want to stop the Rubber Band AI where they get to take your chips and models and catch up. That’s key as well.
There are complications, especially with verification, but this is worth considering. On SB 1047 in particular, I do think the expected economic impact is net positive even if you don’t care about the catastrophic harms themselves, for various second-order reasons and because the first-order costs are quite small, but of course some others strongly disagree with that.
That seems obviously false? Also it seems to imply no regulation can matter in any other way that matters either? If you can’t change the possibility of an ‘AI risk event’ then you can’t meaningfully alter the pace of progress either. And I presume Roon would agree that the mundane utility in the meantime ultimately doesn’t matter. One can also ask, are you willing to bite the bullet that not only no set of rules could make things better, but that no set of rules can make things worse? Finally, if that were remotely true, then isn’t the response to pass rules that radically speed up the pace of regulatory and government response and gives them the expertise and transparency to know how to do that? And indeed most currently debated rules are mostly doing a subset of this, while opponents sound alarms that they might do a larger subset of it.
Here, in addition to the traditional topline questions that reliably find support for the bill, they ask about various amendments proposed by Anthropic that would weaken the bill. They find the public opposed to those amendments. Much of that opposition, and much support for SB 1047 provisions, is overwhelming. Most important is that they support 69%-17% that enforcement should happen before any potential harm occurs, rather than after a catastrophic event. I find the wording on that question (#12) quite fair. Looking at these results over many surveys, my take is that the public is highly suspicious of AI, and will support regulations on AI well beyond what I think would be wise, and without knowing whether they are designed well. SB 1047 is a remarkably light touch bill, and it is remarkably and unusually well crafted. The Week in Audio
Rhetorical Innovation
When discussing potential outcomes, saying numbers is almost always better than not saying numbers.
This is very different from when others deny that you can assign meaningful probabilities to such events at all. When some reply with ‘oh sure, but when I say it they say I am denying the existence of probabilities or possibility of calculating them’ usually (but not always) the person is indeed denying that existence.
The most successful arguments were ‘competent non-aligned agents’ and ‘catastrophic tools’ with honorable mention to ‘second species’ and ‘human non-alignment (with each other under future conditions).’ I am sad that no one has been able to make the ‘multi-agent dynamics’ case better, and I think the explanation here could be improved a lot, it is important to combine that with the fact that the competition will be between AIs (with any humans that try to compete rapidly losing).
The open refers only to the weights. It doesn’t mean you get the source code, the training procedures, or any idea what the hell is going on. A truly open source release would capture far more upside. It would also carry more potential downside, but the middle ground of open weights is in many ways a poor trade-off.
Crying Wolf
More technically, the reason it is so bad to cry wolf is that it ruins your credibility. Which is quite bad if there is, inevitably or otherwise, a wolf. If various people shout ‘aliens in a UFO’ until everyone stops believing them, and there are indeed and will always be no alien UFOs, then that is only a small mistake. Indeed, it is helpful to learn who is not credible. Similarly, Altman teaching us that Altman lies all the time is highly useful if Altman is in the business of lying all the time. What if the AGI is indeed eventually coming? Then it is unfortunate that we will not be able to tell based on similar future rumors. But it is still true that the boy crying ‘wolf’ provides weaker (but not zero) evidence, each time, of a wolf, regardless of how likely it is that wolves are real. And the boy’s willingness to cry ‘wolf’ a lot probably does not provide much evidence about whether or not wolves ultimately exist, or exist in your area, versus if he hadn’t done it. The real moral of the original story, of course, was that the villagers should have replaced the boy as lookout the moment they stopped believing him. People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone
It does sound fun to watch. The key is being able to do that. What about the part where one of those facets was formerly you? Do you think it would still be you afterwards? Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone
It doesn’t matter why we think we are doing it. What matters is what it will do. Your intentions are irrelevant, especially after you are no longer in control. (This is from the latest OpenAI rumor account, you know what to expect, etc.) The Lighter Side
Seriously, what? Meta and Amazon?
You're currently a free subscriber to |