---
subject: "Do Androids dream of electric battery-swapping?"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2019-05-06 02:35:51
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031"]
---
One of the most important skills we all, especially journalists, need to cultivate is the ability to distrust and question our own conclusions derived from first-hand experiences and knowledge. Because the scale of technology and capital we’re awash in can create markets where no obvious problems existed. Radical new products can invert conventional wisdom worth decades overnight. Which is why whenever you catch yourself thinking, “That will never work, because…”, stop.
Which is what I did when Olina, the writer of today’s story, was discussing her rather counterintuitive story about the rise of battery-swapping for electric vehicles in India. “That’ll never work, because electric charging will become ubiquitous. Who’s going to want to mess around with heavy batteries each day just to ride to work? Didn’t former SAP executive Shai Agassi’s battery-swapping startup Better Place spectacularly flame out after raising and spending $850 million?”
Stop. Olina’s story is a case study in how we’re often unable to visualise disruptive products, especially when they arrive via customers and sectors and channels “invisible” to us.
Battery-swapping might sound ridiculous if you’re visualising the average consumer who drives 30-40 km each day and can charge her vehicle overnight at home. Given the rise of private charging stations in our cities, even getting a quick top-up charge during the day won’t be a problem.
But the scenarios all break down if you’re a delivery person working for a logistics company or the driver of a commercial transport vehicle. B2B is a different ball game. It inverts our conventional wisdom.
Why would you want to own a battery? Why would you want to charge a battery over 8 hours if you could swap it in less than 8 minutes? What if not owning the battery reduced the price of an electric vehicle by 50%?
“Think of us as the Android platform for electric mobility. It’s an open standard, with little, individualised tweaks for different form-factors. Just like Android has the capacity to tweak its apps for a Xiaomi or Samsung phone. But the basic application remains the same,” says Chetan Maini, the co-founder of SUN Mobility, a high-tech, battery-swapping platform for electric two and three-wheelers. The comparison with Android makes SUN’s ambition—to be the new normal in charging standards—crystal clear.
Read Olina’s deeply reported story to understand why battery swapping is seeing a rise in India, seemingly at odds with global trends (even Elon Musk had to abandon his early dreams for Tesla battery swapping). Here you go:
[https://the-ken.com/story/battery-swapping-ev-ambitions/](http://link.the-ken.com/wf/click?upn=HQSq6eeRV1xAVaGuFOahuNCZVVXPeP-2FJpSqxhvIUDrn-2BL6yC1UGDIo8kL0Z5mbugUykBeKM14IKI8-2FMEHDcpnmDNS6I3m83JL5svwnQKBFEkjsQQHcBjk0qL2XkoKUsBAFR9zSpvYII7u5-2BEUaLj0bfsK2cqsv3Tf8K7U95OeUCm3GARgGUcacij-2BzCu4ukE_S4jLOsNx-2Fv6Jev2nvow8b7P9pBCWGd8KNZfb200gkZLQNlXQHio0noZzXtsWoloZmPWeyZsh7a4QCV9ufwCUKi00jlBT0uEdvwYDMuVuqcPM0Rt6ZWrneu781-2Ff-2FSXeYCR10kRPIjbUZkpsszas0G965cxKXR90F6X2PJWT67bnwFqIpCc-2FX-2FdJz2uioHBu3V19EntmBfEGTjSDwnQ77RbtPAMKgFe4FzE84IDHCztGzrKcGpCAapiYfcw2nZsI1gdxz1X03cgkO6Uo9AP5GZjdKwFvVCXcJ-2BrXqcF9IrKY4f-2FjfKBym4cpgHwtv6c97atQMSht60N9HG-2B1vQTXQsgHfvYpg-2FRJFm6hELJRPLWtxmBGHuJeEabEpNqQIKN9D2r6zm9P9-2FELGC5CLRHWWi8tZw2Vu44Vj0UfEXRkaicY-3D)