---
subject: "Learning to Slow Down Time"
from: "Trung Phan <trungphan@workweek.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-06-15 06:11:08
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Trung Phan"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_7971156048460647958"]
---
Eagleman had his research subjects do the SCAD while wearing a wristband with a flashing LED screen. Why? Because there is a visual phenomenon called flicker fusion frequency, which is the frequency at which a flickering light appears steady.
If a person’s perception of time really slowed down in near-death situations, the research subjects would be able to identify a number that was flickering at a very high rate while falling (a rate that typically can not be seen by the human eye).
None of the SCAD research subjects could actually identify the number while falling. This suggests that the experience of time in the moment (prospective) did not actually slow down. However, when looking back on the experience (retrospective), all of the subjects overestimated the duration of the fall.
According to Eagleman, the reason why the fall felt longer in retrospect is because the subjects’ amygdala was engaged. The amygdala is the part of the brain that activates the fight-or-flight response in dangerous situations (such as a car cutting in front of you or your wife asking “hey, I’ve been meaning to ask why…”).
“[In] emergency situations, your amygdala commandeers the rest of the brain and makes you attend to what’s happening [vision, audio, feelings, memory],” says Eagleman. “When the amygdala is involved, memories are laid down on a secondary memory system.”
The primary memory system — which sorts through routine everyday activities — is handled by our hippocampus. But most everyday activities are very unmemorable. It’s this secondary memory system that creates long-lasting memories. The memories that are salient many years after the incident. It makes sense. Our survival depends on knowing how to navigate dangerous situations and we want to implant those memories and lessons directly into the dome when they do happen.
There are two main takeaways. First, there is literally no amount of money that you could pay me to do a SCAD. $1 million? Nope. $100 million? Still nope. $1 billion? I will be very upset about this decision — and probably regret missing out on all the Disneyland Misting Fans I could have purchased — but the answer is still nope. Kick rocks.
The larger takeaway is applicable to anyone: engaging more of your brain is crucial for laying down denser memories and stretching out the feeling of the experience of time in retrospect.
***
How to change our perception of time
Eagleman’s ideas have had a particularly profound impact on me based on simple math.
Say the average lifespan is 80 years old. Then consider that time feels like it moves faster as we age. At age 40, the average person may be 50% through their biological life but they may have experienced 75% of what the brain will ever experience.
God damn, that’s too real.
Here’s a longer excerpt from Eagleman’s podcast that really hammers home the realness:
"We all have the impression that a childhood summer seemed to last forever, but when you're older, the summers are here and then they're gone and years zip by and decades, zip by. Well, now you know why. It's because the job of the brain is to build an internal model of the world out there. Your brain is locked in silence and darkness inside your skull, and all it is trying to do is understand the structures of the world so it can operate in it better. And whenever it encounters a surprise, it writes that down and it makes changes to your circuitry.
But as you go through life and your brain develops better models of the world, less and less carries much surprise. This is why you lay down fewer memories as you age. It's because you've seen that situation before and you've met that personality before and you've done that job before. The memories that you lay down are much thinner, they're more impoverished. But in contrast, when you're in your childhood, everything is new. And so the richness of your memories gives you the impression of increased duration.
When you are looking back at the end of a childhood summer, it seems to have lasted for such a long time because everything was new. But when you're looking back at the end of an adult summer, it seems to have disappeared rapidly because you haven't written much down in your memory. So I don't recommend emergency situations, but it sure does make you operate like you're a child again. So here is the take-home lesson. We have to seek novelty because this is what lays down new memories in the brain."
Eagleman concludes his podcast episode by explaining practical things he does to lay down denser memories (thankfully, none involve a SCAD):
"One thing I do every day is drive home a different route from work. It's not that hard and it doesn't take much longer, but it allows me to see things in a fresh way. Most of us have had the experience that when you drive to work for the first time, it seems to take a really long time, but after that, it shrinks. And it's because you're becoming an automatized zombie and you're just running this program unconsciously of driving to work. You're not noticing new things anymore. And another thing I try to do is rearrange my office every month or so. It's really easy. You just push your desk over to the other side. You maybe swap the artwork on the walls, things like that. These are easy things to do. One thing that I recommend is tonight brush your teeth with your other hand.
It's not that hard to do, but it will make you seem as though you are extending your time a bit because you're forcing your brain off its hamster wheel of doing things a particular way every day. And by the way, if you wear a watch or a Fitbit, switch it to the other hand so that when you are looking at it, it's not just an automatic thing, but it's something you have to put a little bit of attention towards. So all these kinds of things — any version of this — it's the best thing that you can do to perceptually extend your life."
One tip: don’t try to change your daily commuting routine by driving to work in reverse. My personal experience this morning suggests you will get pulled over by the cops.
Anyway, other techniques to extend the experience of time include having “signposts” on your calendar, which are activities that you look forward to doing. Remember, having the same monotonous daily routine bleed into the next same daily monotonous routine is how the experience of time feels short in retrospect. Having different activities to break up a “more of the same” schedule — especially for parents of young children (where routine is routine) — is important.
Geographies with multiple seasons (winter, summer, spring, fall) also extend the perception of time in retrospect. A locale that has a single season for the entire year is more likely to make months blend together. The changing of the seasons acts as temporal signposts.
I know that a lot of SatPost readers spend their professional lives in front a screen.
A day full of Zoom meetings, replying to e-mails and pretending to laugh at your co-workers Slack jokes is a sure way to lay down thin memories. Everyday bleeding into the next.
The biggest life change I’ve done in recent years to counter the digital life is spend at least 90 minutes every day outdoors. It is usually a long walk or jog. While my amygdala is mostly chill, way more parts of the brain are engaged just to keep my body upright and visually locating my next footsteps. It is important to engage all of the senses as much as possible to form dense memories.
This is not just a subjective perception issue, either.
There is also a physics-based rationale.
Let me explain. Duke Professor Adrian Bejan published a paper titled “Why the Days Seem Shorter as We Get Older” and his thesis is that time moves faster as we age because our sensory organs degrade as we age and receive less (or worse) stimuli.
The paper’s [abstract reads](https://link.workweek.com/click/35727369.37914/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuY2FtYnJpZGdlLm9yZy9jb3JlL2pvdXJuYWxzL2V1cm9wZWFuLXJldmlldy9hcnRpY2xlL3doeS10aGUtZGF5cy1zZWVtLXNob3J0ZXItYXMtd2UtZ2V0LW9sZGVyLzJDQjhFQzlCMEIzMDUzNzIzMEM3NDQyQjgyNkU0MkYxP2hhc2hlZF91c2VyPTBlYmVmMTJjNDI5MTE4NDU2MmRhYzA5OTY1YmNlODA4I2ZpZzE/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Bda02922d):
…measurable ‘clock time’ is not the same as the time perceived by the human mind. The ‘mind time’ is a sequence of images, i.e. reflections of nature that are fed by stimuli from sensory organs. The rate at which changes in mental images are perceived decreases with age, because of several physical features that change with age: saccades frequency, body size, pathways degradation, etc.
It is fairly easy to square Bejan’s paper with Eagleman’s take on memory. If our eyesight, hearing, touch and general cognitive abilities degrade as we age, the memories we form will be less dense … and our perception of time will move faster.