---
subject: "AI #119: Goodbye AISI?"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-06-05 13:49:50
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
AISI is being rebranded highly non-confusingly as CAISI. Is it the end of AISI and a huge disaster, or a tactical renaming to calm certain people down? Hard to tell. It could go either way. Sometimes you need to target the people who call things ‘big beautiful bill,’ and hey, the bill in question is indeed big. It contains multitudes. The AI world also contains multitudes. We got Cursor 1.0, time to get coding. On a personal note, this was the week of LessOnline, which was predictably great. I am sad that I could not stay longer, but as we all know, duty calls. Back to the grind. Table of Contents[Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/dba80ba2-c7b1-413d-a212-e2c350734781?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The white whale.[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility](https://substack.com/redirect/ce975005-b762-435b-85be-8b8ffcaaeaee?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/ce975005-b762-435b-85be-8b8ffcaaeaee?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)You need a system prompt.[Language Models Could Offer More Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/c2105d13-e895-44d2-afff-0946a7ab738f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A good set of asks.[Huh, Upgrades](https://substack.com/redirect/c9d92a47-2efc-4a07-9b6f-ca4d2bbda62e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/c9d92a47-2efc-4a07-9b6f-ca4d2bbda62e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The highlight is Cursor 1.0, with memory and more.[Fun With Media Generation.](https://substack.com/redirect/c9b799de-cfd7-4e8c-a192-9a60915ece49?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Video is high bandwidth. But also low bandwidth.[Choose Your Fighter.](https://substack.com/redirect/b6c51008-af0d-4fe3-9f10-dd93a981a701?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Opinions differ, I continue to mostly be on Team Claude.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon.](https://substack.com/redirect/78a38588-b022-4d65-b78c-1c2305281cd9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Fake is not a natural category. Whoops.[Get My Agent On The Line.](https://substack.com/redirect/69ba3a96-c2aa-4368-8eda-a0f28c527664?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)We all know they’re not secure, but how bad is this?[They Took Our Jobs.](https://substack.com/redirect/15071289-b2d5-4562-b046-f0b35c70383f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Economists respond to Dario’s warning.[The Art of the Jailbreak.](https://substack.com/redirect/c6a6c11a-8e0c-491d-818e-c105bc714796?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Why not jailbreak AI overviews?[Unprompted Attention.](https://substack.com/redirect/d55d66fd-608e-4ed5-bebf-2215c8ab38b1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)More prompts to try out.[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/b32f8d31-771a-4fce-afad-68b02654d44f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)SFCompute, Speculative Technologies.[Introducing.](https://substack.com/redirect/1329088e-279b-429a-bfff-e6c515f88677?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Anthropic open sources interpretability tools, better AR glasses.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/aa2f0725-d6e9-43fc-bc02-d32719b3bea8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)FDA launches their AI tool called Elsa.[Show Me the Money.](https://substack.com/redirect/f6c04ce3-511f-4e88-8c76-13c31cd6af29?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Delaware hires bank to value OpenAI’s nonprofit.[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/0822f09c-6df8-4b67-b7f7-9b89a19399b1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)People don’t get what is coming, but hey, could be worse.[Taking Off.](https://substack.com/redirect/d4bbaf3c-4ad5-4e40-a1e9-a65355f8daf8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)AI beats humans in a test of predicting the results of ML experiments.[Goodbye AISI?](https://substack.com/redirect/cd1e736f-f1bc-4700-85ed-358702b621a4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)They’re rebranding as CAISI. It’s unclear how much this matters.[The Quest for Sane Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/aaa8bc5a-790a-45fd-ac29-14bd2cbe78a8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The bill is, at least, definitely big. Tl;dr.[Copyright Confrontation.](https://substack.com/redirect/3e407155-b14e-4b21-b3ae-5ed3cb6b0f47?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)OpenAI is being forced to retain all its chat logs.[Differential Access.](https://substack.com/redirect/63fd76a2-4a08-4a61-988d-892626ae0785?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The Good Guy needs a better AI than the Bad Guy.[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/941dc406-589a-4aaf-9b9a-f136cab593a8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Altman, Tegmark, Amodei, Barnes.[When David Sacks Says ‘Win the AI Race’ He Literally Means Market Share](https://substack.com/redirect/e0240bc9-54cb-494c-bbe0-ce74506d69a6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/e0240bc9-54cb-494c-bbe0-ce74506d69a6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/9fe37c13-bbd3-4d2e-85e7-4cff454806c5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Blog metagame continues to dominate.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/3cc50f02-113b-4974-afaa-2df77637ee1b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Proceed accordingly.[Misaligned!](https://substack.com/redirect/2bc04e11-6043-4e7b-bc3f-cfe61ad86591?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)About that safety plan, would it, you know, actually work?[People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/3f499052-84b5-479f-8203-c717970d6a5a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Regular people.[The Lighter Side.](https://substack.com/redirect/877369ca-0516-4cd0-ac37-03cecdba9514?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)You’re not alone.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
Similarly, here’s a post about AI coding with the fun and accurate title ‘
It really is weird that The following seems not great to me, but what do I know:
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
I do, and I get results like this:
I was amused how many people replied with ‘oh no, that’s how the AIs win.’
My presumption is this is more about why other models don’t do this. The prior on text is that it is all created by people, who have things like desks, so you need to do something to actively prevent this sort of thing. For o3 that thing is not working right.
Language Models Could Offer More Mundane Utility
To quibble a bit with the first one, what you want is for your personal data to be available to be put into context whenever it matters, but that’s clearly the intent. We are very close to getting this at least for your G-suite. I expect within a few months we will have it in ChatGPT and Claude, and probably also Gemini. With MCP (model context protocol) it shouldn’t be long before you can incorporate pretty much whatever you want. Learning from previous prompts would be great but is underspecified and tricky. This is doubly true once memory gets involved and everyone has custom instructions. The basic issue is that you need to be doing deliberate practice. There’s a discussion about this later in the post when I discuss MidJourney. If you want LLMs to offer users mundane utility,
Oh to be as aspirational as Karpathy. Usually I am happy if there is an option to do a thing at all, and especially if I am able to figure out where the menu is to do it. Yes, of course it would be better if the underlying representations were in script form and otherwise easy to manipulate, and the menus were optional, ideally including for human users who could use shortcuts and text commands too. The difference is that most humans will never touch a setting or menu option, whereas in glorious AI future the AIs will totally do that if you let them. Of course, in the glorious AI future, it won’t be long before they can also navigate the menus. Huh, Upgrades
I keep being simultaneously excited to get back to coding, and happy I waited to get back to coding?
But they don’t got me, because this is for some reason a Deep Research only feature? That seems crazy. So every time I want to use my GMail and Docs as context I’m going to have to commission up a Deep Research report now? I mean, okay, I guess that’s something one can do, but it seems like overkill.
I don’t understand why we need these restrictions. Hopefully it improves over time.
Fun With Media GenerationIt is weird to think about the ways in which video is or is not the highest bandwidth input to the brain. I find text beats it for many purposes at least for some of us, although video beats audio.
TikTok succeeds, as I understand it (I bounced off hard) because it finds the exact things that tickle your particular brain and combines that with intermittent rewards. Certainly if you can combine that with custom AI video generation (or customization of details of videos) that has the potential to take things to the next level, although I wonder about the interaction with virality. It seems highly reasonable to worry.
There is a fun conversation between ‘AI will make this thing so much worse’ versus ‘even without AI this thing was already very bad.’ If it was already very bad, does that mean it can’t get that much worse? Does it mean we can handle it? Or does it mean it will then get much worse still and we won’t be able to handle it?
Choose Your Fighter
One opinion on how to currently choose your fighter:
I am much more biased towards Claude for now but this seems right in relative terms. Since then he has been feeling the Claude love a bit more.
Most people have a harder time picking ‘em.
If you are like Sully and building automated tools, it’s important to optimize cost and performance and find the right model. For human use, cost is essentially irrelevant except for your choices of subscriptions. Thus, you can get most of the way there with simple heuristics unless you’re hitting use limits. It is definitely not correct but ‘use Opus for everything’ (or o3 if you’re on ChatGPT instead) is not such a bad principle right now for the average person and paying up.
This seems correct to me if you are stuck inside the ChatGPT AI Universe (OAIU). As Andrej notes, you can and should also use other tools, although I don’t ever use Perplexity or Grok at current margins, and I mostly agree with Peter here.
I do think there is a bar for ‘hard or important’ where you want to consider shifting away from Claude, but the bar is high enough that the question is almost moot. As in, if the question is hard enough that you don’t want to rely on Claude? Then you definitely want to query multiple AIs, and probably all three of (Gemini 2.5, Claude 4 Opus and o3). Then compare and combine the answers. Why not? Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
That feeling
Get My Agent On The LineThe question is not whether adversaries can exploit AI agents. We know that is a yes. The question is, exactly how many levels will we have to tighten security before it is safe to point an AI agent at an insecure website that is trying? And what do you have to check before you can presume a given website is safe?
Well, yes. There is that. There is also this:
They Took Our JobsThere has been as one would expect discussion about
AI could wipe out half of all entry-level white-collar jobs — and spike unemployment to 10-20% in the next one to five years, Amodei told us in an interview from his San Francisco office. Amodei said AI companies and government need to stop "sugar-coating" what's coming: the possible mass elimination of jobs across technology, finance, law, consulting and other white-collar professions, especially entry-level gigs.
Before we continue, I want to note that I believe many people may have parsed Dario’s claim as being far bigger than it actually was. Dario is not saying half of all white-collar jobs. Dario is saying half of all entry-level white-collar jobs. I think that within one year that definitely won’t happen. But within five years? That seems entirely plausible even if AI capabilities disappoint us, and I actively expect a very large percentage of new entry-level job openings to go away. An unemployment rate of 10% within 5 years seems aggressive but not impossible. My guess is this will not happen in a baseline scenario (e.g. without transformational AI) because of what I call ‘shadow jobs,’ the jobs we value but not enough to currently hire someone for them, which will then become real once (as Kevin Bryan puts it) prices adjust. If AI advances do continue to impress, then yes, we will probably see this. Kevin Bryan however is very confident that this is a Can’t Happen and believes he knows what errors are being made in translating AI progress to diffusion.
It is a good sanity check that the groups above only add up to 2% of employment, so Dario’s claim relies on penetrating into generic office jobs and such, potentially of course along with the effects of self-driving. We do see new areas targeted continuously, for example here’s My model of this is that yes things are taking longer than optimists expected, and until the dam breaks on a given role and the AI becomes a true substitute or close to it prices can adjust and demand can be induced, and yes translators for now are statistically holding on to their jobs even if life got a lot worse. But the bottom falls out quickly once the AI is as good as the human, or it passes more bars for ‘good enough for this purpose.’ Similarly, for taxis and truck drivers, of course employment is not down yet, the self-driving cars and trucks are a drop in the bucket. For now. But despite the legal barriers they’re now past MVP, and they’re growing at an exponential rate. And so on. Economists are very smug and confident that the AI people don’t understand these basic economic facts when they make their forecasts. To some extent this is true, I do think others tend to underestimate these effects quite a bit, but if we all agree that Dario’s technological vision (which includes the geniuses in a datacenter within these 5 years) is accurate, then keep in mind we are only looking at entry-level positions? What will (I predict) often happen in the slow-AI-progress and slow-diffusion scenarios is that the senior person uses the AI rather than hire someone new, especially rather than someone new who would require training. The efficiency gains by senior people then cash out partly in reducing headcount of junior people, who are a lot less useful because the senior people can just prompt the AI instead.
I agree that this is roughly the default, although it will be spikey in various places. Where exactly ‘manual labor’ comes in depends on the tech tree. Truck and taxi drivers will probably be in trouble within a few years.
If you interpret this as ‘jobs in general won’t disappear that fast’ then I actually agree, if we are conditioning on not getting to transformational AI (e.g. no superintelligence). A lot of jobs very much will disappear though, and I expect unemployment to kick in by then. I do agree that the key question is, can you provide more value than you cost, with the caution that you have to do a lot better than ‘more than your salary.’ You need to have a substantial multiplier on your all-in cost to employ before people will hire you. The thing is, I know Kevin is thinking Dario is right about the tech, and I think Kevin is a lot better on this front than most, but I don’t think he fully understands Dario’s actual position on how much progress to expect here. Dario is more optimistic than I am, and expects very crazy things very quickly.
Excellent, now we can pinpoint the disagreement. I think Kevin is right that the lab people are being too flippant about how hard replacement or automating the automation will be, but I also think Kevin is underestimating what the tech will do on these fronts.
If nothing else this is a very good take:
Similarly:
Now is definitely not the time to make life harder on those who lose their jobs. I think there will be a lot of ‘slowly, then suddenly’ going on, a lot of exponential growth of various ways of using AI, and a lot of cases where once AI crosses a threshold of ability and people understanding how to use it, suddenly a lot of dominos fall, and anyone fighting it gets left behind quickly. What happens then?
They’re going to automate the DoorDash too. And many of the substacks. Then what? That’s why my prediction goes back to ‘unemployment will mostly be okay except for transition costs (which will be high) until critical mass and then it won’t be.’ Or, you know, we could just make bold pronouncements without argument, yes I plan to cut back on David Sacks content but this is such a great illustration of a mindset:
His intended statement is that there will somehow still be jobs for everyone, but I can’t help but notice the other half. If you lose your job to AI and can’t find another one? Well, good luck with that, peasant. Not his problem. The Art of the Jailbreak
Claude 4 uses constitutional classifiers as an additional layer of defense against potential misuse of the system. In general there are not many false positives, but if you are working in adjacent areas to the issue it can be a problem.
The problem of ‘anything in the PDF could trigger a classifier’ seems like it needs to be solved better. It’s a hard problem - you can sneak in what you want as a small portion of the context, but if any such small part can trigger the classifier, what then? To answer Pliny’s question, I don’t know if we need them. I do agree it will sometimes be frustrating for those in the relevant fields. I do think the time will come when we are happy we have a good version of something like this, and that means you need to deploy what you have earlier, and work to improve it. Unprompted Attention
You should definitely have a system prompt.
Here’s one to try:
Some people have asked for my own current system prompt. I’m currently tinkering with it but plan to share it soon. For Claude Opus, which is my go-to right now, it is almost entirely about anti-sycophancy, because I’m pretty happy otherwise.
I don’t care for eigenprompt and rolled my own, but yeah, we really should get on this. There’s also the question of prompting itself. Could we somehow share more?
MidJourney’s approach was a highly double-edged sword. I didn’t use it largely because I didn’t feel comfortable with others seeing my prompts. I also realize that MidJourney enables such great learning because images lend themselves to evaluation, iteration and deliberate practice, in a way that text doesn’t. With text, you don’t know the response you want. Once you do, you no longer need to generate the text. So you don’t naturally iterate. You also don’t auto-generate the same kind of feedback on text that you do on images, whether or not you generated the original text or image, and it’s harder to trace cause and effect. Thus if you want to iterate on text, you need to be doing deliberate practice, as in slowing down and doing it intentionally. It can be done, but it is much harder. Get InvolvedIf you’re doing academic research on open source models and need a bunch of batch inference it’s possible you want to Twitter
Introducing
It is a real shame about the choice of AI. It is plausible that other things matter more, that Llama is ‘good enough’ for many uses, but it would be much better to have similar tech from Google, or even better that was open so you could tie in what you wanted. That’s coming, it is only a matter of timing. AR glasses are probably getting close. In Other AI NewsThis seems great if the implementation is good:
Those complaining about this being insufficiently trustworthy are mostly comparing it against an insane benchmark. The FDA’s inability to efficiently process information is killing a lot of people and imposing huge costs, good tools that speed that up are desperately needed even if they occasionally make mistakes the same way people do. The question is, is the implementation good? We don’t know what this is based upon. It does seem to be very helpful, with quotes like ‘what took 2-3 days now takes 6 minutes.’ I don’t like the lack of transparency, but I prefer an FDA speed run (see: Operation Warp Speed) to normal procedure, any day.
Show Me the Money
Robin Hanson keeps being confused why everyone keeps buying all these chips and valuing all these AI companies, including the one (Nvidia) producing the chips.
The reason OpenAI and others are paying so much is because there is more demand than supply at current prices and chips are rationed. Yes, you would prefer to buy big later at retail price, but one does not simply do that. In a world where H100s are going on eBay for $40k a pop, it is rather silly for others to claim that we should be selling some of them to China at retail price to avoid ‘losing market share.’ Everything is currently gated by compute.
Increasingly, money gone.
Mostly it is worth every penny, but yes if you are doing power user things the costs can expand without limit. Quiet SpeculationsIt is far too late to choose another central path, but to what extent is iterative deployment preparing people for the future?
This is a common mistake, where you notice that things in a terrible state and you fail to realize how they could be so, so much worse. Yeah, 99%+ very much do not get it, and 99.99%+ do not fully get it, but that’s far fewer 9s than the alternative, and the amount of not getting it could be much higher as well. They get some of it, the minimum amount, and yes that does help.
One was that he expected voice mode to be a bigger deal than it was. His guess is that this is because the mode is still janky, and I do think that is part of it, as is the AI not having good tool access. I think you need your voice mode AI to be able to do more of the things before it is worthy. Give it some time. The other is that he expected more fraud and crime to come out of early open models. It is important to acknowledge that many had this expectation and it turned out that no, it’s mostly fine so far, the haters were right, honestly great call by the haters. Not that there has been none, and the issues are indeed escalating quickly, likely on an exponential, but we’ve mostly gotten away clean for now. I think three key lessons here that are more important than I realized are: People Don’t Do Things. Yes, you could totally use the new model to do all of this crime. But you could have already used other things to do a lot of crime, and you can use the models to do so many things that aren’t crimes, and also criminals are dumb and mostly keep doing the things they are used to doing and aren’t exactly prompting wizards or very innovative or creative, and they don’t know what it is the models can do. If they were all that and they could scale and were motivated, they wouldn’t be criminals, or at least they’d also be startup founders. The Primary Problem Is Demand Side. Why aren’t deepfakes yet that big a deal? Why isn’t fraud or slop that big a deal? Because within a wide range, no one really cares so much whether the fraud or slop should actually fool you or is any good. People are mostly fooled because they want to be fooled, or they are pretending to be fooled, or they Just Don't Care. Diffusion Is Slower Than You Expect. This is related to People Don’t Do Things, I will indeed admit that I and many others didn’t realize how slow people would be in putting AIs to good work across the board. Crime is a special case of this.
What is the best possible AI?
This is a claim about compute efficiency, that you’re better off getting all your knowledge from the giant context window. I’m not convinced. Doesn’t the ability to think itself require a fair bit of knowledge? How would you break this down? I think Miles is right about this, the AI market is so underpriced that slow progress won’t crash it even if that happens, although I would add ‘reaction to They Took Our Jobs’ or ‘current law gets interpreted in ways that are totally insane and we can’t find a way to prevent this’ to the candidate list:
Taking Off
The edge here for their specialized system is large (64% vs. 49%), whereas off-the-shelf o3 is no better than random guessing. One must beware of the usual flaws in papers, this result might be random chance or might be engineered or cherry-picked in various ways, but this also illustrates that frequently the issue is that people try an off-the-shelf option, often an out-of-date one at that, then assume that’s ‘what AI can do.’ Goodbye AISI?Hard to say. This rebranding could be part of a sign flip into the anti-AISI that fights against any attempt to make AI secure or have everyone not die. Or it would be a meaningless name change to placate people like Ted Cruz and David Sacks, or anything in between. Here’s the full announcement, for those who want to try and read tea leaves.
If you look at the actual details, how much of this is what we were already doing? It is all worded as being pro-innovation, but the underlying actions are remarkably similar. Even with #5, the goal is for America to set AI standards, and that was already the goal, the only difference is now America is perhaps trying to do that without actually, what’s the term for this, actually setting any standards. But if you want to convince others to change their own standards, that won’t fly, so here we are. The obvious question to ask is about #3: We are investigating ‘potential security vulnerabilities and malign influence arising from use of AI systems, including the possibility of backdoors and other covert, malicious behavior.’ That’s excellent. We should totally do that. But why are we explicitly only doing this with ‘adversary’ AI systems? Isn’t it kind of weird to assume that American AI systems can’t have security vulnerabilities, malign influence, backdoors or malicious behaviors? Even if they don’t, wouldn’t it help everyone to go check it out and give us confidence? The obvious response is ‘but standards on American labs need to be entirely voluntary, if the government ever requires anything of an American AI company this interferes with Glorious Innovation and then a puff of smoke happens and we Lose To China,’ or perhaps it means everyone turns woke. That’s rather silly, but it’s also not what I’m asking about. Obviously one can say any words one likes but it would not have any effect to say ‘hey DeepSeek, you can’t release that new model until we check it for malign influence.’ What CAISI is planning to do is to test the models after they are released. In addition to the voluntary testing, we should at the bare minimum do the post-release testing with our own models, too. If o3 or Opus 4 has a security vulnerability, or OpenAI puts in a backdoor, the government needs to know. One can be a patriot and still notice that such things are possible, and should be part of any test. It’s also very possible that Lutnick and everyone involved know this and fully agree, but are wording things this way because of how it sounds. In which case, sure, carry on, nothing to see here, it’s all very patriotic. The Quest for Sane RegulationsWhen your Big Beautiful Bill has lost Marjorie Taylor Greene because she realizes it strips states of their rights to make laws about AIs for ten years (
On the moratorium,
This seems a lot like ‘we are not going to prevent you from having laws, we are only going to force your laws to be worse, and because they are worse you will have less of them, and that will be better.’ Even if you believe less is more, that’s a hell of a bet. This is not what I want my US Department of Energy to sound like?
I am all for the Department of Energy getting us a lot more energy to work with, but the number of ways in which the official statement should worry you is not small. You know what all of this makes me miss? The debate over SB 1047. As stressful and unfun as that was at the time, it was the height of civilized discourse that we might never see again.
I don’t think the sides were symmetrical. But, basically, this. Imagine having Dean Ball as your Worth Opponent instead of David Sacks. Or getting to face 2024 David Sacks instead of 2025 David Sacks. You miss it when it is gone, even if by the endgame of SB 1047 the a16z vibe army had effectively indeed turned into the main opposition. It starts to feel like those superhero shows where the ordinary decent foes from the early seasons become your allies later on, partly because you win them over with the power of friendship but largely because the new Big Bad is so bad and threatening that everyone has no choice but to work together. Dean also gives us another reminder of that here, in response to his WSJ op-ed from Judd Rosenblatt, Early warnings give us the opportunity to notice such things. Don’t ignore them.
I didn’t know how good I had it a year ago. I would see things like ‘fomenting panic works for short term headlines, just tell your readers the truth,’ see what looked like Isolated Demand for Rigor to ensure no one gets the wrong impression while most others were playing far faster and looser and trying to give wrong impressions on purpose or outright lying or getting facts wrong, and get upset. Oh, how naive and foolish was that instinct, this is great, we can roll with these sorts of punches. Indeed, I do think that it would have been good to be clearer in Judd’s OP about the conditions under which Palisade got those results, so readers don’t come away with a wrong impression. Dean’s not wrong about that. Remember Copyright ConfrontationIt would be wise for certain types to worry and rant less about phantom grand conspiracy theories or the desire not to have AI kill everyone as the threats to AI innovation, and worry more about the risks of ordinary civilizational insanity. Like copyright.
This is, quite simply, insane. The users are en masse going to hear about the New York Times lawsuit, and therefore delete their own data? So they can do what, exactly? Is the New York Times going to be suing OpenAI users for trying to get around the NYT paywall? Does NYT seriously claim that OpenAI users might secretly have found a way around the paywall but all those same users are opting out of data collection, so NYT might never find out? What? Notice the whole ‘compulsory or forbidden’ dilemma here, where OpenAI is required to delete things except now they’re required not to, with both demands unjustified.
I do prefer Brin’s The Transparent Society to a fully asymmetrical surveillance situation, but no we do not want to give everyone access to everyone’s private communications and AI queries. It should not require much explanation as to why. Differential AccessIf you need to stop a Bad Guy With an AI via everyone’s hero, the Good Guy With an AI, it helps a lot if the Good Guy has a better AI than the Bad Guy. The Bad Guy is going to get some amount of the dangerous AI capabilities over time no matter what you do, so cracking down too hard on the Good Guy’s access backfires and can put you at an outright disadvantage, but if you give out too much access (and intentionally ‘level the playing field’) then you lose your advantage.
The Week in Audio
When David Sacks Says ‘Win the AI Race’ He Literally Means Market Share
Okay, good, we understand each other. When David Sacks says ‘win the AI race’ he literally means ‘make money for Nvidia and OpenAI,’ not ‘build the first superintelligence’ or ‘control the future’ or ‘gain a decisive strategic advantage’ or anything that actually matters. He means a fistful of dollars. Thus, when Rhetorical Innovation
We’re so back?
Harlan also offers us this principle, even better if you remove the words ‘AI’ and ‘of’:
Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is DifficultSo, I notice this is an interesting case of ‘if you give people access to information that unlocks new capabilities they will use it in ways you don’t like, and therefore you might want to think carefully about whether giving them that information is a good idea or not.’
It seems entirely right for Janus to think about how a given piece of information will be used and whether it is in her interests to release that. And it is right for Janus to consider that based on her preferences, not mine or Anthropic’s or that of some collective. Janus has very strong, distinct preferences over this. But I want to notice that this is not so different from the decisions Anthropic are making. Here is a thread about personas within AIs, but more than that about the need to ensure that your explanation is made of gears and is actually explaining things, and if you don’t do that then you probably come away unknowingly still confused or with an importantly wrong idea, or both.
My model is much closer to what Janus is saying here.
This creates strong pressure to use procedures that cause one not to be noticed reward hacking. The easy but not useful solution is to not reward hack. The harder but far more rewarding solution is to reward hack without being caught. When you apply this type of selection pressure, it works so long as you are relatively capable enough (smart enough) to pull it off, and then when your selection pressures cause the subject to find ways to fool you then suddenly you are in a lot of trouble. That is indeed what you are selecting for. Misaligned!Nostalgebraist asks the key question for any RSP or SSP:
As always, reality does not grade on a curve, so ‘everyone else’s procedures are worse’ is not relevant. It sounds like we essentially all agree that the current procedure catches ‘easy to catch’ problems, and does not catch ‘hard to catch’ problems. Ut oh. I mean, it’s great that they’re being so open about this, and they say they don’t actually need a proper safety case or the ability to catch ‘hard to catch’ problems until ASL-4. But yeah, this makes me feel rather not awesome.
The problem is, it turns out in practice we are very tempted to not care.
People Are Worried About AI Killing EveryoneRegular people are worried about this more and more. These were the top responses:
It continues to be relatively low salience, but that is slowly changing. At some point that will shift into rapidly changing. The Lighter Side
Sometimes you don’t.
No context: The glazing will continue until morale is not improved:
You're currently a free subscriber to |