---
subject: "The Friday Recommends Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-10-28 10:03:05
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
We interrupt our regular programming to bring you a Friday Recommends edition with some new finds and old favorites (we also sent out a call for ideas on Proraso Shaving Cream If you know me at all, it’s doubtful that shaving is the first thing you think of. I’ve spent most of the last decade at least stubbly and at most with a full beard. That said, I recently rediscovered Self Control App If you are like basically everyone else, there are times you need to focus and find the internet to be a distraction. Porter x Monocle Travel Tote Gotta love an indestructible tote that also slides nicely onto your roller bag. For those that don’t know, Porter is a deep cut Japanese brand that works with good materials and lasts forever. Monocle regularly does collaborations with them. WITI Classifieds: We are experimenting with running some weekly classifieds in WITI. If you’re interested in running an ad, Nudge, get customer insights with ease. Do you want to improve your life by tapping into behavioral science insights? Listen to the award-winning Behavioral Grooves podcast today! Another interesting newsletter: Making the case for good content, clear writing, and the creative process. Subscribe to the Hand & Eye. A publication exploring the most interesting and innovative consumer businesses, products, and trends Rancourt Acadia Chukka Redux Boots Michael Williams recently tipped these boots in Heavy-Duty Magnetic Hooks I bought a set of a close approximation of these hooks years ago and ended up using them all over the place. Then I couldn’t find them anymore at Amazon and have finally tracked down a good replacement. We hang our keys on our door (thankfully metal), our leash on the frame, and lots of random stuff on the fridge. They have a 22lb capacity, so they’re pretty strong. Nike Air Huarache Living in New York City, there’s a tension between “form” and “function” with respect to sneakers. I’m by no means a sneakerhead, but after living in the city for seven years, I’ve burned through a lot of shoes while walking for my primary mode of transportation. All of the usual suspects (Vans, Stan Smith, Nike Killshot, Nike Airforce 1’s, Allbirds) have been in my lineup at one point or another, but the Nike Huarache is the first shoe I’ve bought that looks cool (streetwear/futuristic style) but focuses primarily on comfort. They’re extremely light and available in a variety of colorways. Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) —
You’re a free subscriber to |