---
subject: "The Mr. Zip Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-02-01 12:26:57
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Noah here. A while back I took my kids to the Transit Museum in Brooklyn. Housed in an old subway station, the museum allows visitors to walk (and in the case of my daughter run) through subway cars of the past. To make things more realistic, each train includes reproductions of ads that would have run at that time. As a marketing nerd, this is one of my favorite parts. Seeing how products and brands were advertised in earlier times is a fascinating way to understand culture. Thus the below ad, urging people to use zip codes on their mail, caught my eye. That, if you’re not familiar, is Mr. Zip.
The piece goes on to explain that AT&T bought the copyright from the ad agency and WITI Classifieds: We are experimenting with running some weekly classifieds in WITI. If you’re interested in running an ad, Daly is a comms+ agency that reaches beyond the standard PR playbook to deliver results (and some magic) for our exceptional clients. The Intermodal Spirit. Writing about Exploring, Relating, and Being. Available by newsletter or online. Parlance is a Brand Voice Advisory Studio. We Help Make the Impossible, Relatable. Noah here. I've got a new newsletter about brands and AI called BrXnd Dispatch. If you're in marketing, creative, or just interested in understanding what's up with AI, check it out. Tempo Rubato is a live classical music venue in an old factory shell in the backstreets of inner city Melbourne. Why is this interesting? I love stuff like this. What could be more mundane than a zip code? But at some point, it didn’t exist and the USPS needed to convince people to use it and they ran an ad campaign with a funny-looking cartoon that, at least according to the Postal Service, had 80% (!!!) awareness. On one hand, it’s totally amazing that something like that worked. It’s hard to imagine any national ad campaign could reach these kinds of levels. Some of that is a result of the current media environment, obviously. But it’s also hard to imagine advertising something as fundamental as zip codes today. I remember seeing an old GE ad for a refrigerator that was effectively an ad for refrigeration—“keep your drinks cold for parties,” the ad promised. Would we need to advertise refrigeration today? Probably not. In the end, we don’t yet know about the things that people will look back on in sixty years and think it's unimaginable that at some moment you needed to convince people they were worth buying or using. But given modern aesthetics, it seems reasonably certain we won’t get another Mr. Zip anytime soon. (NRB) — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) —
|