---
subject: "The Futurist Trap"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-05-28 13:15:22
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
The way he told it, Filippo Tommaso Marinetti was never quite the same after that car crash. Driving around Milan in 1908 — in the days when driving a car was for daredevils, not bored commuters — Marinetti narrowly avoided some cyclists and plowed his car into a ditch. He climbed out a different person. As he put it, in his typically florid style:
The experience moved Marinetti and his friends to form a new artistic movement, which they called Futurism, that would celebrate the new and destroy the old. The next year, Marinetti issued the Marinetti declared that he wanted his movement to be one of drastic action:
He aligned his movement with the excitement that new technologies brought:
He exalted the man of action, who was willing to make progress while others were too hidebound or cowardly:
And he disdained the ideas that would tie society to the past:
The Futurist Manifesto became a sensation — its fearless, intense, off-kilter style and ideas made it the talk of European intellectual society. A little more than a century later, one of the world’s richest men decided to pay homage to Marinetti’s radical ideas. Marc Andreessen, the venture capitalist billionaire, decided in 2023 that the world needed to hear his
The parallels didn’t end there. Andreessen declared that he wanted his movement to be one of drastic action:
He aligned his movement with the excitement that new technologies brought:
He exalted the man of action, who was willing to make progress while others were too hidebound or cowardly:
And he disdained the ideas that would tie society to the past:
Andreessen’s manifesto ditches the purple prose and artistic visions of Marinetti’s and replaces them with homages to “markets” and “the Techno-Capital Machine.” But his manifesto is a deliberate reimagining of Marinetti’s century-old ideas. Since its publication, Andreessen’s text has come to These people design the gadgets that dominate our attention, they harvest our data, and they control the social-media networks that shape our information diets. Many of them sat in the first row of the presidential inauguration and now enjoy great influence over the federal government. They now have political power to match their immense wealth and social influence. So it’s worth seeing where the old version of Futurism led; it may help us understand where this newer model is taking us. Futurism was, on its face, an artistic movement. Its adherents wanted to break free of the straitjackets of tradition and criticism and create something new. In the Manifesto of the Futurist Painters (Futurists loved to write manifestos), they
Futurists drew on the innovations of Cubism to create art that celebrated the constant movement and chaos of modern life. Umberto Boccioni painted “Dynamism of a Cyclist” in 1913: While Joseph Stella tried to capture the electrified excitement at Coney Island: And the industrial grandeur of the Brooklyn Bridge: But their interests went well beyond art. The Futurists were what we might now call accelerationists — they wanted to bring the future into being as quickly as possible, breaking down any barriers that might prevent this from happening. The more quickly the new ways destabilized the old order, the better. They had an interest in technology and science, as we’ve seen, and they weren’t shy of a little bloodshed if it would help bring change. After all, point #9 of the Futurist Manifesto reads:
The Futurists had a chance to try their hand at war soon enough; many of them enlisted in the Italian Army to fight in World War I. The war killed several prominent members of the group, including Boccioni, and caused the movement to disband for a while. As the war ended, Marinetti decided to push the movement toward politics. He formed the Futurist Political Party in 1918, combining socialist and nationalist ideas. It didn’t last long, because Marinetti merged his new party with another new political organization in 1919; the Fasci Italiani di Combattimento, or Italian Fascist Party, led by Benito Mussolini. Not only were the Futurists attracted to fascism, but they lent the budding fascist movement some key techniques. As
Marinetti dreamed of a government of “technicians,” in which the wonders of new technology would be deployed to bring Italy to greatness. He found a hero in Benito Mussolini, who promised to make Italy a cutting-edge industrial power. The movements didn’t mesh perfectly — Marinetti would storm out of the 1920 Fascist Congress and stay out of politics for a while before rejoining Mussolini’s cause — but the Futurists thought that the fascists were useful, and vice versa. Marinetti praised Mussolini’s rise to power in 1923 by
Our modern techno-futurists have allied themselves with Donald Trump’s hard-right movement in much the same way that the Italian Futurists embraced Mussolini. Rather than being enamored with cars and electricity, they want to clear the way for the glorious advances that artificial intelligence will bring. They Trump even invited one of the most reckless of the “technicians,” Elon Musk, into the White House, where he proceeded to unleash chaos with what Marinetti might have called “aggressive action, a feverish insomnia.” The idea was that he would apply the Silicon Valley “move fast and break things” ethos to the American government. He did, I guess. Whether or not Donald Trump has ever heard of Filippo Marinetti, he seems to be acting out the goal Marinetti set for the Futurists: “We will destroy the museums, libraries, academies of every kind, will fight moralism, feminism, every opportunistic or utilitarian cowardice.” Elon Musk The group of techno-futurists that have gathered around Trump imagine themselves, as the Italian Futurists did, as bold men of action, hitching themselves to a movement that will destroy the old order to bring about a new technological age. In the end, Marinetti and his movement brought Italy fascism and ruin. What will this age’s futurists bring to the United States? This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are three ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: You can share the newsletter with others: You can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week! You're currently a free subscriber to |