---
subject: "Why Is Homeowners Insurance Getting So Expensive?"
from: "Construction Physics <constructionphysics@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-01-23 13:03:20
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Construction Physics", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8588207018748827248", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
The recent Los Angeles fires have highlighted the rising costs of homeowners insurance in the US. Between 2020 and 2023, US homeowners insurance premiums Rising insurance costs have led some folks to worry that the It’s easy to understand why insurance in some places, like wildfire-prone areas, is getting expensive or unavailable. But the broader trend of rising insurance costs can be observed in essentially every state, and it’s harder to explain. Most potential explanations don’t seem to be sufficient to explain the increase, either because the impact is too small, or because the cause wouldn’t apply country-wide. After diving into the data on homeowners insurance spending and losses, I came up with few smoking guns. Homeowners insurance costs over timeTo understand trends in homeowners insurance, we can use We can see that even after adjusting for inflation and population, homeowners insurance costs are steadily rising over time; between the 1980s and today, per-capita premiums more than doubled, with most of the increase coming after 2000. Most folks reach for climate change-fueled disasters as the explanation, but let's first look at other potential factors. One obvious one is simply an increasing number of homes. Over time, household size in the US has Here’s per-capita insurance costs adjusted for changes in home size, number of homes/homeownership rate, and construction cost inflation. Adjusting for the number of homes and home size explains about 15% of the increase, and construction cost explains another 33%; together, they explain about half the cost increase.¹ However, only since around 2016 can increased construction costs explain a large chunk of the cost increase. I suspect a lot of what’s happening is that lots of homeowners insurance policies Another possible factor is rising profits: maybe insurers are simply pocketing the increased premiums. Here’s US homeowners insurance profitability over time. There is a slight trend upward (more visible if you use a moving average)², but this still doesn’t explain more than a tiny sliver of the increase. Homeowners insurance profitability is extremely low, and in any given year the industry is very likely to lose money. Between 1977 and 2022, US homeowners insurance profits were greater than 10% in only 5 years, and nationwide annual profits have never exceeded 15%. The average annual profitability for the industry is less than 1% (and depending on how you calculate it, it may actually be negative).³ In any given year, insurers lose money on homeowners insurance in about 1/3rd of the states. ( More generally, the loss ratio (the fraction of premiums paid out to claims) of homeowners insurance nationwide has been relatively stable over time. Roughly the same fraction of premiums are paid out today as they were in the 1970s. So whatever is causing insurance costs to go up, it seems to be by way of increased losses driving up premiums. Another possible explanation is geographic population changes. If people are disproportionately moving to risk-prone areas where insurance is more expensive (such as fire-prone California or the hurricane-prone southeast), that could show up as a steady rise in insurance costs nationwide, even if no particular place is getting more expensive to insure. Here’s state-by-state insurance costs over time: We do see a huge increase in homeowners insurance costs in Florida (though this is apparently driven by There are more sophisticated analyses you could do here: using a more accurate count of homes that includes vacation homes and not just owner-occupied homes, looking at state-by-state number of homes and home size increases, using task-based construction cost inflation instead of just the high-level Census index, looking at more granular population shifts, and so on. But I would be somewhat surprised if these changed the overall conclusion here. Homeowners insurance costs have risen nationwide for the past several decades, and things like regional population changes, increasing home size, rising construction costs, and insurers profits only appear to explain a portion of the increase. Climate change and insurance costsThis seems to leave climate change as the most obvious explanation for the remaining cost increase. It’s certainly We see a somewhat similar trend if we look at the magnitude of homeowners insurance losses on a state-by-state level over time. As noted earlier, in any given year insurers will lose money on homeowners insurance in a large number of states. The number of states where losses exceed $1 billion in a given year has crept up over time (though this trend is less pronounced for $500 million losses, and almost nonexistent for $100 million losses). Large homeowners insurance losses Number of states where annual losses exceeded $100 million, $500 million, and $1 billion. This tells us that losses from disasters are getting more expensive, but it still doesn’t tell us what, specifically, is driving them. We ruled out several explanations above (ie: it’s mostly not because homes are so much larger today), but there are still many factors that could be at work. The most obvious one is that disasters are getting more frequent and/or more destructive. But as far as I can tell, this is only partially true.
Climate policy nonprofit Climate Central
Hail has possibly gotten more severe in some locations, but the data is inconclusive and there
Tornado severity also
But this is somewhat balanced by the fact that house fires have gotten So an increase in climate-related damage seems like it can do some of the work, due to things like increased wildfire risk and certain regions seeing more severe weather than they did historically. Is this enough to explain the nationwide increase? One challenge with this explanation is that states typically require justification for an insurer raising their rates, and an insurer can’t necessarily compensate for rising risk in one state by raising premiums in another. This map shows the change in average loss ratio (a 5-year moving average) between 2000 and 2020. This is a messy metric, because even with a 5-year moving average a single bad year can dramatically shift averages, making it somewhat sensitive to your choice of starting and ending point. But it’s nevertheless illuminating. Some states, notably western states at risk of fire and some hurricane-prone states, have significantly increased their loss ratios, while in many other states they’ve decreased. There’s also not any correlation to change in loss ratio and change in premiums-per-capita over time. States where loss ratios are increasing show similar premium changes to states where loss ratios are decreasing. Loss ratio vs per capita premium increase Change in the loss ratio vs real per capita premium increases for homeowners insurance from 2000 to 2020. So this does suggest that the cost in high-risk states is being spread to other states, but this is a fairly noisy measure and it’s hard to be sure here. It also suggests that it's mostly fire risk, rather than hurricanes or thunderstorms, that’s being spread to other states. Trends in types of lossesWe can get a better sense of what’s driving insurance losses by looking at data from the What’s notable here is that every type of loss has gotten more expensive, mostly in relatively similar proportions. The average damage cost for wind and hail, water, theft, other property, and bodily injury have all risen by about a factor of 1.5-1.7 since 2005. Fire damage, medical payments and credit card fraud have increased in severity more, with the average payout of the first two increasing by a factor of closer to 3 and credit card fraud seeing a single huge spike. And here's the frequency of different loss types over time. Nearly every type of loss has gotten less frequent over time, often substantially. The frequency of fire damage, bodily injury, and other medical payouts fell by half or more. Theft fell by more than 2/3rds. Wind and hail fell by around 25%. And if you look at The only type of loss that has gotten more frequent is water damage. This isn’t due to floods (which typically aren’t covered by homeowners insurance): water damage covers things like roof leaks, burst pipes, and water discharged from appliances. Putting this data together gives us the annual expected loss from different types of events over time. Theft and bodily injury expected losses have decreased, while every other type of loss has increased. Of these, the major outlier isn’t any climate-related loss event, but water damage. Because water damage frequency has increased so much (while every other type of loss frequency has declined), water damage is responsible for roughly 75% of the rise in expected annual payouts (and thus presumably the rise in premiums) since 2005. ConclusionTo sum up, homeowners insurance costs have risen steadily and substantially since the 1970s. Construction cost inflation and increasing home size can probably only explain a small portion of the increase. Insurers’ profits don’t seem to be a driver, and neither does state-level population shifts: the cost increases are across the board, in essentially every state. Increasingly destructive weather events and climate-related disasters are probably part of the explanation, with the cost in risky regions being spread over the rest of the country, but it’s hard to tell how much this is occurring. Over the past two decades, by far the biggest driver of rising homeowners insurance expected losses isn’t anything climate-related, but is instead due to the increasing severity and frequency of water damage. But it’s unclear to me why this is occurring, and to what extent whatever’s behind it can explain increasing severity of other sorts of claims (fire, hail, wind, etc.) 1 Home size was corrected by using the median home size from the 3 These data use “direct” values for premiums collected and costs and losses incurred. If you include indirect expenses (given in an Insurance Expense Exhibit, or IEE), profitability calculations are slightly lower. 4 Five-year moving average. Construction Physics articles will always remain free, but if you find this work valuable, I encourage you to Construction Physics is produced in partnership with the Institute for Progress, a Washington, DC-based think tank. You can learn more about their work by visiting their You can also contact me on |