---
subject: "The Nutgraf: What do regulations for 10-minute deliveries look like?"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-09-21 05:10:27
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
Around a month ago, Union Commerce Minister Piyush Goyal had some not-no-nice words about e-commerce in India.
Giving the example of western countries, Goyal noted the decline of traditional corner shops – or ‘mom and pop’ stores – in the US and Europe due to the rise of e-commerce.
“I’m not wishing away e-commerce. It’s here to stay,” Goyal said, “but we must think carefully and cautiously about its role. Is predatory pricing good for the country?”
The commerce minister expressed his concern about the impact of e-commerce on local businesses and employment, particularly in sectors like pharmacies and mobile phone repair shops.
“When Amazon says ‘we are going to invest a billion dollars in India’ and we all celebrate, we forget the underlying story that these billion dollars are not coming for any great service or investment to support the Indian economy,” said Goyal.
‘Amazon investment won’t support Indian economy’: Piyush Goyal flags ‘predatory price’ risks for local retailers, [Mint](https://www.livemint.com/economy/amazon-investment-wont-support-indian-economy-piyush-goyal-flags-predatory-price-risks-for-local-retailers-11724238017637.html)
The minister wasn’t particularly excited about the growth and potential of e-commerce in India, and went on to state that “it’s not a matter of pride that half of our market could possibly become part of e-commerce in the next 10 years; it’s a matter of concern”.
Three days after Goyal’s comments on Amazon and e-commerce, he received a communication from the All India Consumer Products Distributors Federation (AICPDF), which represents thousands of FMCG distributors in the country.
Except they were less concerned about Amazon, and were more worried about something else entirely.
FMCG distributors have raised concerns over the “rapid and unregulated growth” of quick commerce platforms, saying it needs immediate scrutiny.
In a letter written to Commerce & Industry Minister Piyush Goyal, FMCG distributors’ body AICPDF said this unchecked expansion of quick commerce platforms, which typically deliver goods within 10 to 30 minutes, is creating an “uneven playing field”, threatening the livelihoods of millions of small retailers and distributors who have been the backbone of India’s retail sector for decades.
The All India Consumer Products Distributors Federation (AICPDF) also suspected potential violations of FDI regulations by these quick-commerce companies and sought an immediate investigation into the operational models of these platforms.
The rapid growth of quick commerce platforms like Blinkit, Zepto and Instamart has posed significant challenges to the traditional retail sector and the established fast-moving consumer goods (FMCG) distribution network.
FMCG distributors raise concern over unregulated growth of ‘quick commerce’, [Business Standard](https://www.business-standard.com/industry/news/fmcg-distributors-raise-concern-over-unregulated-growth-of-quick-commerce-124082400572_1.html)
I don’t think it’s a coincidence that they specifically mentioned the thing that Goyal has expressed concern about, i.e., the decline of ‘mom and pop’ stores. Here’s what the FMCG distributors wrote in their letter—“We are witnessing the erosion of small ‘mom-and-pop’ stores and a shift in the FMCG distribution landscape, as these platforms are increasingly being appointed as direct distributors by major FMCG companies, side-lining traditional distributors,’’
These days, as 10-minute deliveries continue to transform India’s retail, I find myself starting to wonder more and more about how regulations will be introduced to slow it down. In general, quick-commerce has accelerated not just our deliveries, but also the speed of disruption. It took the better part of a decade before traditional retailers started raising concerns about e-commerce. That period has been significantly shortened for quick-commerce. As more and more players start entering this space, I think that regulation isn’t just likely, it’s inevitable.
What is unknown is where this regulation will come from, and how it will manifest itself.
If you are still sceptical, let me argue that there are more compelling reasons for regulation to be created in some form. First, there’s a recent [report](https://www.deccanherald.com/business/economy/quick-commerce-could-wipe-off-25-30-of-kirana-stores-report-3186795) by the advisory firm Elara Capital that says quick-commerce platforms coupled with discounting could wipe off 25–30% of kirana stores. Earlier, Aakriti Bhalla, my colleague at The Ken, also reported that [kirana stores are seeing businesses decline](https://the-ken.com/story/blinkit-and-instamart-threaten-kiranas-in-ways-that-bigbazaar-and-amazon-never-could/) by as much as 50% thanks to 10-minute deliveries. As quick commerce expands and goes deeper into India’s cities, its impact will start to be felt sooner, and become much more noticeable.
The most obvious way how regulation will hit quick-commerce is through a modification in FDI regulations, which is the current way e-commerce companies like Amazon and Flipkart are controlled. There are multiple aspects of control—depending on how entities are funded, where they sell (online or offline), whether they sell one brand or support multiple brands, and whether they own their inventory or run a marketplace. As an example, the current rules prohibit foreign-funded multibrand e-commerce companies from engaging in an inventory-based model of e-commerce.
This is the wedge where regulation for quick-commerce may arrive.
There are two aspects here—ownership structures and dark stores.
Already, we’re starting to read reports about the complex ownership structures that 10-minute delivery companies are doing to sidestep the current FDI regulations. A few months ago, Livemint did a fantastic story about Zepto’s ownership structures, where they discovered that the company [has created](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/prime/technology-and-startups/zepto-ceo-aadit-palicha-doesnt-run-the-quick-commerce-app-then-who-does/primearticleshow/109485567.cms?utm_source=twitter.com&utm_medium=Social&utm_campaign=ETTWPrime&from=mdr) a convoluted mesh of B2B companies combined with a licensee model. Sometime back, Flipkart and Amazon also did something similar, just to keep an arm’s-length distance from their sellers and the platform.
The government understands what’s going on though, and how it works. In fact, Piyush Goyal called attention to this model in that same event. He [said](https://www.moneycontrol.com/news/business/startup/quick-commerce-on-govt-radar-ministries-assess-impact-on-kirana-stores-12808501.html), “When they get caught, they start closing down those entities. But they only reroute all the business through an entity to show that it’s a business to business (B2B) (transaction) but (the) reality is all of you buy on these platforms, don’t you? How do you buy? B2C is not allowed on these platforms. How are they doing it? Should this not be a matter of concern for all of us?”
He [even had a word](https://www.moneycontrol.com/news/business/companies/amazons-india-investments-only-to-fill-balance-sheet-losses-no-reason-to-celebrate-piyush-goyal-12802589.html) for how e-commerce companies pay lawyers a heavy retainer to ensure that the model remains unchallenged.
“They paid Rs 1,000 crore to professionals—I don’t know who these professionals are. I am myself a chartered accountant (CA), I have done law. I would love to know which CAs, professionals, lawyers get Rs 1,000 crore. Unless you’re paying all the top lawyers to block them so that nobody can fight a case against you.”
So essentially, according to Goyal, e-commerce companies create a complex set of companies to stay true to the letter of the law around FDI regulations while they are actually running a different kind of a business altogether. Everyone understands this playbook. And 10-minute companies are following in the footsteps, just to make sure they conform to regulations.
This is one axis on which regulations can arrive. I can imagine the government introducing stuff that makes this arrangement much more difficult—like placing more restrictions on selling directly to customers.
But the other (and more likely) axis through which regulations are likely to arrive is through… dark stores.
At some level, dark stores aren’t too different from a seller who sells exclusively to a single company. This is what makes it fundamentally different from a kirana, which sells to anyone. I think this ‘preferred seller’ model is where the regulation for 10-minute groceries will come. How hard is it to envision a world when regulations insist that dark stores have an obligation to supply to anybody who wants to buy from them, just like a kirana store, and cannot operate on a ‘preference model’.
The groundwork for this is already being laid. Back in August, the AICPDF, in their letter to Goyal, called attention to quick-commerce delivery companies as a whole.
Yesterday, they narrowed down their attack specifically to the dark store model.
The All India Consumer Products Distributors Federation (AICPDF), led by its National President, Dhairyashil Patil, has filed a complaint with the Commerce Ministry and the Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT). The complaint’s core alleges that quick commerce companies violate the Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) regulations by operating inventory-based models, which are prohibited under Press Note 2 of India’s e-commerce policy.
In an interview with CNBC-TV18, Patil argued that these quick commerce firms rely on “dark stores”—warehouses near consumers to deliver products within 10 to 15 minutes. He emphasised that such models function as inventory-based e-commerce, contravening the FDI rules. “Unless and until there is inventory in hand, you cannot deliver in 10 to 15 minutes,” said Patil.
Quick commerce under fire: AICPDF files complaint over alleged FDI violations, [CNBC](https://www.cnbctv18.com/business/quick-commerce-companies-violate-fdi-norms-aicpdf-19480198.htm)
Another reason why I think the arrangement between 10-minute delivery companies and dark stores will come under scrutiny is because of ONDC. If you imagine a world where India wants to create an open commerce network, on which all retail can be plugged in, anywhere and anytime, how long before systems are created that incentivise (or more likely, disincentivise) the creation and existence of “closed and exclusive” dark stores?
Worth a thought.
Two by Two: Health insurance in India is ripe for disruption
From the surface, health insurance is one of the brightest spots in India’s insurance story, growing at 20% annually.
But that number doesn’t tell the whole tale.
There are a whole load of people who are insured under government schemes (close to 300 million) and group insurance (~200 million), but very few hold personal health insurance (just ~50 million).
At the other end, though, are around 350 million people who remain uninsured.
Health insurance is by no means an ignored product in India, but many of the pitfalls lie in how it’s sold to people, and how people view it.
In the latest episode of Two by Two, Rohin and I were joined by two wonderful guests to discuss why health insurance is broken, and how it can be fixed.
First, there’s Viren Shetty, the Executive Vice Chairman of one of India’s largest hospital groups, Narayana Health, who has also been spearheading Narayana Health’s foray into the health insurance segment.
We were also joined by Shivaprasad Krishnan, who currently runs Kricon Capital, an investment banking firm, but he was earlier part of the founding team at ICICI Lombard, one of India’s first private health insurers.
It was a fantastic conversation, and one of my favourite episodes.
There are multiple ways to participate in Two by Two.
[Subscribe](https://the-ken.com/pricing/?utm_source=newsletter&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=twobytwo) to The Ken’s Premium subscription tier, then install our iOS, iPad, or Android apps. You have full access to not just all of our podcasts, but also stories, newsletters, and infographics.
[Subscribe](https://podcasts.apple.com/in/podcast/two-by-two/id1757938645) to Two by Two on Apple Podcasts. It’s a monthly subscription, so you can decide after listening to four episodes whether you want to renew and stay a subscriber.
[Subscribe](https://open.spotify.com/show/7tyBxrqQYwQAFQPr6ACsMn) to Two by Two as a free subscriber on any podcast platform. Each week, you can listen to a 30-minute version of our new episodes.
[Subscribe](https://the-ken.com/newsletters/two-by-two/) to the Two by Two weekly newsletter for free. Each week, you’ll get to read a “storified” version of that week’s podcast episode plus get to participate in The Ken’s various subscriber-driven initiatives.
Next week, I’ll be back with the results of the survey on what killed the art of Product Management in India.
It’ll be a great edition and I can’t wait for you to read it.
Regards,
Praveen Gopal Krishnan
Better communication means better business outcomes85% of our participants say that learning Narrative Communication from The Ken resulted in better business outcomes for their organisations. Our workshops are practice-oriented, and use customised examples and exercises for each corporate team. |