---
subject: "Ka-Ching!: Why 1,600+ investors are stuck watching a blame game over their money"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-07-17 01:32:06
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
Ka-Ching!
Thu, 17 Jul 25
A weekly newsletter about how finance is getting supercharged by tech in India, and how you can make money work for you.
Good Morning Ishan,
A very bitter public spat is playing out between two startups, with each flinging accusations at the other regarding their respective culpabilities (or lack thereof) around a particularly problematic investment instrument—the Community Subscription Offer Plan (CSOP).
On one side is Tyke Technologies.
Founded in 2021, Tyke was one of the major platforms that started offering CSOPs, acting as an intermediary between individual investors and startups that wanted to raise funds from them. These CSOPs resembled the Employee Stock Appreciation Right (ESAR) offered by some listed companies to employees—where if a holder was granted one for the value of X, and the valuation of the company doubled, the holder would receive the difference between 2X and X in cash.
CSOPs also allowed retail investors to invest in a startup for as little as Rs 5,000, and the returns promised were mouth-watering, to say the least—2X to 4X within just 2–4 years.
This was problematic from the get-go. The companies raising funds through these CSOPs were usually loss-making early-stage startups for whom free cashflow wasn’t a strong point, even if their valuations jumped sky high.
Nevertheless, according to Tyke founder Karan Mehra, over Rs 150 crore (US$18.1 million) was invested in 110+ startups on the Tyke platform.
But that was when Tyke was actually offering CSOPs. It doesn’t any longer. You may recall The Ken’s [February 2023 story](https://the-ken.com/story/shark-tank-india-phenomenon-triggers-a-wave-of-risky-investments-by-retail-investors/) on these instruments, which was the first to raise the alarm and suggest that it was perhaps time to look into such hype-led fundraising.
These campaigns, resembling a public offer under company law, raise low-ticket funds from retail investors through a community subscription plan, but are actually innovative non-equity instruments with an underlying speculatory bet on the company’s future valuation. Under securities laws, these contracts resemble derivative products, which are prohibited unless traded on a recognised stock exchange.
Well, the regulators eventually took notice and cracked down.
In September 2023, the Registrar of Companies (ROC) fined Sustvest (Solargridx Ventures Private Limited)—a startup that raised funds via Tyke—Rs 10 lakh and ordered it to return investor money with 12% annual interest. Among other offences, the ROC cited the violation of a 200-investor limit for private placements.
While Tyke was found to have facilitated the breach, it wasn’t penalised due to legal technicalities. The ROC order noted that Section 42 of the Companies Act did not allow the imposition of a penalty for such facilitation. In response to The Ken’s queries, Tyke said that it filed a writ petition with the finance ministry accompanied by a detailed legal explainer outlining the CSOP framework, backed by opinions from multiple reputed legal experts. And that it is currently awaiting a formal response. However, the company did not share this submission with us.
Nevertheless, Tyke halted CSOP fundraises that same year and shifted focus to invoice discounting and peer-to-peer (P2P) lending.
And the startups that raised all those crores on its platform between 2021 and 2023?
Well, many of them went silent. Investors had no voting rights or clear exit options due to the nature of the contract, and startups just stopped updating them about the CSOPs. When we [last wrote about](https://the-ken.com/kaching/tyke-was-supposed-to-make-everyone-a-shark-now-you-may-just-get-the-jaws/) Tyke in March 2024, ~42% of the companies that had raised money through the platform had not provided updates to investors for six months.
Which is pretty much what the other party in this current spat did—Cloud Tailor, aka Tailortech Private Limited. Having raised Rs 1.9 crore from 1,660 investors on Tyke in 2022, the D2C fashion startup went mostly incommunicado.
And Tyke, now confronted with furious Cloud Tailor investors, has thrown its metaphorical hands up in the air and Cloud Tailor under the bus. And Cloud Tailor is pushing back.
Tyke isn’t just redirecting queries to Cloud Tailor. In a communication to investors on 28 May, it actually gave out the contact details of Cloud Tailor founder Rudra Pratap and called for investors to hold Pratap and his team accountable.
Cloud Tailor had launched on Tyke in April 2022, looking to raise Rs 50 lakh. These were the returns it promised in its contract with investors if it went on to redeem the CSOPs:
Well, it exceeded its target by a massive 279%, keeping all the money raised. Of course, investors need to shoulder some of the blame here—Sebi’s rules on collective investment schemes prohibit offering guaranteed returns, and this should have set off alarm bells for any informed investor.
In April 2023, Cloud Tailor appeared on Shark Tank India and revealed that it had raised these funds at a valuation floor of Rs 50 crore and a valuation cap of Rs 80 crore. Their CSOP contract with investors, which The Ken has seen, and Tyke say the valuation cap was Rs 200 crore. Either way, it was a huge premium over other fundraises it had done around the same time. (A valuation cap is the maximum amount that Cloud Tailor could be valued at in their next equity funding round for the purpose of the CSOP, while a valuation floor would be the minimum. The CSOP would then be valued equal to one equity share in the company at that respective valuation after the round had closed.)
In March 2022, a month before the CSOP raise, Cloud Tailor had accepted a term sheet from 35 North Ventures and drawn Rs 15 lakh at a much lower valuation of just Rs 10.2 crore. Just a few months later, in July 2022, it raised Rs 3 crore at a Rs 30 crore valuation.
This led even the Shark Tank judges to remark on the complexity of Cloud Tailor’s cap table, noting how the ownership structure was confusing.
| A screengrab from Cloud Tailor’s Shark Tank India episode, showing the different valuations of its fundraises. Source: Sony Entertainment TV |
Cut to a year later, and Tyke was starting to wind up its CSOP business. And with investors still eager for information about their investments, it began coordinating with some founders to resume communication and provide updates.
Clearly, this hasn’t worked very well with Cloud Tailor. Because last month, Tyke informed the fashion brand’s investors that Cloud Tailor was failing to act in the interest of subscribers and had not provided reports of its business from April 2024 to April 2025. It also called for Cloud Tailor to initiate a liquidation process for all subscribers.
In its response to The Ken’s queries, Tyke alleged that the situation escalated because Cloud Tailor founder Rudra Pratap, without Tyke’s involvement, had assured a subscriber of liquidity during a private call—only to later back out of that commitment despite the conversation being recorded by the investor. Tyke added that it had then advised him to engage with subscribers directly going forward.
We looked into the financials uploaded by Cloud Tailor with the Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA) and compared their results with the projections that they had presented to CSOP subscribers just three years ago. The presentation had projected revenues of Rs 10 crore and Rs 36 crore for FY23 and FY24, respectively. Its filings with the MCA, however, show that it generated just Rs 3.9 crore and Rs 8.3 crore in non-CSOP revenue for those two years.
In recent emails between Tyke and Cloud Tailor reviewed by The Ken, Pratap accused Tyke of misconduct, claiming the platform had profited while leaving founders like him exposed. He also alleged that Tyke founder Karan Mehra should indemnify the company against prior commitments (not disclosed in the email) provided by Tyke and its founder. Pratap also demanded full disclosure of Tyke’s communications with government authorities on CSOPs and asked for a formal authorisation from Tyke’s board of directors naming a point person to handle the matter. He alleged that random people from different Tyke entities had been appearing on different forums, causing intentional confusion.
Tyke, in its response, rejected the allegations as baseless and asked Pratap to refrain from making such claims. It stated that there was no verbal or written indemnity agreement, nor any guarantee by Mehra, and that all documents had been signed after review by Cloud Tailor’s own legal team. Tyke also said that providing business updates was the founder’s responsibility and claimed that it had shared the communications between Tyke and the authorities to Pratap.
With both companies pointing the finger at each other, Cloud Tailor’s CSOP investors have been left watching the fireworks from the sidelines.
One such investor who wished to remain anonymous said that they had reached out to both sides. Pratap, for his part, informed them that Cloud Tailor has provisioned for the base amount that was raised, but that the company has received notices from the income-tax department and was waiting for that matter to be resolved before making any payments.
Tyke, on the other hand, claimed that it was the responsibility of Cloud Tailor to inform and pay investors, and that it should initiate the process for an exit.
Many of Cloud Tailor’s investors have now given up hope for a resolution from either Tyke or Cloud Tailor and raised complaints with the MCA’s Registrar of Companies (ROC) in Hyderabad, where Cloud Tailor is incorporated.
The ROC has registered the complaints. But it still begs the question—just who is responsible for this mess?
According to the agreements signed between investors and Cloud Tailor, the CSOPs shall only be paid out under two conditions—either a liquidity event (such as dissolution, acquisition, change of control, merger, or reorganisation) or when the board of the company chooses to do so.
If Cloud Tailor decides to call the CSOPs and repurchase them, Tyke says it would be liable to pay approximately Rs 5.7 crore—3X the initial amount raised.
Unless it uses the anti-dilution clauses present in the contract.
As per its FY24 financial statements, Cloud Tailor had a net working capital of just Rs 20 lakh (excluding the CSOPs liability), and such an outflow of cash would likely cause the company significant financial stress, especially considering that it made a loss of Rs 7.8 crore in FY24 and had cash and bank balances of Rs. 9.6 lakh. It is yet to file its FY25 numbers.
When The Ken reached out to Cloud Tailor for comment, the company said that the matter “is pending clarifications and submissions from multiple aspects” and that it would “take the necessary steps in the form of a separate communication at the appropriate time, directly with the concerned holders”. It also said that the “CSOP amount has been recognised as in the books of the company in the last financial year”.
Tyke, for its part, says that if Cloud Tailor refuses or is unable to fulfil its repayment obligations to investors, the matter may be treated as a breach of the CSOP agreement. “Tyke may pursue appropriate legal remedies, including initiating proceedings under applicable contract laws. Additionally, if the company is unable to meet its liabilities, Tyke has the right to approach the National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) for insolvency proceedings under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) framework,” the company added.
To be clear, Cloud Tailor isn’t the only company that raised funds via Tyke which is in trouble.
In its FY24 update, Tyke informed investors that five companies had bought back their CSOPs, delivering a total return of 151%. But on the same day we interviewed Mehra last year, Kohbee—a creator-economy startup with among the most CSOPs then listed on Tyke Square (the platform’s secondary exchange)—shut down operations. Their last business update a year earlier had claimed a possible break-even within the next four to six months. And just this week, Zymrat, another startup that had raised funds on Tyke, said that it had undergone a distress acquisition in 2023, and that its CSOP investors would have to take a 95% haircut.
In fact, at least 16 companies that raised funds via Tyke—including Shark Tank-featured Geeani—have shut down with little to no communication to investors. While some startups such as Joules Health, Lets Dress Up, and PDRL have coughed up the agreed-upon returns, others such as Neuphony and Kidzbyte have arbitrarily reduced them, in some cases to as little as 12.5%, which after tax (on the total income in the case of CSOPs, not just profits) reduces the investment into a loss-making one. Tyke says the cuts were due to these companies facing financial losses and the returns coming as part of shutdown or distress acquisition processes. For instance, Kidzbyte has been acquired by digital entertainment and gaming company Jet Synthesis.
What makes things more interesting, though, is that Tyke itself has raised funds via CSOPs.
Early this year, it bought back about 10% of these CSOPs, paying investors Rs 1 crore and delivering a 3X return as per the original contract. But this move only sparked further controversy.
You see, the buyback coincided with Tyke transferring its invoice discounting and P2P lending businesses to another company owned by its founder Mehra and his family in January 2025—Crestfort Technologies Pvt. Ltd.
The problem is, after the shutdown of its CSOP, Compulsory Convertible Debentures, and other startup-related funding operations, these businesses were the only major ones remaining with Tyke. As per the business transfer agreement reviewed by The Ken, this fixed-income division was sold at just Rs 16.92 crore—less than 10% of Tyke’s last reported investor valuation of Rs 240 crore.
This transfer has now left its remaining CSOP investors uncertain—not just about whether they’ll get their money back, but also about what business Tyke actually operates. Some are starting to ask if the business transfer qualifies as a “liquidity” or “payment event” under CSOP terms—aka, a reorganisation that can trigger a mandatory buyback. If that is the case, Tyke could be liable to repay around Rs 10 crore, or 3X its initial fundraise.
That would be some bitter medicine for Tyke indeed.
As for the investors, if there’s anything to be learnt from the almost four-year saga, it is that if something sounds too good to be true, it probably is.
That’s a wrap for this week. Write to [kaching@the-ken.com](mailto:kaching@the-ken.com) with your thoughts and suggestions.
We’ll see you again next Thursday.
Regards,
David Pinto