---
subject: "ChatGPT strategy leaks 📝, Google AI Edge 📱, Claude Code analysis 🧑‍💻"
from: "TLDR <dan@tldrnewsletter.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-06-02 10:22:55
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "TLDR"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_795315172960844453"]
---
[
ChatGPT future just revealed — get ready for a ‘super assistant' (3 minute read)
](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.tomsguide.com%2Fai%2Fchatgpt-future-just-revealed-get-ready-for-a-super-assistant%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000197302a68d5-db608799-5f33-43ba-99b9-c924b6f87336-000000/1XtHIJH9zGr53sWG8oAgOnpVZLXhjA3u5jpGfed9hzo=407)
The Justice Department's antitrust case against Google revealed a heavily redacted document from OpenAI from late 2024 that detailed the company's internal strategy and its goal to create a de facto 'interface to the internet'. While much of the document was blacked out, it was clear how much OpenAI expects ChatGPT to revolutionize the internet. The company planned to spend the first half of 2025 building out ChatGPT as a super assistant and then shift in the second half to generating monetizable demand. One of the company's cornerstone strategies is to build out more data centers to keep up with ChatGPT's ballooning user base.
|
[
Google Now Lets You Use AI Without Internet on Smartphones (2 minute read)
](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fanalyticsindiamag.com%2Fai-news-updates%2Fgoogle-now-lets-you-use-ai-without-internet-on-smartphones%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000197302a68d5-db608799-5f33-43ba-99b9-c924b6f87336-000000/f0EomCRx5T1A9_um83vNGTRyHTXRjgnqiNgGh5jPrhE=407)
Google's new app, Edge Gallery, allows users to download and use AI models on smartphones. The Android app can be downloaded and installed through a GitHub repository - an iOS version will be available soon. There are several models available, including Gemma 3 and 3n and Alibaba's Qwen 2.5 models. The models can be used without an internet connection once installed.
|
|
Science & Futuristic Technology
|
[
It's Waymo's World. We're All Just Riding in It (11 minute read)
](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Flinks.tldrnewsletter.com%2FmamMku/1/01000197302a68d5-db608799-5f33-43ba-99b9-c924b6f87336-000000/liKMlzmFTTy_fMRJqvRBIB81KX50ShK0zvakSH2vg_8=407)
Waymo cracked a million total paid rides in late 2023. By the end of 2024, it reached five million, and it is on track to blow past 20 million full autonomous trips by the end of the year. The company's service is only available in a few cities right now, but it might be available everywhere sooner than expected. The competition in the industry is just getting started, with Tesla planning to reveal a robotaxi service in the coming weeks.
|
[
Elon Musk to build enormous Texas ‘gigabay' to store 1,000 Starships (3 minute read)
](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.yahoo.com%2Fnews%2Felon-musk-build-enormous-texas-144308533.html%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000197302a68d5-db608799-5f33-43ba-99b9-c924b6f87336-000000/ehIG4vzbHcJxYKYCn3DwM7mGwPzQ6Jn6d1feVJY9aMM=407)
SpaceX plans to build the biggest structure in the world to house up to 1,000 Starship rockets per year. The gigabay is part of the company's plans to launch multiple rockets per day to reach and colonize Mars. Elon Musk estimates that SpaceX will need to launch up to 2,000 rockets to Mars in every two-year window to carry the cargo needed to set up a colony. He aims to send humans to Mars by 2029.
|
|
Programming, Design & Data Science
|
[
Claude Code: An analysis (Book)
](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fsouthbridge-research.notion.site%2Fclaude-code-an-agentic-cleanroom-analysis%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000197302a68d5-db608799-5f33-43ba-99b9-c924b6f87336-000000/3Un1Gi6o4LesplXGS_MLSUyQfNfO1n5mngiPnzLQbp4=407)
This is a report on Claude Code generated by Claude Opus 4 with the help of almost all of the major flagship models. Claude Code is an agentic coding tool with a few new novel components. It has a streaming architecture that handles real-time model responses, tool execution, and UI updates, safety systems that provide security without disrupting workflow, a tool design that bridges AI reasoning and system execution, and prompt engineering that reliably controls complex model behavior. The report covers the foundation of Claude Code's architecture, data structures and the information architecture, control flow and the orchestration engine, tools and the execution engine, and much more.
|
[
Systems Correctness Practices at Amazon Web Services (22 minute read)
](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fcacm.acm.org%2Fpractice%2Fsystems-correctness-practices-at-amazon-web-services%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000197302a68d5-db608799-5f33-43ba-99b9-c924b6f87336-000000/rI-TUYAA-2uuCF0HSZRQrO3Onmls5VdQc-Gj-F4d8-c=407)
AWS strives to deliver reliable services that customers can trust completely, which requires maintaining the highest standards of security durability, integrity, and availability. Systems correctness serves as the cornerstone for achieving these priorities. This article looks at the formal methods used across AWS to deliver complex services with high confidence in correctness. It covers more traditional formal approaches such as theorem proving, deductive verification, and model checking, as well as more lightweight semi-formal approaches such as property-based testing, fuzzing, and runtime monitoring.
|
|
[
For Some Recent Graduates, the A.I. Job Apocalypse May Already Be Here (9 minute read)
](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Flinks.tldrnewsletter.com%2FBWVXnE/1/01000197302a68d5-db608799-5f33-43ba-99b9-c924b6f87336-000000/2D6P08OSuyKev9y9yKOgZQhoZLegoG9Go-TH3oIUXZU=407)
Millions of young graduates are entering into industries that have little use for their skills, view them as expensive and expendable, and are rapidly phasing out their jobs in favor of artificial intelligence. This emerging crisis for entry-level workers is being fueled in part by rapid advances in AI capabilities. Unemployment for recent college graduates has jumped to an unusually high 5.8% in recent months. While some executives are making a calculated bet on AI systems, there are many risks, for example, the expectation that entry-level jobs are short-lived may lead companies to underinvest in job training, mentorship, and other programs aimed at entry-level workers, leaving those workers unprepared for more senior roles later on.
|
[
The U.S. Plan to Hobble China Tech Isn't Working (9 minute read)
](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Flinks.tldrnewsletter.com%2F3FAHOl/1/01000197302a68d5-db608799-5f33-43ba-99b9-c924b6f87336-000000/rOfNoM2sVUwV21nL9Z8ZfihqnnvWQWYfofiDIB7N1WE=407)
US efforts to win the tech race against China have so far failed. While White House officials and their proxies want to ban the export of AI microchips and the tools to make them, some outside the administration say that such policies are backfiring by accelerating China's development of its own tech ecosystem. The debate comes down to whether it is better to have China dependent on US tech or if the national security risk of China having US tech is too great. China's well-organized, well-funded, and consistent push for self-sufficiency has lessened its dependence on other countries, and each year it produces a greater proportion of everything it needs.
|
|
|
Love TLDR? Tell your friends and get rewards!
|
|
Share your referral link below with friends to get free TLDR swag!
|
|
|
[Track your referrals here.](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fhub.sparklp.co%2Fsub_3202f09298cc%2F1/1/01000197302a68d5-db608799-5f33-43ba-99b9-c924b6f87336-000000/v2N_mZ_PZ9Ec0OHHlFZQPqWiKcd79ts5fOSZ4jYArlo=407)
|
|
Want to advertise in TLDR? 📰
If your company is interested in reaching an audience of tech executives, decision-makers and engineers, you may want to [advertise with us](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fadvertise.tldr.tech%2F%3Futm_source=tldr%26utm_medium=newsletter%26utm_campaign=advertisecta/1/01000197302a68d5-db608799-5f33-43ba-99b9-c924b6f87336-000000/_MfqOnW-AKcF_nameB10ZvcH8o9Fjzfl5gnJSkMZZt0=407).
Want to work at TLDR? 💼
[Apply here](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fjobs.ashbyhq.com%2Ftldr.tech/1/01000197302a68d5-db608799-5f33-43ba-99b9-c924b6f87336-000000/5TTpwhM8Vjz6TN45EERiUojLo5KJWC625i8D9FpwuD0=407) or send a friend's resume to [jobs@tldr.tech](mailto:jobs@tldr.tech) and get $1k if we hire them!
If you have any comments or feedback, just respond to this email!
Thanks for reading,
[Dan Ni](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2Ftldrdan/1/01000197302a68d5-db608799-5f33-43ba-99b9-c924b6f87336-000000/4-j9lgu6MK0rDnfZKg3C--1cSIq6g1DfpwNVd_SEryY=407) & [Stephen Flanders](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2FSteveFlanders22/1/01000197302a68d5-db608799-5f33-43ba-99b9-c924b6f87336-000000/4p4YrJTYppd7aCJX0yKu_mKfZfjlal3yTiOgYWTk5cs=407)
|
|
|
|