---
subject: "The Monday Media Diet with Jasmine Sun"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-11-25 22:52:14
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
We’re pubbing two issues this week as to not get lost in the email flood. Happy Thanksgiving if you are stateside. -CJN Jasmine Sun is a writer and technologist. She is building a new media venture launching in early 2025. She cofounded Tell us about yourself. I am a writer and technologist in San Francisco. I just left my job as a product manager at Substack, where I I respect the experts, but am frankly more of a dilettante myself. My life has been organized around trying to develop as many “literacies” as possible: learning the language of startups, media, policy, and nonprofits. How can we take the best ideas beyond the ivory tower? Where do new political movements come from? How much blame do tech platforms deserve? Why is the media always in crisis? Theory, practice, and the messy place in between—these are the questions that keep me up at night. Other things I like: gel manicures, goodreads.com, keeping a really organized calendar, making/buying/using too many condiments (preferably spicy ones), Bi-Rite Market, the Pacific Ocean. Describe your media diet. Twitter killed the link but healed my media diet. Now I rely almost entirely on human curators sharing things in chronological order: newsletters, podcasts, group chat recs, and a few social platforms that actually show me what my friends are up to. Even magazines and legacy publications have good email newsletters these days. It takes some effort to build up a bespoke ecosystem, but it’s worth it. I’m optimizing for pluralism: ingesting multiple points of view instead of a single algorithmically flattened one. I have my hold-outs, though; it’s not all taste and agency and informed choice. I often cave to the algorithmic tyranny of the Spotify Daylist™ (sorry What’s the last great book you read? I’ve implored at least three Sally Rooney haters to give Intermezzo a chance. She’s able to branch out of her trademark style (the autofictional anxieties of overeducated leftist writer types) to embody different personalities/voices (namely men), and the plot revolves around a complex sibling relationship rather than a romance (but of course there is romance too). If you prefer nonfiction, I loved Oracle Bones which I read after
What are you reading now? I recently started Conor Dougherty’s Golden Gates, which is a book about the San Francisco housing crisis (it was published a bit ago, but felt appropriate given the central role housing politics still plays in local elections). Housing is a thorny, polarized debate on a bunch of axes—wonks vs. activists, transplants vs. locals, tenants vs. homeowners—but Dougherty’s writing is empathetic and very readable. Also one of my 2025 resolutions is to finally become a Power Broker Guy. What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication? I don’t really read in print! Please don’t kill me!! Who should everyone be reading that they’re not? I’m always recommending What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone?
During the pandemic, I got really into Plane or train? Train! I’m currently drafting these answers on the Amtrak Coast Starlight from Oakland to LA. The sightseer routes—e.g. this and the Zephyr, which View from the California Zephyr What is one place everyone should visit? “This city is dead,” declares a blonde woman to her surly friend as she rides the MUNI. “Excuse me?” asks Jimmie Fails from across the aisle. “You don’t get to hate it unless you love it.” This is the most memorable scene from The Last Black Man in San Francisco (2019), and I think about it all the time. From Nathan Heller’s One of my favorite things about San Francisco is how easily you can forget that you’re in a city at all—and you don’t even need a car. The key, of course, is to get the hell out of Union Square. A few walks I recommend for your next trip: Ocean Beach at sunset; sitting on the ledge to watch the surfers, volleyballers, DJs, and bonfires Clement Street for pastries (Arsicault, Breadbelly, Schubert’s) and dim sum (Hong Kong Lounge or Dragon Beaux) Hiking the Presidio—from Baker Beach to the coastside cliffs to the Golden Gate Bridge Visiting the Legion of Honor museum, which looks like a palace Picking a book from City Lights, then reading it at Vesuvio Cafe Burritos in Dolores Park on a crowded Saturday afternoon Any of the open-air staircases that climb straight into the sky.
Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into. This is a rabbit hole that I’m still falling into—but I’m obsessed with niche Silicon Valley subcultures. Think the Whole Earth Catalog, cypherpunks, seasteading, and transhumanism; more recent instantiations like rationalism, effective altruism, progress studies, and “e/acc.” There’s more texture to these ideologies than a blanket label like “libertarianism” or “tech bro” reveals. Californian openness just nurtures a lot of weird stuff (see: Fred Turner’s excellent book From Counterculture to Cyberculture). My friend was telling me about a guy who gives Claude around $1500 every month to autonomously order stuff from Amazon based on their chat history. He recently got surprised with a Vitamin D lamp at his front door, because winter. Or whatever Bryan Johnson’s deal is. I think it’s cool when people run experiments on themselves, and even more fascinating to see those ideas gain power and start to go mainstream. Writers serve the public as historians of vibe. What does it feel like to be here, now? I’m hoping to capture some of these unique spaces and feelings in my work next year. Forward me your strangest party invites, please. (JS) You're currently a free subscriber to |