---
subject: "The Lost Concept Car Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-01-04 12:25:33
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Ryan McManus (RMM) is a longtime friend of WITI, dating back to our time together at The Barbarian Group. He currently runs Competitive Intelligence & Special Strategic Studies at Ford Motor Company. His previous installments explored dazzle camouflage, low-number license plate lotteries, and the end of spare parts. Ryan here. What is the value of a dream, once dreamt? If you frequent the automotive corners of the internet, you may have come across a Why is this Interesting? The MBUX POD is what is called a concept car. Considering the pod itself has no wheels and is only vaguely automotive in shape, you begin to understand that the definition of “concept car” can be quite broad. Starting in 1938 with the Buick Y-Job, the concept car as a practice served several purposes: Some were built to showcase an idea of where an automaker was going, stylistically (and to judge early public reaction to that direction). Some were built to showcase potential new technologies, like the Ford Nucleon (nuclear powered, or so they intended). Others were built as proofs-of-concept for feats of aerodynamics, like the Concept cars also can be built to very different levels of fidelity. Some are literally painted clay models, with no interior, hidden behind blacked-out windows. Others, like Marc Newson’s Ford The one thing all concept cars have in common? None are built to last, not really. They are exorbitantly expensive sculptures, crafted by automakers to describe a dream, and to hopefully inspire that dream in the public eye. And then, the dream passes. So what happens after that? Back to Atlanta, and our odd-shaped egg pod car. How could a multi-million dollar, highly proprietary concept car that likely took thousands of hours to produce end up unceremoniously dumped in a junkyard? The answer is brutally simple: Once a concept car has served its purpose, has been shown and toured and evaluated and been the darling of the auto show circuit, its time is up. Some concept cars might, in fact, represent the greatest automotive depreciation story of all time —even more than Maserati. They go from 1 of 1, multimillion dollar rarities to worth their weight in scrap. I hear you, reader! I know right now some of you are saying: “Surely there is some archival value? Surely they should be preserved in some way by the automakers or collectors? They belong in a museum!” And yes, some are preserved, rescued by museums or kept in automaker collections.. That GM Futurliner I mentioned above? One of them is now owned by a private party, Peter Pan bus lines, where it still makes public appearances (including mysteriously One notable preservationist is Phillip Sarofim, who owns and drives several iconic concept cars, including the “Owning and maintaining a concept car like the Zero or In the end, these lucky few survivors are the exceptions—on balance, most concept cars are scrapped, shredded, — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) —
Invite your friends and earn rewardsIf you enjoy Why is this interesting?, share it with your friends and earn rewards when they subscribe. |