---
subject: "Unlocked: The Conceptual Winnie the Pooh Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-03-28 18:21:51
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
This previously went out to our paid subscribers. Many good things happen behind the paywall, should you feel like upgrading your subscription. For now, enjoy this free! Louis here. This weekend’s New York Times ‘Modern Love’ column was a The test, which assigns numbers to different personality types, had revealed that the man was a Nine – “The Peacemaker.” He couldn’t handle it. I won’t spoil the ending, but things (and numbers) do get better. I told my friend about the essay, and she asked me if I’d seen the Winnie the Pooh-Enneagram correlation. Apparently, the characters in Winnie the Pooh fit cleanly into the nine Enneagram personality styles, from Eeyore (Type Four, Individualist) to Tigger (Type Seven, Enthusiast) to Pooh (Type Nine, Peacemaker). Why is this interesting? As Kendra Nicola writes in “Because fictional characters tend to follow predictable behavior patterns, it’s not uncommon for a character to align with an Enneagram number.” In fact, she writes, “numerous blog posts and online forums have been dedicated to introducing people to their literary Enneagram doppelgängers.” What struck me as more unusual was that it was the second time I’d heard of Winnie the Pooh being used to illustrate a complicated conceptual spiritual framework. I’m a proud owner of the best-selling ‘The Tao of Pooh’, a 1982 book by Benjamin Hoff, which uses Winnie the Pooh’s characters to explain the basic beliefs of philosophical Taoism. (The soothing back cover reads: “While Eeyore frets, and Piglet hesitates, and Rabbit calculates, and Owl pontificates… Pooh just is.”) As it turns out, Winnie the Pooh has also come to be seen as a possible way to understand the ‘ Pooh has also, of course, become increasingly relevant in China, where the book and access to information about it has been censored since 2017, after images proliferated comparing the bear to President Xi Jinping. (Taiwanese pilots have even worn All of this makes me want to do one thing: Read the original books themselves. If there’s enough ammo in them to host hundreds of theories and riffs, they must tell an enjoyable, clear story. And given that it was just If you are interested in the future of autonomy, check out the WITI subscribers can save 50% on tickets this week by registering here: You're currently a free subscriber to |