---
subject: "Sci-Fi Idea Bank"
from: "Not Boring <notboring@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-08-15 12:43:32
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Not Boring"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2982495070691762429"]
---
Welcome to the 1,216 newly Not Boring people who have joined us since last Tuesday! If you haven’t subscribed, join 210,510 smart, curious folks by subscribing here: Today’s Not Boring is brought to you by… The alternative asset you probably haven't yet considered: While the traditional 60/40 portfolio has fallen short over the past few years, private credit is currently offering double digit yields to investors, while being less-correlated to the market. It’s no wonder Blackstone’s billionaire president Jonathan Gray when discussing private credit last month stated: “I would say whenever you can get equity-like returns taking debt-like risk, that’s something you should do.” While institutional investors have been loading up on private credit for years, this asset class has largely been out of reach for main street investors. But that’s changing thanks to
Attractive Yields: Percent’s current weighted average is 18.32% as of July 31, 2023 Liquidity: Many deals mature in months, not years, with some having liquidity available after just the first month Recurring income: Generate passive income during the lifetime of the deal Low Minimums: Invest as little as $500 to start
Not Boring readers can receive up to a $500 bonus with their first investment. Hi friends 👋, Happy Tuesday! Back in 2021, I If you don’t read much sci-fi, the speed of technological progress can seem overwhelming. There are so many new things, and they’re coming so quickly. If you do read a lot of sci-fi, though, your reaction to each new announcement might be: “What took you so long?” One way to look at progress in tech is that we’re just working our way through ideas that sci-fi writers came up with a long time ago. So a bank of those ideas might be a roadmap to the future and a compass for those who want to build the sci-fi futures we were promised. Let’s get to it. Sci-Fi Idea BankOver the weekend, I built a spreadsheet with 3,567 sci-fi ideas, a Ideas for new technologies almost always appear in sci-fi before they show up in real life. Not the exact ideas, of course, but science fiction writers are astonishingly good at sketching the outlines of technologies that will only become possible decades or even centuries in the future. Did you know, for example, that Jonathan Swift foresaw 3D modeling, search engines, biofuels, and even floating rocks in Or that Ephraim Chambers wrote about humanoid robots nearly 300 years ago in 1727’s Or that John Jacob Astor IV, that John Jacob Astor IV, the richest passenger on the Titanic, the “Astor” in “Astor Place,” wrote about rooftop windmills for energy, security cameras, traffic cameras, regenerative braking, electric cars (complete with recharging stations), hydrofoil boats, spaceships, and airlocks in his 1894 book, When Jeff Bezos walked through the logic behind selling books online in this It’s hard to find an example of a tech company whose product didn’t appear in sci-fi first. Over the weekend, I asked ChatGPT to make a table of the most valuable tech companies, plus a handful of hand-selected ones, and where the technology they built first showed up in sci-fi. It’s not perfect – even some of the books’ published years are wrong – but it’s directionally correct. The seemingly novel ideas behind the biggest tech companies show up in sci-fi before they’re brought into reality. When you think about it, of course they do. It’s easier to write something down than it is to build it. Ideas precede reality. When a sci-fi writer comes up with an idea, it floats around in latent space, waiting to be pulled down when the necessary underlying technologies finally exist and hit their sweet spot on the cost and performance curves. When the time is right, an inventor or entrepreneur grabs it and tries to wrestle it into the real world. Viewed another way, sci-fi is a goldmine of ideas for startups. There are thousands of ideas waiting to be built when the time is right. And as AI explodes, energy becomes more abundant, space becomes cheaper to access, DNA becomes cheaper to sequence, breakthroughs occur, and any number of curves continue to compound, more ideas, pre-vetted in narrative, get unlocked. I think this explains why everyone got so excited about LK-99. I’m sure that a handful of materials scientists and physicists genuinely cared about room-temperature ambient-pressure superconductivity itself, about the science and the decades-long pursuit in nondescript labs across the globe. Most of us, though, cared for a different reason: room-temperature superconductors unlock a new batch of sci-fi ideas. With room-temperature superconductors, so many ideas locked in the pages of sci-fi novels could be brought to life: High-speed mag-lev trains, Desktop quantum computers, compact affordable fusion reactors, lossless long-range power transmission.
Superconductors or not (and it’s There are many such sci-fi technologies, many of which have yet to be built. Luckily, after I I don’t know how I’d never heard of Once I found it, I got obsessed. I spent more time than I care to admit this weekend on a combination of Technovelgy, ChatGPT, Claude (x2 accounts), Excel, and Google Sheets. I wanted to make a The Sci-Fi Idea BankAnd it actually kinda worked! You can The Sci-Fi Idea Bank is a spreadsheet of 3,567 sci-fi ideas lovingly pulled from Technovelgy, updated to include whether they’ve been built yet, and if so, when, by whom, and what the product is, plus some additional notes and whether they’re mainly bits or atoms. There are some interesting Break them down by category – my hunch is a disproportionate number involve space. Measure the idea/reality gap – how long between idea and reality? Is it different for bits and atoms ideas?
Filling in the spreadsheet took a process straight out of the pages of sci-fi itself. After fumbling around with ChatGPT (and the BrowserOp Plugin and Code Interpreter) for far longer than I care to admit, I figured out a way to get my AI interns to fill out the sheet. If you want to read about how I did it, check out Note: this is still not perfect by any means. There are still formatting issues. Claude missed a bunch of things. There are some things that have been made that it didn’t catch, and I didn’t catch nearly all of its misses. It gave broad credit instead of specific companies and products in a lot of cases. It didn’t categorize bits and atoms the way I would have in some cases. But it’s a start. I’m going to keep cleaning it up. I locked the main sheet, but I added a Sci-Fi Idea Bank as Treasure MapThat last part is the most exciting. If you want, you can take this Idea Bank and add color and context to it. I think one of the most interesting extensions would be to figure out which underlying technologies are required for each idea, how far along they are in their development, and how economically feasible they are. Technical specs and roadmaps for sci-fi ideas. Casey Handmer is working his way through Kim Stanley Robinson’s Mars Trilogy and adding If history is a guide, there are billion-dollar-startups hiding all over the Sci-Fi Idea Bank.
Turns out, it was sci-fi. Jerry Pournelle wrote about an Orbital Factory in 1976. Arthur C. Clarke wrote in 1978 that “a continuous pseudo-one dimensional diamond crystal… can be mass-produced only in the orbiting factories.” And William Gibson imagined automated space factories in 1988. While governments experimented with space manufacturing starting at Skylab in the 1970s, it would take 47 years from Pournelle’s orbital factory complex and 35 from Gibson’s automated space factories for Varda to launch the first automated commercial space factory in 2023. In order for that to happen, the technological and economic infrastructure had to catch up with sci-fi. SpaceX brought down the cost of launches. RocketLab let companies buy satellite buses practically off-the-shelf. NASA developed a thermal protection shield perfect for the reentry capsule. The International Space Station proved out drug crystallization in microgravity. And it can happen now. It took Robert Zubrin to recognize that the tech and economics might finally make sense for spade manufacturing in his 2019 book, It’s not just Varda. Startups constantly pull ideas from sci-fi into the real world.
And there are plenty of ideas left. Find your favorite sci-fi idea, figure out what needs to be true for it to become possible, then track the progress of those things until it’s time. If you wanted to, you could even use ChatGPT or Claude to get started on a technical details doc, then track from there. Soon, you should be able to task an AI agent with scanning If you do make that doc, link it back in the Hivemind sheet. Or keep it to yourself and go start a company that makes sci-fi reality. When the time is right, you’ll still have to do the hard work of building a All of the 3,567 ideas on the list started out as just ideas, and crazy sci-fi ones at that. To date, 936, give or take, have been brought to life. That leaves 2,630 to build. Some ideas might have been beaten to the punch by a better one. Jane Webb London’s 1828 idea for a Mail-Post Letter-Ball, “a system of sending mail quickly from town to town via steam-cannon-powered hollow spheres,” is probably no longer worth building now that we have email. Some might be impossible. At least 20 of the ideas involve faster-than-light travel or communications, which feels hard. We’re probably not going to get the But hundreds of them will become feasible at some point, and I hope that this sheet can be a helpful starting point for those who want to build the future with the ideas of the past. In Hall wrote that the empty top right half, “represents the futures we were promised but were denied.” It’s time to build the futures we were promised. Thanks to That’s all for today! We’ll be back in your inbox on Friday with the Weekly Dose. Thanks for reading, Packy |