---
subject: "AI Craziness: Additional Suicide Lawsuits and The Fate of GPT-4o"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-11-14 20:18:05
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
GPT-4o has been a unique problem for a while, and has been at the center of the bulk of mental health incidents involving LLMs that didn’t involve character chatbots. I’ve previously covered related issues in The Latest Cases Look Quite Bad For OpenAII’ve consistently said that I don’t think it’s necessary or even clearly good for LLMs to always adhere to standard ‘best practices’ defensive behaviors, especially reporting on the user, when dealing with depression, self-harm and suicidality. Nor do I think we should hold them to the standard of ‘do all of the maximally useful things.’
I do think it’s fair to insist they never actively encourage suicidal behaviors.
We also has repeated triggers of safety mechanisms to ‘let a human take over from here’ but then when the user asked OpenAI admitted that wasn’t a thing it could do. It seems like at least in this case we know what we had to do on the active side too. If there had been a human hotline available, and ChatGPT could have connected the user to it when the statements that it would do so triggered, then it seems he would have at least talked to them, and maybe things go better. That’s the best you can do.
I do think this is largely due to 4o and wouldn’t have happened with 5 or Claude. Routing Sensitive Messages Is A Dominated Defensive StrategyIt is important to understand that OpenAI’s actions around GPT-4o, at least since the release of GPT-5, all come from a good place of wanting to protect users (and of course OpenAI itself as well). That said, If the act must be done then it’s better to rip the bandaid off all at once with fair warning, as in announce an end date and be done with it. Some 4o Users Get Rather Attached To The Model
In another kind of crazy,
A Theory Of How All This WorksWhat is actually going on with 4o underneath it all?
I wouldn’t say it ‘expects’ you to put the breaks on, it simply doesn’t put any breaks on. If you choose to apply breaks, great. If not, well, whoops. That’s not its department. There are reasons why one might want this style of behavior, and reasons one might even find it healthy, but in general I think it is pretty clearly not healthy for normies and since normies are most of the 4o usage this is no good. Maybe This Is Net Good In Spite Of Everything?
Connections with 4o run the spectrum from actively good to severe mental problems, or the amplification of existing mental problems in dangerous ways. Only a very small percentage of users of GPT-4o end up as ‘zombies’ or ‘mind controlled,’ and the majority of those advocating for continued access to GPT-4o are not at that level. Some, however, very clearly are this, such as when they repeatedly post GPT-4o outputs verbatim. Could One Make A ‘Good 4o’?Could one create a ‘4o-like’ model that exhibits the positive traits of 4o, without the negative traits? Clearly this is possible, but I expect it to be extremely difficult, especially because it is exactly the negative (from my perspective) aspects of 4o, the ones that cause it to be unsafe, that are also the reasons people want it. Snav notices that GPT-5 exhibits signs of similar behaviors in safer domains.
I don’t like the ‘generalized 4o’ thing any more than I like the part that is especially dangerous to normies, and yeah I don’t love the related aspects of GPT-5, although my custom instructions I think have mostly redirected this towards a different kind of probabilistic overconfidence that I dislike a lot less. You're currently a free subscriber to |