---
subject: "5-Bullet Friday — February 3, 2023"
from: "Tim Ferriss <tim@fourhourbody.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-02-03 23:44:20
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tim Ferris"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_7132466938079773548"]
---
|
|||
Hi All!
Here is your weekly dose of 5-Bullet Friday, a list of what I’m pondering and exploring. Please feel free to forward this along to friends.
[Stio’s Environ XT Jacket](https://click.fourhourmail.com/38u8kd42kehkhodrooxuz/owhkhqh4e098d8sv/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuc3Rpby5jb20vcHJvZHVjdHMvbWVucy1lbnZpcm9uLXh0LWphY2tldA==). I recently replaced my old ski jacket/shell with this, and I’m thrilled that I did. It’s lightweight, durable, and has made even windy negative temperatures easy to handle with a proper base layer and midlayer. The Stio Environ XT is one of SKI Magazine’s “Best Men’s Ski Jackets of 2023,” and I chose Afternoon Azure for color. Here’s the description from the website: “Primed and ready for sidecountry hits, all-day tours, and storm laps in the resort, this jacket is for the minimalist who never uses his powder skirt and the purist who knows exactly what he needs.”
[Lonesome Dove](https://click.fourhourmail.com/38u8kd42kehkhodrooxuz/z2hghnhozm6dxoup/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYXVkaWJsZS5jb20vcGQvTG9uZXNvbWUtRG92ZS1BdWRpb2Jvb2svQjA3QkdRMlpRMw==) by [Larry McMurtry](https://click.fourhourmail.com/38u8kd42kehkhodrooxuz/p8heh9h9ep67ozbq/aHR0cHM6Ly9lbi53aWtpcGVkaWEub3JnL3dpa2kvTGFycnlfTWNNdXJ0cnk=). This is one of the best audiobooks I’ve ever found. The dialogue is burst-out-loud funny, and the writing is spectacularly visual. I’d heard the name Lonesome Dove many times over the years, and I finally dove in after a friend mentioned that it’s his all-time favorite book. Here’s the description: “A love story, an adventure, and an epic of the frontier, Larry McMurtry’s Pulitzer Prize-winning classic, Lonesome Dove, is the grandest novel ever written about the last defiant wilderness of America. Two retired Texas Rangers, Captains Woodrow Call and Augustus ‘Gus’ McCrae, lead a cattle drive from the small town of Lonesome Dove to the unsettled Montana territories. On their grueling journey, they are joined by Joshua Deets, a Black scout and former Ranger; Jake Spoon, a fugitive; and Newt Dobbs, a 17-year-old boy who may have family ties to Call.”
Even if you end up reading the text, listen to 30–60 minutes of the audiobook for narrator [Lee Horsley](https://click.fourhourmail.com/38u8kd42kehkhodrooxuz/x0hph6hnm4270ef5/aHR0cHM6Ly9lbi53aWtpcGVkaWEub3JnL3dpa2kvTGVlX0hvcnNsZXk=)’s accents and performance. Warning: Gus can be high-volume, as he’s a loudmouth in the book, and there is one tough stretch via audio about one-third in. I was tempted to put it down briefly, as was a friend, so just power through or switch to text. It evens out after that and simply gets better and better with each short chapter.
[David Hockney: The Art of Seeing](https://click.fourhourmail.com/38u8kd42kehkhodrooxuz/6qheh8hp43r2enso/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cueW91dHViZS5jb20vd2F0Y2g_dj1DZHFjaDMtRDk0QQ==). Here’s the description: “[David Hockney](https://click.fourhourmail.com/38u8kd42kehkhodrooxuz/kkhmh6h8pow9vmcl/aHR0cHM6Ly9lbi53aWtpcGVkaWEub3JnL3dpa2kvRGF2aWRfSG9ja25leQ==), widely considered to be Britain’s best-loved living artist, has taken over the Royal Academy [RA] in London with his exhibition A Bigger Picture, made up of recent works depicting the landscape of his native Yorkshire. In this programme, Andrew Marr, a friend of Hockney’s and an amateur painter himself, is in conversation with the artist, both at his home in Bridlington and in the galleries of the RA.”
“[Taming the Mammoth: Why You Should Stop Caring What Other People Think](https://click.fourhourmail.com/38u8kd42kehkhodrooxuz/58hvh7h5w4x92li6/aHR0cHM6Ly93YWl0YnV0d2h5LmNvbS8yMDE0LzA2L3RhbWluZy1tYW1tb3RoLWxldC1wZW9wbGVzLW9waW5pb25zLXJ1bi1saWZlLmh0bWw=).” This remains one of the most empowering articles I’ve read in recent years. It’s hilarious and amazing. For double trouble, pair it with [my interview with the author](https://click.fourhourmail.com/38u8kd42kehkhodrooxuz/25h2hoh7xq9owlu3/aHR0cHM6Ly90aW0uYmxvZy8yMDE3LzExLzMwL21hbmFnaW5nLXByb2NyYXN0aW5hdGlvbi1wcmVkaWN0aW5nLXRoZS1mdXR1cmUtYW5kLWZpbmRpbmctaGFwcGluZXNzLz91dG1fc291cmNlPWNvbnZlcnRraXQmdXRtX21lZGl1bT1jb252ZXJ0a2l0JnV0bV9jYW1wYWlnbj01YmY=), Tim Urban ([@waitbutwhy](https://click.fourhourmail.com/38u8kd42kehkhodrooxuz/g3hnh5he209zw9br/aHR0cHM6Ly90d2l0dGVyLmNvbS93YWl0YnV0d2h5)).
“The very secret of life for me, I believed, was to maintain in the midst of rushing events an inner tranquility.”
— [Margaret Bourke-White](https://click.fourhourmail.com/38u8kd42kehkhodrooxuz/9qhzhnhg8ew2rrs9/aHR0cHM6Ly9lbi53aWtpcGVkaWEub3JnL3dpa2kvTWFyZ2FyZXRfQm91cmtlLVdoaXRl)
([Click here to share on Twitter](https://click.fourhourmail.com/38u8kd42kehkhodrooxuz/3ohphkhq8kmdglhr/aHR0cHM6Ly9jdHQuZWMvYml1dDU=))
You can complement this edition of 5-Bullet Friday with [my interview](https://click.fourhourmail.com/38u8kd42kehkhodrooxuz/48hvheh037l284ax/aHR0cHM6Ly90aW0uYmxvZy8yMDE5LzAzLzI4L25laWwtZ2FpbWFuLz91dG1fc291cmNlPWNvbnZlcnRraXQmdXRtX21lZGl1bT1jb252ZXJ0a2l0JnV0bV9jYW1wYWlnbj01YmY=) with bestselling author [Neil Gaiman](https://click.fourhourmail.com/38u8kd42kehkhodrooxuz/48hvheh037l284ax/aHR0cHM6Ly90aW0uYmxvZy8yMDE5LzAzLzI4L25laWwtZ2FpbWFuLz91dG1fc291cmNlPWNvbnZlcnRraXQmdXRtX21lZGl1bT1jb252ZXJ0a2l0JnV0bV9jYW1wYWlnbj01YmY=), who wrote and narrated another of my favorite audiobooks, [The Graveyard Book](https://click.fourhourmail.com/38u8kd42kehkhodrooxuz/wnh2hghrdl7o60b7/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYXVkaWJsZS5jb20vcGQvVGhlLUdyYXZleWFyZC1Cb29rLUF1ZGlvYm9vay9CMDAyVjhERUtDPw==).
And, as always, please give me feedback on Twitter. Which bullet above is your favorite? What do you want more or less of? Other suggestions? Please let me know. Just [send a tweet to @tferriss](https://click.fourhourmail.com/38u8kd42kehkhodrooxuz/reh8hohqpod5zot2/aHR0cHM6Ly90d2l0dGVyLmNvbS90ZmVycmlzcw==) and put #5BulletFriday at the end so I can find it.
Have a wonderful weekend, all.
Much love to you and yours,
Tim
I’ve stocked up on boxes and boxes of [LMNT](https://click.fourhourmail.com/38u8kd42kehkhodrooxuz/8ghqhohg87d5n4tk/aHR0cDovL2RyaW5rbG1udC5jb20vVGlt), and I usually use 1–2 packs per day to add electrolytes. These days, as I’m logging more outdoor and skiing hours, [LMNT](https://click.fourhourmail.com/38u8kd42kehkhodrooxuz/8ghqhohg87d5n4tk/aHR0cDovL2RyaW5rbG1udC5jb20vVGlt) has been critical. Electrolytes are essential minerals that keep you moving and prevent dehydration symptoms like headaches, muscle cramps, and fatigue. They support hundreds of processes within the body. I add electrolytes for many reasons: because I over-hydrate compulsively while stuck at a laptop (which dilutes electrolytes and leads me to feel tired), because I’m on a low-carb diet, because I’ve lost electrolytes through exercise, etc. It’s simply cheap hydration insurance that tastes great.
Developed by Robb Wolf and his coaches, each serving delivers a meaningful dose of electrolytes without the garbage—no sugar, no artificial ingredients, no coloring, no junk. [LMNT](https://click.fourhourmail.com/38u8kd42kehkhodrooxuz/8ghqhohg87d5n4tk/aHR0cDovL2RyaW5rbG1udC5jb20vVGlt) is used by three Navy SEAL teams, as prescribed by their master chief; Tia-Clair Toomey-Orr (5x CrossFit Games winner); dozens of NFL and NBA teams; and others, like me, who are looking for a physical and mental edge. My favorite flavor is Citrus Salt, which, as a side note, you can use to make a kick-ass, no-sugar margarita. Grapefruit is a close second, so I alternate the two.
[Find your favorite flavor with a free LMNT Sample Pack, included with any purchase for a limited time](https://click.fourhourmail.com/38u8kd42kehkhodrooxuz/8ghqhohg87d5n4tk/aHR0cDovL2RyaW5rbG1udC5jb20vVGlt). And if you don’t love your purchase for any reason, my friends at LMNT offer a no-questions-asked refund policy. This special offer is available here >>> [DrinkLMNT.com/Tim](https://click.fourhourmail.com/38u8kd42kehkhodrooxuz/8ghqhohg87d5n4tk/aHR0cDovL2RyaW5rbG1udC5jb20vVGlt).