---
subject: "Tim Kane on my visit to University of Austin"
from: "Marginal REVOLUTION <donotreply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-01-18 16:11:40
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tyler Cowen", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2466199532210586699", "UNREAD"]
---
Here is [the link](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=9134ef63dc9646de61d18200f483b54efe6cbca84397bd913e0fa8948d36af9f&blog_id=42693868&post_id=92261&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=40f9611657978ef128c7524f44c1a1d4&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly9wcm9mZXNzb3J0aW1rYW5lLnN1YnN0YWNrLmNvbS9wL3RoZS10b3AtaW5ub3ZhdGlvbnMtYXQtdWF0eD91dG1fc291cmNlPXBvc3QtZW1haWwtdGl0bGUmcHVibGljYXRpb25faWQ9NTY2NzUzJnBvc3RfaWQ9MTg0MjY2Mjk3JnV0bV9jYW1wYWlnbj1lbWFpbC1wb3N0LXRpdGxlJmlzRnJlZW1haWw9dHJ1ZSZyPTJpOHpuZCZ0cmllZFJlZGlyZWN0PXRydWUmdXRtX21lZGl1bT1lbWFpbA=&email_id=e21e4e7a6759ec41026892e7914e77c4), I should add that in addition to [my enthusiasm for the students](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=9644ab730ef23a02fb680b45601185dc0edd71314b1331d2e8e9a7c1ce320fbb&blog_id=42693868&post_id=92261&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=47e7d22a3e463e059aac24fb02e143ff&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly9tYXJnaW5hbHJldm9sdXRpb24uY29tL21hcmdpbmFscmV2b2x1dGlvbi8yMDI2LzAxL215LWF1c3Rpbi12aXNpdC5odG1s&email_id=e21e4e7a6759ec41026892e7914e77c4), the faculty also seemed quite good, most of all knowledgeable and open. I know very little about how the school is run, you might try [this short piece from Arnold Kling](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=20529ecdc53aa87e031e24434593cdc37f25d4190bb5d5feeb72ae830f688b17&blog_id=42693868&post_id=92261&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=a3204bd30bf12db6315cb9d02140f993&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly9hcm5vbGRrbGluZy5zdWJzdGFjay5jb20vcC9jb3Jwb3JhdGUtc29hcC1vcGVyYS1hdC11YXR4&email_id=e21e4e7a6759ec41026892e7914e77c4), who has been visiting there for a week.
Here is an excerpt from Tim:
Tyler made a remark that he didn’t think fighting grade inflation matters very much. I respect his opinion, but I think he’s wrong. And I hope I can change his mind. Here’s why I care so much about it, and why I think a GPA target is the only — literally the only — effective solution. A college cannot fight grade inflation with rhetoric and goals and hand-wringing. Genuine academic rigor requires strong limits on what faculty can do with grades.
Professors everywhere have a large incentive to give higher grades. The situation has
[inflated asymptotically]to the ceiling for 8 decades, particularly at the Ivies...
At University of Austin, all professors have to give an average grade of B. Here is more from Tim:
Consequences?
- More learning. UATX students are focused on learning, not grades.
- Less squabbling. Faculty are seeing way fewer ticky-tack arguments over a single point on homework and exams because the students aren’t obsessed with the 4.0 or 3.0 threshholds.
- More studying, especially increased follow-through. The incentives for students to care about final exams are stronger (none of this late-term “that grade is already settled, so I am blowing off that final exam” nonsense.)
- Less anxiety. I skimmed the grades data for our fall semester and am pretty sure I did not see a single “perfect” grade of 100/100 for any student in any class.
Some of you have asked me what I think of [the recent Politico article on University of Austin](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=7ba5f2761f8e0dcd954018c1c0421b36f3578076dded7166a888db9d3540a400&blog_id=42693868&post_id=92261&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=0ca8dbbb64251769fd18bc72e51437cc&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cucG9saXRpY28uY29tL25ld3MvbWFnYXppbmUvMjAyNi8wMS8xNi9jaXZpbC13YXItdW5pdmVyc2l0eS1vZi1hdXN0aW4tYmFyaS13ZWlzcy0wMDcyOTY4OD9uaWQ9MDAwMDAxODAtM2U3OC1kZTkyLWFkZGYtZmU3ZmYyMjIwMDAwJm5uYW1lPXBvbGl0aWNvLXdlZWtlbmQmbnJpZD0wMDAwMDE1Yy02YWVjLWRmOWYtYWI3Zi1lZWVmNzRiZjAwMDA&email_id=e21e4e7a6759ec41026892e7914e77c4). First, I have not been involved in any of the cited disputes, so I cannot speak to their details. Second, I do not not not speak for the University at all (while I am on the Advisory Board, it is an unpaid position with no authority or fiduciary responsibility and my advice/consultation has been on the AI topic). But I would make these more general points:
a. If a university decided to be based explicitly on classical liberal perspectives and principles, I would think that is great (not saying what is the best way to describe U. Austin, this is a general observation). I would however worry that the decision is not sustainable over time at much scale, given the career incentives of so many of the people who will be hired.
b. If that decision to be "classically liberal in orientation" required the administration to set some general principles to try to assure that the faculty at said school did not evolve into being like the faculty almost everywhere else, I would be fine with that.
c. I think such a school, over time, if it stuck to its principles, would end up with more de facto free speech than most other institutions of higher education.
d. I am glad that Notre Dame and Georgetown are Catholic schools, that UC Santa Cruz was founded as a kind of hippie school, that there is Yeshiva, the New School, HBCUs, and so on. I favor schools being "more different" ideologically in a variety of directions, including those I do not agree with, which of course will cover the majority of cases. My main objection is that many of the "Catholic" schools for instance are not very Catholic anymore, having been taken over by a kind of rampant general professionalism. I hope University of Austin avoids that fate. I should add that I am well aware that the general rise in fixed costs makes such endeavors much harder to sustain these days. I would like to reverse that general trend, and that is one reason for my interest in online and AI-oriented methods in education.
e. To innovate, more and more schools will have to move away from the old "faculty control" model. This change is already substantially underway, sans the innovation however.
f. Failure to contextualize is often the greatest "sin" of media articles offering coverage of disputes.
Returning to the University of Austin, right now their entering class is about 100 students, and they offer 35 classes a semester. It is one floor in an office building, and it is not costing any taxpayer dollars. It is a tiny, tiny drop in the bucket. GMU alone has about 40,000 students, and is basically a city. My Principles class this last fall alone had about 3.5x more students than are in the entire U. Austin.
If you are very upset by whatever is going on at U. Austin, or not going on, or whatever...I would say that is the real story.