---
subject: "Filling Out Forms is Corvée Labor"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <the-diff@ghost.io>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-24 15:34:46
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
In this issue: - Filling Out Forms is Corvée Labor—Some of the costs of government aren't booked as part of the budget: money is easier to track than time, but that means that there's an incentive to outsource the administrative burden to taxpayers. This cost may or may not be worth paying in a given instance, but if there's a push for government efficiency, it's important to measure it well.
- The Real News Business—Real news remains the least lucrative part of the news business.
- Credit, Wealth, and Risk-Adjusted Returns—Fixed income and equities have similar risk-adjusted returns over long periods, and lending is finally producing the kinds of fortunes that stockpicking has.
- Less-Than-Truckload—Amazon makes a natural expansion bet.
- Capex—Apple is ready to spend.
- Bundling and Scale—You can beat Netflix on churn if you're willing to be beaten by a bigger margin on revenue per user.
Filling Out Forms is Corvée LaborHistorically, taxes were collected in a few forms: some countries had the kind of economy where there was a tax base that could actually hand over a set quantity of physical coins at some appointed time in order to provide revenue, but in many cases taxes were paid in either goods or labor—a share of the crops, some unpaid labor building a road, etc. The usual term for taxes collected in the form of work is corvée labor, and it's a sufficiently old and persistent practice that the term comes to English by way of French translations of a Roman legal term. Over time, as economies have gotten more market-oriented and the scope of government activity has broadened, we've switched to a system where taxes are collected entirely in currency. Or did we? That model certainly dominates discussions of government policy, outside of social issues: how much money gets raised, and from whom? How much gets spent, and on what (or, realistically, on whom)? And what's the optimal gap between the two? The Department of Government Efficiency's But, especially when it comes to government spending, it's often helpful to avoid thinking about dollars and to think about real resources instead. Healthcare spending is not just dollars-in and then dollars-out: providing healthcare means paying for the time of people with specific skills, some of which are valuable and scarce. It requires buildings, capital equipment, and consumables. And doing all of this shapes incentives: in the very long run, the impact of government healthcare policy shows up in people's decisions to go into medicine, pharma research, etc., and for companies in that space to alter their R&D spending. This clarifies issues that would otherwise be hard to talk about: no money is directly lost by anyone when student loans are zeroed out. The cost to society is the incentive created to pursue or provide education in ways that are legible to sources of student loans. So, one large line item that doesn't show up on the Federal budget, but which is a meaningful cost, is the time spent complying with regulations. Conveniently, the US government actually provides an estimate for this: filling out paperwork takes But that's probably a low estimate of the cost. There's likely to be a roughly U-shaped relationship between income and the paperwork burden: if you're very well-off, you probably have interestingly complicated taxes, and there's a disproportionate chance that you work in a highly-regulated industry (the most common job in the top 1% isn't management, or law; it's medicine). Even if the average very wealthy person isn't preparing their own 1040, the person they're paying to do this for them probably earns well above the average income, too. At the other end of the scale, if you're impoverished enough to qualify for welfare programs, you'll be doing a fair amount of paperwork to get it—ChatGPT estimates that The 10.9bn-hour figure is limited in other ways: it's a measure of time actively spent on paperwork, but that's a subset of time spent on or because of regulation. Like the difference between It's important to note that these costs are not pure dead weight. They're expenditures, like other government expenditures. If there's a mandate to sort your recycling, the question of whether or not that's a good mandate comes down to the cost of everyone's time and the benefit of sorting the recycling. So this time spending isn't a pure cost. But if the government can spend either your time or your money, and the monetary component is the one that gets highlighted in policy debates, the incentive is to underspend money and overspend time. But since the money mostly comes from taxes which are the result of people trading their time for money, what this really amounts to is an incentive to use taxpayers' time inefficiently. It's somewhat unfair to contrast this with the private sector, for a few reasons. First, private companies have ruthless selection against unnecessary process, at least outside of monopolies. In some cases, a form is something that stands between a willing customer and a willing seller, so every superfluous field has a real cost, and cleverly autocompleting addresses or providing useful error messages pays a direct, measurable dividend. So even if the median private sector participant is exactly as red tape-happy as the average bureaucrat, the ones you'll actually encounter aren't, because "average" isn't good enough to stay in business. Second, governments specialize in the kinds of things that are hard to privatize because it's hard to measure their outputs. If you're putting together an e-commerce checkout flow, you can estimate whether some extra step reduces fraud enough to offset the lost sales from customers dropping off after that step. But what's the tradeoff between someone getting food stamps if they shouldn't versus someone else not getting them when they should. (This example also illustrates the ambiguous politics of efficiency: conservatives talk a lot more about overregulation, but a streamlined process of applying for benefits leads to a net increase in the availability of those benefits. The Diff has This is something DOGE can actually do. Described in purely neutral, apolitical terms, DOGE is a group of young people with a tech background and a mandate to streamline government processes. This is bland enough a descriptor to apply to the A student loan borrower is, in real terms, promising to forgo future consumption in exchange for getting access to education, as well as housing and food during the time they're getting that education. The bet both sides are implicitly making is that the incremental consumption they can afford with the skills from their education means that they're better-off, while the rest of society is afforded a more productive workforce. It's not necessarily the case that every degree needs to lead to a better job to be worth doing, of course, but to the extent that we want to subsidize degrees that don't lead to a sufficient improvement in income to offset their cost, or to subsidize degrees for people who don't understand that getting a generous interest deferral option means that the total amount they owe rises over time, then a loan is the wrong structure. They should be replaced with grants, and these grants should be debated in terms of the positive externalities they create. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/7047fee9?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
You're on the free list for The Diff. This week, paying subscribers read about Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. See a sampling of current open roles below: - A Google Ventures backed startup founded by SpaceX engineers that’s building data infrastructure and tooling for hardware companies is looking for full-stack and front-end focused software engineers with 3+ years experience, ideally with data intensive products. (LA, Hybrid)
- A company building better analytics for pricing insurance is looking for a senior software engineer who likes turning messy data into clear answers. (NYC or Boston)
- A premier proprietary trading firm is looking for smart generalists to join their investor relations team, working with external investors, rating agencies, and the internal finance team. Investment banking and/or investor relations experience preferred. Quantitative background and technical aptitude a plus. (NYC)
- An AI startup building tools to help automate compliance for companies in highly regulated industries is looking for a staff product designer with 7+ years of product / design experience. Experience with AI driven experiences and interaction models a plus. (NYC)
- YC-backed AI company that’s turning body cam footage into complete police reports is looking for a front-end focused software engineer who has sharp design sensibilities. (SF)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. ElsewhereThe Real News BusinessIf you think of what the brand name New York Times connotes, you probably think about news and opinion. If there's some major global event, there's a good chance that the Times has a reporter nearby, who has existing contacts with the relevant people, and who can whip up context so Americans know what's going on. And if there's a major issue, the Times will probably weigh in, whether through the editorials it runs or through the stories it chooses to emphasize. But if you read their investor materials, the news part of the business gets less and less relevant. Their most recent Apple is Credit, Wealth, and Risk-Adjusted ReturnsA few years ago, The Diff asked: Less-Than-TruckloadAmazon (disclosure: long) is CapexA few weeks ago, an OpenAI-led consortium announced plans to spend $500bn on AI infrastructure in the US over the next four years (see This is also a good reminder that buildout races can overshoot, but they don't need many active participants to keep going. Microsoft is Disclosure: Long MSFT. Bundling and ScaleThe story in streaming video over the last few years has been that many companies have a big enough content library and popular enough brand to take a shot at it, and that in most cases they don't quite reach the escape velocity necessary to compete with Netflix, unless their streaming business is bundled with something else. But a pure streaming bundle can work, if it's big enough: |
||||||||||
|
|
|
||||||||||
|