---
subject: "Efficiency Is Sacred"
from: "Robin Hanson from Overcoming Bias <overcomingbias@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-04-16 17:27:02
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Overcoming Bias", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8616244883382228708", "UNREAD"]
---
We all see some things as sacred. These things bind us to associates, via a shared a view of their importance. You can figure out what are your sacred things by seeing what you value, idealize, like to sacrifice for, are reluctant to tradeoff, want to clearly separate from mundane things, and prefer to feel not think about it. One of my sacred things is honesty. Seeing something as sacred induces you to put more energy into it. But it also I we must treat something as sacred, we can minimize the cost of this distortion by treating things as sacred that are the least distorted by such treatment. I’ve previously In this post I want to argue that the mathematically defined concept of economic efficiency has a similar property. Economic efficiency is a standard that we economists use to evaluate policies. We are to ask how much people would be willing to pay, or be paid, to get some policies over others, considering all of the effects of such policies, and all of the ways people care about those policies, and given the same shared information about those policies. A policy is more efficient if people would pay more in total to get it. By its construction, it is hard to idealizing efficiency by dropping details, as it is already defined in terms of all the possibly relevant details. And an attitude of refusing to trade off other things against efficiency has little effect, as efficiency already embodies all possible tradeoffs. Thus treating efficiency as sacred does relatively little to distort it. Now maybe our sacred instincts are less willing to treat efficiency as sacred. I don’t think we have good theories yet about this part of the sacred. But I greatly You're currently a free subscriber to |