---
subject: "Funding supplements and investing complements"
from: "\"Ka-Ching! by The Ken\" <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2021-12-13 10:34:10
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
One of the biggest signals of a good product-market fit is a company raising some funding.
Going by that measure, it looks like peer-to-peer lending just found its fit. Last week, LenDenClub raised US$10 million in a Series A round from a clutch of investors, including Artha Venture Fund and Cred’s founder Kunal Shah, among others.
Except, this round came a whole seven years after the company was set up. Its pre-Series A round came pretty recently too—in August 2019.
P2P lending companies like LenDenClub are regulated marketplaces that connect individual borrowers to individual lenders; the proposition for lenders being that the interest rate they charge borrowers can translate into great returns. And such platforms have been around for a while now, even if they haven't attracted much investor attention.
So, what is bringing these rather late rounds of funding? The answer seems to be the pull of the market, more than anything else.
As American venture capitalist Marc Andreessen [said](https://pmarchive.com/guide_to_startups_part4.html): "In a great market—a market with lots of real potential customers—the market pulls product out of the startup. The market needs to be fulfilled and the market will be fulfilled, by the first viable product that comes along. The product doesn’t need to be great; it just has to basically work. And, the market doesn’t care how good the team is, as long as the team can produce that viable product."
Product, meet Market.
Fixed deposit rates offered by banks in India have gone down steadily—from about 8.2% in 2011, to 7.9% in 2014, and finally to around 5% [this year](https://www.livemint.com/money/personal-finance/it-is-good-to-look-for-alternatives-to-fds-amid-falling-interest-rates-11634020030180.html). And as the interest one can earn from deposits keeps plummeting, P2P lending becomes more attractive than ever before—offering returns ranging from 10% to as much as 18%.
India has nearly 20 P2P lending platforms with a combined loan book of Rs 5,000 crore (US$660 million), according to this The Economic Times [report](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/banking/finance/banking/p2p-lending-machine-firing-on-all-cylinders-amid-slackened-bank-loan-disbursals/articleshow/87232970.cms). Of that, LenDen alone has facilitated Rs 1,200 crore (US$160 million) worth of disbursals, and sees that growing by 5X to US$1 billion worth of loans in the next 18 months, its founder Bhavin Patel [told](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=weayKDJsLkg) CNBC.
These numbers are probably what got LenDenClub its US$10 million Series A round, among the largest any P2P platform has raised so far. It must have also helped that the company has been making the most of a favourable market. LenDenClub struck partnerships with other financial services platforms such as Cred and Google Pay this year, offering their users the opportunity to lend and borrow from each other.
But a buoyant market risks masking the true nature of the product—in this case, peer-to-peer lending. As we have [written](https://the-ken.com/story/putting-the-p-back-in-p2p-lending/) in the [past](https://the-ken.com/story/peer-to-peer-lending-claims-its-first-victims/), the P2P business has always been a risky proposition for the lender-investors.
The whole concept of peer-to-peer lending is rooted in the fact that when you borrow money from a peer you know, there is trust between the two parties. That trust translates into a repayment commitment, and the relationship you share with that peer invariably becomes the collateral.
In the online world, P2P marketplaces match borrowers with lenders using ‘AI/ML’ technologies (Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning). So, it is not so much peer-to-peer but stranger-to-stranger lending. (Side note: I wonder if changing the name to the latter would give users a more accurate representation of the product.)
The ultimate proof of the P2P model, though, lies in its default rates. And LenDenClub’s founder says its default rates stand at just 3.95%, and that he expects it to hover between 4-5%. The reason could be because of [this](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/banking/finance/banking/p2p-lending-machine-firing-on-all-cylinders-amid-slackened-bank-loan-disbursals/articleshow/87232970.cms):