---
subject: "The One and a Half Gemini"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-02-22 13:00:45
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Previously: I hit send on So this covers Gemini 1.5. One million tokens, and we are promised overall Gemini Advanced or GPT-4 levels of performance on Gemini Pro levels of compute. This post does not cover the issues with Gemini’s image generation, and what it is and is not willing to generate. I am on top of that situation and will get to it soon. One Million Tokens
It is truly bizarre to launch Gemini Advanced as a paid service, and then about a week later announce the new Gemini Pro 1.5 is now about as good as Gemini Advanced. Yes, actually, I do feel the acceleration, hot damn. And that’s not all!
One million is a lot of tokens. That covers every individual document I have ever asked an LLM to examine. That is enough to cover my entire set of AI columns for the entire year, in case I ever need to look something up, presumably Google’s NotebookLM is The Way to do that. A potential future 10 million would be even more. Soon Gemini will be able to watch a one hour video or read 700k words, whereas right now if I use the web interface of Gemini Advanced interface all I can upload is a photo. The standard will be to give people 128k tokens to start, then you can pay for more than that. A million tokens is not cheap inference, even for Google.
Here are their head-to-head results with themselves:
Mixture of ExpertsWhat is their secret to the overall improved performance?
My understanding is that GPT-4 is probably a mixture of experts model as well, although we have no official confirmation. This all suggests that Google’s underlying Gemini models are indeed better than OpenAI’s GPT-4, except they are playing catch-up with various features and details. As they catch-up in those features and details, they could improve quite rapidly. Combine that with Google integration and TPUs, and they will soon have an advantage, at least until GPT-5 shows up. They claim understanding and reasoning are greatly improved. They have a video talking about analyzing a Buster Keaton silent movie and identifying a scene. Another thing they are proud of
Overall they claim that Gemini Pro 1.5 is broadly similar in performance level to Gemini Ultra 1.0. Except presumably for the giant context window. Something else I noticed as well:
Quality Not QuantityIn practice how good is it? I’ve had access to it this week, but didn’t do enough queries to be confident yet. So far, from what I have seen? It is quite good. Others mostly agree.
The caveat on that one, of course, is that while this very much seems like an honest opinion, I saw this because it was retweeted by Demis Hassabis. So there might be some favorable selection there. Just a bit.
Ethan Mollick is more objective. He gave Gemini 1.5 the rulebook for the over-the-top 60 Years in Space,
Then he uploaded his entire academic works all at once,
Paige Bailey similarly records a screen capture of her looking for an apartment on Zillow,
Here are two sides of the coin. Matt Shumer is impressed that Gemini 1.5 was able to watch a long video and summarize it within only a minute, I think both interpretations are right. The summary is impressive in some ways, and also unimpressively full of important errors. Other summaries of other things were mostly much better at avoiding such errors. This was actually a relative underperformance. What To Do With It?There are three big changes coming. We are getting much larger context windows, we are getting GPT-4 level inference at GPT-3.5 level costs, and Google is poised to have a clearly superior free-level offering to OpenAI. So far, due to various other shiny objects, people are sleeping on all of them. Assuming Gemini 1.5 becomes Google’s free offering, that suddenly becomes the default. I prefer Gemini Advanced to GPT-4 for most text queries, but I prefer DALLE-3 by far to Gemini for images and there are complications and other features. Google also has wide reach to offer its products. We should expect them to grab a lot of market share on the free side. Next up is the ability of other services to use Gemini 1.5 via the API. Right now, essentially every application that has to produce inference at scale is using GPT-3.5 or an open weights model that offers at best similar performance. We only got GPT-4-level responses in bespoke situations. Lots of studies used GPT-3.5. That random chatbot with a character was no better than GPT-3.5. Most people’s idea of ‘what is a chatbot’ were 3.5 rather than 4. Then there is the gigantic new context window. It is a bigger jump than it looks. Right now, we have large context windows, but if you use anything close to the full window, recall levels suffer. You want to stay well clear of the limit. It is good and right for companies to let you push that envelope if you want, but you also should mostly avoid pushing it. Whereas Gemini 1.5 seems much better at recall over very large context windows. You really can use at least a lot of the million tokens.
So much value is in ‘this just works’ and ‘I do not have to explain this.’ If you make the request easy to make, by allowing context to be provided ‘for free’ via dumping tons of stuff on the model including video and screen captures, you are in all sorts of new business. What happens when context is no longer that which is scarce? There are also a lot of use cases that did not make sense before, and do make sense now. I suspect this includes being able to use the documents as a form of training data and general guidance much more effectively. Another use case is simply ‘feed it my entire corpus of writing,’ or other similar things. Or you can directly feed in video. Once the available UI gets good things are going to get very interesting. That goes double when you consider the integration with Google’s other services, including GMail and Google Drive. There was a lot of shiny happening this week. We had Sora, then GPT-4 went crazy and Gemini’s image generator had some rather embarrassing issues. It is easy to lose the thread. I still think this is the thread. You're currently a free subscriber to |