---
subject: "Festivo/The Sound of Love/Zester"
from: "Recomendo <recomendo@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-06-08 09:00:47
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Recomendo", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8455078693589186571", "UNREAD"]
---
Calendar of festivalsI try to coordinate my travel to exotic places with local festivals that occur at the same time. Trouble is, there’s been no easy way to find out which festivals are happening where. For example many traditional celebrations run on a lunar cycle. So I built a calendar that will show me all the festivals in Asia that are happening on a particular day. Or I can look at the map and see what festivals occur nearby and when. My site is called The Sound of LoveThe website Wide zesterWhile I like my Contain your messMy husband is the gardener of the family, and this Leak detectorsThree separate acquaintances of mine recently suffered significant, expensive flood damage in their homes as a result of water leaks while they were away. It’s not an uncommon disaster. After some research I settled on the best recommended solution: a set of Peanut butter hack — use a massage gunAfter seeing a video of someone using a massage gun to force every last drop of mayonnaise out of a bottle, I decided to try in on a plastic jar of unmixed natural peanut butter. I pushed the business end of the gun against the side of the jar and marveled at how quickly the vibrations mixed the separated oil with the solids. A week later, the peanut butter remains perfectly blended. Note: I've only tested this on plastic jars; use caution with glass containers. — MF Recomendo is an authentic, hand-crafted, human-written weekly newsletter that is free, but not cheap. Please consider supporting our work with a paid option, now at the low price of $45 per year. Paid subs enable us to keep making it free for others. Recomendo Unclassified Ads work! UNCLASSIFIEDS 9 Hidden Perks of Your Amazon Prime Membership. Are you taking advantage of your Amazon Prime perks? Whether you’re already a Prime member or considering signing up, here are Declutter your inbox! Meco newsletter reader app lets you organize and read newsletters in dedicated space. Connect Gmail/Outlook. Features offline reading, topic grouping, highlights, saved links, custom themes. Available on iOS, Android, web. Your Mac software solution. Setapp! 240+ premium apps, one subscription. Includes productivity, design, maintenance tools. No ads, in-app purchases or extra fees. Mac, iOS, web access. Auto-updates included. Family/team plans available. Travel worry-free in 200+ countries with aloSIM! Get $50 in mobile data credit for just $24.97 -— that's up 11 weeks of coverage starting at $4.50/week. Download our app, activate your eSIM instantly, and enjoy reliable data with no roaming charges or hidden fees. Recomendo is published by Cool Tools Lab, a small company of three people. We also run the Recomendo is copyrighted by Cool Tools Lab, LLC. Commissions may be earned from the links above. |