---
subject: "Finally, a bill that helps our industry: why and what to do"
from: "web3 letter from a16zcrypto <a16zcrypto@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-05-19 16:16:17
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "a16zcrypto"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_2535365729249697677"]
---
By the end of this month, the House of Representatives is going to vote on a major bill (HR 4763) — one that we think you should pay attention to. It’s called the give blockchain projects a pathway to safely and effectively launch in the United States; clarify the line between the SEC and CFTC on who regulates what in crypto, and whether digital assets are a security or a commodity; ensure oversight of crypto exchanges, and further protect American consumers by implementing rules on crypto trading.
We share more on the big picture for why this all matters below — also so you can share with others! — but first… What's in the bill?The FIT21 bill/ HR 4763 …Address the unique structure of digital assets; …Provide for clear, robust consumer protections; …Clarify which digital assets are regulated by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) and which by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). This is important because of the key differences between the definitions of “commodities” vs. “securities”, which have consequences for how they are regulated. The CFTC would regulate a digital asset as a commodity “if the blockchain, or digital ledger, on which it runs is functional and decentralized”. The SEC would regulate a digital asset as a security “if its associated blockchain is functional but not decentralized”.
The bill defines The bill also establishes other consumer protection requirements such as segregation of customer funds; lock-up periods for token insiders (to incentivize innovation not just speculation); limitations on annual sales volumes; and disclosure requirements. These are not unlike the protections regulators implemented following the Great Depression, after the excesses of the roaring 1920s and stock market crash of 1929 — once those guide rails were in place, the U.S. saw an unprecedented era of growth and innovation in our markets and economy. What's not in the billSome within the industry have voiced concern that the bill gives the SEC too much jurisdiction by providing a very high bar for decentralization — as well as the ability to claw back any tokens or projects that become “re-centralized”. There are other concerns that the bill doesn’t provide harder lines between SEC and CFTC jurisdiction. However, the bill, while not perfect, will give the crypto industry the regulatory certainty it needs to continue to operate — and innovate — in the United States. Some have asked, why have any regulation at all? It’s unrealistic to think there can be no regulation, and more clarity is better than having confusing rules. Regulation, along with a clear path to compliance for businesses, allows innovators to build trust with, and useful products for, the public — while holding any ill-intentioned actors more accountable. Who is behind it?The FIT21 bill was a joint effort by the House Committee on Why now, and what can you do to help?Happening in the next couple weeks, the vote on the bill will be a referendum on crypto in the United States. It’s therefore imperative it passes with strong bipartisan support. After that, it would need to be passed by the Senate and signed by the President to become a law. So, we’re at a critical juncture now. To do your part, we urge you to contact your local representative via Stand with Crypto’s portal: Why it matters, the big picture:Even though the crypto industry has been around for over a decade, there hasn’t been a comprehensive regulatory framework for digital assets in the United States. Our current regulatory framework is fragmented, incomplete, and lacking in clarity. This regulatory uncertainty has not only created a confusing environment for innovation, it has created a feeding ground for bad actors. As we’ve seen, ill-intentioned firms and individuals can easily launch products that take advantage of regulatory gaps. Meanwhile, responsible actors — legitimate entrepreneurs and startups — have been subject to dubious “regulation-by-enforcement”. This approach hurts American innovation, especially while other countries innovate, and is not good for the long-term dominance of the U.S. dollar, for U.S. consumers, and for the U.S. economy overall. When other jurisdictions Whatever you Other resourcescontact the a16z crypto policy team: [crypto-policy-team@a16z.com](https://substack.com/redirect/ad6acbdf-eb89-4f37-acde-767ee3e23b9f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)
You’re receiving this newsletter because you signed up for it on our websites, at an event, or elsewhere (you can opt out any time using the ‘unsubscribe’ link below). This newsletter is provided for informational purposes only, and should NOT be relied upon as legal, business, investment, or tax advice. Furthermore, the content is not directed at nor intended for use by any investors or prospective investors in any a16z funds. Please see a16z.com/disclosures for additional important details, including link to list of investments. subscribe to our podcast ' |