---
subject: "Hey would you mind killing that patient for me thnx"
from: "Adam Mastroianni <experimentalhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-03-04 13:39:48
labels: ["Adam Mastroianni", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_7809102548325458452", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
This is the quarterly links and updates post, a selection of things I’ve been reading and doing for the past few months. (1) HEY WOULD YOU MIND KILLING THAT PATIENT FOR ME THNXEverybody knows about the Milgram shock experiments, but I had never heard of the A guy introducing himself as “Dr. Smith” would call into the ward and ask a nurse to administer a mega dose of “Astroten” to a patient. The nurses had never met Dr. Smith (because he was made up), they had never dispensed Astroten (because it was also made up), they weren’t supposed to take orders over the phone, and the bottle itself clearly indicated that Dr. Smith’s requested dose was double the daily limit. When this situation was described to a sample of nurses in a separate study, almost all of them insisted that they would refuse the order. And yet 21/22 nurses who were subjected to the real situation made it all the way to the patient’s room with their overdose in tow before the research team stopped them. In a sort-of People have tried to debunk the Milgram studies, but (2) BACK THAT PAPAL ASS UPPeople always think the end times are around the corner (see my recent posts: Word on the street was that the Papal Ass was sent by God to demonstrate the depravity of (3) YOU CAN’T HANDLE THE TOOTHOn the other hand, sometimes weird births could be good omens. For instance, in 1595, a child was born in Silesia (now mostly Poland) with a golden tooth. A certain Dr. Horst investigated and
(4) DUI AS I SAY, NOT AS I DUIOn Christmas Eve 2020, the New York State Representative Brian Kolb wrote an op-ed warning people not to drive drunk over the holidays. On New Years Eve 2020, (5) LOWER THE BARMany people blame scientific stagnation on That said, I don’t think the evidence they present is all that convincing, because they assume they can measure researcher ability by looking at how much people make when they leave their research jobs. As in, if people are leaving their postdoc positions to start billion-dollar companies, they must be pretty smart. But if they’re leaving to go dig ditches, their research probably sucked. This is obviously pretty fraught—it assumes that people always choose the job that maximizes their income, and that the highest earners outside the research sector would be the top performers inside it. It also focuses on the average quality of researchers, when in fact (6) HOW 2 LIKEBefore I started a blog, I thought I would write a post like “How to like more things” and I never did, and now I’m glad because (7) SMALLPOX, BIG DEALSmallpox is the (8) MAD ABOUT MADOFFThe other day I was like, “wait, who lost money in
He added, “This is only a minimum punishment.” (9) THIS IS BANANASOn a single day in London, 1902, “ (10) TURNIP FOR WHATI love Then watch ‘em grow. Wherever their growth plateaus, that’s how much you need to hoe. Someone could have done this a thousand years earlier, and if they had, we would have way more turnips by now. (11) SUBSTACK RECOne turnip I’m glad we have: (12) SUBSTACK REC PART IIAnother sporadic-but-never-miss Substack is (13) YOU GOT A FRIEND IN METhe sociologist Claude S. Fischer
(14) PLENTY OF ROCKS TO GO AROUNDSpeaking of things that were supposed to be running out, the journalist Ed Conway intended to write a series about “the world’s lost minerals.” He now (15) OH NO-LITAAccording to (16) |