---
subject: "The Nutgraf: India rages against the machine"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-01 04:56:58
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
A little over 60 years ago, in 1963, the Life Insurance Corporation (LIC) of India installed a computer.
By today’s standards, it was primitive and couldn’t do anything advanced. They called it a data processor. But it marked the first instance of an Indian company adopting a digital automation device. I imagine they installed it just to play around, and maybe to experiment and see if it could help with record-keeping.
The response to it was anything but muted. The computer’s installation was one of the triggers for a sustained, national protest led by LIC employees. India historians and social scientists refer to it as the “anti-automation movement”, which continued and eventually reached its peak between 1967 and 1969. This movement had several repercussions, and was one of the causes for India to [walk away from](https://www.jstor.org/stable/2672025) a golden opportunity to liberalise its economy in the mid-1960s.
This also led to other strange developments. Arun Mohan Sukumar, in his outstanding book [Midnight’s Machines](https://www.penguin.co.in/book/midnights-machines/), has a compelling chapter about India’s relationship with technology through the ’60s and ’70s. I highly recommend reading it if you get the chance. Here’s one excerpt:
Calls soon arose to amend the country’s labour laws to compensate job losses on account of new technologies. Eventually, the government was compelled to set up a committee to examine the consequences of automation on Indian labour. The Dandekar Committee, which submitted its report in 1972, recommended that no commercial entity install a computer without first “justifying” its use to employees and their trade unions.
This, despite the Committee’s own conclusion that the use of computers in establishments such as the LIC had only a marginal effect on employment. Policies across developing countries in the seventies were experiencing a steady leftward movement, but even by such standards, the requirement for businesses to justify installing computers was an astonishing prescription. The Committee had among its ranks prominent industrialists like Naval Hormusji Tata, who were left with few options but to agree to the recommendations.
The Age of Doubt, Midnight’s Machines, Arun Mohan Sukumar
As Sukumar argues in his book, India’s relationship with technology through this period was complicated. On the one hand, partly due to the India-China war in 1962, multiple governments and prime ministers for several decades enacted policies that effectively created a significant distance between India’s citizens and machines. The Indian state embraced the notion that “big technology” was undesirable and became enchanted by the philosophy of “appropriate technology”. Essentially, this led to policies that were embedded with the belief that technology adoption had to be specific, targeted, and contextual to the local needs of Indians, so it could solve uniquely Indian problems. Indians were encouraged to pursue stuff like smaller, cottage-industry style industries. Think of biogas-fuelled fertilizer plants and mechanised bullock carts.
Anyway, here’s the news from yesterday.
Days after a Chinese artificial intelligence (AI) lab launched the low-cost foundational model DeepSeek, the Indian government has said it has decided to build a domestic large language model of its own as part of the Rs 10,370 crore IndiaAI Mission, IT Minister Ashwini Vaishnaw said Thursday.
The government has also selected 10 companies that will supply 18,693 graphics processing units or GPUs—high-end chips needed to develop machine learning tools that can go into developing a foundational model. The companies include the Hiranandani Group-backed Yotta, Jio Platforms, Tata Communications, E2E Networks, CMS Computers, Ctrls Datacenters, Locuz Enterprise Solutions, NxtGen Datacenter, Orient Technologies, and Vensysco Technologies. Nearly half of the total GPUs will come from Yotta alone, who has committed to offer 9,216 units.
“Over the last 1.5 years, our teams have been working closely with startups, researchers, professors etc. Today, we are calling for proposals to develop our own foundational model. The model will take care of the Indian context, languages, culture, are devoid of biases,” Vaishnaw told reporters.
[India braces up for AI challenge, plans own LLM foundational model to rival ChatGPT, DeepSeek R1](https://indianexpress.com/article/business/india-world-class-ai-model-ashwini-vaishnaw-9807337/), The Indian Express
Last week, I [wrote](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/what-chinas-cheap-ai-model-tells-us-about-indias-future/) how Deepseek’s launch raises deeper questions about India’s priorities, capabilities, and intentions with technology, particularly AI. After the events of the past week, I’m more convinced that AI advancements have put India in a uniquely difficult position. It’ll need an incredible amount of skill, vision, and luck for India to emerge on the other side in a stronger position.
Fundamentally, assuming that the AI cycle plays out the way it’s supposed to in the short to medium term, it’ll lead to two inescapable outcomes.
- Labour disruptions: Higher rates of unemployment and more income inequality caused by a displacement of labour by automated technology.
- A second service boom: The creation of inexpensive, quality, AI-backed services and products built in India, by Indian companies and developers for the world. Almost like the successor to the era of SaaS and IT services.
I believe that both of these will happen together.
And that’s not going to be pretty.
Many people in tech, especially founders, VCs, and the rest are optimistic about India’s position in the second services boom, and are pretending that the labour disruption is overstated. Meanwhile, the doomsayers are focused on disruption and ignore India’s historical and future advantage to build and create software services and products.
Whenever labour disruption is brought up with the introduction of new technologies, a general argument is that the worst case scenarios never pan out. The technocrats believe that technological change is like a force of nature, and that the broader economy can modify itself to create new jobs replacing those that are lost. However, in the past, technological change has often brought with it a difficult period of economic disruption, with wages stagnating while the GDP and productivity rise.
The economic historian Robert C. Allen even coined a phrase for this in 2008—Engel’s pause. He described this in detail in his [landmark paper](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0014498309000199?via%3Dihub), and charted out what this looked like the last time we had a technological revolution that transformed the way we build, produce, and consume goods and services, i.e. the Industrial Revolution.
It’s not that the Indian government underestimates the likelihood of this playing out. Just yesterday, in the latest Economic Survey, an entire chapter was dedicated to the possibility of how AI can disrupt India’s labour market. As a nation that’s already struggling to create jobs for a growing, aspirational population, the impact on employment, even if it’s limited to a decade, can be catastrophic. Seen in this context, AI may be viewed with suspicion, not unlike how governments of the past viewed technology and took decisions that were only “appropriate”.
The other side of the machine is the opportunity.
But even in this regard, the Indian government’s approach seems strange. At the end of the day, is the role of the state to empanel companies like Yotta, Jio, and others to procure GPUs and make them available to companies, researchers, and others? In a post-Deepseek world, is high-end GPU access really the only meaningful barrier we want to overcome? After all the subsidies, these GPUs will be available at little less than Rs 100 per hour. This isn’t that significantly lower than the prevalent market rate. So, I’m not so sure this is the fulcrum on which India will emerge stronger and ready with new, bold applications in the AI era.
Finally, all governments, especially in India, have a history of making big, bold proclamations with technology—either embracing it or decrying it. It’s easy to get 72-point headlines from fawning business media papers and pliant YouTube influencers while announcing something new in the flashiest way possible. Just yesterday, Vaishnaw said India will also build foundational models of its own as part of the AI mission, and that the government was getting in touch with startups to do this. However, he said nothing about the fact that several Indian startups have been working on building foundational models for a while now. Sarvam. Krutrim. And others. What happened to them?
I’m not going to pretend that there are any easy, simple solutions for India’s policymakers to find a way to make India’s companies dominate in AI while insulating the country from all its disruptions.
But at the very least, we can begin by acknowledging what we are really up against.
Regards,
Praveen Gopal Krishnan