---
subject: "Open Thread 332"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-06-03 13:09:18
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
This is the weekly visible open thread. Post about anything you want, ask random questions, whatever. ACX has an unofficial [subreddit](https://substack.com/redirect/9f13caa3-423a-4d75-a65f-e6bf015a0cd8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), [Discord](https://substack.com/redirect/83eed5f7-1872-4522-a283-ea016b521c2a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), and [bulletin board](https://substack.com/redirect/9ae45097-6cd0-4de7-9062-b72fbc2b5da3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), and [in-person meetups around the world](https://substack.com/redirect/ac95d496-e0ee-4192-b4fa-84a5028b6092?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). 95% of content is free, but for the remaining 5% you can subscribe [here](https://substack.com/redirect/cf4a3c06-281f-474f-b460-020417cffbde?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Also:
1: Thanks to everyone who talked to me at the Less Online conference. Thanks especially to the person who gave me a working GPS-based version of the automated land acknowledger from [Bay Area House Party](https://substack.com/redirect/7d9bc0e4-c0a6-438e-8fec-bc07f59ba3c2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), it’s one of the most interesting gifts I’ve ever received and I’m looking forward to bringing it to some other city to test its functionality:
2: Comment of the week: [why does Britain let submarine commanders launch nukes on their own, when Russia and America have the opposite policy?](https://substack.com/redirect/622a541d-10f2-4263-8c27-8d710832ceb7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) Also related to the links post: someone on Facebook says that Cryonics Institute has not confirmed that Paris Hilton is signed up, and this might be a false story.
3: Lyman Stone [has responded to](https://substack.com/redirect/40819998-aea4-4d24-80a8-cdf949b81dc9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) my response to him. I think it just doubles down on the same bad points he made the first time, so I might not get around to writing a full response. I’ll just say that first, I think he would benefit from reading about the difference between rule utilitarianism, two-level utilitarianism, and virtue ethics - Mill, Hare, or Parfit would be good sources, or even just some of the blog posts I linked. Second, he seems confused that I’ve blocked him on Twitter. I want to stress that I never block people just because I disagree with them; the only reason I block people is because of a history of doxxing, which Stone has, and which enrages me for deep personal reasons. I think in an ideal world this would merit a permaban from Twitter, but all I can do personally is block him from reading my stuff.
4: Berkeley meetup this Wednesday at 6:00 at 2740 Telegraph. I’ll be there. I’ll probably post a reminder with slightly more information tomorrow or Tuesday.