---
subject: "Medical Roundup #1"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-01-16 20:19:56
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Saving up medical and health related stories from several months allowed for much better organizing of them, so I am happy I split these off. I will still post anything more urgent on a faster basis. There’s lots of things here that are fascinating and potentially very important, but I’ve had to prioritize and focus elsewhere, so I hope others pick up various torches. Vaccination Ho!We have a new malaria vaccine. That’s great. WHO thinks this is not an especially urgent opportunity, or any kind of ‘emergency’ Also, EA and everyone else who works in global health
Did you also know that I also need to note the And what do we do more generally about the fact that there are quite a lot of takes that one has reason to be nervous to say out loud, seem likely to be true, and also are endorsed by the majority of the population?
Potential Progress
London hospital uses
From Sarah Constantin, She also notes that
Experts are, and I quote, warning us ‘not to get our hopes up yet.’
Seems great to me. Yes, if your only optimization target is optimal care and presume that everyone would otherwise get the full product, you will favor vastly more doctor attention, at vastly greater expense. However, if you instead realize that people’s time and money are things that matter to them and to society generally, which also means they will forgo medical consultations and treatments that cost too much of them. And also that we only have so many doctors (thanks AMA!) and thus only so many doctor hours to allocate, so if you waste them where they’re not valuable then someone else misses out, and that we do a lot of that allocation via time rather than price which is even worse. This is all very practical, a lot of people in the spots Amazon is offering a consult would instead have chosen no care at all under our existing system. Health care would work so much better if we treated it as less sacred and more like Amazon treats its other products. It’s Not ProgressEconomist reports (
So what matters is whether something in one’s early life is going very wrong. When that happens, we are letting such people down in many ways. Not that the overdoses don’t matter. We have The right question to ask, as is often the case, is: Is this an ongoing exponential? It looks exponential. It would be scary anyway since it is already almost 3% of deaths in 2021. What happens if it doubles again in the next decade? My mind still boggles that asking questions with the intent to learn or prove something requires ‘ethical’ clearance and worries about ‘potential harm’, and people keep endorsing this on reflection, burn it all to the ground.
Yes. A simple safe harbor. If all you are doing is talking to people, or ideally also if you are otherwise doing things humans are allowed to do to other humans without any paperwork or checking for ‘informed consent’ then you don’t need any approvals. Even if you have A continuous problem is that the world desperately needs more common sense ethics and well-considered ethical considerations, and also that anyone who uses the word ‘ethics’ almost ever has anything to do with either of these things. Cost Plus
Quite right on all counts. Government has decided for various reasons to intervene massively in the health care payments system, which is a central reason we lack price transparency. We need to use government to fix this, even if we do not use the first best solution of ‘get out of the way,’ and the benefits would be massive if we did fix it. New Findings
In the context of a pandemic, working from home was probably relatively worse. My model is that the problem comes from isolation. If work was your only contact with the outside world you needed that. If not, you don’t.
The expiration dates are mandated only for infant formula. That does not mean they are useless, not net useful, or not protective of your health. Expiration dates are highly useful as they mark the relative freshness and remaining time of your items, and they provide reasonable approximations on how long various items can remain edible. Does that make them reliable markers of either spoilage or safety? No. It is a problem when sticklers treat them as gospel, again in either or both directions. I’m still glad they are there. FDA Delenda Est
That would be a reasonable practical compromise, but I think you can go a lot further. All these questions have reasonable answers. Prescriptions can continue where a sufficiently high bar is met, likely with a broader range of who can prescribe (e.g. a pharmacist should be fine for many but not all of them, so you don’t need an extra visit.) The other stuff will sort itself out the way it does everywhere else. Inspection agencies, for example, will rise up that do a better job for less money. Probably we do keep an FDA-like agency around for safety certifications due to liability concerns. To the extent other things wouldn’t fix themselves, it would mostly reveal rather than create those additional problems. Again, I’d be happy to take Scott’s or another similar compromise. I still want to recognize it is far from first best. The alternative is not abolishing the FDA
So, yeah. I’ll take my chances with abolition. Also, the Also, why don’t your cold medicines work?
Will they finally fix it? I am not optimistic. If the system were otherwise sane, I would have zero problem with people selling a medicine that does not work. People could make their own choices. Alas, given the say the rest of the system works, permission, like retweets, here is an endorsement, and results in this preventing other actually effective treatment. Covid Response Postmortem and Paths Forward
I thank him for the clarity. Let this be common knowledge. Then let us never again entrust any future public health decisions to anyone with this ‘public health mindset.’ Instead, public health carries on as if they were right all along, even calling for us to mask up again every so often, and we sometimes see cases such as this one: Some good news on Covid is new claims that
This was the dog that did not bark. By all accounts, hospitals should have been far more overwhelmed, in ways that caused a lot more degradations in care and many excess deaths. Indeed, health care workers were constantly reporting hellish conditions, being put under unbearable pressures. Yet in the end, at least after the very early days, the center almost entirely held. We never properly thanked or honored those who pulled this off, in any form. Nor have we updated our future anticipations.
Covid Origins
The responses attempting to defend natural origin are all essentially ad hominem attacks at this point. The wrong person is advocating, why are you amplifying this bad person and bad theory, you do not know what you are talking about. Never arguments about the facts.
I still am not about to watch hours of that. The prior should not be low:
If we have almost one confirmed lab leak per year, and given the other circumstances, it would almost be surprising if Covid-19 wasn’t a lab leak. Was Covid a lab leak? We don’t know. At this point it seems more likely than not. That statement should drive huge changes in policy. A lot of people should be rethinking quite a lot of things. That is true even if (as I expect) we never know the answer for sure. This is very similar to the question of existential risk from AI. Any reasonable person, given the evidence, should say the lab leak has substantial probability, as does natural origin. Once you think the number is substantial, it does not much matter if your probability of the lab leak is 30%, 50%, 70% or 90%. They should drive most of the same changes in policy, and the same reflections. They won’t. Imagine how we and you would have reacted if we had known, back in February 2020, that this virus had escaped from a lab. Then ask which parts of that reaction you would endorse on reflection, and which you do would not. Then act accordingly. The good news is that it likely has succeeded in at least
You think this is the worst that can happen? Ban Gain of Function Research
Cause Areas
Statements like Nathan’s require caution and careful calibration. I very much doubt a billion dollars would put a stop to all the lead poisoning. How much would it reduce such lead poisoning for how many children, with how much impact? I have no idea. I find it likely that $1 billion well-spent on this would be a good use of funds. I also can think of ways one could plausibly spend that money badly, and it ends up wasted or even making things worse. Seriously, let’s buy out the patent rights and offer these drugs for free to anyone who wants them, what are we waiting for. New EA cause area.
I criticize Effective Altruists for insufficiently high levels of epistemic rigor, because reality does not grade on a curve, |