---
subject: "ChatGPT Agent 🤖, iOS Call Screening 📱, Google AI Video API 👨‍💻  "
from: "TLDR <dan@tldrnewsletter.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-07-18 10:22:13
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "TLDR", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_795315172960844453", "UNREAD"]
---
[
OpenAI's new ChatGPT Agent can control an entire computer and do tasks for you (5 minute read)
](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.theverge.com%2Fai-artificial-intelligence%2F709158%2Fopenai-new-release-chatgpt-agent-operator-deep-research%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001981d0e4d49-f3590087-4c0a-4e61-9ed5-00b0bf222c56-000000/BPboN-bkEe0avYf00dA6zpKtNm1HCI5WYgQkikB0LDc=414)
ChatGPT Agent is a new tool from OpenAI that completes work on users' behalf using its own virtual computer. It is powered by a new unnamed model that OpenAI developed specifically for the product. The model was trained on complex tasks that require multiple tools, like briefing users on upcoming client meetings, planning and purchasing ingredients for a meal, or creating a slide deck based on an analysis of competing companies. ChatGPT Agent is now rolling out to Pro, Plus, and Team users - it will be available to Enterprise and Education users later this summer. There is no rollout timeline for the European Economic Area and Switzerland.
|
[
This upcoming iOS feature will make spam phone calls an issue of the past (2 minute read)
](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2F9to5mac.com%2F2025%2F07%2F17%2Fios-26-spam-call-feature%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001981d0e4d49-f3590087-4c0a-4e61-9ed5-00b0bf222c56-000000/JnfO9NNJOaa0S2u0vGQSPWPM7HgdljPnH86Apk931Ig=414)
Apple announced two new features to vastly improve the phone calling experience for iPhone users this year at WWDC25: Hold Assist and Call Screening. Hold Assist manages calls for users when placed on hold. Call Screening, designed to deter spam callers, answers calls for users and asks callers for their names and reasoning. iOS 26 will also introduce a screening filter for texts.
|
|
Science & Futuristic Technology
|
[
IVF breakthrough using 3‑person DNA leads to 8 babies born free of genetic disease (3 minute read)
](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Finterestingengineering.com%2Fscience%2Fbreakthrough-ivf-leads-eight-healthy-births%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001981d0e4d49-f3590087-4c0a-4e61-9ed5-00b0bf222c56-000000/t06BPPF8ewNeqdkwXTOBDdQj7vW4NCbqxzt_MWHPYv8=414)
Eight babies were born healthy thanks to a groundbreaking new DNA-enhanced IVF technique aimed at preventing children from inheriting severe, incurable mitochondrial diseases from their mothers. The babies were born to seven mothers at high risk of passing on severe mitochondrial DNA diseases. The novel IVF method utilizes DNA from the mother's egg, the father's sperm, and healthy mitochondrial DNA from a donor. Children conceived via this technique inherit the vast majority of their DNA from their biological parents, but they also receive a minute amount of healthy mitochondrial DNA from a third person, a genetic alteration that will be passed down to future generations.
|
[
NASA's new Roman Space Telescope aims to discover 100,000 cosmic explosions (4 minute read)
](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.popsci.com%2Fscience%2Froman-space-telescope-future-discoveries%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001981d0e4d49-f3590087-4c0a-4e61-9ed5-00b0bf222c56-000000/HDu7CtP4uEnjEf2ocxOt1YstiKhjp4qfkKS-too81l0=414)
NASA's Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope has a field of view at least 100 times larger than Hubble's. It has the potential to document light from over a billion galaxies over its career. The telescope will help researchers better understand exoplanets, infrared astrophysics, and the nature of dark matter. Roman could potentially find evidence of the very first stars to ever form in the universe. The telescope is scheduled to launch in 2027.
|
|
Programming, Design & Data Science
|
[
Build with Veo 3, now available in the Gemini API (5 minute read)
](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fdevelopers.googleblog.com%2Fen%2Fveo-3-now-available-gemini-api%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001981d0e4d49-f3590087-4c0a-4e61-9ed5-00b0bf222c56-000000/z8HvcrOUovMKF-kA_JkQnc5JJOGiMjqg8RpeckcY5oI=414)
Veo 3 is now available in paid preview via the Gemini API and Vertex AI. The model is designed to handle a range of video generation tasks with stunning visuals and audio, including dialogue and sound effects. It can simulate real-world physics for authentic motion. Examples of videos generated by Veo 3 are available in the article.
|
[
TypeScript Execute (2 minute read)
](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftsx.is%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001981d0e4d49-f3590087-4c0a-4e61-9ed5-00b0bf222c56-000000/bRrdtZP_zLh9se1hdgqXGiRP9xgLVrB6eBK2wp8hYpE=414)
TypeScript Execute (tsx) is an enhancement to Node.js that allows it to run TypeScript. It features seamless TypeScript execution and CJS/ESM imports and a Watch mode that lets users re-run their files whenever they save them, allowing them to iterate on their code faster and boost productivity. tsx enhances Node.js with TypeScript support in both CommonJS and ESM modes, allowing users to switch between them seamlessly.
|
|
[
‘Utopian' city California Forever announces huge tech manufacturing park (1 minute read)
](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftechcrunch.com%2F2025%2F07%2F17%2Futopian-city-california-forever-announces-huge-tech-manufacturing-park%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001981d0e4d49-f3590087-4c0a-4e61-9ed5-00b0bf222c56-000000/wOEBtmbGNMKWsaqJ2fz67FPZA_a_eSqe1b_gy4fh_50=414)
California Forever, a project backed by a group of Silicon Valley billionaires, plans to build a massive manufacturing park in its planned 'utopian' city. The Solano Foundry will host 40 million square feet of advanced tech manufacturing space and have over 175,000 homes. The site will offer expedited permitting, transportation for finished goods, and plenty of power from renewable energy. The project aims to attract hardware, engineering, and AI talent from Silicon Valley, which is about 40 miles away.
|
[
How Android phones became an earthquake warning system (6 minute read)
](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Farstechnica.com%2Fscience%2F2025%2F07%2Fhow-android-phones-became-an-earthquake-warning-system%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001981d0e4d49-f3590087-4c0a-4e61-9ed5-00b0bf222c56-000000/f7EgFmA84in8qdVTengIixAAEXauUu5CPRG6iZv0I20=414)
The Android Earthquake Alert system, which is on by default in most Android phones, displays a notification to users when there is an earthquake nearby to warn them to get to a safer location. The system uses accelerometers to detect vibrations - an alert is triggered when there is widespread phone activity that matches the pattern expected for an earthquake. As of the end of March last year, the system has sensed a total of 1,279 events, ranging in magnitude from 1.9 to 7.8, of which only three were false positives.
|
|
[
Amazing Hand project (GitHub Repo)
](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fpollen-robotics%2FAmazingHand%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/010001981d0e4d49-f3590087-4c0a-4e61-9ed5-00b0bf222c56-000000/VRpAfRM81tdZF2mWl6b-ZFnhzYs83nkTvdtdLF30kZY=414)
The Amazing Hand is an open source 3D printable four-fingered robotic hand - this repository contains the code and model for controlling the device.
|
|
|
Love TLDR? Tell your friends and get rewards!
|
|
Share your referral link below with friends to get free TLDR swag!
|
|
|
[Track your referrals here.](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fhub.sparklp.co%2Fsub_3202f09298cc%2F1/1/010001981d0e4d49-f3590087-4c0a-4e61-9ed5-00b0bf222c56-000000/OmSN5V5GcrJKapI4jC1fUx6aWtxLuo3WohNga4_i2NA=414)
|
|
Want to advertise in TLDR? 📰
If your company is interested in reaching an audience of tech executives, decision-makers and engineers, you may want to [advertise with us](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fadvertise.tldr.tech%2F%3Futm_source=tldr%26utm_medium=newsletter%26utm_campaign=advertisecta/1/010001981d0e4d49-f3590087-4c0a-4e61-9ed5-00b0bf222c56-000000/aNN4j44CxX-9K2jCWVRLMAaVVAMOgdIxBi6AyxbhAxo=414).
Want to work at TLDR? 💼
[Apply here](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fjobs.ashbyhq.com%2Ftldr.tech/1/010001981d0e4d49-f3590087-4c0a-4e61-9ed5-00b0bf222c56-000000/aSyj3-TOOGCYphBAEiGfSCsfaR-Hmvxtb7BFGZWJmt8=414) or send a friend's resume to [jobs@tldr.tech](mailto:jobs@tldr.tech) and get $1k if we hire them!
If you have any comments or feedback, just respond to this email!
Thanks for reading,
[Dan Ni](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2Ftldrdan/1/010001981d0e4d49-f3590087-4c0a-4e61-9ed5-00b0bf222c56-000000/_L0vYtmP67zw5y0RhR2L48UVFuuqePL0UV1ky9xb8Ts=414) & [Stephen Flanders](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2FSteveFlanders22/1/010001981d0e4d49-f3590087-4c0a-4e61-9ed5-00b0bf222c56-000000/yBN4rMnYn_QV8DNn_h5uyUCdVeX-MVZOvHtq8s5WNYU=414)
|
|
|
|