---
subject: "Google's on-campus hotel 🏨, how to make LK-99 ⚡, future of remote work 👨‍💻"
from: "TLDR <dan@tldrnewsletter.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-08-07 10:17:22
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "TLDR"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_795315172960844453"]
---
[SpaceX conducts a mostly successful test of its Super Heavy booster (5 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Farstechnica.com%2Fspace%2F2023%2F08%2Fspacex-conducts-a-mostly-successful-test-of-its-super-heavy-booster%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000189cf805ab7-336fc649-1199-4bad-951f-ccbb0bf1aa89-000000/hNMlRK91CJO77gfVdpX_eLbQT0XLGx88scR2f4aZ7vU=312)
SpaceX performed a static fire of a new Super Heavy booster on Sunday. The rocket survived the test and appeared to be in good shape afterward. However, the test did not run its full duration, and four of the rocket's 33 engines shut down prematurely. SpaceX is working on an upgraded version of its Raptor engines to address reliability. While it is unclear how far away SpaceX is from a second Starship launch attempt, the fact that the latest test took place on a Sunday indicates that there is some sense of urgency as the company can only close the road leading to its launch site on a few weekend days per year. |
Science & Futuristic Technology
|
[We’re closer to ‘engineering’ blood vessels (7 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fpursuit.unimelb.edu.au%2Farticles%2Fwe-re-closer-to-engineering-blood-vessels%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000189cf805ab7-336fc649-1199-4bad-951f-ccbb0bf1aa89-000000/O-stvj723zZ3UFGzOLY7lnFSvUm7QCQKNymlvvSPkI8=312)
Bypass surgery has significant limitations. For example, some patients lack appropriate donor vessels. Tissue engineered blood vessels, blood vessels manufactured using human cells and tissue, could provide a viable treatment option. A team of researchers has developed a fast, inexpensive, and scalable method for tissue engineering blood vessels that replicate the complex geometry of native blood vessels. The technology is not yet ready for bypass surgery, but the team believes they are on the right track. This article explains the difficulties around creating engineered blood vessels and looks at how the researchers managed to do so. |
[Engineer Details Messy LK-99 Superconductor Creation Process (5 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.tomshardware.com%2Fnews%2Fengineer-details-messy-lk-99-superconductor-fabrication-process%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000189cf805ab7-336fc649-1199-4bad-951f-ccbb0bf1aa89-000000/wiEt3afvKDJ9rEfoFeLEUfEavpAUm4maq4xCgBgjDxk=312)
The process of making LK-99 is complex and there is some difficulty in sourcing some of the materials needed. The original papers were incredibly vague about the manufacturing process. They neglected to mention key details, so scientists trying to replicate their results had to guess. These factors have caused many failed attempts. The frenzy around LK-99 has dried up an unsuspecting worldwide supply chain. It is now relatively tough to secure red phosphorus, a controlled substance, and copper phosphate has climbed in price towards $20,000 per kilogram. |
Programming, Design & Data Science
|
[Fern - SDKs and Documentation for your API (Sponsor)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fbuildwithfern.typeform.com%2Fto%2FIcT0TVdk/1/01000189cf805ab7-336fc649-1199-4bad-951f-ccbb0bf1aa89-000000/U6E49wr2LrFulscz0hJTugAg2_nHY5r0ZGvY0a2IsgM=312)
[Fern](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fbuildwithfern.typeform.com%2Fto%2FIcT0TVdk/2/01000189cf805ab7-336fc649-1199-4bad-951f-ccbb0bf1aa89-000000/ObRco5hCv7szZSBXslq1mROwCyztu6PvzDsWQXW42_g=312) is an open source CLI that creates client libraries and API docs for REST APIs. The generated clients can be automatically published to registries like NPM and PyPI. The docs can be personalized to match your existing company website. Fern is compatible with OpenAPI. [Learn more](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fbuildwithfern.typeform.com%2Fto%2FIcT0TVdk/3/01000189cf805ab7-336fc649-1199-4bad-951f-ccbb0bf1aa89-000000/trhgpahGDJij1biiSv3CNLgVfEMzGgpVwCQhp9-lOKc=312). |
[Catching up on the weird world of LLMs (38 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fsimonwillison.net%2F2023%2FAug%2F3%2Fweird-world-of-llms%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000189cf805ab7-336fc649-1199-4bad-951f-ccbb0bf1aa89-000000/Mip_laahGuxd9SjhGiFTRcvw2UZrppuZ0cUbyN-Af-g=312)
This article is a written version of a talk that summarizes the last few years of development in the space of LLMs. It aims to help people outside of the industry understand what LLMs are, what they can be used for, how they're trained, and the challenges in using them safely, effectively, and ethically. The article contains annotated slides from the talk along with extra notes and links. A video of the 40-minute-long talk is available. |
[Jupyter AI (Website)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fjupyter-ai.readthedocs.io%2Fen%2Flatest%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000189cf805ab7-336fc649-1199-4bad-951f-ccbb0bf1aa89-000000/fbQaASJBhv8bQzAvc-b4u-RcIJgDQmyg7Heytj02PO4=312)
Jupyter AI brings generative AI to Jupyter. It provides a way to explore generative AI models in notebooks and improve productivity. Jupyter AI can turn the Jupyter notebook into a reproducible generative AI playground. It features a native AI chat and support for a wide range of generative model providers and models. |
[How room-temperature superconductors would change the world forever (7 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.scotsman.com%2Fnews%2Fopinion%2Fcolumnists%2Fhow-room-temperature-superconductors-would-change-the-world-forever-dr-mohammad-yazdani-asrami-and-dr-devendra-kumar-namburi-4241558%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000189cf805ab7-336fc649-1199-4bad-951f-ccbb0bf1aa89-000000/tpWlctdHFz19tnmySQ-UeiBzsnhA6sc90GDU31wz2zo=312)
Room-temperature conductors would have a transformative effect across a wide range of fields, including computing, aviation, healthcare, and the fight against climate change. If the claims about LK-99 turn out to be repeatable, reproducible, and reliable, it will change the world forever. Many devices will become more compact, cooler, and energy efficient. The material could enable levitating devices, faster quantum computing systems, and particle accelerators that don't require vast amounts of cooling. Much more research is needed to assess LK-99's properties - promising claims about room-temperature superconductors have been published before, but they have either been retracted or their results have been unverifiable. |
[The Future of Remote Work (19 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fstaysaasy.com%2Fmanagement%2F2023%2F08%2F06%2Fthe-future-of-remote-work.html%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000189cf805ab7-336fc649-1199-4bad-951f-ccbb0bf1aa89-000000/bZZJMVsB2A49T2C584VjsgtP10lWOm_5sIhkOnRDYNM=312)
The debate about remote work is still nowhere near settled. This post discusses why it's hard to discuss remote work rationally, the positives and negatives of remote work, a framework for reasoning about remote vs in-office work, and why remote work is a strategic advantage to some companies and poison for others. The discussion of the future of remote work is complex, especially as both sides are incentivized to normalize their own point-of-view. |
[TLDR Talent](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fdanni763618.typeform.com%2Fto%2FrSL4lOH3/1/01000189cf805ab7-336fc649-1199-4bad-951f-ccbb0bf1aa89-000000/_dH1724lzjWmsrxy11N3lxyNi5nYVCIci6qt3WR2RFs=312) is our exclusive community where we help world-class tech talent and get intros to companies of their choice, along with a number of exciting startups and tech companies curated by TLDR.
We give you full control of the process, you can specify if you’re actively searching or passively interested only if something amazing comes along. Set your preferred compensation, seniority/title/role, specific companies (or types of companies) you’d like to work for and more. [Click here to apply](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fdanni763618.typeform.com%2Fto%2FrSL4lOH3/2/01000189cf805ab7-336fc649-1199-4bad-951f-ccbb0bf1aa89-000000/11oKJHddi2PnwlVCpmG9mLqzpPtLmR2bRy12UMhFHVM=312).
|
If your company is interested in reaching an audience of tech executives, decision-makers and engineers, you may want to [advertise with us](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fshare.hsforms.com%2F1OxvmrkcFS4qsxKpNXCi76wee466%3Futm_source=tldr%26utm_medium=newsletter/2/01000189cf805ab7-336fc649-1199-4bad-951f-ccbb0bf1aa89-000000/1r0wdPAXmr73QbWeh7BXKycu7tC2HrpROK5lAclMINg=312).
If you have any comments or feedback, just respond to this email!
Thanks for reading,
[Dan Ni](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2Ftldrdan/1/01000189cf805ab7-336fc649-1199-4bad-951f-ccbb0bf1aa89-000000/FfkG6zQK7cmCbGpGKKuU6AsKkLpFw9IO6sM58I3uwcM=312) and [Stephen Flanders](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2FSteveFlanders22/1/01000189cf805ab7-336fc649-1199-4bad-951f-ccbb0bf1aa89-000000/fMDqkbiXDMMdI6rL5EMR7jKFvX0oNC2VRYXrLXlNroY=312)
|
|
|
|