---
subject: "AI #69: Nice"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-06-20 12:27:10
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Nice job breaking it, hero, unfortunately. Ilya Sutskever, despite what I sincerely believe are the best of intentions, has decided to be the latest to do The Worst Possible Thing, founding a new AI company explicitly looking to build ASI (superintelligence). The twists are zero products with a ‘cracked’ small team, which I suppose is an improvement, and calling it Safe Superintelligence, which I do not suppose is an improvement. How is he going to make it safe? His statements tell us nothing meaningful about that. There were also changes to SB 1047. Most of them can be safely ignored. The big change is getting rid of the limited duty exception, because it seems I was one of about five people who understood it, and everyone kept thinking it was a requirement for companies instead of an opportunity. And the literal chamber of commerce fought hard to kill the opportunity. So now that opportunity is gone. Donald Trump talked about AI. He has thoughts. Finally, if it is broken, and perhaps the it is ‘your cybersecurity,’ how about fixing it? Thus, a former NSA director joins the board of OpenAI. A bunch of people are not happy about this development, and yes I can imagine why. There is a history, perhaps. Remaining backlog update: I still owe updates on the OpenAI Model spec, Rand report and Seoul conference, and eventually The Vault. We’ll definitely get the model spec next week, probably on Monday, and hopefully more. Definitely making progress. Table of ContentsOther AI posts this week: Introduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. DeepSeek could be for real. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. Careful who you talk to about AI. Fun With Image Generation. His full story can finally be told. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. Every system will get what it deserves. The Art of the Jailbreak. Automatic red teaming. Requires moderation. Copyright Confrontation. Perplexity might have some issues. A Matter of the National Security Agency. Paul Nakasone joins OpenAI board. Get Involved. GovAI is hiring. Your comments on SB 1047 could help. Introducing. Be the Golden Gate Bridge, or anything you want to be. In Other AI News. Is it time to resign? Quiet Speculations. The quest to be situationally aware shall continue. AI Is Going to Be Huuuuuuuuuuge. So sayeth The Donald. SB 1047 Updated Again. No more limited duty exemption. Democracy, ya know? The Quest for Sane Regulation. Pope speaks truth. Mistral CEO does not. The Week in Audio. A few new options. The ARC of Progress. Francois Chollet goes on Dwarkesh, offers $1mm prize. Put Your Thing In a Box. Do not open the box. I repeat. Do not open the box. What Will Ilya Do? Alas, create another company trying to create ASI. Actual Rhetorical Innovation. Better names might be helpful. Rhetorical Innovation. If at first you don’t succeed. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. How it breaks down. People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone. But not maximally worried. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Here they are. The Lighter Side. It cannot hurt to ask.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
Three things jump out. GPT-4o is dominating by an amount that doesn’t match people’s reports of practical edge. I saw a claim that it is overtrained on vanilla Python, causing it to test better than it plays in practice. I don’t know. The gap from Gemini 1.5 Flash to Gemini 1.5 Pro and GPT-4-Turbo is very small. Gemini Flash is looking great here. [DeepSeek-Coder-v2 is super impressive](https://substack.com/redirect/61aa6eb4-7037-4e44-99bb-48ce52eb4735?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). The Elo tab gives a story where it does somewhat worse, but even there the performance is impressive. This is one of the best signs so far that China can do something competitive in the space, if this benchmark turns out to be good.
The obvious note is that DeepSeek-Coder-v2, which is 236B with 21B active experts, 128k context length, 338 programming languages, was released one day before the new rankings. Also There is a lot of bunching of Elo results, both here and in the traditional Arena rankings. I speculate that as people learn about LLMs, a large percentage of queries are things LLMs are known to handle, so which answer gets chosen becomes a stylistic coin flip reasonably often among decent models? We have for example Sonnet winning something like 40% of the time against Opus, so Sonnet is for many purposes ‘good enough.’ From Venkatesh Rao: He is skeptical AI Fixes This. I am less skeptical. One excellent use of AI is to ask it about the arbitrary things in life. If it was in the training data, or you can provide access to the guide, then the AI knows. Asking is annoying, but miles less annoying than not knowing. Soon we will have agents like Apple Intelligence to tell you with a better interface, or increasingly do all of it for you. That will match the premium experiences that take this issue away.
Fine tuning, for style or a character, works and is at least great fun.
The obvious solution is for Amazon to do a deal with either Google or Anthropic to incorporate this ability into the Kindle. Get to work, everyone. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
Having a dedicated button on mouse or keyboard that says ‘turn on the PC microphone so you can input AI instructions’ seems good? Yes, the implementation is cringe, but the button itself is fine. The world needs more buttons. Fun with Image Generation
As noted earlier, the big weakness for now is that the clips are very short. Within the time they last, they’re super sweet.
New compression method dropped for images,
Right. It is theoretically impossible to actually encode the entire picture in 320 bits. There are a lot more pictures than that, including meaningfully different pictures. So this process will lose most details. It still says a lot about what can be done.
Movies that change every time you watch? Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
This is in response to Mary Rose reporting that
Make sure you know which half you are in. In this case, seems fine. I also note that if they save the training data, the AI can improve a lot over time.
The Art of the Jailbreak
This seems like a necessary and useful project, assuming it is a good implementation. It is great to have an automatic tool to do the first [a lot] cycles of red-teaming while you try to at least deal with that. The worry is that they are overpromising, implying that once you pass their tests you will be good to go and actually secure. You won’t. You might be ‘good to go’ in the sense of good enough for 4-level models. You won’t be actually secure and you still need the human red teaming. The key is not losing sight of that. Copyright Confrontation
Perplexity denies the allegations in the strongest and most general terms, but the denial rings hollow. The evidence here seems rather strong. A Matter of the National Security AgencyOpenAI’s newest board member is
The public reaction was about what you would expect. The NSA is not an especially popular or trusted institution. The optics, for regular people, were very not good.
The counterargument is that cybersecurity and other forms of security are desperately needed at OpenAI and other major labs. We need experts, especially from the government, who can help implement best practices and make the foreign spies at least work for it if they want to steal all the secrets. This is why Leopold called for ‘locking down the labs,’ and I strongly agree there needs to be far more of that then there has been. There are some very good reasons to like this on principle.
There are also reasons to dislike it, if you think this is about reassurance or how things look rather than an attempt to actually improve security. Or if you think it is a play for government contracts. Or, of course, it could be some sort of grand conspiracy. It also could be that the government insisted that something like this happen. If so? It depends on why they did that. If it was to secure the secrets? Good. This is the right kind of ‘assist and insist.’ Jeffrey Ladish thinks If it was to steal our secrets? Not so good. Mostly I take this as good news. OpenAI desperately needs to improve its cybersecurity. This is a way to start down the path of doing that. If it makes people think OpenAI are acting like villains? Well, they are. So, bonus. Get Involved
IntroducingRemember
There’s also a bunch of help with paperwork and admin, which is most welcome.
They call this ‘elevating human creativity’ with AI technology. I wonder what happens when they essentially invite low-effort AI content onto their platform en masse?
In Other AI News
Luke Muehlhauser explains he resigned from the Anthropic board
I am not going to otherwise link to it but Guardian published a pure hit piece about Lighthaven and Manifest that goes way beyond
At this point, my thesis is that the way you save the good parts of journalism is by actually doing good journalism, in ways that make sense today, a statement I hope I can conclude with: Your periodic other reminder: Y saying things in bad faith about X does not mean X is now ‘controversial.’ It means Y is in bad faith. Nothing more.
It is quite an awesome venue.
In other words: Meta was told it couldn’t use personal data to train its AIs without consent. Meta decided if it couldn’t do that it wasn’t worth launching its AI products. They could have launched the AI products without training on personal data. So this tells you a lot about why they are launching their AI products.
The AI needs to learn the simple principle: Space Bunnies Must Die. As in, your opponent is doing things for a reason. If you don’t know the reason (for a card, or a move, or other strategy) then that means it is a Space Bunny. It Must Die.
Quiet Speculations
Mostly she echoes highly reasonable criticisms others (including myself have raised). Strangest claim I saw was doubting that superhuman persuasion was a thing. I see people doubt this and I am deeply confused how it could fail to be a thing, given we have essentially seen existence proofs among humans. ChatGPT says the first known person to say the following quip was Ken Thompson, but who knows, and I didn’t remember hearing it before:
She offers sensible basic critiques of Leopold’s alignment ideas, pointing out that the techniques he discusses mostly aren’t even relevant to the problems we need to solve, while being strangely hopeful for ‘pleasant surprises.’ This made me smile:
She then moves on to doubt AI will be crucial enough to national security to merit The Project, she is generally skeptical that the ASI (superintelligence) will Be All That even if we get it. Leopold and I both think, as almost everyone does, that doubting ASI will show up is highly reasonable. But I find it highly bizarre to think, as many seem to predict, that ASI could show up and then not much would change. That to me seems like it is responding to a claim that X→Y with a claim of Not X. And again, maybe X and maybe Not X, but X→Y.
My answer would be: Because seriousness does not mean that kind of situational awareness, these people do not think about security that way. It is not in their culture, by that standard essentially no one in the West is serious period. Then again, Dominic and Leopold (and I) would bite that bullet, that in the most important sense almost no one is a serious person, there are no Reasonable Authority Figures available, etc. That’s the point. In other not necessarily the news, on the timing of GPT-5, which is supposed to be in training now:
My response would be that there is no conflict here. Apple and Microsoft have found a highly useful (if implemented well and securely) application of AI, and a plausible candidate for the medium term killer app. It is a good vision in both senses. For that particular purpose, you can mostly use a lightweight model, and for now you are wise to do so, with callouts to bigger ones when needed, which is the plan. That has nothing to do with whether Leopold’s vision can be achieved in the future. My baseline scenario is that this will become part of your computer’s operating system and your tech stack in ways that mostly call small models, along with our existing other uses of larger models. Then, over time, the AIs get capable of doing more complex tasks and more valuable tasks as well.
The observation that human affairs are damn certain to be transformed is highly wise. And indeed, in the ‘AI fizzle’ worlds we get a transformation that still ‘looks human’ in this way. If capabilities keep advancing, and we don’t actively stop what wants to happen, then it will go the other way. There is nothing about the business case for Apple Intelligence that precludes the other way, except for the part where the superintelligence wipes out (or at least transforms) Apple along with everything else. In the meantime, why not be one of the great companies Altman talked about?
Yes, Apple is a winner, great keynote. But. Seems hard to call Apple the big winner when everyone else is winning bigger. Apple is perfectly capable of winning bigly, but this is such a conventional, ‘economic normal’ vision of the future where AI is nothing but another tool and layer on consumer products. If that future comes to pass, then maybe. But I see no moats here of any kind. The UI is the null UI, the ‘talk to the computer’ UI. There’s no moat here. It is the obvious interface in hindsight because it was also obvious in advance. Email summaries in your inbox view? Yes, of course, if the AI is good enough and doing that is safe. The entire question was always whether you trust it to do this. All of the cool things Apple did in their presentation? Apple may or may not have them ready for prime time soon, and all three of Apple and Google and Microsoft will have them ready within a year. If you think that Apple Intelligence is going to be way ahead of Google’s similar Android offerings in a few years, I am confused why you think that. Nat says this straightforwardly, the investor perspective that ‘UI and products’ are the main barrier to AI rather than making the AIs smarter. You definitely need both, but ultimately I am very much on the ‘make it smarter’ side of this. Reading the full interview, it sounds like Apple is going to have a big reputation management problem, even bigger than Google’s. They are going to have to ‘stay out of the content generation business’ and focus on summarizes and searches and so on. The images are all highly stylized. Which are all great and often useful things, but puts you at a disadvantage. If this was all hype and there was going to be a top, we’d be near the top. Except, no. Even if nothing advances furth, not hype. No top. Not investment advice. But yes, I get why someone would say that.
I mean, least of our concerns, but also yes. An LLM can Consider the generalization. There are those who think LLMs will ‘stop at human level’ in some form. Even if that is true, you can still do a ‘mixture of experts’ of those humans, plus avoiding blunders, plus speedup, plus memorization and larger context and pattern matching, and instruction following and integrated tool use. That ‘human level’ LLM is going to de facto operate far above human level, even if it has some inherent limits on its ‘raw G.’ AI Is Going to Be HuuuuuuuuuugeThat’s right,
That’s because someone did just show him a bunch of stuff for the first time. Also, I’ve never tried to add punctuation to a Trump statement before, I did not realize how wild a task that is. Here is exactly what he said, although I’ve cut out a bit of host talk. Vintage Trump.
Trump was huge for helping me understand LLMs. I realized that they were doing something remarkably similar to what he was doing, vibing off of associations, choosing continuations word by word on instinct, [other things]. It makes so much sense that Trump is super impressed by its ability to write him a speech. What you actually want, of course, if you are The Donald, is to get an AI that is fine tuned on all of Donald Trump’s speeches, positions, opinions and particular word patterns and choices. Then you would have something. Sure, you could say that’s all bad, if are the Biden campaign.
Here I agree with Daniel. This is a totally valid use case, the familiarity is great, why shouldn’t Trump go for it. Overall this was more on point and on the ball than I expected. The electricity point plays into his politics and worldview and way of thinking. It is also fully accurate as far as it goes. The need to ‘beat China’ also fits perfectly, and it true except for the part where we are already way ahead, although one could still worry about electricity down the line. Both of those were presumably givens. The concerns ran our usual gamut: Deepfaketown, They Took Our Jobs and also loss of control over the future. For deepfakes, he runs the full gamut of Things Trump Worries About. On the one hand you have global thermonuclear war. On the other you have fake commercials. Which indeed are both real worries. (Obviously if you are told you have thirteen minutes, that is indeed enough time to check any codes or check the message details and origin several times to verify it, to physically verify the claims, and so on. Not that there is zero risk in that room, but this scenario does not so much worry me.) It is great to hear how seamlessly he can take the threat of an AI takeover fully seriously. The affect here is perfect, establishing by default that this is a normal and very reasonable thing to worry about. Very good to hear. Yes, he is saying go ahead, but he is saying you have to be careful. No, he does not understand the details, but this seems like what one would hope for. Also in particular, notice that no one said the word ‘regulation,’ except by implication around electricity. The people in San Francisco giving him money got him to think about electricity. But otherwise he is saying we must be careful, whereas many of his presumed donors that gave him the $12 million instead want to be careful to ensure we are not careful. This, here? I can work with it. Also noteworthy: He did not say anything about wokeness or bias, despite clearly having spent a bunch of the conversation around Elon Musk. SB 1047 Updated Again
There were other people talking about SB 1047 prior to the updates. Their statements contained nothing new. Ignore them.
Before getting into the changes, one thing needs to be clear: What are the changes? As usual, I’ll mostly ignore what the announcement says and look at the text of the bill changes. There are a lot of ‘grammar edits’ and also some minor changes that I am ignoring because I don’t think they change anything that matters. These are the changes that I think matter or might matter. The limited duty exemption is gone. Everyone who is talking about the other changes is asking the wrong questions. You no longer have to implement covered guidance. You instead have to ‘consider’ the guidance when deciding what to implement. That’s it. Covered guidance now seems more like a potential future offer of safe harbor. 22602 (c) redefines a safety incident to require ‘an incident that demonstrably increases the risk of a critical harm occurring by means of,’ which was previously present only in clause (1). Later harm enabling wording has been altered, in ways I think are roughly similar to that. In general hazardous capability is now risk of causing a critical harm. I think that’s similar enough but I’m not 100%. 22602 (e) changes from covered guidance (all relevant terms to that deleted) and moves the definition of covered model up a level. The market price used for the $100 million is now that at the start of training, which is simpler (and slightly higher). We still could use an explicit requirement that FMD publish market prices so everyone knows where they stand. 22602 (e)(2) now has derivative models become covered models if you use 3e10^25 flops rather than 25% of compute, and any modifications that are not ‘fine-tuning’ do not count regardless of size. Starting in 2027 the FMD determines the new flop threshold for derivative models, based on how much compute is needed to cause critical harm. The requirement for baseline covered models can be changed later. Lowering it would do nothing, as noted below, because the $100 million requirement would be all that mattered. Raising the requirement could matter, if the FMD decided we could safely raise the compute threshold above what $100 million buys you in that future. Reevaluation of procedures must be annual rather than periodic. Starting in 2028 you need a certificate of compliance from an accredited-by-FMD third party auditor. A Board of Frontier Models is established, consisting of an open-source community member, an AI industry member, an academic, someone appointed by the speaker and someone appointed by the Senate rules committee. The FMD will act under their supervision.
Scott links to The best criticism I have seen of the changes, Dean Ball’s, For the audits, I do agree that if all you worry about is potential to impose costs, and you can use licensing to limit competition, this could be an issue. I don’t expect it to be a major expense relative to $100 million in training costs (remember, if you don’t spend that, it’s not covered), but Whereas the authority to change compute thresholds was put there in order to allow those exact requirements to be weakened when things changed. But also, so what if they do lower the compute threshold on covered models? Let’s say they lower it to 10^2. If you use one hundred flops, that covers you. Would that matter? No! Because the $100 million requirement will make 10^2 and 10^26 the same number very quickly. The only thing you can do with that authority, that does anything, is to raise the number higher. I actually think the bill would plausibly be better off if we eliminated the number entirely, and went with the dollar threshold alone. Cleaner. The threshold for derivative models is the one that could in theory be messed up. It could move in either direction now. There the whole point is to correctly assign responsibility. If you are motivated by safety you want the correct answer, not the lowest you can come up with (so Meta is off the hook) or the highest you can get (so you can build a model on top of Meta’s and blame it on Meta.) Both failure modes are bad. If, as one claim said, 3x10^25 is too high, you want that threshold lowered, no? Which is totally reasonable, but the argument I saw that this was too high was ‘that is almost as much as Meta took to train Llama-3 405B.’ Which would mean that Llama-3 405B would not even be a covered model, and the threshold for covered models will be rising rapidly, so what are we even worried about on this? It is even plausible that no open models would ever have been covered models in the first place, which would render derivative models impossible other than via using a company’s own fine-tuning API, and mean the whole panic about open models was always fully moot once the $100 million clause came in. The argument I saw most recently was literally ‘they could lower the threshold to zero, rendering all derivative models illegal.’ Putting aside that it would render them covered not illegal, this goes against all the bill’s explicit instructions, such a move would be thrown out by the courts and no one has any motivation to do it, yes. In theory we could put a minimum there purely so people don’t lose their minds. But then those same people would complain the minimum was arbitrary, or an indication that we were going to move to the minimum or already did or this created uncertainty. Instead, we see all three complaints at the same time: That the threshold could be set too high, that the same threshold could be set too low, and the same threshold could be inflexible. And those would all be bad. Which they would be, if they happened.
It is a better tweet, and still true, if you delete the word ‘AI.’ These are all problems. Each can be right some of the time. You do the best you can. When you see them all being thrown out maximally, you know what that indicates. I continue to be disappointed by certain people who repeatedly link to bad faith hyperbolic rants about SB 1047. You know who you are. Each time I lose a little more respect for you. But at this point very little, because I have learned not to be surprised. All of the changes above are relatively minor. The change that matters is that they removed the limited duty exemption. This clause was wildly misunderstood and misrepresented. The short version of what it used to do was: If your model is not going to be or isn’t at the frontier, you can say so. If you do, ensure that is still true, otherwise most requirements are waived. Thus models not at frontier would have trivial compliance cost.
This was a way to ensure SB 1047 did not hit the little guy. It made the bill strictly easier to comply with. You never had to take the option. Instead, everyone somehow kept thinking this was some sort of plot to require you to evaluate models before training, or that you couldn’t train without the exception, or otherwise imposing new requirements. That wasn’t true. At all. So you know what happened in committee? I swear, you cannot make this stuff up, no one would believe you. The literal Chamber of Commerce stepped in to ask for the clause to be removed.
So the committee was convinced. The limited duty exemption clause is no more. You win this one, Chamber of Commerce. Did they understand what they were doing? You tell me. How much will this matter in practice? Without the $100 million threshold, this would have been quite bad. With the $100 million threshold in place, the downside is far more limited. The class of limited duty exception models was going to be models that cost over $100 million, but which were still behind the frontier. Now those models will have additional requirements and costs imposed. As I’ve noted before, I don’t think those costs will be so onerous, especially when compared with $100 million in compute costs. Indeed, you can come up with your own safety plan, so you could write down ‘this model is obviously not dangerous because it is 3 OOMs behind Google’s Gemini 3 so we’re not going to need to do that much more.’ But there was no need for it to even come to that. This is how democracy in action works. A bunch of lawmakers who do not understand come in, listen to a bunch of lobbyists and others, and they make a mix of changes to someone’s carefully crafted bill. Various veto holders demand changes, often that you realize make little sense. You dream it improves the bill, mostly you hope it doesn’t make things too much worse. My overall take is that the changes other than the limited duty exemption are minor and roughly sideways. Killing the limited duty exemption is a step backwards. But it won’t be too bad given the other changes, and it was demanded by exactly the people the change will impose costs upon. So I find it hard to work up all that much sympathy. The Quest for Sane Regulations
That is not going to be easy.
If you thought
The Week in Audio
From last week’s One contrast that was enlightening: Early on Trudeau sounds like a human talking to a human. When he was challenged on the whole ‘force Meta to support local journalism’ issue, he went into full political bullshit rhetoric mode. Very stark change. The ARC of ProgressExpanding from last week: No matter how much I disagree with many of Chollet’s claims, the million dollar prize is awesome. Put your money where your mouth is, this is The Way. Many thanks.
Chollet says the point of ARC is to make the questions impossible to anticipate. He admits it does not fully succeed. Instead, based on the sample questions, I’d say ARC is best solved by applying some basic heuristics, and what I did to instantly solve the samples was closer to ‘memorization’ than Chollet wants to admit. It is like math competitions, sometimes you use your intelligence but in large part you learn patterns and then you pattern match. Momentum. Symmetry. Frequency. Enclosure. Pathfinding.
There’s some cool misleading involved here, but ultimately it is very simple. Yes, I think a lot of five year olds will solve this, provided they are motivated. Once again, notice there is essentially a one word answer, and that it would go in my ‘top 100 things to check’ pile. Why do humans find ARC simple? Because ARC is testing things that humans pick up. It is a test designed for exactly human-shaped things to do well, that we prepare for without needing to prepare, and that doesn’t use language. My guess is that if I used all such heuristics I had and none of them worked, my score on any remaining ARC questions would not be all that great. If I was trying to get an LLM to get a good score on ARC I would get a list of such patterns, write a description of each, and ask the LLM to identify which ones might apply and check them against the examples. Is pattern matching memorization? I can see it both ways. Yes, presumably that would be ‘cheating’ by Chollet’s principles. But by those principles humans are almost always cheating on everything. Which Chollet admits (around 27:40) but says humans also can adapt and that’s what matters. At minimum, he takes this too far. At (28:55) he says every human day is full of novel things that they’ve not been prepared for. I am very confident this is hugely false, not merely technically false. Not only is it possible to do this, I am going to outright say that the majority of human days are exactly this, if we count pattern matching under memorization. This poll got confounded by people reading it backwards (negations are tricky) but the point remains that either way about roughly half of people think the answer is on each side of 50%, very different from his 100%. At (29:45) Chollet is asked for an example, and I think this example was a combination of extremely narrow (go on Dwarkesh) and otherwise wrong. He says memorization is not intelligence, so LLMs are dumb. I don’t think this is entirely No True Scotsman (NTS). The ‘raw G’ aspect is a thing that more memorization can’t increase. I do think this perspective is in large part NTS though. No one can tackle literally any problem, if you were to do an adversarial search for the right problem, especially if you can name a problem that ‘seems simple’ in some sense with the knowledge a human has, but that no human can do. I liked the quote at 58:40, “Intelligence is what you use when you don’t know what to do.” Is it also how you figure out what to do so you don’t need your intelligence later? I also appreciated the point that intelligence potential is mostly genetic. No amount of training data will turn most people into Einstein, although lack of data or other methods can make Einstein effectively stupider. Your model architecture and training method are going to have a cap on how ‘intelligent’ it can get in some sense. At 1:04:00 they mention that benchmarks only get traction once they become tractable. If no one can get a reasonable score then no one bothers. So no wonder our most used benchmarks keep getting saturated. This interview was the first time I can remember that Dwarkesh was getting visibly frustrated, while doing a noble attempt to mitigate it. I would have been frustrated as well. At 1:06:30 Mike Knoop complains that everyone is keeping their innovations secret. Don’t these labs know that sharing is how we make progress? What an extreme bet on these exact systems. To which I say, perhaps valuable trade secrets are not something it is wise to tell the world, even if you have no safety concerns? Why would DeepMind tell OpenAI how they got a longer context window? They claim OpenAI did that, and also got everyone to hyperfocus on LLMs, so OpenAI delayed progress to AGI by 5-10 years, since LLMs are an ‘off ramp’ on the road to AI. I do not see it that way, although I am hopeful they are right. It is so weird to think progress is not being made. There is a common pattern of people saying ‘no way AIs can do X any time soon, here’s a prize’ and suddenly people figure out how to make AIs do X. The solution here is not eligible for the prize, since it uses other tools you are not supposed to use, but still, that escalated quickly.
The market says
Put Your Thing |