---
subject: "Links For September 2024"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-09-12 03:46:22
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX"]
---
[I haven’t independently verified each link. On average, commenters will end up spotting evidence that around two or three of the links in each links post are wrong or misleading. I correct these as I see them, and will highlight important corrections later, but I can’t guarantee I will have caught them all by the time you read this.] 1: 2: Many personality differences are partly genetic. So why did evolution give different people genes for different personalities, instead of everyone converging onto one optimal personality? The debate has focused on two theories. First, maybe there is an optimal personality, but evolution doesn’t move fast enough to get us there (this would be like disease risk or IQ, where some people just luck into having better genes than others). Second, maybe there are rock-paper-scissors personality types such that convergence is itself a non-optimal strategy (this would be like gender, where if everyone else is a woman, then your best strategy for getting mates easily is to be a man, and vice versa, so we naturally end up 50-50). A new review analyzes the evidence, and finds pretty decisively that it’s the first one (there are optimal personalities but evolution is too slow to get there). Here’s 3: Ruxandra Teslo has a 4: 5: Why is Israel one of the only developed countries with above-replacement fertility rate? It’s natural to suspect some role for its ultra-Orthodox Jewish population, who live traditional lifestyles with large (5-10 children) families. But they’re not numerous enough to shift fertility all by themselves, and even secular Israelis have anomalously high fertility. Maybe the presence of the ultra-Orthodox shifts broader cultural norms? But then why don’t isolated high-fertility groups elsewhere (eg Amish and Mormons in the US) produce the same phenomenon? 6: …and I found the above a good appetizer before reading 7: Related, from 8: Law students, like most academic elites, are mostly liberal. But part of US legal training is apprenticing with a judge. And the more prestigious the judge, the more prestigious the clerkship, and the more career capital it provides. Judges and Supreme Court Justices are appointed through partisan politics, so they're about 50-50 liberal/conservative. And conservative judges prefer clerks who share their values. So the few Republicans who go into law have an easier time getting good clerkships and ending up on a prestigious career path, leading to a sort of unintentional "affirmative action" for right-wingers. 9: The princess of Norway
10: After a four year experiment with Portugal-style decriminalization of hard drugs, 11: Related: 12: A while back 13: From 14: Why did the Ptolemaic Egyptian pharaohs marry their sisters? 15: The ominously named “cerebrolysin” has a positive reputation in the nootropics community, but 16: Why is the Ukraine war a horrible grinding war of attrition like World War I, instead of resembling more dynamic modern conflicts? I asked this on an Open Thread and got some good answers: [PolymorphicWetware](https://substack.com/redirect/dba24452-5914-4362-bdf0-233e6f7bd669?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)says that the Soviets focused on artillery, so the post-Soviet armies of both Russia and Ukraine are both artillery-heavy. Artillery is better at defending your lines than breaking your enemies’, so both sides are great at pushing back enemy troops but bad at pushing forward themselves.[John Schilling](https://substack.com/redirect/bb9e5741-5ca2-4515-93ec-f90b5c695637?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)says that neither side in Ukraine has established air superiority - Ukraine because it barely has an air force, Russia because the West gave Ukraine cutting-edge anti-air defenses. This is almost unique among major modern wars, and the lack of air power pushes ground conflicts back towards the World War I equilibrium.
17: Related: the ancient Greeks built a city called Chersonensus in Crimea. The Russian occupiers in Crimea 18: Also related ( 19: Ancient Chinese philosopher Wang Lin is known for, among other things, his
20: You’ve probably seen that whenever a new LLM comes out, it comes with a “model card” showing how it outperforms all other LLMs, performs at near-human or above-human level on benchmarks, and is definitely the most advanced technology ever invented. You’ve also probably assumed those are mostly garbage. Your assumption is correct, but if you want to know exactly what’s going on, and how to sift through it for the grains of truth, Lawrence Chen has an article on 21: 22: Daniel Bottger (author of the recent 23: Gender differences? ( 24: Another day, another 25: Sometimes business-minded presidential candidates say they will be “the CEO of America”. But did you know that America already has a 26: I’ve lived in Oakland for five years now and never considered the possibility that it might be valorous, but apparently 27: Related: 28: 29: Related: 30: CerebralLab 31: Related: Nicholas Reville (of the Recursive Adaptation Substack) has
32: 33: 34: 35: I’m not saying Satoshi Nakamoto was a CIA asset, but 36: Amazon has added an incredibly annoying popup thing called “Rufus” that appears on every page now and can’t be turned off (Jeff Bezos would be turning in his grave). If you can’t figure out a good non-Amazon way to get the products you need, 37: Extelligence (aka “Some Guy”) is an excellent Substacker who often writes about his (unusual, colorful) life experiences. Here he has 38: 39: 40: This month in prediction markets: 41: Nate Silver has a new book, 42: Related: Nate Silver’s …even though Harris is ahead in most swing state polls: This is partly because his model is pricing in a “convention bounce” for the Democrats around now - it’s unclear whether it’s right to do so; 43: 44: New voices in favor of SB 1047 California bill on regulating AI - 45: Debating which candidate has better policies seems so almost comical these days - isn’t everyone already sure which candidate is an ontologically-evil commie Nazi, and which is a bold hero riding in to save the Union? Still, a few people have taken on this thankless task, most notably 46: An unsympathetic portrayal of 47: Did you know: Malaysia not only has a king, but also a 48: Despite what you hear, Republicans 49: Michael Wiebe continues to do great work replicating (and failing to replicate) econ papers. Most recently ( It really does seem like a lot of big economics results that get brought out in policy debates aren’t just wrong, but simple-coding error wrong, and that one person has discovered a bunch of these. The hero we’ve all been waiting for! 50: Did you know: You're currently a free subscriber to |