---
subject: "The SoftBank fault line"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2019-09-23 02:35:46
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031"]
---
In business, when pronouns become verbs, they signal tectonic shifts. Who can forget Xerox. For a good many years, global IT services was Bangalored. Google became the default for search before anybody realised it.
A new verb has entered the lexicon: SoftBank. Until recently, startups getting SoftBanked implied the other (non-major) investors would build the company to eventually exit to the Japanese investor. To the extent that Paytm's founder ducked a question on the IPO saying, “An MPO is our IPO”, M for the maverick CEO of SoftBank, Masayoshi Son.
In fact, for VCs like Sequoia and Lightspeed, the MPO became an RPO when OYO founder Ritesh Agrawal bought back a chunk of his company’s shares through a $2 billion buyback.
But for the MPOs and RPOs to work for SoftBank’s portfolio companies, some of the IPOs needed to become the promised dream offerings. Instead, first Uber, and now WeWork have shown that implied valuations based on SoftBank’s funding are transient if the fundamentals like revenue and profit are not in place.
With WeWork sputtering, not only has SoftBank’s investor image taken a beating, its fault lines are all too evident. At a time when most businesses and funds are becoming more conservative about their use of financial leverage, SoftBank is increasing it. Founder Son has already pledged 38% of his SoftBank shares to 19 different banks in return for loans. In addition, for its Vision Fund 2, SoftBank not only planning to pony up $38 billion by itself but is also planning to lend $20 billion to its own executives to invest in the fund as well. Up to 60% of Vision Fund 2 could be SoftBank’s own money or money it's borrowed!
Tech analysts are concerned that tensions along this fault line could lead to future crises. In today’s story, Rohin asks if the hidden fractures release stress, how will it impact SoftBank’s 16 portfolio companies in India. He has created an assessment model to arrive at a composite score for each company. While those like Oyo, Grofers and Paytm Mall look adversely SoftBanked, Ola and PolicyBazaar are on a firmer footing.
Warmly,
PS: Earlier this year, we wrote about how companies were putting off IPOs and opting to raise funds from SoftBank’s deep pockets instead. Just for today, we’re making it free for those working at Paytm, Policybazaar, Ola, OYO, and, of course, SoftBank. If you work at any of these companies, you can read it [here](http://link.the-ken.com/wf/click?upn=HQSq6eeRV1xAVaGuFOahuNCZVVXPeP-2FJpSqxhvIUDrmA2RTNtJAI8RHp9sQqvH3eWviuYV7vydG1eULVQ4SAdMArJ8OUyRoACnBDxPQOinIKOvJ6JJC2RS86v3S1Ck48RwLPYtWTYSuZ7jb9ZBhvdB15vXs8QWOcf-2BZGJoMrdfQI1jvhA8pTADNHqnfpZOgu_S4jLOsNx-2Fv6Jev2nvow8b7P9pBCWGd8KNZfb200gkZLQNlXQHio0noZzXtsWoloZmPWeyZsh7a4QCV9ufwCUKi00jlBT0uEdvwYDMuVuqcNu9x9QITYRc7mUNdaI9c8-2F91lqU11NUOxT68UYgVR6Ey2AHEhzrWSjML4bdiGZD2xzlVaLp5RBerbtEaVP1GLAF4-2FFz8IR-2F699hqzjpkoP3QWvltmMUsM8n2ZOYRDpJU0WBJHaV-2F2GId0obzJnzqnG1jvRuPKdI26ulI3hWzZ0T-2FimzwMdngy38j3VTbgh-2FwndBI2fhTwcC1xfnFDNAr-2BHfzIs2DLxxk98P2-2FElt-2BM7beFqwu5gDkChXeppMR74EgXqSVOG-2BOQQ0Rs7YlZSmhoEzorELycJv5Qh9yeVjBORNa2nEy2XoRuyOwR81ysFHd-2FoKevQeN6yNd1ca92lQBH). Know someone employed with these companies? Share it with them.