---
subject: "All It Takes Is All You Got"
from: "Balaji <balajis@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-03-29 04:25:13
labels: ["Balaji", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_3304713803370614215", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX"]
---
A recent That’s weird. Why is the US government issuing Treasuries at emergency rates when the official narrative is that everything is fine? And why is the Wall Street Journal acknowledging something extremely strange is going on…and that it could
They’re understating it. When they say “ended badly”, they mean crisis. 2000 was the dotcom crash (“tech stocks”) 2008 was the financial crisis (“mortgage bonds”) 202X is the sovereign debt crisis
Moreover, in this one little quote WSJ also acknowledges that (a) there’s risk in the supposed “ II. The Big OneThing is though…I hesitate to accept some of these parallels. What’s the right precedent for what’s coming? You can use the financial crisis progression of 2000 and 2008 and 202X, as WSJ implicitly did. But you can also put the events of 2001, 2008, and 2020 into a different crisis
We can organize these two different progressions in tabular form as follows, where WSJ’s is the middle row and Summers is the middle column: Note first that 2001, 2008, and 2020 were each preceded by an “ignorable” event. The Note next that as you go across, things get more severe. I’ve used the labels ignorable, decadal, and civilizational. An ignorable event is a news story that even someone who lived through at the time might not have registered. A decadal event is something that shaped the decade. And a civilizational event? We haven’t had one of those in a while. It’s going across — from ignorable, to decadal, to civilizational — that concerns me. I don’t know if we’ll see a nuclear 9/11, or a pandemic that’s much worse than COVID-19.¹ But I do think, like And so comparing 2008 to what is coming may give a false sense of security. What if the coming sovereign debt crisis is to the mortgage crisis as COVID-19 was to H1N1? What if it’s just so much bigger that it’s like comparing a small war to a world war? Because that’s Dalio’s thesis. That a sovereign debt crisis will mean a III. What about the assets, huh?Ok, ok. Let’s not get ahead of ourselves. If I represent the “ Here I am Checkmate, right? IV. All It Takes Is All You GotI actually really loved this response so much. First, the Below is the same graph with And now we're getting down to brass tacks. See, Keynesianism is like Communism in that it sees no real difference between household and government assets. They recognize no moral limit on how much they can take from the population via inflation and seizure, only practical limits. If you doubt this, ask a Keynesian if they would accept any hard limit on the money supply or upper bound on the tax rate. They won’t. And this is why they print trillions yet keep proposing “ And how much does it owe? Well for that we can go to a recent But wait, there's more! Later in the doc Treasury itself admits even *this* is a sharp underestimate of what the US owes in terms of Social Security and Medicare because it's not accounting for future payouts decades from now. Once it does, what does the number get to? Here's the That $175.3T lines up with the ~$200T number that The entire fedguv only collected [$1.86T last year](https://substack.com/redirect/c8b523fc-e0ca-4167-b787-5cf5afdedcab?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)That number is itself juiced by deficit spending The dollar is down [~25% in real terms since 2020](https://substack.com/redirect/334da249-5a2d-4604-b197-efc41e883570?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)³And the "177T" in asset value plummets if liquidated ...or if there is a financial crisis, or both
So: no, the US government doesn't have nearly enough to pay for what it owes. It's made promises to everyone, from allies to retirees, that it simply can't keep. To hang on to power amidst that web of broken obligations, it is going to get nasty on a level beyond which most can really comprehend. I appreciate, however, that we are starting to glimpse the endgame. When a bankrupt state collapses, it's like a black hole. It sucks everything it can into its gaping maw. Everything it can possibly seize, will be seized. Everything it can possibly print, will be printed. All your assets become its assets. 1 There was a report of Chinese scientists 2 This $177T isn't cash, of course. If you actually sold all those assets (to who?! for what?!?) they would crash in value. Google itself is only worth <$2T! So if we're actually talking about that $177T as "collateral" against the $200T owed by the US government, which means welfare payments and medical care for seniors — we're talking about a bizarre end-of-the-Soviet-Union fire sale here, combined with a beginning-of-the-Soviet-Union asset seizure. 3 See some visuals in this tweet Discuss this article with Balaji and your fellow subscribers at |