---
subject: "A Newer Seward?"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-12-26 14:02:43
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
As I’ve As always, if you want to support my work, you can subscribe to the newsletter as a free or paid subscriber. Paid subscribers get access to the archives and the satisfaction that comes from supporting all of the work that goes into this project. A lot of This is, after all, a man who invited Hulk Hogan to the Republican Convention, who loves the glitzy gold-and-black aesthetic of Wall Street, and would certainly agree with Gordon Gekko’s assertion that “greed is good.” He’s always believed in the decade’s ethos that more is more, that there’s no shame in excess. Heck, Trump even just But lately, Trump has been making me wonder if I’ve been thinking about the right decade in the wrong century — maybe he wants to go back to the 1880s, not the 1980s. Trump seems increasingly fond of the America of the late 19th century. One of his signature campaign promises was to Trump’s latest foray into late-19th-century thinking threatens to revive that age’s obsession with American imperialism. Trump has, over the last few weeks, mused aloud about acquiring Trump may be, as my daughter would say, “just yapping,” sweatily trying to refocus the media’s attention on himself after Elon Musk These days, Trump sounds quite a bit like William Seward, who served as Secretary of State under Abraham Lincoln and Andrew Johnson. Seward is probably best known for his deal to purchase Alaska from Russia in 1867. In the 1700s and early 1800s, Russian leaders claimed Alaska, using it more as land they intended to exploit than territory they intended to settle. The main Russian interest in the area was hunting otters for furs. By the middle of the 19th century, Russian hunters had killed almost all of the otters, so they were willing to sell. After the Civil War ended, Tsar Alexander II moved to cash in on his seemingly worthless territory. For their part, Johnson and Seward thought that purchasing Alaska would boost public opinion for the struggling Johnson administration. So they struck a deal — $7.2 million for all of Alaska. Though most newspapers at the time seemed to approve of the deal, it did have its critics — some called it “Seward’s Folly” while the New York Herald memorably described Alaska as a “ Purchasing Alaska turned out to be a pretty good decision, for reasons that Seward could not have anticipated — beneath the Alaskan snow, Americans would find gold and, later, immense fossil fuel reserves. This particular deal was not all that foolish. Seward’s name is connected with Alaska because that’s the one acquisition that he managed to pull off, but the man was obsessed with expanding the United States and considered adding to its territory in almost every direction: He worked for years to [annex](https://substack.com/redirect/23c316c2-8ab0-4fc5-9672-7d1db2ac30d6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)British Columbia to connect Alaska with the rest of the United States and allow America to project its power into the North Pacific. Seward even attempted to leverage American claims against England (the British had built ships for the Confederates during the Civil War) into some kind of swap — the U.S. would drop its complaints in exchange for British Columbia.This was only part of his grander dream to annex even larger parts of [Canada](https://substack.com/redirect/660cba4c-8538-4bfa-9207-27cba4abcdd2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). He seems to have dreamed that he could somehow convince the Canadian people to join the U.S.He flirted with taking control of several Caribbean territories, [musing](https://substack.com/redirect/2677ba7c-1bbf-4313-9e72-42902a10adf0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)at various points about absorbing Santo Domingo and Cuba. He attempted to purchase St. Thomas and St. John from Denmark after a devastating hurricane made the Danish occupation of those islands unprofitable. He managed to make an agreement for the latter two, but the Senate blocked the treaty (these islands would eventually become part of the U.S. Virgin Islands in 1917).These weren’t the only islands Seward desired — he also pushed for the annexation of Pacific outposts like Fiji and Midway (the U.S. took possession of Midway in 1867, the same year it purchased Alaska). And Seward [discussed](https://substack.com/redirect/3641a6c2-b075-4cc0-a0cc-5491a9854671?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)purchasing Greenland and Iceland from Denmark, though he never made an official offer.
Seward wasn’t alone in his desire to expand the American empire in any way he could. Many American leaders fantasized about joining the imperial “game” during the late 19th century — and, over time, those ideas became reality. What motivated them? First, there was a general worry in the late 19th century that the “ Men like Seward also believed that colonies would expand the American economy. In the less-globalized 19th century, dominating territory meant that you controlled markets and resources. As Senator Albert Beveridge The imperialists of the time also believed that America was special. this American exceptionalism convinced them that the American was better than anybody else’s and that the world would thank them for imposing American power, trade, and culture on them. The expansion of American power — through naval bases, trade, and settlement — would be good for everyone, not just Americans. Seward and his allies got their way in the end. By the early 20th century, the United States had built an empire to compete with its European rivals’, annexing places like Puerto Rico, the Philippines, Hawaii, and Guam, while interfering in the internal affairs of many countries in the Western Hemisphere and beyond. One of the most important examples of this era of American imperialism is one of Trump’s targets today — Panama. By the end of the 19th century, all of this expansion had made the United States very big, which was, after all, what the imperialists had wanted. But it left them with a problem — how to move people and goods 3,000 miles from coast to coast? The answer was staring back at them from every map of the Western Hemisphere — build a canal across the narrow part of Central America. There was a race among imperialist nations to build and control a Central American canal (a French company made the first attempt in 1881). There was also a lot of There was a problem — the United States and its imperialist rivals didn’t control Nicaragua or Panama (Panama was, at the time, part of Colombia). The Theodore Roosevelt administration first tried to purchase land for the canal. Then, when the negotiations broke down, he supported a fledgling Panamanian movement for independence. The grateful leaders of the new nation granted building rights and control over the canal to their imperial sponsors. (I wrote a whole post about the history of the canal a while back — if you’re interested in learning more, click below:) In 1977, during the post-Vietnam period in which America was trying to atone for its global overreach, Jimmy Carter negotiated the return of the canal to Panama, although Panama didn’t take full control until 1999. It seemed that the matter was settled — until Trump came along. Trump’s If I had to guess, I’d say that this is Trump’s usual negotiating tactic — complain that the United States is being wronged; make outlandish, destabilizing threats; bully a smaller entity into making concessions; and declare victory. I would imagine that Panamanian authorities aren’t expecting an American invasion, nor is Denmark preparing for serious negotiations about Greenland. I especially doubt the Canadians are trying to figure out who they’re going to send to the Senate as the 51st state. It’s sort of the opposite of Theodore Roosevelt’s imperialist philosophy — Trump seems to speaking loudly and carrying a small stick. But it is notable that he’s trying to revive an ethos of American imperialism that last flourished when Roosevelt was president. Trump’s musings, even if they don’t go much further than this, tell us two things about him. First, according to international relations scholar Daniel And what if Trump’s not “just yapping?” There is the possibility that, as has happened in other arenas, Trump’s unlikely and unwise ideas could slowly become mainstream Republican Party doctrine. After all, William Seward’s musings about Alaska were ridiculous until they weren’t. Maybe Trump is really trying to revive the age of American Imperialism alongside Gilded Age trade policy. This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: Or you can share the newsletter with others: Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week! Adapted from this You're currently a free subscriber to |