---
subject: "AI #138 Part 2: Watch Out For Documents"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-10-17 11:42:39
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
As usual when things split, Part 1 is mostly about capabilities, and Part 2 is mostly about a mix of policy and alignment. Table of Contents[The Quest for Sane Regulations](https://substack.com/redirect/5f8a6480-2cca-4e29-8792-12c16dddd715?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/5f8a6480-2cca-4e29-8792-12c16dddd715?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The GAIN Act and some state bills.[People Really Dislike AI.](https://substack.com/redirect/ca676fd8-7489-4a03-aee7-a50e95c324c1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)They would support radical, ill-advised steps.[Chip City.](https://substack.com/redirect/dbb4a4e1-f601-43ab-afec-a133e52902a2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Are we taking care of business?[The Week in Audio](https://substack.com/redirect/22536733-09d2-43ed-8e3f-422063b7a218?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/22536733-09d2-43ed-8e3f-422063b7a218?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Hinton talks to Jon Stewart, Klein to Yudkowsky.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/d6ca6327-8451-438d-b718-c16c0a60ee08?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)How to lose the moral high ground.[Water Water Everywhere.](https://substack.com/redirect/26ad2a45-eeb8-4599-8b2c-74ace0dbc185?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)AI has many big issues. Water isn’t one of them.[Read Jack Clark’s Speech From The Curve](https://substack.com/redirect/90771616-8025-4b01-86dd-5ac7179344de?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/90771616-8025-4b01-86dd-5ac7179344de?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)It was a sincere, excellent speech.[How One Other Person Responded To This Thoughtful Essay.](https://substack.com/redirect/7bff5232-968f-418c-862a-d3c79166e226?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Some aim to divide.[A Better Way To Disagree.](https://substack.com/redirect/196d2f2b-bead-4a0c-b002-9371f0e3e345?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Others aim to work together and make things better.[Voice Versus Exit.](https://substack.com/redirect/b823d00b-3fde-4c92-a64a-35f8280bc772?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The age old question, should you quit your job at an AI lab?[The Dose Makes The Poison](https://substack.com/redirect/8f06f83c-8be2-4ac0-a4cc-fc0801c6ccb8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/8f06f83c-8be2-4ac0-a4cc-fc0801c6ccb8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)As little as 250 documents can poison an LLM.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/357bf412-ef2e-41e1-bac1-0f7e06714563?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Techniques to avoid.[You Get What You Actually Trained For.](https://substack.com/redirect/0f72addc-344d-4391-8555-7e7f789e6097?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)So ask what you actually train for.[Messages From Janusworld.](https://substack.com/redirect/39d3c3bf-1e44-4afd-8e88-46bd688d7360?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Do not neglect theory of mind.[People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/d0f90812-61ff-41a0-9c23-66c8489dba4a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A world-ending AI prompt?[The Lighter Side.](https://substack.com/redirect/b2b9147b-17c3-4751-96a8-6f5f828c3895?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Introducing the museum of chart crimes.
The Quest for Sane Regulations
It’s pretty amazing that it has come to this and we need to force this into the books. The least you can do, before selling advanced AI chips to our main political adversary, is offer those same chips for sale to American firms on the same terms first. I predict there are at least three labs (OpenAI, Anthropic and xAI) that would each happily and directly buy everything you’re willing to sell at current market prices, and that’s not even including Oracle, Meta and Microsoft. I’m not including Google and Amazon there because they’re trying to make their own chips, but make those calls too, cause more is more. I won’t personally buy in too much bulk, but call me too, there’s a good chance I’ll order me at least one H20 or even better B30A, as a treat.
In all seriousness, I will rest a lot easier if we can get the GAIN AI Act passed, as it will severely limit the amount of suicide we can commit with chip sales.
California Governor Newsom There was a divide in industry over whether SB 243 was an acceptable alternative to AB 1064 or still something to fight, and a similar divide by child safety advocates over whether SB 243 was too timid to be worth supporting. For AB 1064, Newsom’s veto statement says he was worried it could result in unintentionally banning AI tool use by minors, echoing arguments by opposing lobbyists that it would ban educational tools.
One thing to note is that these numbers are so small. This is framed as a big push and a lot of money, but it is many orders of magnitude smaller than the size of the issues at stake, and also small in absolute terms. It’s moot now, but I took a brief look at the final version of As written the definition of ‘companion chatbot’ applies to ChatGPT, other standard LLMs and also plausibly to dedicated educational tools. You could write it slightly differently to not have that happen. For whatever reason, that’s not how the bill ended up being worded. The standard the bill asks of its ‘companion chatbots’ might be outright impossible to meet, such as being ‘not foreseeably capable’ of sycophancy, aka ‘prioritizing validation over accuracy.’ Thus, you can hate on the AI lobbyists all you want but here they seem right.
Tyler Cowen expects most written words to come from AIs within a few years People Really Dislike AIPeople do not like AI, and Nor do they trust their government to regulate AI, except for the EU, which to be fair has one job. Whenever we see public polls about what to do about all this, the public reliably not only wants to regulate AI, they want to regulate AI in ways that I believe would go too far. I don’t mean would go a little too far. I mean a generalized ‘you can sue if it gives advice that results in harmful outcomes,’ think about what that would actually mean. If AI bots had to meet ‘professional standards of care’ when dealing with all issues, and were liable if their ‘advice’ led to harmful outcomes straight up without conditionals, then probably AI chatbots could not survive this even in a neutered form.
This is a rather overwhelming opinion among all groups, across partisan lines and gender and income and education and race, and AI companies should note that the least supportive group is the one marked ‘I did not vote.’ This is the background of current policy fights, and the setting for future fights. The public does not want a threshold of ‘reasonable care.’ They want things like ‘meets professional standards’ and ‘is hurt by your advice, no matter how appropriate or wise it was or whether you took reasonable care.’ The graphs come from Kelsey Piper’s post saying As she points out, remember those huge fights over SB 1047 and in particular the idea that AI companies might be held liable if they did not take reasonable care and this failure resulted in damages of *checks notes* at least hundreds of millions of dollars. They raised holy hell, including patently absurd arguments like the one Kelsey quotes from Andrew Ng (who she notes then went on to make better arguments, as well).
I mean, sure you can, watch claim engine go brrrr. People be hypocrites. It’s our job not to let them.
Bingo. We absolutely do not want to give the public what it wants here. I am very happy that I was wrong about our tolerance for AIs giving medical and legal and other such advice without a license and while making occasional mistakes. We are much better off for it. In general, I am highly sympathetic to the companies on questions of, essentially, AIs sometimes making mistakes, offering poor advice, or failing to be sufficiently helpful or use the proper Officially Approved Words in your hour of need, or not tattling on the user to a Responsible Authority Figure. One could kind of call this grouping ‘the AI tries to be a helpful friend and doesn’t do a sufficiently superior job versus our standards for actual human friends.’ A good rule of thumb would be, if a human friend said the same thing, would it be justice, and both legally and morally justified, to then sue the friend? However we absolutely need to have some standard of care that if they fail to meet it you can sue their asses, especially when harm is caused to third parties, and even more so when an AI actively causes or enables the causing of catastrophic harms. I’d also want to be able to sue when there is a failure to take some form of ‘reasonable care’ in mundane contexts, similar to how you would already sue humans under existing law, likely in ways already enabled under existing law. Chip CityHow’s the beating China and powering our future thing going?
Yeah, so not great, then. Although there are bright spots, such as Sahil points out that The Week in Audio
Rhetorical InnovationNot AI, but worth noticing that South Korea was foolish enough to keep backups so physically chose to originals that Point of order:
There are two distinct true things here. There’s too much aiming at relatively friendly targets. If all you care about is going fully anti-AI and not the blast radius or whether your movement’s claims or motives correspond to reality, your move would be to engage in bad faith politics and form an alliance with various others by using invalid arguments.
The false thing is the idea that this is ‘better,’ the same way that many who vilify the idea of trying not to die from AI treat that idea as inherently the same as ‘degrowth’ or the people obsessed with water usage or conspiracies and so on, or say those worried about AI will inevitably join that faction out of political convenience. That has more total impact, but it’s not better. This definitely doesn’t fall into the lightbulb rule of ‘if you believe [X] why don’t you do [thing that makes no sense]?’ since there is a clear reason you might do it, it does require an explanation (if you don’t already know it), so here goes. The point is not to empower such folks and ideas and then take a back seat while the bulls wreck the China shop. The resulting actions would not go well. The idea is to convince people of true things based on true arguments, so we can then do reasonable and good things. Nor would throwing those principles away be good decision theory. We only were able to be as impactful as we were, in the ways we were, because we were clearly the types of people who would choose not to do this. So therefore we’re not going to do this now, even if you can make an isolated consequentialist utilitarian argument that we should.
Strive to remain a non-profit. Put increasing efforts into the safety/control problem. Engage with government to provide trusted, unbiased policy advice. Be perceived as a place that provides public good to the research community, and keeps the other actors honest and open via leading by example.
By those markers, it’s not going great on the moral high ground front. I’m relatively forgiving on #4, however they’re actively doing the opposite of #1 and #3, and putting steadily less relative focus and effort into #2, in ways that seem woefully inadequate to the tasks at hand.
I’ll try to cover MacAskill later when I have the bandwidth, but the thing I don’t agree with is the idea that a crucial flaw was failure to emphasize we might need a multi-decade AI pause. On the contrary, as I remember it, early AI safety advocates were highly willing to discuss extreme interventions and scenarios, to take ideas like this seriously, and to consider that they might be necessary. If anything, making what looked to outsiders like crazy asks like multi-decade or premature pauses was a key factor in the creation of negative polarization. Is it possible we will indeed need a long pause? Yes. If so, then either: We get much, much stronger evidence to generate buy-in for this, and we use that evidence, and we scramble and get it done, in time. Or someone builds it [superintelligence], and then everyone dies.
Could we have navigated the last decade or two much better, and gotten into a better spot? Of course. But if I had to go back, I wouldn’t try to emphasize more the potential need for a long pause. If indeed that is necessary, you convince people of true other things, and the pause perhaps flows naturally from them together with future evidence? You need to play to your outs. Water Water EverywhereAndy Masley continues his quest to illustrate the ways in which The average American uses 422 gallons a day, or enough for 800,000 chatbot prompts. If you want to go after minds that use a lot of water, they’re called humans.
Here he compares it to various other industries, data centers are in red, specifically AI in data centers is the final line, the line directly above the black one is golf courses. Or here it is versus agricultural products, the top line here is alfalfa. One could say that AI is growing exponentially, but even by 2030 use will only triple. Yes, if we keep adding orders of magnitude we eventually have a problem, but encounter many other issues far sooner, such as dollar costs and also the singularity. He claims there are zero places water prices rose or an acute water shortage was created due to data center water usage. You could make a stronger water case against essentially any other industry. A very small additional fee, if desired, could allow construction of new water infrastructure that more than makes up for all water usage.
Read Jack Clark’s Speech From The CurveI try to be sparing with such requests, but in this case I’ll provide some quotes, but seriously, pause here and read the whole thing.
If anything, that 12% feels like a large underestimate based on other reports, and number will continue to go up.
Jack Clark also provides helpful links as he does each week, often things I otherwise might miss, such as I do love how, rather than having to wait for such things to actually kill us in ways we don’t expect, we get all these toy demonstrations of them showing how they are on track to kill us in ways that we should totally expect. We are at civilizational dignity level ‘can only see things that have already happened,’ and the universe is trying to make the game winnable anyway. Which is very much appreciated, thanks universe.
Reaction at The Curve was universally positive as well. How One Other Person Responded To This Thoughtful EssayAI Czar
These claims by Sacks are even stronger claims of a type he has repeatedly made in the past, and which he must know, given his position, have no basis in reality. You embarrass and dishonor yourself, sir. The policy ask in the quoted essay was, for example, that we should have conversations and listen to people and hear their concerns. Sacks’s response was part of a deliberate ongoing strategy by Sacks to politicize a bipartisan issue, so that he can attempt to convince other factions within the Republican party and White House to support an insane policy of preventing any rules whatsoever applying to AI for any reason and ensuring that AI companies are not at all responsible for the risks or damages involved on any level, in sharp contrast to how we treat the humans it is going to attempt to replace. This is called regulatory arbitrage, the classic tech venture capitalist playbook. He’s also using the exact same playbook in crypto, in his capacity as crypto czar. Polls on these issues consistently show almost no partisan split. Many hard MAGA people are very worried about AI. No matter what anyone else might say, the David Sacks fever dream of a glorious fully unregulated AI playground called Earth is very much not the policy preference of most Republican voters, of many Republicans on the Hill, or of many others at the White House including Trump. Don’t let him, or attempts at negative polarization via conspiracy theory style accusations, fool you into thinking any differently. The idea that Anthropic is pursuing a regulatory capture strategy, in a way that goes directly against the AI Czar at the White House, let alone has a central role in such efforts, is utterly laughable. Given their beliefs, Anthropic has bent over backwards to insist on only narrowly targeted regulations, and mostly been deeply disappointing to those seeking to pass bills, especially at the state level. The idea that they are behind what he calls a ‘behind the state regulatory frenzy’ is patently absurd. Anthropic had nothing to do with the origin of these bills. When SB 1047 was the subject of a national debate, Anthropic demanded it be weakened quite a bit, and even then failed to so much as offer an endorsement.
In Bloomberg, Clark is quoted as finding Sacks’s response perplexing. This conciliatory response isn’t some new approach by Anthropic. Anthropic and Jack Clark have consistently taken exactly this line. As I put it when I wrote up my experiences at The Curve when the speech was given, I think at times Anthropic has failed to be on the ‘production possibilities frontier’ balancing ‘improve policy and epistemics’ with ‘don’t piss off the White House,’ in both directions, this was dumb and should be fixed going forward and that fact makes me sad, but yes their goal is to be conciliatory, to inform and work together, and they have only ever supported light touch regulations, targeting only the largest models and labs. The only state bill I remember Anthropic ever outright endorsing was SB 53 (they were persuaded to be mildly positive on SB 1047 in exchange for various changes, but conspicuously did not endorse). This was a bill so modest that David Sacks himself praised it last week as a good candidate for a legislative national framework. Anthropic did lobby actively against the proposed moratorium, as in doing a full preemption of all state bills without having a federal framework in place or even one proposed or outlined. I too strongly opposed that idea. Nor is there any kind of out of the ordinary ‘state regulatory frenzy.’ This is how our federalist system and method of making state laws works in response to the creation of a transformative new technology. The vast majority of proposed state bills would be opposed by Anthropic, if you bothered to ask them. Yes, that means you have to play whack-a-mole with a bunch of terrible bills, the same way Big Tech plays whack-a-mole with tons of non-AI regulatory bills introduced in various states every year, most of which would be unconstitutional, disastrous if implemented, or both. Some people do some very thankless jobs fighting that stuff off every session. As this week’s example of a no good, very bad state bill someone had to stop, Nor is anything related to any of this substantially ‘damaging the startup ecosystem,’ the boogeyman that is continuously pulled out. That’s not quite completely fabricated, certainly it is possible for a future accumulation of bills (almost certainly originating entirely outside the AI safety ecosystem and passing over Anthropic’s objections or ignorance) to have such an impact, but (not to relitigate old arguments) the related warnings about prominent bills have mostly been fabricated or hallucinated. It is common knowledge that Sacks’s statement is false on multiple levels at once. I cannot think of a way that he could fail to know it is factually untrue. I cannot even find it plausible that he could be merely ‘bullshitting.’ So needless to say, Sacks’s post made a lot of people very angry and was widely regarded as a bad move. Do not take the bait. Do not let this fool you. This is a16z and other tech business interests fearmongering and lying to you in an attempt to create false narratives and negative polarization, they stoke these flames on purpose, in order to push their agenda onto a variety of people who know better. Their worst fear on this is reasonable people working together. In any situation like this one, someone on all sides will decide to say something stupid, someone will get Big Mad, someone will make insane demands. Some actively want to turn this into another partisan fight. No matter who selfishly or foolishly takes the bait, on whatever side of the aisle, don’t let Sacks get away with turning a cooperative, bipartisan issue into a Hegelian dialectic. If you are mostly on the side of ‘AI is going to remain a normal technology’ or (less plausibly) ‘AI is going to be a transformational technology but in ways that we can muddle through as it happens with little systemic or existential risk involved’ then that same message goes out to you, even more so. Don’t take the bait, don’t echo people who take the bait and don’t take the bait of seeing people you disagree with take the bait, either. Don’t negatively polarize or essentially say ‘look what you made me do.’ Try to do what you think is best. Ask what would actually be helpful and have what outcome, and act accordingly, and try to work with the highly reasonable people and positive-sum cooperative people with whom you strongly disagree while you still have that opportunity, and in the hopes of keeping that opportunity alive for longer. We are massively underinvesting, on many levels including at the labs and also on the level of government, in safety related work and capacity, even if you discount the existential risks entirely. Factoring in those risks, the case is overwhelming. A Better Way To Disagree
It would not be helpful to rehash the various disagreements about the past or the implications of various tech developments again, I’ve said it all before so I will kindly not take that bait. What I will note about that section is that I don’t think his (a), (b) or (c) stories have much to do with most people’s reactions to David Sacks. Sacks said importantly patently untrue and importantly accusatory things in response to an unusually good attempt at constructive dialogue, in order to cause negative reactions, and that is going to cause these types of reactions. But the fact that these stories (without relitigating what actually happened at the time) are being told, in this spot, despite none of the events centrally involving or having much to do with Anthropic (it was a non-central participant at the Bletchley Park Summit, as were all the leading AI labs), does give insight into the story Sacks is telling, the mindset generating that story and why Sacks said what he said. Instead, the main focus should be on the part that is the most helpful.
Viewpoint diversity is a good thing up to a point, and it would certainly be good for many organizations to have more of it in many ways. I try to be intentional in including different viewpoints, often in ways that are unpleasant. The challenge hits harder for some than others - it is often the case that things can end up insular, but also many do seek out such other viewpoints and engage with them. I don’t think this should much challenge the technical work, although it impacts the choice of which technical work to do. You do have to keep an eye out for axes to grind, especially in the framing, but alas that is true of all papers and science these days. The epistemics of such groups for technical work, and their filtering of evidence, are (in my experience and opinion) typically imperfect but exceptional, far above the norm. I do think this is a valid challenge to things like timeline work or advocacy, and that the diversity would help in topic selection and in presenting better frames. But also, one must ask what range of diversity is reasonable or productive in such topics? What are the relevant inputs and experiences to the problems at hand? So going one at a time: How many of your employees have p(doom) < 10%? Frankly, <10% is an exceptionally low number here. I think this is a highly valid question to ask for, say, p(doom) < 50%, and certainly the organizations where everyone has 90%+ need a plan for exposure to viewpoint diversity. As in, I think it’s pretty patently absurd to expect it almost certain that, if we construct new minds generally more capable than ourselves, that this turns out well for the humans. Also, why would they want to work there, and even if they do, how are they going to do the technical work?
Why are most “AI timeline forecasters” funded by organizations such as OpenPhilanthrophy and not from a broader base of engineering and technical talent or people from different walks of life? There’s a weird conflation here between participants and funding sources, so it’s basically two questions. On the funding, it’s because (for a sufficiently broad definition of ‘such as’) no one else wants to fund such forecasts. It would be great to have other funders. In a sane world the United States government would have a forecasting department, and also be subsidizing various prediction markets, and would have been doing this for decades. Alas, rather than help them, we have instead cut the closest thing we had to that, the [Office of Net Assessment](https://substack.com/redirect/9b3ae6df-4f86-4a40-9d02-7c9635b6792a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)at DoD. That was a serious mistake.
Why do they have physicists build all the physics models? Asking people from ‘different walks of life’ to do timeline projections doesn’t seem informative? Giving such outsiders a shot actually been tried, with the various ‘superforecaster’ experiments in AI predictions, which I’ve analyzed extensively. For various reasons, including broken incentives, you end up with both timelines and risk levels that I think of as Obvious Nonsense, and we’ve actually spent a decent amount of time grappling with this failure. I do think it’s reasonable to factor this into one’s outlook. Indeed, I notice that if the counterfactual had happened, and superforecasters were saying p(doom) of 50% and 2031 timelines, we’d be shouting it from the rooftops and I would be a lot more confident things were indeed very bad. And that wouldn’t have shocked me on first principles, at all. So by Conservation of Expected Evidence, their failure to do this matters. I also do see engagement with various objections, especially built around various potential bottlenecks. We could certainly have more. @random_walker above is Arvind Narayanan, [who Open Philanthropy has funded for $863,143 to develop an AI R&D capabilities benchmark](https://substack.com/redirect/d10c4e71-768b-4f69-a5f3-aa0b638a4477?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Hard to not call that some engagement. I’ve quoted him, linked to him and discussed his blog posts many times, I have him on my Twitter AI list that I check every day, and am happy to engage.@sayashk is Sayash Kapoor. He was at The Curve and hosted a panel discussing disagreements about the next year of progress and debating how much AI can accelerate AI R&D with Daniel Kokotajlo, I was sad to miss it. [One of his papers appeared today in my feed](https://substack.com/redirect/db5a5efe-f76c-4b32-91c9-b0124465747e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)and will be covered next week so I can give it proper attention. I would be happy to engage more.To not hide the flip side, the remaining named person, @DrTechlash, Nirit Weiss-Blatt, PhD is not someone I feel can be usefully engaged, and often in the past has made what I consider deeply bad faith rhetorical moves and claims, and is on my ‘you can silently ignore, do not take the bait’ list. As the sign at the table says, change my mind. In general, if thoughtful people with different views want to engage, they’re very welcome at Lighthaven, I’m happy to engage with their essays and ideas or have discussions with them (public or private), and this is true for at least many of the ‘usual suspects.’ We could and should do more. More would be good.
I would urge these organizations: how often are you talking to people in the real world using, selling, adopting AI in their homes and organizations? I do think a lot of them engage with software engineers using AI, and themselves are software engineers using AI, but point applies more broadly. This highlights the difference in philosophies. Sriram sees how AI is being used today, by non-coders, as highly relevant to this work. In some cases, for some research and some interventions, this is absolutely the case, and those people should talk to users more than they do, perhaps a lot more. In other cases, we are talking about future AI capabilities and future uses or things that will happen, that aren’t happening yet. That doesn’t mean there is no one to talk to, probably yes there is underinvestment here, but there isn’t obviously that much to do there. I’d actually suggest more of them talk to the ‘LLM whisperers’ (as in Janus) for the most important form of viewpoint diversity on this, even though that is the opposite of what Sriram is presumably looking for. But then they are many of the most interesting users of current AI.
These are the some of the discussions we can should be having. This is The Way. He then goes on to draw a parallel to raising similar alarm bells about past technologies. I think this is a good choice of counterfactual to consider. Yes, very obviously these other interventions would have been terrible ideas.
Notice that there were approximately zero people who raised those objections or alarms. If someone had tried, and perhaps a few people did try, it was laughed off, and for good reason. Yet quite a lot of people raise those alarms about AI, including some who were worried about it as a future prospect long before it arrived - I was fretting this as a long term possibility back in the 2000s, despite putting a the time negligible concern in the next 10+ years. So as we like to ask, what makes this technology different from all other technologies? Sriram Krishnan and David Sacks want to mostly say: Nothing. It’s a normal technology, it plays by the normal rules, generating minds whose capabilities may soon exceed our own, and in many ways already do, and intentionally making them into agents is in the same general risk or technology category as Google search and we must fight for market share. I think that they are deeply and dangerously wrong about that.
Agreed. Many possible futures could occur. In many of those futures, highly capable future AI poses existential risks to humanity. That’s the whole point. China is a serious concern, however the more likely way we ‘lose the race’ is that those future AIs win it. Similarly, here’s another productive engagement with Sriram and his best points.
It seems obviously true that a sufficiently advanced AI is not safe to open source, the same way that sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic. The question is, at what level does this happen? And when are you sufficiently uncertain about whether you might be at that level that you need to start using prior restraint? Once you release the weights of an open model, you cannot take it back.
Sean points out: A lot of the reaction to Sacks was that Sacks was accusing Clark’s speech of being deliberate scaremongering and even a regulatory capture strategy, and everyone who was there or knows him knows this isn’t true. Yes. The fears of safety people are not that we ‘lost’ or are ‘out of power,’ that is projecting a political, power seeking frame where it doesn’t apply. What we are afraid of is that we are unsafely barreling ahead towards a precipice, and humanity is likely to all get killed or collectively disempowered as a consequence. Again, yes. If those fears are ill-founded, then great, let’s go capture some utility. Left vs. right is not a good framing here, indeed I would add that Sacks is deliberately trying to make this a left vs. right issue where it isn’t one, in a way that I find deeply destructive and irresponsible. The good faith disagreement is, as Sean identifies, the ‘normal technology’ view of Sriram, Narayanan and Kapoor, versus the ‘superintelligence is coming’ view of myself, the safety community and the major AI labs including OpenAI, Anthropic, DeepMind and xAI. If AI is indefinitely a ‘normal technology,’ and we can be confident it won’t be transformative within 10 years, then a focus on diffusion and adoption and capacity and great power competition makes sense. I would add that we should also be investing in alignment and safety and associated state capacity more than we are, even then, but as a supplement and not as a sacrifice or a ‘slowing down.’ Alignment and safety are capability, and trust is necessary for diffusion. Again, don’t take the bait and don’t fall for negative polarization. If you want to ensure we don’t invest in safety, alignment or reliability so you can own the libs, you have very much lost the plot. There is no conflict here, not on the margin. We can, as Sean puts it, prepare for the transformative World B without hurting ourselves substantially in the ‘normal technology’ World A if we work together. If AI has substantial chance of being transformative on roughly a 10 year time horizon, that there’s going to be a discontinuity, then we will indeed need to deal with actual tradeoffs. And the less we prepare for this now, the more expensive such responses will be, and the more expensive failure to respond will also be. I would add: Yes, when the time comes, we may need to take actions that come with substantial costs and opportunity costs, and slow things down. We will need to be ready, in large part to minimize those costs, so we can use scalpels instead of hammers, and take advantage of as many opportunities as we safety can, and in part so that if we actually do need to do it, we’re ready to do it. And yes, there have been organizations and groups and individuals that advocated and do advocate taking such painful actions now. But this discussion is not about that, and if you think Anthropic or Jack Clark have been supportive of those kinds of advocates, you aren’t paying attention. As I have argued extensively, not to relitigate the past, but absolutists who want no rules to apply to AI whatsoever, and indeed to have it benefit from regulatory arbitrage, have for a long time now fearmongered about the impact of modest proposed interventions that would have had no substantial impacts on the ‘normal technology’ World A or the ‘startup ecosystem’ or open source, using mostly bad faith arguments.
I mean, yes, in theory. I would love to bury the hatchet and enter a grand coalition. Anton is correct that both the tech right and the worried understand AI’s potential and the need for diffusion and overcoming barriers, and the dangers of bad regulations. There are lots of areas of strong agreement, where we can and sometimes do work together, and where populist pressures from both sides of the aisle threaten to do a lot of damage to America and American AI in exchange for little or no benefit. Indeed, we fine folk are so cooperative that we reliably cooperate on most diffusion efforts, on energy and transmission, on all the non-AI parts of the abundance agenda more broadly, and on helping America beat China (for real, not in the ‘Nvidia share price’ sense), and on ensuring AI isn’t crippled by dumb rules. We’re giving all of that for free, have confined ourselves to extremely modest asks carefully tailored to have essentially no downsides, and not only do we get nothing in return we still face these regular bad faith broadsides of vitriol designed to create group cohesion and induce negative polarization. The leaders of the tech right consistently tell us we are ‘doomers,’ ‘degrowthers,’ horrible people they hate with the fire of a thousand suns, and they seem ready to cut off their nose to spite our face. They constantly reiterate their airing of grievances over past battles, usually without any relevance to issues under discussion, but even if you think their telling is accurate (I don’t) and the actions in question were blameworthy, every cause worth discussing has those making extreme demands (who almost never are the people being attacked) and one cannot change the past. Is it possible that the tech right is the devil we know, and the populists that will presumably replace them eventually are worse, so we should want to prop up the tech right? Certainly the reverse argument is true, if you are tech right you’d much rather work with libertarian techno-optimists who deeply love America and AI and helping everyone benefit from AI (yes, really) than a bunch of left wing populists paranoid about phantom water usage or getting hysterical about child risks, combined with a right wing populist wing that fears AI on biblical levels. Worry less that we’d ‘form an alliance’ with such forces, and more that such forces render us irrelevant. What about preferring the tech right as the Worthy Opponent? I mean, possibly. The populists would be better in some ways, worse in others. Which ones matter more depends on complex questions. But even if you come down on the more positive side of this, that doesn’t work while they’re negatively polarized against us and scapegoating and fearmongering about us in bad faith all the time. Can’t do it. Terrible decision theory. Never works. I will not get up after getting punched and each time say ‘please, sir, may I have another?’ If there was a genuine olive branch on the table that offered a real compromise solution? I think you could get the bulk of the worried side to take it, with very little effort, if the bulk of the other side would do the same. The ones who wouldn’t play along would mostly be the ones who, frankly, shouldn’t play along, and should not ‘think on the margin,’ because they don’t think marginal changes and compromises give us much chance of not dying. The problem with a deal on preemption is fourfold. Are they going to offer substantive regulation in exchange? Really? Are they going to then enforce the regulations we get at the Federal level? Or will they be used primarily as leverage for power while everyone is waved on through? Why should we expect any deal we make to be honored? I’m only interested if I think they will honor the spirit of the deal, or nothing they offer can be worthwhile. The track record here, to put it mildly, is not encouraging. Are they going to stop with the bad faith broadside attacks and attempts to subjugate American policy to shareholder interests? Again, even if they say they will, why should we believe this? Evan a ‘fair’ deal isn’t actually going to be strong enough to do what we need to do, at best it can help lay a foundation for doing that later. And of course, bonus: Who even is ‘they’?
Voice Versus ExitIn general but not always, when a group is sufficiently bad, the correct move is exit.
I don’t fully agree, but I consider this a highly reasonable position. Here are some arguments we should view with extreme suspicion: ‘If I don’t do [bad thing] then someone else will do it instead, and they’ll be worse, and that worse person will be the one making the money.’ ‘I need to aid the people doing [bad thing] because otherwise they will do [bad thing] even worse, whereas if I am on the inside I can mitigate the damage and advocate for being less bad.’ ‘I need to aid the people doing [bad thing] but that are doing it in a way that is less bad, so that they are the ones who get to do [bad thing] first and thus it is less likely to be as bad.’ ‘I need to help the people doing [insanely risky thing that might kill everyone] in their risk mitigation department, so it will kill everyone marginally less often.’ ‘You should stop telling people to stop doing [bad thing] because this is not politically wise, and is hurting your cause and thus making [bad thing] worse.’ ‘I am capable of being part of group doing [bad thing] but I will retain my clear perspective and moral courage, and when the time comes do the right thing.’
Extreme suspicion does not mean these arguments should never carry the day, even when [bad thing] is extremely bad. It does mean the bar is very high.
The level of integrity required to know you would whistleblow in that spot is higher than it appears, because you will both face very large financial, social and other personal pressures, and also will have spent time inside the relevant culture. Saying in advance you would totally do it is not remotely similar to actually doing it, or otherwise taking a stand when it matters. My current position is: If you are in a non-safety position at any lab seeking superintelligence other than Anthropic, you should quit. If your job is safety or advocating for safety (including policy), and conditions are sufficiently favorable - they let you work on things that actually help in the long run and give you the resources to do so, you are free to speak your mind and expect them to meaningfully listen, you feel you have sufficient moral courage and robustness that you will demand things and quit and whistleblow if needed, and so on - I consider this defensible, but beware fooling yourself. If your job is something else at Anthropic, with similar caveats to the above I consider this defensible. If your job is doing alignment research at Anthropic, that seems fine to me.
The Dose Makes The Poison
On reflection this makes sense, because there is little or no ‘competition’ for what happens after <SUDO>, so all models have the same level of Bayesian evidence that after seeing that you’re supposed to now output random gibberish. Notice what happens to newer models when you mention Pliny’s name? This seems like quite bad news. You only have to sneak a limited number of documents through to poison a model, either yours or someone else’s, rather than needing a fixed percentage, so you have to increasingly play very reliable defense against this via scanning all training data. And we have evidence that the labs are not currently doing this filtering sufficiently to prevent this level of data poisoning.
Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
Anthropic did then declare in the Haiku 4.5 system card that they were avoiding doing this for the 4.5-level models. I would like to see a step further, and a pledge not to do this going forward by all the major labs. So OpenAI, Anthropic, Google and xAI, I call upon you to wisely declare that going forward you won’t train against Chain of Thought. Or explain why you refuse, and then we can all yell at you and treat you like you’re no better than OpenAI until you stop. At bare minimum, say this: “We do not currently train against Chain of Thought and have no plans to do so soon. If the other frontier AI labs commit to not training against Chain of Thought, we would also commit to not training against CoT.’
OpenAI’s He thinks mostly you don’t get fired or punished for caring about safety or alignment, but the way to get something done in the space (‘get a huge boost’) is to argue it will improve capabilities or avoid some kind of embarrassing safety failure in current models. The good news is that I think basically any alignment work worth doing should qualify under those clauses.
You Get What You Actually Trained ForTwo new papers illustrated this. The first is on training with realistic reward hacking.
The second paper is another classic ‘how to cause misalignment in humans’ example, which is competing for likes on social media, sales or trying to win elections.
(Obligatory: How dare you sir, trying to coin Moloch’s Bargain, that’s very obviously my job, see More seriously, yeah, obviously. Your system instruction saying not to do it is no match for my puny fine tuning. You’re fine tuning based on human feedback of what gets likes, closes sales or wins votes. You’re going to get more of whatever gets likes, closes sales or wins votes. We all know what, among other things, helps you do these things in the short run. Each of us has faced exactly these pressures, felt our brains being trained in this fashion, and had to resist it. If all that matters is winning, expect winning to be all that matters. The interesting question here is whether and to what extent and in what ways this causes Emergent Misalignment overall. Of course training it to increase sales is going to increase deceptive marketing, but does that AI then also just lie to you about other stuff too? I presume that it would, potentially a lot, because you’re reinforcing lying generally, and everything impacts everything. Could you do this training without invoking this effect? Yes, absolutely. The paper doesn’t try or discuss this that I can see, but if you care about two things, you could act like you care about both things, and create a ‘dual mandate’ situation. As in, you can both gather feedback on what worked and also evaluate whether posts are whatever you consider ethical or otherwise preferable, and then evaluate on both, and negatively reinforce unethical content quite a lot even if it works. Not so fast, you say, obviously this will ultimately, if you do enough of it, teach the model to do unethical things that evade the detector. That’s true, so you have to set things up so that you’re fine with this result in practice. In these cases, I think that should be fine for now given realistic detectors? It will become an increasingly severe problem as you scale up, and you definitely wouldn’t want to use this strategy on a superintelligence, but as long as you know that, we should be good. Messages From Janusworld
I think this neglects a lot of other ways one gets ‘good at AI,’ a lot of it is straight up technical, and as usual I warn that one can anthropomorphize too much as well, but yeah, basically. People Are Worried About AI Killing EveryoneStephen Witt, author of The Thinking Machine, writes a New York Times essay, ‘ The prompt in question involves the creation of a pandemic, and a lot of the focus is on jailbreaking techniques. He discusses pricing AI risks via insurance, especially for agentic systems. He discusses AI deception via results from Apollo Research, and the fact that AIs increasingly notice when they are being evaluated. He talks about METR and its famous capabilities graph. If you’re reading this, you don’t need to read the essay, as you already know all of it. It is instead a very good essay on many fronts for other people. In particular it seemed to be fully accurate, have its head on straight and cover a lot of ground for someone new to these questions. I’m very happy he convinced the New York Times to publish all of it. This could be an excellent place to point someone who is up for a longer read, and needs it to come from a certified serious source like NYT.
People ask me how I do it. And I say there’s nothing to it. You just stand there looking cute, The actual answer is, I do it by being a gamer, knowing everything can suddenly change and you can really and actually lose, for real. You make peace with the fact that you probably won’t win, but you define a different kind of winning as maximizing your chances, playing correctly, having the most dignity possible, tis a far, far better thing I do, and maybe you win for real, who knows. You play the best game you can, give yourself the best odds, focus on the moment and the decisions one at a time, joke and laugh about it because that helps you stay sane and thus win, hope for the best. And you use Jack Clark’s favorite strategy, which is to shut that world out for a while periodically. He goes and shoots pool. I (among several other things) watch College Gameday and get ready for some football, and write about housing and dating and repealing the Jones Act, and I eat exceptionally well on occasion, etc. Same idea. Also I occasionally give myself a moment to feel the divine terror and let it pass over me, and then it’s time to get back to work. Or something like that. It’s rough, and different for everyone.
The Lighter SidePeter Thiel has called a number of people the antichrist,
Yep. As always, both paths get easier, so which way, modern AI user?
There are so many more exhibits we need to add. Send her your suggestions.
You're currently a free subscriber to |