---
subject: "A Matter of Taste"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-12-18 17:42:48
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
In light of other recent discussions, He then got various reactions. This will now be one of them. My answer is that taste is all of these, depending on context. Taste is Most Centrally Like GrammarScott Alexander is very suspicious of taste in general, since people keep changing what is good taste and calling each other barbarians for taste reasons, and the experiments are unkind, and the actual arguments about taste look like power struggles. Here’s another attempt from Zac Hill, which in some ways gets closer.
If we are going with one answer from Scott’s list, it is obviously grammar. The real answer is it is all of them at different times and places. He points to one key aspect of grammar, which is that you can have different internally consistent grammars, and they are all valid in their own way, but within each you need to follow their logic and spirit, and there is better and worse Quality. Languages also work this way overall. Or cuisines. So do artistic styles. So does taste. You can ‘have taste’ or ‘not have taste’ within any type of taste, in addition to having the taste to prefer the right kinds of taste, by being able to properly sort things by Quality, and create and engineer high Quality yourself, and have the preference and appreciation for and ability to notice high Quality. Sometimes ‘Taste’ Is Out to Get YouSometimes, yes, taste is rotating in the sense of fashion, where everyone is trying to stay one step ahead in the status game, but also there is a skill of doing that while also ‘having taste’ both in general and within each context, which is also being tested. Also, yes, as we saw in And all of this is being combined, in places like the AI Art Test, with other preferences that are not about taste. And sometimes people are trying to apply the wrong kind of ‘good taste’ test to something in a different grammar, or saying that taste should apply on the meta level between the grammars. You Are Low Quality and You Have No TasteThus, ‘having no taste’ can mean any combination of these (with some overlap): Too little ability to distinguish, in a context, what is good versus bad taste. Choosing taste preferences that are, at a meta level, considered bad taste. Choosing types of things where Quality and taste have relatively low impact. Failing to appreciate and take joy in good taste and high Quality. Caring more about non-Quality aspects, thus often choosing low Q over high Q. Caring about things ‘people with good taste’ think you shouldn’t care about. Not playing along with today’s status game or power trip. Failing to appreciate complex historical context that explains why a particular thing has been done before and is therefore bad, or is commenting on something else and therefore good, or other such things (see the Lantz discussion later).
Within a given grammar and context, I will stand up for taste Platonism and physics. I believe that, for all practical purposes, yes, there is a right answer to the Quality level of a given work, to whether liking it reflects good taste. That doesn’t mean you have to then care about it in every instance. You certainly get to rank things for other reasons too. My Letterboxd ratings (from 0.5-5 stars) are meant to largely reflect this Platonic form of Quality. And sometimes I think ‘oh this is going to be a 2-3 star movie’ and decide that’s what I want to watch today, anyway. When I differ from the critics, both high and low, it’s generally because of aspects they think you’re ‘not supposed to’ care about, that are ‘outside of taste’ to them and that they think shouldn’t matter if you’re in good enough taste, but that I think should count, and matter for Quality. Don’t Be a SnobI think you greatly benefit from good taste if and only if you are not a snob about it. As in, you can develop the ability to appreciate what is good, without having disdain for things that are bad. Ebert can appreciate and understand both the great movie and the popcorn flick, so his taste means he wins. But if it meant he turned up his nose at the popcorn flicks, now it’s not clear, and maybe he loses. Ideally, one has the ability to appreciate all the subtle things that make things in good taste, without recoiling in horror when someone has a bad color scheme or what not. Never, ever tell anyone to In They site C.S. Lewis and endorse my #4 in what bad taste primarily is - that good taste is the ability to experience the sublime in things. To which I say: You can have this, while still appreciating low Quality things too. Also often the failure to experience the sublime in things that people traditionally think are in bad taste, and of low quality, is a Skill Issue. In particular, I think one skill I have is the ability to experience the sublime and aesthetic pleasure when consuming media that, objectively, is low Quality and in bad taste, that ‘objectively’ sucks, by isolating the elements that have it from the parts that suck, despite noticing the parts that suck. When done properly, that makes it better, not worse.
Good as in UsefulI also think that SO hints at the distinction between ‘good taste’ and ‘good.’
Which is why they weren’t saying the picture is good as in ‘in good taste.’ They are saying it is ‘good’ as in ‘fun’ or as in ‘is useful.’ Are they having a ‘direct aesthetic experience’ of its details? Not in the sense SO is thinking, presumably, but they are having a conceptual experience, and they are using it as a tool that serves a purpose. Several stars. What is going on with AI art? It’s not good as in taste. But it’s good as in pretty. And for a lot of people, that’s what they want. This is also my response to S
So I would say, you can say that you got great aesthetic pleasure from Dostoyevsky’s prose, or you appreciated his deep understanding of character, or other neat things like that. If you say those things about Rowling then I’m going to laugh. But Rowling still spun a good yarn (over and over again) in more basic ways, there is a lot more demand for that product than there is for Dostoyevsky’s product, and there’s no reason you can’t love Harry Potter or let it change your life. It’s fine. There are things there worth finding. Critic Tells Me I Have No Taste
While I stand by my statements there, and I still wouldn’t set foot in the MoMa, and you can see above what I think about modern architecture regarding Lantz’s most important contribution to this discussion, as I see it, is to point out that art and taste are largely in response to the desire to avoid the boring and predictable and what has already been done while also matching expectations, and that a lot of artistic choices and good taste emerge from the detailed context of what had existed before and also what came after. And I think all of that really is legitimate, and investing in understanding that context can pay off, and that earlier works very much are enriched and ‘get a free pass’ in various ways by the fact that they came earlier, and they were original and innovative at the time, and in what they then led to, and so on. There’s an elegant, important dance going on there. Sometimes. Stand Up For What You Believe InOther times, taste is functionally being fashion, or it is being a priesthood, and for Modern Art I strongly suspect it’s best classified (in Scott’s taxonomy) as bizarre porn, except in a bad way and as buildings displayed on the street. I’m going to double down that most - not all, but most - of all this modern ‘conceptual art’ is rather bogus and masterbatory, and mostly a scam or a status game or at best some kind of weird in-group abstract zero-sum contest of one-upmanship, at worst a ‘speculative market in tax-avoidant ultra-luxury hyper-objects, obscene wealth and abject, hipster coolness,’ and also a giant f*** you to humanity, and I want it kept locked behind the doors of places like MoMa so I can choose to not set foot in there. I’m definitely doubling down on Modern Architecture. I’m not bad at aesthetics, you’re bad at aesthetics, in that you stopped believing in them at all, and tried to darvo and gaslight the rest of us into thinking it was our fault. Or, I’m not the one who doesn’t care about aesthetics, you’re the one who doesn’t care about aesthetics, and you’re gaslighting the rest of us. You’re pretending to do grammar when you’re obviously doing something else. I’m not skeptical of art. I’m skeptical of your particular art, which happens to be the dominant thing called ‘Art’ in some circles. Whereas the people I think of as ‘artists’ today that I admire tend to work with video, or audio, or games, or text, or make visual art within one of those contexts that the capital-A Art World would scoff at. (Yes, the And in other places, like the stuff Sarah Constantin is describing in Being Technically In Good Taste Is Not a Free PassI also think there’s an implicit claim that if you are in good enough taste, enough ‘part of a project,’ then you don’t have to be accessible, you don’t have to stand outside the ‘project,’ and you don’t have to have aesthetic or other value absent your place in that project. I think that’s very wrong. Doing all of that is also part of your job as an artist and creator. You can sacrifice it in some situations, and certainly you shouldn’t always be able to come in ‘in the middle’ of everything, but this very much counts against you, and reduces not only the reach of the work but also its value even to those who can handle it, because you’re operating without key constraints and that too is important context - you now owe us a worthwhile payoff. As a writer, I have to continuously strike the balance of accessibility versus repetition, of knowing people don’t read these posts in any particular order. I make trade-offs that I’m learning to improve over time, and everyone else has to make them as well. It Is Good To Like and Appreciate ThingsThis concept seems important:
Weird to say ‘catch yourself’ as if it’s something to avoid or be ashamed about. I attempt to like things all the time. Ceteris paribus, I would prefer to like as many things (and people!) as possible, while keeping them in proper rank order. Find the good in it. But you don’t want to engage in preference falsification. You don’t want to pretend, especially to yourself, to like things you don’t like or especially things you despise, because you’re ‘supposed’ to like them, or it would benefit you to like them.
In turn, I love Lantz’s attitude here that he finds this exciting, and it’s a lot of why I’m giving him so much consideration. I presume this post should provide a lot of information on how one might go about convincing Zvi to change his mind on this, and what exactly it is that you might want to change my mind about? Convince me, essentially, that there is a worthwhile and Platonic there there. If Lantz wants to take a crack at convincing me, maybe even in person in NYC (and potentially even literally at MoMa), I’d be down, on the theory that given story value it’s hard for that to be an unsuccessful failure. You're currently a free subscriber to |