---
subject: "AI Turns UGC into a PVP Zone"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <byrne@thediff.co>"
to: ""
date: 2023-07-03 13:21:39
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
|
In this issue: - AI Turns UGC into a PVP Zone
- Goldman
- ETFs
- Dispersion
- Softbank
- Contrarianism
- Diff Jobs
AI Turns UGC into a PVP ZoneOver the weekend, Twitter started severely rate-limiting tweet consumption. Leaving aside To borrow an analogy from gaming: running a user-generated content site used to be a player-versus-environment area, where the threats were external and low agency—trolls, spammers, garbage content. But now it's a player-versus-player zone, where the threat is some specific agent with a definite plan to wreck one business model and replace it with another. PVP zones can be unpleasant, with lots of annoying sneak attacks and dubious strategies. But they're more interesting, because there's a thinking agent on the other side. Training large language models was viable in part because there was so much human-generated, machine-readable text out there, available to anyone who could crawl a webpage. And it appears that one consequence of the growth of these models is that we'll reach Peak Freely-Available Purely-Human Content, as two forces collide: - Certain kinds of human-generated text might as well exist in the latent space accessible to a model rather than as the output of a person. Many Stack Overflow-style questions can be trivially answered by ChatGPT (more on this fact, metrics behind it, and its consequences in a future post!), though the best explanations are still from human beings. If more queries get sent to a language model rather than to a Q&A site, the growth of long-tail user-generated content stalls.
- The existence of AI models means that openness is a bigger liability for user-generated content companies. The existence of a successful company in some category indicates demand for the content, so these are the easiest business models to drop into AI. "Quora, but there's no cold-start problem because our LLM can offer an instant answer" is one of dozens of narrow-but-accurate ways to describe ChatGPT as a very valuable product.
That's unfortunate. It's easy to over-extrapolate, though: the companies most affected by AI have to think about defense as well as offense. Defense means reducing the rate at which AI-based competitors can render them obsolete, or at least getting well-paid to watch it happen. For services like Reddit and Twitter, it's a particularly tricky situation. Their big asset is their community, but a fair amount of the monetization of that asset comes from people with no investment in the community but who are willing to tolerate ads in exchange for the information they want. So the grand bargain for such a site looks like this: - It's a money-losing proposition to build it entirely on behalf of its audience. If we use the standard rule of thumb that ~1% of people create content and only ~10% will upvote/downvote/share content, while the rest are completely passive consumers, then a site whose audience is only the active users has given up 90% of its pageviews. (And, it's likely that these sorts of power users are disproportionately likely to use ad blockers.)
- Ads slightly annoy everyone, but they're a bit less annoying to drive-by visitors who just want to get a specific answer. So these users end up subsidizing the operating costs of a community website, while the community's content creates the demand for traffic.
You can't replace the Twitter experience of an active Twitter user with bots (at least until someone turns " One vision of the future is that the Internet separates into two different spheres: most of the content is custom-generated for individual consumers, tightly tailored to their needs, continuously updated based on their feedback, and utterly disposable. And then there are niches where human-to-human conversations still happen, and where the content is, in fact, original. AI models can produce content arbitrarily close to what a given user is looking for, while real humans are often less cooperative. Another vision is that there's a hybrid model, where companies embrace the fact that human-generated content a) has less scarcity value in a world where things that look like the output of hours of work from talented people can be produced in seconds Any business that can be characterized as AI-food can also be characterized as an AI-ranch-in-the-making. The human input is still required, but it's capex rather than opex or COGS. And that changes the equation a bit: if the content your site encourages is meant to be an asset that makes AI tools built off of it more valuable, then the counterpoint to endless seas of AI-generated fake content is a higher premium for the best real content. Disclosure: Long MSFT. This is a perfectly reasonable approach for many kinds of companies. Horse-based transportation was net benefited by the rise of trains, even though trains were more efficient for long-distance transportation, because trains also created much more demand for last-mile delivery. As long as the companies in question were aware of this, they had time to transition to a model that was more suited to a newer technological paradigm and that benefited from their existing network effects. This is not a hypothetical example; two $100bn+ companies, American Express and Wells Fargo, started out in the business of moving high-value goods by horse. [↩︎](#fnref1)This is one reason empty storefronts are associated with the cheapest and most expensive commercial real estate. There's a lot of uncertainty about how Fifth Avenue's foot traffic and social cachet will change over time—what if all the rich people stay in Miami!?—and in a poorer neighborhood, there's also uncertainty about whether things will bounce back or not. High occupancy makes the most sense in a stable place, where few stores are going under and new entrants are rare enough that landlords can't raise rents in the hope that they'll appear. [↩︎](#fnref2)People in Q&A communities really, really dislike it when a new user shows up just to copy-paste their homework assignment. [↩︎](#fnref3)One of my system idle processes is coming up with lyrics to parody song concepts, like "Isn't it Pythonic?" or something. These random ideas used to end up consuming lots of time, but now ChatGPT can scratch the itch trivially. ChatGPT's lyrics aren't good, exactly, but they're good enough—a parody song is the "smart beta" of the media world, with levered exposure to the "familiar" and "novel" factors, producing a higher risk-adjusted outcome with minimal effort [↩︎](#fnref4)
A Word From Our SponsorsThis issue of The Diff is sponsored by—The Diff! We're excited to announce the launch of DiffGPT, a service paying subscribers can use to search through the back catalog. A very common question from subscribers is something like "Hey, did you write a piece a few years ago about X?" and sometimes the answer was "I definitely did and I can't find it, either." We're excited to roll out new tools that make it easier to interact with our content. (And if you think something like this would be useful for your business, whether as a feature for a content play or just a way to make internal documentation easier to access, just hit reply and we'll chat.) ElsewhereGoldmanGoldman Sachs is ETFs
DispersionSnippet Finance SoftbankWhenever there's a big rise in interest in some industry, a common practice is to look at who was excited about it early and how much they benefited from being ahead of the curve. Softbank ContrarianismJeff Blau of the Related Group is Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. A sampling of current open roles: - A startup building a new financial market within a multi-trillion dollar asset class is looking for generalists with banking and legal experience. (US, Remote)
- A company building zero-knowledge proof-based tools to enable novel financial arrangements is looking for a senior engineer with a research bent. Ideal experience includes demonstrations of extraordinary coding and/or math ability. (NYC or San Diego preferred, remote also a possibility.)
- A new AI company is looking for senior engineers with experience building scalable systems with Node and Typescript on AWS. Management experience is a plus. (SF)
- A proprietary trading firm is seeking systematic-oriented traders with ML experience—ideally someone who has displayed excellence in DS and ML, like a Kaggle Master. (Montreal)
- A crypto proprietary trading firm is actively seeking systematic-oriented traders with crypto experience—ideally someone with experience across a variety of exchanges and tokens. (Remote)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. |
||
|
|
|
|||
|