---
subject: "iPhone 15 launch date 📱, jailbreaking Teslas 🚗, Raspberry Pi shortage solved 📈"
from: "TLDR <dan@tldrnewsletter.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-08-04 10:17:30
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "TLDR"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_795315172960844453"]
---
[Apple prepping for iPhone 15 Pro event potentially scheduled for September 13 (2 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2F9to5mac.com%2F2023%2F08%2F03%2Fsources-iphone-15-event-september%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000189c00d63aa-65dad07c-57cb-42b5-962a-c8fd14bb03d0-000000/zK94Ee8VmEiINpcZRHkKW0vEqw1fLtidJSrTICM8t40=312)
Apple plans to announce its iPhone 15 lineup in the third week of September. Mobile carriers have been asking employees not to take the 15th of September off due to a major smartphone announcement. If Apple announces the new lineup on September 13, pre-orders will likely begin on September 15, and the official launch will take place on September 22. iPhone sales have been delayed in the past due to supply issues which may happen again this year. |
[Elon Musk’s plan to own the meme (stocks) (4 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.semafor.com%2Farticle%2F08%2F03%2F2023%2Felon-musks-plan-to-own-the-meme-stocks%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000189c00d63aa-65dad07c-57cb-42b5-962a-c8fd14bb03d0-000000/0bnqkcmUJOX4Z7N_nMLO9qi8JcgGO98gE3fOmV9Z17Y=312)
X is looking to build a trading hub inside its app. The company sent a request for plans to large data providers in recent weeks seeking proposals for financial content, real-time stock data, and other features. X is offering data companies the ability to reach hundreds of millions of highly-qualified users. The offer did not mention compensation. X's request asked companies to send in bids, but is unclear if any firms replied. |
Science & Futuristic Technology |
[Scientists in Japan Develop Experimental Alzheimer's Vaccine That Shows Promise in Mice (3 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fgizmodo.com%2Fjapan-experimental-alzheimers-vaccine-is-promising-1850700985%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000189c00d63aa-65dad07c-57cb-42b5-962a-c8fd14bb03d0-000000/9tUpxHWZYzLZkKOx3sWEGnjh5Cky9c4RjI42WUzUvek=312)
Scientists in Japan have developed a vaccine that can delay the progression of Alzheimer's disease. It appears to reduce inflammation and improve other important biomarkers in the brains of mice with Alzheimer's-like illness. The vaccine is supposed to work by training the immune system to go after senescent cells that produce high levels of a particular protein. Its effectiveness has yet to be formally peer-reviewed and there are still many steps to take before the team even begins thinking about large-scale human trials. |
[LK-99 Is the Superconductor of the Summer (5 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.nytimes.com%2F2023%2F08%2F03%2Fscience%2Flk-99-superconductor-ambient.html%3Funlocked_article_code=CTdKxDBuq6kEimW9V4bT7GMl6VyBNjdtJQP8U_okg82y-oQb1vMh5PACQVm4YrwPNFJjf9uo28U44rlYDk5--Z4vjmms31cyHUcOOJ-ksFGi-7Pc0aqhup-XfbsCU2wff1qhnVndl9LsKxioJmqloSjNQXBaT2-rnnbpy7KCXc-sh56H4Sci_QGaGvETdWBupFpRkxvyOk66c4Qq7goKedkUA_PYIeeWHWNAmxjHqywJEc3D_LWES6IJ_tmGHTpl2RuAaDg5Q7Y3_OBWOPRbimK6t50j_APClPsTb5D-h8g0SktkOl3TkeWszJy9vFoXDNrCw8NyHoiWS7e6iKPlkpJoCA%26smid=url-share/1/01000189c00d63aa-65dad07c-57cb-42b5-962a-c8fd14bb03d0-000000/ETa0Vau6v5UKDaYlWl5QF0EOx_tfsqXXuawQs8SMawg=312)
LK-99 is a new material that is said to be a superconductor at room temperature and ambient pressure. A recent post on X from a researcher at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in California shows a small piece of the material levitating over a magnet. Some have said this is proof of the superconductivity claims. Others are still skeptical and are waiting for LK-99's properties to be evaluated by more researchers. |
Programming, Design & Data Science |
[Hydra (GitHub Repo)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fhydradatabase%2Fhydra%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000189c00d63aa-65dad07c-57cb-42b5-962a-c8fd14bb03d0-000000/tcZWCj0fhvfMOPlFkBwo7Xql49vYXr319A_LKX2pErQ=312)
Hydra is a column-oriented Postgres that can query billions of rows instantly on Postgres without code changes. It uses columnar storage, query parallelization, vectorized execution, column-level caching, and a tuned Postgres to achieve parallelized analytics in minutes. Hydra is meant for aggregates, WHERE clauses, and bulk inserts and not frequent large updates or small transactions. It doesn’t support logical replication. |
[Introducing code referencing for GitHub Copilot (6 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fgithub.blog%2F2023-08-03-introducing-code-referencing-for-github-copilot%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000189c00d63aa-65dad07c-57cb-42b5-962a-c8fd14bb03d0-000000/Sx2olJIbF4vCJIR7aQNmQKc-COhuBPB3kgeXLdefGLE=312)
GitHub has announced a private beta of GitHub Copilot with a new code referencing feature that shows a list of repositories for source code whenever it makes a suggestion based on public code. The feature will allow developers to learn from others' work or use a dependency rather than introduce new app logic. It will also allow developers to more easily give and receive credit for their work. An overview of how GitHub Copilot code referencing works is available in the article. |
[Raspberry Pi availability is visibly improving after years of shortages (2 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Farstechnica.com%2Fgadgets%2F2023%2F08%2Fsome-shops-will-let-you-buy-more-than-one-raspberry-pi-at-a-time-again%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000189c00d63aa-65dad07c-57cb-42b5-962a-c8fd14bb03d0-000000/6ts7f4y0D1KDRnp63nk6Yb6KyISJMVraXSlDu7a_m-E=312)
The Raspberry Pi supply has been hit with shortages for years. Manufacturing numbers have now climbed from 400,000 monthly units to 1 million. Raspberry Pi’s CEO Eben Upton says that this level of production can be sustained as long as necessary to clear the company’s customer backlogs and return to free availability. Some suppliers have already removed purchasing restrictions. Upton has previously implied that the company is putting off Raspberry Pi 5 development to allow stock of current models to return to normal. |
[Google’s Plan To DRM The Web Goes Against Everything Google Once Stood For (15 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.techdirt.com%2F2023%2F08%2F02%2Fgoogles-plan-to-drm-the-web-goes-against-everything-google-once-stood-for%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000189c00d63aa-65dad07c-57cb-42b5-962a-c8fd14bb03d0-000000/koWXg1asPS8DyKiUmslUUNPgOVqKxHInQOZqT3U-Uuk=312)
Rather than creating new and useful things, older companies tend to become less innovative and start litigating. This tactic allows them to extract more value while simultaneously suppressing new competitors. Google has clearly reached that stage in some aspects of its business. It is meddling with the Web Environment Integrity system by allowing websites to determine which browsers to serve. This move will ultimately enable Google to effectively block ad-blocking while also eroding the principles of the open web, which Google used to be at the forefront of fighting for. |
[Want to join the TLDR team full time?](mailto:jobs@tldr.tech)
Hey everyone, TLDR is looking for a resourceful, tech-savvy senior sponsorship sales director to join our fully remote team of six and work with our head of sales Danny Miller (who previously started the ads business at StackOverflow) to lead the next phase of our revenue growth.We are growing at a rate of 10% month over month and we're looking for someone who is highly entrepreneurial and thrives in a fast-paced environment. Total compensation including commission will be between $150,000 - $200,000. If you know someone who would be a good fit, please refer them to us and we will send you $1000 if we hire them. To apply, please send your resume or LinkedIn profile to [jobs@tldr.tech](mailto:jobs@tldr.tech) along with a few sentences on why you would be a good fit. |
[Zep (GitHub Repo)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fgetzep%2Fzep%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000189c00d63aa-65dad07c-57cb-42b5-962a-c8fd14bb03d0-000000/7LJKPeVJN1vw89XCqjbAAYPw3YnL0qB0rPe7ErDSqJk=312)
Zep makes it easy to add documents, chat history, and rich user data to large language model prompts. |
[TLDR Talent](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fdanni763618.typeform.com%2Fto%2FrSL4lOH3/1/01000189c00d63aa-65dad07c-57cb-42b5-962a-c8fd14bb03d0-000000/BQDOZzKwj__VTeAm0I-Z15p2G5irdnVP3dqfBnsM5tU=312) is our exclusive community where we help world-class tech talent and get intros to companies of their choice, along with a number of exciting startups and tech companies curated by TLDR.
We give you full control of the process, you can specify if you’re actively searching or passively interested only if something amazing comes along. Set your preferred compensation, seniority/title/role, specific companies (or types of companies) you’d like to work for and more. [Click here to apply](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fdanni763618.typeform.com%2Fto%2FrSL4lOH3/2/01000189c00d63aa-65dad07c-57cb-42b5-962a-c8fd14bb03d0-000000/M8ieNTrNMFkY8hnNS6vcRpUpxe_QoPWrn0GofcjGeAw=312). |
If your company is interested in reaching an audience of tech executives, decision-makers and engineers, you may want to [advertise with us](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fshare.hsforms.com%2F1OxvmrkcFS4qsxKpNXCi76wee466%3Futm_source=tldr%26utm_medium=newsletter/2/01000189c00d63aa-65dad07c-57cb-42b5-962a-c8fd14bb03d0-000000/MOcZ6cyvItnZMJ-qcn4wUw8zL07mNkb1mrmK6Id8a4o=312).
If you have any comments or feedback, just respond to this email!
Thanks for reading,
[Dan Ni](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2Ftldrdan/1/01000189c00d63aa-65dad07c-57cb-42b5-962a-c8fd14bb03d0-000000/G82whKl-_wtwXOdwZgtVVqmxxoClMmSrvThd6SbE7o0=312) and [Stephen Flanders](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2FSteveFlanders22/1/01000189c00d63aa-65dad07c-57cb-42b5-962a-c8fd14bb03d0-000000/pv8hBnH0t_BFdjZliB4J9tXEXkA1uJQM7KP37lbSNL0=312)
|
|
| |