---
subject: "Childhood and Education #16: Letting Kids Be Kids"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-12-26 13:40:42
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
A third of people, both parents and non-parents, responded in a survey that it is not appropriate to leave a 13 year old at home for an hour or two, as opposed to when we [used to be 11 year olds babysitting for other neighborhood kids](https://substack.com/redirect/c289df81-994a-49cf-8b9f-cdf9b674e7b6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).A third of people said in that same survey that if a 10-year-old is allowed to play alone in the park, there needs to be an investigation by CPS.
Whereas I think that if you don’t allow your 10-year-old to play alone in a park, that is a much better (although still quite bad) potential reason for a CPS investigation. This is not an idle threat, per the common statistic that As Kelsey Piper says, we don’t want a lot of 14-year-olds being breadwinners for their families. But this is so bad in the other direction it might be even worse than that, even discounting the kids that this causes to never be born at all. Kids need to be kids. We don’t let them. It’s a big problem, both greatly raising the dollar, time and lifestyle costs of having kids and also destroying their childhoods. This post is about various ways of seeing exactly how bad things have gotten. We Don’t Let Kids Be KidsSome dire statistics from the Harris poll.
Have not walked in a different aisle in a store or never talked to a stranger or even a neighbor is positively bonkers, as is ‘have not walked somewhere without an adult.’ Let Your Children PlayWhy are kids on their phones and tablets all the time? How could we stop this? Easy, you let them have unstructured playtime, that’s it, that’s how you do it. All you have to do is let them. They want unstructured free play time without adults. They know this is The Way. It’s free, it’s easy, it’s deeply safe, it’s good for them, they enjoy it, we’re just completely bonkers and have decided this is not allowed, somehow.
The Algorithm of FearThis problem mostly isn’t dastardly addictive algorithms.
What do kids want? The ability to move around. Free play, in person, with other kids. As I keep saying, essentially everyone sane realizes this. The Only Thing We Have To Fear Is Fear ItselfBut everyone is terrified, not without reason, that if you try this strangers will call the police on your children. So out of fear that some stranger might abduct your children, which is ~0% to ever happen and less likely than ever for any given activity, strangers will… abduct your children via calling the government to do it. They will do this on the thinnest of hair triggers. ‘Grocery aisle’ above was not a metaphor, we mean literally not allowed to go down a grocery aisle.
I think we have a new crazy requirement record.
Here’s another case:
This ‘people will tell you acting like a normal person is criminal’ pattern is deep and wide, and it only takes one person to call the police. It could get worse:
No Means NoA twelve year old is paranoid that if they go into the donut shop they’ll get questioned about why they’re alone. A thirteen year old is not allowed to be alone in a public park. A seventeen year old is not allowed to go to Target. An 8th grader is forced into indentured servitude (they call it) ‘volunteer hours for career path class’) but no one will agree to let him serve them.
Child Abduction Is Either Custody Disputes Or Government InterventionWhat are the odds on child abduction by a stranger who isn’t with the government and isn’t involved in a custody dispute?
Let that number sink in. That’s it. We ruin our lives over that. If you left your child unattended, the original claim is that Almost all missing children ran away or were taken by people you know, or by authorities, or simply temporarily got lost. However, the main concern was never strangers kidnapping the child directly, it was strangers observing the child and then calling authorities to do the kidnapping:
Who should you be worried will report on you, in general? Random strangers will definitely do it if you appear to leave children unsupervised. Even if the law explicitly says the kids are allowed to be unsupervised, crazy people will report them anyway. Otherwise it’s mostly professionals, and risk goes way down after the first year, although it remains high.
For practical purposes, it is correct to act as if ~100% of the risk from strangers is that they call upon the authorities to punish you, and ~0% of it is them harming the child. Stranger Danger DangerThe craziest part about ‘stranger danger’ not existing is the lack of joy about this fact, and the craziest part about ‘you have to have eyes on your toddler at literal all times or else’ is that people thought that made the slightest bit of physical sense. Yet here we are.
It was great news to me. I very much like the fact that no one is trying to kidnap my children. Or at least, no one except CPS, which may try to do this if I take ‘no one is trying to kidnap my kids’ too seriously and give them sensible levels of freedom.
The Before TimesIt is hard to overstate how harmful it is that we therefore cannot let kids roam free until long past the age it makes sense to allow this. It impoverishes childhood, is terrible for the kids long term and it imposes immense costs on parents.
I don’t know that we would have been able to have more children if the de facto laws around all this were less insane, but there’s a pretty good chance of it. Could It Be… Murder?
In this particular case, there were various reasons that this was a lot less outrageous than it sounds. The road they were jaywalking was four lanes, two ways at 50 miles an hour. There had been numerous incidents at the house with drugs and domestic abuse prior to this. Presumably the DA was dropping the hammer on things in general. I get all that. This is still completely bonkers insane. The Long Road Home
Either Bored Or Happy
All Eyes on MeYou can’t let kids be kids primarily for fear others will see them being kids, and this also applies to other interactions others might witness. This is a relatively harmless situation, and yet, man, very awkward.
Ideally, if people are well calibrated and enforcing good norms, this dynamic is actively helpful. Other adults and the desire to avoid minor social awkwardness or worse acts to nudge you towards better choices. In an atomized world where people’s instincts are often some combination of crazy and superficial, and where remarkably often they feel this obligates or allows them to escalate to the authorities, this ends up not going so well. Screens From The PastBryan Caplan points out that if you think modern smartphones how we use them are especially terrible for children, He’s right. It’s crazy to give up the power of the screen entirely, the cost of doing that is crazy stupid high. It’s especially stupid high given you’ve lost the old ability to let your children play outside. Inside? The old world can still exist, if you want it to. The VCR trick presumably works for a two year old, since they don’t know any better. Bryan downplays the difficulty of the kids finding out about phones and tablets and streaming television and so on, since in addition to other families and kids they’re going to see you using them. You can still set whatever restrictions you want. And I do. However modern experiences very quickly spoil older experiences, and avoiding contact becomes very difficult. No, you can’t really expect kids to watch a bunch of old VCR tapes with old cartoons on them, and my attempts to get my kids to watch most of the ‘shows of my youth’ that I remembered fondly did not work at all. You often can’t go home again. In other ways? You can go home again. I’ve had great success giving my kids a Mini-NES and mini-SNES, and having them largely play older video games, and I think that was a big win. You need to take a page from the Amish, and choose what to accept versus reject. Also, um, Bryan, you do know what the song ‘do the time warp again’ was about? MedicalizationOur approach to childhood is to imprison kids most of their waking hours, both at school and then at home, direct most of their activities or else in ways that look and are largely stupid and pointless, force them to interact with a peer group that includes various forms of bullying with no form of exit or choice, and so on, giving them little free time or opportunity to play outside or anything like that. Then, if they are not happy, they are basically told to suck it up, unless they can be labeled as ‘depressed.’ And then we go around periodically asking them ‘are you depressed?’ If they say yes, of course, you don’t change any of the above. You drug the kid.
Under current conditions, I too predict that this policy is disastrous and will do large net harm. Our mental health screening system has too many false positives even if you first need to have a reasonable suspicion before checking. Television
I think very clearly no, for three reasons. Phones are carried around in your pocket, a constant distraction and temptation even when you are not using them. This is a big difference. The new short form content seems clearly way worse. Imagine children switching from watching old television shows to YouTube Kids or Shorts on that same TV. Television was a correct moral panic, and letting kids watch tons of TV sucked.
Suspiciously Large Effect Size
That is an insane effect size. The part about the extension is almost certainly wrong, because college performance is largely signaling and a positional good, so you can’t predict what a universal boost in performance would do to initial wages, probably very little even if it raised real human capital levels, also the ban seems hard to enforce. They use a natural experiment identifier from the timing of a blockbuster release to try and isolate changes in app use, which is intriguing. My presumption is that they did something wrong somewhere to get an effect this large, but we’ve seen a lot of studies with absurdly low impacts from phone distractions and wasted time, so we should also note when the number comes out too large. If you check everyone, given the likely way they’ll react to false positives? Oh no. You're currently a free subscriber to |