---
subject: "The Life (and Death) of Marat"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-02-15 12:00:33
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
We’re turning our attention to the art and material culture of French Revolution for the next few weeks. First up — a very famous painting of a poorly understood man! Let’s get the part you know out of the way. John-Paul Marat was stabbed in the bathtub, and Jacques-Louis David painted this picture of the dead revolutionary: If you’re like me, you saw this painting in a high school textbook when you were learning about the French Revolution and understood that it was an Important Historical Artifact — one of those paintings that everybody has seen — but didn’t really understand why. I mean, the image is arresting. It’s not every day that somebody gets stabbed in the bathtub, and David’s painting is notable for the way in which it presents a secular hero as if he were a martyred Christian saint. But Marat deserves more than a glance, because he was more than the victim of an unusual death and the subject of a famous painting. One of the things that always floors me about the French Revolution was how young these guys were. Danton and Desmoulins were just 34 when the Reign of Terror came for them. Robespierre was only 36 when his turn in the guillotine came. These three were elders compared to the 26-year-old Saint-Just, the radical “Angel of Death” who persecuted them and later found himself under the executioner’s blade. Marat, however, was older. He was not an old man (he was killed at age 50, in 1793, about a year before the others), but not a wild-eyed young radical either. The younger generation looked up to him as someone with valuable life experience, a man who had been advocating for change since they were children. Marat had spent significant time outside of France — he grew up in Switzerland (his surname at birth had been Mara) and had lived in England as an adult — and he had enjoyed a long and substantial career as a doctor before the revolution. Moreover, Marat was a true man of the Enlightenment. In his younger days, he had published essays that waded into the philosophical disputes of the time; he clashed with Voltaire and found inspiration in Rousseau’s ideas. He performed experiments on the nature of fire, the behavior of light, and electricity. These didn’t all go over well — he seems to have attracted the ire of many of France’s most prominent scientists. Perhaps this was because Marat was, as we might put it today, a lot. He was a short, unusual-looking man. He was fiercely moralistic, perhaps even self-righteous. He
Marat had a tendency toward black-and-white thinking. He was aggressive and direct, verging on rude, when he disagreed with someone. His moral code was total, which meant that he had a hard time seeing things any other way but his own. His newspaper, The People’s Friend, took no prisoners, but he always seemed to escape punishment for his inflammatory views. As the revolution began, he went after pre-revolutionary Finance Minister Jacques Necker in a 69-page manifesto. He
Later, he daydreamed about the death of the moderate Marquis de Lafayette:
He saw widespread
In life, he was portrayed — by his supporters at least — as inspired and bold: As the revolution intensified, Marat waded into the complex struggles between the radical and moderate wings of the National Convention. He sided, of course, with the radicals. His rhetoric was so inflammatory that the moderate Girondins put him on trial in 1793. He won; it seemed like Marat always seemed to avoid consequences for his bold and inflammatory actions. Not only did he avoid punishment, his supporters treated him like a folk hero: In this drawing, Diogenes — the Greek philosopher who searched for the one honest man — helps to pull Marat into the light after his acquittal: Soon after, the Girondins would fall from power. But Marat would not enjoy this victory for very long. The radicals who had celebrated him soon started to ignore him, and he was in the bathtub too often to force himself into the political scene. Ah, yes, the bathtub. As he got older, Marat spent all of his time there. It wasn’t because he wanted a life of leisure; on the contrary, Marat was tortured by a chronic, spreading skin What was wrong with Marat? At age 45, he started to experience devilishly itchy skin lesions on his genitals. Over time, they spread to much of the rest of his body. He itched and ached all the time. Marat’s opponents gleefully suggested that he suffered from Whatever it was, he confined himself more and more to the bath, because that was the only place where the torment stopped. He soaked all day, his head wrapped in a vinegar-soaked cloth. This kept him away from the center of the revolutionary effort, and his influence waned. The bathtub is also where Charlotte Corday found him. Corday was a supporter of the Girondins, the moderates whom Marat had worked to weaken, the ones who had put him on trial and failed to convict him. She thought Marat was the force behind the September Massacres, in which mobs of radical revolutionaries had dragged prisoners into the streets and murdered them (Marat’s writings had certainly set the stage for such violence, but it does not seem as if he helped to plan the violence). She determined to kill him, believing that his death would save many thousands of lives. Corday dreamed of murdering Marat in front of the entire Convention, but she soon learned that he rarely left the bath. So she showed up at his door and claimed to have evidence of a Girondist plot. Marat let her in, and she plunged a knife into his chest. In his painting, David depicts Marat holding Corday’s petition: The French national library does have this copy of The People’s Friend, stained with the blood of its editor: David’s version of this moment is the iconic one, but many, many artists depicted this shocking event. Some were relatively matter-of-fact: Some tragic: And some satirical: Years later, even Edvard Munch took liberties with the idea: Charlotte Corday was, like so many, guillotined. At least her execution was connected to a real crime, not a political one. As happens so often, people liked Marat better after he was dead. He was no longer an annoying, combative, rigid figure prone to paranoia. He was now a pure martyr of the revolution. David chose to idealize him in his famous painting, showing Marat with soft, pale skin free of the scabs and lesions that he dealt with in real life. The radicals embalmed his heart separately from the rest of his body and essentially built a shrine to his memory. They briefly changed the name of the city of Le Havre to Le Havre-Marat. His tomb became a sacred site: But then the radicals whom Marat had helped to bring to power turned on each other and fell from power. The revolution stumbled and foundered, eventually becoming something Marat would not have recognized. As the radical values that he championed faded away, so did knowledge of Marat himself. He became a vague symbol of the excesses of the revolution, or, for many of us, the guy who died in his bathtub in that one painting. But Marat had been much more than that — a strange, insistent force, convinced of his own righteousness, who dragged his country toward his own moral principles by sheer force of will. Perhaps it was lucky that he died before he could see that his ideas would end in disaster. This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: Or you can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading! You're currently a free subscriber to |