---
subject: "The Euchre Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-09-13 12:47:52
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Jason Boog leads editorial at Jason here. Many, many years ago, in my smartphone-free adolescence, my great friend Colin (ed: not this Colin) and I mastered a Midwestern card game called euchre while playing in school buses, church halls, family parties, and other dull locations. I won't bore you with the slightly esoteric mechanics of this card game (you can Colin and I destroyed our opponents with a simple strategy. At an appropriate juncture in the game, we’d slowly unfurl the most elaborate Why is this interesting? I live in Los Angeles now, dwelling among heathens who do not practice my Midwestern customs, so I have spent more than a decade seeking digital euchre solutions. There are apps galore for playing on my smartphone, but this particular card game depends on the quality of your partner’s banter. Euchre bots can dutifully follow the rules but cannot replicate the joy of casually conversing while playing the game. Forget the Turing Test. I will force every fancy new large language model to take the Euchre Test for the rest of my AI-addled life. ChatGPT made a very promising start as I researched this piece, dutifully creating three fictional characters to play euchre with me, including my AI-generated partner Olivia "Lucky" Chang: “Olivia is a free-spirited world traveler who's seen it all. She relies on her intuition and a touch of luck to guide her through life's adventures. She's cheerful and believes that life is one big game. Her motto: ‘Embrace the chaos and trust in fate.’” ChatGPT effortlessly described the first deal and told me what cards I held in my virtual hand. In a few milliseconds, it successfully calculated the winner of the hand and narrated the start of the next one. Things were looking up, so I gave Olivia “Lucky” Chang the chance to confound our digital opponents with a shaggy dog story by reminiscing about some tourists we met at a jam band festival. Even though it could handle the simple game mechanics, ChatGPT couldn’t contribute even the slightest bit of banter. It just narrated the game with the same humorless tone it uses to deliver coding advice, cupcake recipes, or school essays for cheating students.
Things quickly fell apart after that. ChatGPT lost both the thread of our stoner rock adventures and the actual gameplay. The fanciest AI in the world continued to deal virtual cards, mangling the rules while radiating the smarmy confidence of an eager-to-impress honors student. Now I am a fair-to-middling writer with no illusions that my abilities will ever compete with the sheer output of AI writing tools. But it will be a while before an AI can match me and my buddy Colin in full flight, tossing a metaphorical football between ourselves as we manipulate our hapless opponents during a euchre game. A computer scientist named Benjamin Seelbinder has thought about the problem of euchre and AI for many years. "The mix of conversation strategy and personalities is too much to simulate," Whenever a large language model like ChatGPT invents fake facts, imaginary legal cases, or erroneous card game rules, you could call this kind of behavior “ Going back to Euchre Game of the Day: Mark Twain immortalized some euchre-playing sea captains in his memoir, Roughing It: “[They] played euchre in the smoking room day and night, drank astonishing quantities of raw whisky without being in the least affected by it, and were the happiest people I think I ever saw.” Here’s the illustration from that 1872 book. (JB) Quick Links: While struggling to stream [Trust](https://substack.com/redirect/0d3a3f24-202d-4019-b125-2d92d9ed1982?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), one of my most fondly remembered films from the 1990s, I discovered that the indie director Hal Hartley has solved his distribution woes by hosting all his films[on his own site](https://substack.com/redirect/4b016f66-25cf-4ffb-8540-60b960aed754?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). (JB)The [Endless Thread podcast](https://substack.com/redirect/24dc15fa-3a32-43f9-91e3-2224ca1d3d75?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)solved an old literary mystery, finally discovering the artist behind the cover art for the 1976 Dell/Laurel Leaf paperback edition of Madeleine L'Engle's A Wrinkle in Time.If you need a quick book to read, [Before the Coffee Gets Cold](https://substack.com/redirect/09916eeb-3830-47f8-940f-6d33ff3a2e8c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)by Toshikazu Kawaguchi was perfect for me this week. A masterpiece of human confabulation. (JB)
Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Jason (JB) —
You're currently a free subscriber to |