---
subject: "The Nutgraf: An IPL whodunit"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-03-22 05:06:54
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
If you’d rather listen to today’s edition on The Nutgraf podcast, you can stream it on [The Ken app](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/the-nutgraf/an-ipl-whodunit/) with a Premium subscription, or on [Apple Podcasts](https://podcasts.apple.com/in/podcast/an-ipl-whodunit/id1794924619?i=1000700349398) for just Rs 199/- a month.
Before I get to today’s edition, I have a big announcement.
It’s a little terrifying. If you are in Bengaluru, come say hi. I am really looking forward to the discussion. In the past, I’ve written about the compulsions that companies experience in the public market—whether that’s Zomato, Swiggy, Ola Electric, or others. On Monday; I expect many of those to be challenged and strengthened by Nithin and Deepak.
We are running out of tickets. So just make sure you buy yours in advance. You can do it here: [https://the-ken.com/event/beyond-the-first-order/](https://the-ken.com/event/beyond-the-first-order/)
Mostly, I write this newsletter because I see things happen around me and try to put them into a clean, logical narrative that connects them and illustrates the consequences.
Well, not today.
Today’s edition does not really have a clear solution. A lot of mysterious things have happened, but it’s unclear who really caused them to happen. If this were a murder whodunit, it’d be like if someone tore out the final chapters that reveal the killer. I imagine this would be frustrating to you as a reader, but I’m being upfront that I don’t really have a clearcut answer. All I can promise is that I’ll make the crime as interesting as I can, and tell you who gains and who loses so that you can gauge the motives for yourself. Maybe there isn’t one killer—perhaps there are several, or perhaps there are none. You decide.
I’ll start with the most exciting part—the murder itself.
Here’s the news from two days ago.
The Indian antitrust body has raided the offices of many global advertising giants, including GroupM, Publicis, Dentsu and Interpublic Group, and a broadcasters’ industry group over alleged price collusion, people with direct knowledge told Reuters on Tuesday.
Officers of the Competition Commission of India searched around 10 locations after it initiated a case against the agencies and top broadcasters over allegedly fixing ad rates and discounts, said one of the sources.
The raids were being carried out in Mumbai, New Delhi and Gurugram, the first source said. Five other sources familiar with the ongoing antitrust operation confirmed the names of the entities being raided.
The raids come as the ad landscape in India is seeing major shifts following the $8.5 billion merger between Walt Disney and Reliance’s India media assets, which Jefferies analysts say will have a 40% share of the ad market in TV and streaming segments.
Well, well, well.
Occasionally, I come across an obscure piece of news that makes me turn to the nearest person and ask, “Wow isn’t that super interesting?” Usually, I’m met with blank stares, because the popular perception of online advertising is that it’s boring (and annoying) as hell. It’s not. A long time ago, I used to work as a product manager in brand advertising at Inmobi—an ad network. So in many ways, I’m uniquely qualified to tell you what’s happening here, and why you should be as intrigued as I am. This is no ordinary murder.
I could write ten thousand words about how advertising works, but here’s the over-simplified version: when you see an ad for, say, a shampoo on television, the way it ended up there is through a chain of entities all the way from the shampoo company to the television company. Usually, the shampoo company goes to an ad agency, which spends a few weeks doing things like market research (outsourced to college students), crafting a personalised brand positioning (created by overworked interns after copy-pasting an older client presentation), and making a meticulous 360-degree media buying plan (ChatGPT). The shampoo company gets suitably awed at all the big words that mean nothing, the primary colours that look “bold”, and the story that sounds “evocative”. Then, they take a look at their own in-house marketing team, who look like a set of bumbling idiots by comparison. So the big shampoo company says the magic words to the ad agency: “You can handle our account”.
And from that point on, the ecosystem starts scurrying.
The ad agency calls up another smaller agency to make the ad, another contractor to shoot the ad, another to sell the ad, and another to make reports about the ad to the client. Those people call other people—all of whom claim to have their own unique specialisations. I’m really not exaggerating when I say there may be as many as 10-15 entities sitting between the company paying for the ad and the television company publishing the ad. All of these entities sit pressed tightly next to each other, each trying to add their own marginal value and taking their own marginal cut from it. Most of them don’t make it for long. Some stay alive longer than they should because someone in one entity has a working relationship with another entity next to them. It’s a form of freelance co-dependency. Online advertising is brutal. It’s a jungle out there.
And just like the jungle, some beasts are at the top of the food chain. In this case, those are the big ad agencies. You’ve probably heard of some of them. GroupM. Publicis. Dentsu. Madison. IPG. These are the ones who’re bigger than everyone else, and hold the accounts of some of the world’s biggest advertisers. Coca Cola. Nike. Unilever. And none of this is small business. Just last week, Coca-Cola [took away](https://www.thedrum.com/news/2025/03/13/coca-cola-s-700m-account-goes-publicis-wpp-s-media-model-put-the-test) its North America media business from GroupM and gave it to Publicis. The value of that business? A cool US$700 million dollars.
In the jungle, these ad agencies aren’t just big predators. They are giants.
Last week, the Competition Commission of India attacked all the giants, all at once.
This is interesting by itself, but what makes it enthralling is the timing of it. The CCI decided to raid the offices of the biggest global ad-agencies companies just three days before the biggest marketing event on the calendar—the Indian Premier League.
Now, this could well be a coincidence, but if it is, it’s an unfortunate coincidence. The two-month long IPL is the time when most Indians are glued to their screens, and thus most brands plan their biggest campaigns around this event. This is when they launch new products, do their big repositioning, or just come up with new, innovative ways to drive business and awareness. I mean it when I say that the total budgets managed by the five biggest ad-agencies in the lead-up to the IPL goes into several hundred crores. This is the time when they show their clients how amazingly their campaigns were executed. This is what gets them the big dollars. This is their big moment.
And now, three days before the IPL… chaos. These were not perfunctory raids. They [began](https://www.storyboard18.com/agency-news/overnight-raids-and-sleepless-ceos-how-cci-cornered-media-giants-59629.htm) on Tuesday at multiple offices across several cities and went on until the early hours of Wednesday morning. CEOs and senior executives of these agencies were confined to boardrooms, watched by CCI officials. Mobile phones and electronic devices were seized and cloned. Hard drives of laptops were scrutinised. Officials also knew what to look for—they pored through rate-card agreements, insertion orders, and much more. Some reports suggest that call records are going to be examined after this. The financial consequences for the agencies are also quite severe. If found guilty of collusion, they could face penalties up to three times their profits for the duration of the alleged misconduct or 10% of their total revenue, whichever is higher.
For most of India’s brands who’ve signed agreements with these agencies, with the IPL around the corner, the future is uncertain. Will their campaign even run this weekend? Should it? Is there some wrongdoing involved?
All the news reports are quite hazy about what precipitated the CCI raids. Some suggest that there was collusion and price-fixing between the agencies and broadcasters, but there are no specifics. Also, who exactly is the affected party here?
This is the whodunit.
I’m not sure who was really responsible for this. The reason why it’s much harder to figure this out is because everyone had something to gain… depending on your appetite for conspiracy theories. You can choose your perpetrator.
On one hand, smaller ad agencies have a lot of reasons to be unhappy with bigger ad agencies who corner most of the business and make it difficult to compete against. Of all the ad agencies out there, the one that has the fewest friends is also the one that’s the biggest by quite a margin—GroupM, owned by WPP. As the Reuters story notes, WPP has a 45% media market share in India in 2023 with 45 of the top 50 advertisers as clients. And that market share is what WPP claims. Most industry insiders believe that number to be much larger. I wouldn’t be surprised if someone told me that one of the other ad agencies approached the CCI with some damaging information about how WPP was doing business and got them interested. The fact that multiple agencies were raided may be a smokescreen. At least one report [noted](https://bestmediainfo.com/mediainfo/advertising/inside-cci-raids-ad-agencies-grilled-over-commissions-cartelisation-8871877) that, “raids are typically conducted across all entities, including the complainant” as a way to protect the identity of the complainant from risk.
Another popular theory is that the complaint came from an unhappy advertiser. In some ways this makes sense. If ad agencies are working together to create a “standard” rate to advertise on broadcasters, well, I can see why some big advertisers may have a problem with that. You could say, “why not just bypass them and go directly to the broadcaster?” You could, except maybe the broadcaster refuses to work with individual advertisers and directs them back to one of the ad agencies, who command the price. As an analogy, it’s like if you wanted to buy a plane ticket, but all airlines just told you, “Sorry you can’t buy it here directly. We accept orders only via these five ticket booking platforms.” And so you go there and you find out that all of them have the same price, which is double what you believe the price of the ticket is. Well, you might believe that the airlines and the ticket booking platforms are working together to inflate the price.
The problem with the unhappy advertiser theory is that broadcasters don’t really need to do this circus. They set the rates themselves, and it’s reasonable for them to set the same rate for all agencies—which is not really an indication of collusion. Maybe if some broadcasters were offering some concessions to some ad agencies… well, that would be strange. But is that anticompetitive? I’m not sure.
My favourite theory is that the affected party is not an advertiser or another ad agency but a broadcaster. If you put yourselves in their shoes, you can imagine them looking at these ad agencies and wondering, “what exactly are you doing here and what value do you add?” While advertisers may see agencies as extensions of their marketing departments, broadcasters can see them as pesky middlemen who take a cut out of the advertising budget—a cut that they believe they don’t deserve to get in the first place.
As a hypothetical example, put yourself in the shoes of a broadcaster, like, say, Jiohotstar. The IPL is their biggest event. A few weeks ago, I wrote that Jio was pitching “neural brain mapping technology” to advertisers along with significant hikes in advertising rates for the IPL. Back then, I [wrote](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/jiohotstar-is-not-content/):
Of course, one reason why Reliance has to say more is because advertisers are not convinced that saying that is good enough. As the Reuters story notes, this is partly because Reliance raised advertising rates this year by “up to 25%”. It’s one thing to be more expensive, but advertising is a two-sided market. You can raise prices all you want, but unless there’s demand that’s willing to pay for that price, at the density that you desire, it’s practically pointless. In many ways, price discovery is automatic in advertising that happens at scale. If you are Reliance, you really can’t do much.
I’m assuming one of the reasons why Reliance is doing all of this fancy brain-mapping stuff is because enough advertisers aren’t convinced about the ROI they’ll get from advertising in the IPL.
Maybe from Jiohotstar’s perspective, their ad rates are perfectly reasonable and maybe even advertisers were willing to pay for it but these ad agencies are sitting in the middle and making it unreasonable for advertisers and for JioHotstar. Both advertisers and the broadcaster win if they go direct. To put it in another way, say you’re looking to buy a house, you find someone looking to sell theirs, and everything is wonderful. But the pricing isn’t working out, so maybe you both start wondering if the broker is the one who’s screwing over the two of you.
So who let the ads out?
We’ll probably never know, but one thing we know is that big agencies have lots of friends they do business with and outsource work to, but they also have lots of enemies who’d love to see them go away.
And like most things, that too is a law of the jungle.
Regards,
Praveen Gopal Krishnan