---
subject: "How China Became the World’s Biggest Shipbuilder"
from: "Construction Physics <constructionphysics@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-07-18 12:02:36
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Construction Physics", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8588207018748827248", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Since 2017, China has been the largest shipbuilder in the world. Of the 89 million China’s shipbuilding dominance didn’t happen overnight, but followed years of effort, investment, successes, and setbacks: China’s was left with little to no shipbuilding capabilities following the end of the Despite a collapse in the worldwide shipbuilding market following the Global Financial Crisis, China has since continued to expand its dominance. While it’s produced all kinds of ships over its history, for the most part its ship exports have consisted mostly of relatively simple ships like tankers and bulk carriers.³ More specialized, complex ships like liquified natural gas (LNG) carriers and cruise ships historically remained the purview of producers like South Korea, Germany, and Italy. But as China’s shipbuilding capabilities have grown, it has encroached into these areas as well. China now has 34% of the world orderbook for LNG, including an enormous order for Shipbuilding after the birth of PRCPrior to the formation of the People’s Republic of China in 1949, China was a minor player in the global shipbuilding industry.⁴ Between 1865 and 1949 China only built around 500,000 deadweight tons of steel ships (roughly the capacity of 46 But a capable shipbuilding industry was valuable for China, both for naval purposes and for the transportation of goods. Most of China’s population was concentrated on the coasts (making coastal cargo trade important), and while road and rail networks were sparse (China had China’s early post-war shipbuilding efforts were buoyed by assistance from the Soviet Union. In 1950, the two countries signed the “ Chinese shipbuilding progressed slowly in the 1950s and 1960s, and most efforts were focused on naval vessel construction. Following the war, China didn’t build its first steel cargo ship until 1955, and by 1960 it was only building around 10 mostly small cargo ships per year. What little progress there was stalled following the Which isn’t to say that China made no efforts to improve its shipbuilding industry during this time. China consolidated shipbuilding efforts under the Sixth Ministry of Machine Building in 1963, and sent teams to Western and Eastern European shipyards to learn modern principles of shipbuilding shipyard design. But these efforts mostly focused on naval construction, and building merchant ships remained a challenge. The “Dongfeng” a 11,400 dwt cargo ship celebrated as being of Chinese design and built entirely with Chinese components, had to wait six years after its 1960 launching due to a lack of engines. Shipbuilding facilities appear to have been small and/or scarce. In one case, a 5,000 dwt ship was built on a beach due to the lack of a proper berth. And while Japan was building
Shipbuilding worsened following the onset of the The shipbuilding industry remained enmeshed in political struggles in the 1970s: Factions battled over whether China’s merchant fleet should be expanded by buying ships (favored by the “rationalists”) or building them (favored by the “radicals”). Ship output rose and fell, depending on which faction was in power.⁶ This continued until Mao’s death in 1976, when the radical faction was purged and emphasis shifted from shipbuilding to buying yet again. China Domestic Ship Purchases % of additions to China's merchant fleet that were new, domestically produced ships. As China’s state-owned shipping companies had begun to favor foreign over domestic shipbuilders, China’s shipbuilding industry took tentative steps into the international market and building ships for export. China’s first export orders for small ships (less than 5000 dwt) were booked in 1975, and for larger ships in 1977. To improve its shipbuilding capabilities following the end of the Cultural Revolution as part of the broader “ As it upgraded its shipyard facilities with foreign assistance, China also began to obtain licenses to manufacture foreign ship technology. Starting in the late 1970s, China began local production and assembly of foreign-designed ship components, such as marine diesel engines, electrical generators, deck cranes, and steering machinery. (Chinese producers often struggled to manufacture these components at the required level of quality, and much of this work was simply final assembly using foreign-produced parts.) The late 1970s and early 1980s was also when foreign certification societies, like Lloyd’s Register, began overseeing Chinese ship construction and certifying Chinese ships. Without these certifications, ships would have great difficulty getting insured, making ship owners very reluctant to buy them. By 1983, 90% of ships built in China for export were certified by Lloyd’s. By the end of the 1970s, China had exported a handful of ships and was offering to export ships priced 5-15% cheaper than other producers. Despite the low quality and outdated technology of Chinese ships, Chinese shipyards had accumulated an orderbook for 900,000 deadweight tons for export by 1982 — mostly bulk carriers, oil tankers, and other similarly simple ships — more than the capacity of all existing Chinese shipyards. And while for most of its history most of China’s shipbuilding was for naval vessels, by 1981 more than 60% of shipbuilding was for civilian cargo ships. Shipbuilding in post-reform ChinaBy the early 1980s, China was finding some success in the ship export market, and had substantially developed its shipbuilding industry. A 1976 CIA study noted that ““the past decade has shown a dramatic increase in China’s shipbuilding capabilities”. But China’s shipbuilding industry was still far behind international leaders like Japan and Korea. China’s ship and shipyard technology was out of date, ship quality was low, and deliveries were often late. In an apparent holdover of Mao’s emphasis on self-reliance, individual shipyards still tried to produce as much as they could in-house, including shipbuilding equipment, which had created a highly fragmented industry with few economies of scale. And even with the empahsis on in-house production, low technical capabilities meant that most critical ship components had to be imported from abroad. Responsibility for shipbuilding was similarly fragmented among various ministries, agencies, and local governments. And while the industry had begun to produce ships for export, China placed little emphasis on tailoring production to meet market demands: shipyards simply sold the same sorts of ships that they were producing for domestic purposes. But a period of great reform to China’s shipbuilding industry began in 1982. That year, in an effort to improve the industry’s performance, China consolidated nearly all shipbuilding efforts into a single state-owned enterprise, China State Shipbuilding Corporation (CSSC). CSSC oversaw 26 shipyards, 66 factories, 33 R&D units, 3 universities and marine schools, and a workforce of roughly 300,000. The original goal of CSSC was simply to more effectively carry out China’s existing shipbuilding policy: Build ships primarily for the domestic market while selling some similar ships for export. But a downturn in the global ship market in the early 1980s (coming on the heels of a much larger downturn from the industry’s 1970s peak) left shipbuilders around the world with huge amounts of excess capacity and desperate for new orders. From 1981 to 1982 the price for new ships declined by more than 40% on average. Ships were so cheap, and offered on such favorable terms, that it was cheaper for China’s primary shipping enterprise, China Ocean Shipping Company (COSCO), to import ships than buy them from CSSC. In spite of the efforts made to improve the industry, shipbuilding remained a low priority for China’s top leadership, and COSCO was under no pressure to purchase domestically-produced ships. In 1982 and 1983 more than 90% of COSCO’s ship orders went to foreign shipyards. At the same time, the weak shipbuilding market caused CSSC’s export orders to dry up: new orders fell from more than 300,000 dwt in 1981 to less than 100,000 in 1982. Unable to rely on a captive domestic market, CSSC was forced to try and make its export offerings more competitive to keep its shipyards occupied (as a state corporation for a communist country, there was no risk that CSSC would go out of business, but apparently due to political considerations it couldn’t simply allow its shipyards to sit idle). However, the sorts of ships it had traditionally focused on building – relatively simple bulk carriers and tankers – were in low demand in the cutthroat shipbuilding market of the early 1980s. China’s shipyards thus began to hunt for orders for any type of ship at all, including more advanced ships that they had traditionally eschewed such refrigerated containerships, roll-on/roll-off (ro-ro) car carriers, and chemical carriers. In the mid 1980s China secured orders for two 69,000 dwt chemical carriers and a 125,000 dwt shuttle tanker⁷ from Norwegian shipowners, as well as two small containerships and two ro-ro ships from the Japanese. While traditionally China’s shipyards had sought to maximize domestically-produced components and to minimize foreign involvement in ship production, CSSC found itself relaxing these requirements in its quest to fill its order books. The Norwegian ships were Norwegian-designed, used equipment and materials imported from Europe, and subcontracted some of the work to Norwegian companies. The containerships for Japan similarly were built with imported equipment and steel plate from Japan. One shipowner in the 1980s claimed that his Chinese-built ships were simply assembled in China using Japanese-produced parts. Ship Equipment Lead Times in the 1980s Months of lead time required for various pieces of ship machinery at a Chinese shipyard in Shanghai and a Japanese shipyard at Kobe. In an effort to make its offerings more competitive and fill its empty shipyards, CSSC also undertook other improvements in its shipbuilding operations. At the time, ship construction times were long and unpredictable, due in part to bureaucratic delays in decision-making and material procurement. A mid-1980s shipbuilding study that compared lead times in a Chinese and Japanese shipyard found that the Chinese yard required up to six months more time to procure material. In one case, a refrigerated containership built for a German customer was delivered a year late because of difficulties obtaining the steel:
But CSSC’s construction times improved, as individual shipyards gained more autonomy in their operations: Shipyards gradually gained the ability to negotiate individually with foreign shipowners, equipment manufacturers, consultants, and classification societies. They were given more leeway to use foreign-produced ship designs, to make their own equipment and material purchases, and exercise more managerial control over their operations. Steel plate, for instance, had previously only been distributed twice a year from the Ministry of Metallurgy, forcing yards to plan very far in advance and resulting in frequent steel shortages and delays. But by the mid-1980s, yards were being given more control over acquiring materials outside of set schedules. Contracts began to be used to manage responsibilities between different organizations within CSSC, and bonus systems were implemented to motivate workers. Slowly, CSSC started to become more of a coordinator of somewhat (but only somewhat) independent shipyard companies, rather than a single monolithic enterprise. As a result of these and other improvements, ship delivery times improved. CSSC’s large shipyard at Jiangnan halved its delivery times over the course of the 1980s, and by the end of the decade some Chinese yards were actually delivering ships early. CSSC also worked to improve its capabilities in other ways. It continued to license foreign ship technology — by 1986 it had signed over 200 contracts for licensed manufacture, co-production, and other similar arrangements — while also improving its manufacturing capabilities so more components could be produced domestically rather than assembled from foreign-produced parts. It improved its financing offerings for ship buyers, offering credit terms more in line with those offered by foreign builders. It upgraded facilities at various shipyards, restructuring and consolidating their operations and installing more modern production machinery. While at the beginning of the '80s shipyards strived to be autarkic, vertically-integrated operations that could produce any type of ship, over the decade shipyards began to specialize: some yards focused on tankers, some on containerships, and so on. Yards experimented with new management practices and invested much more in management training. China’s shipbuilding industry remained behind countries like Korea and Japan in the 1980s. Shipbuilding facilities were small compared to the largest foreign yards: China’s largest drydock (a flat, floodable basin on which ships are built) in 1985 could produce ships up to 100,000 dwt, while in Japan the largest drydocks could produce ships ten times that size. China wouldn’t complete a 250,000 dwt drydock, allowing it to build the very largest crude oil tankers, until the mid-1990s. Shipyard crane capacity was similarly limited, and while the And despite China’s efforts at technological transfer, the fraction of domestically-produced components in Chinese ships remained “disappointingly low”; even things like ship steel mostly had to be imported because Chinese steel wasn’t good enough. Designs and components were often unstandardized, and ships were frequently built based on the idiosyncrasies of whatever engineer happened to be working on the project. Ship quality had improved, but slowly, and many shipowners remained dubious. Delivery times and labor efficiency were still far behind what Korea and Japan were capable of. And while Chinese shipyards were offering prices well below international competitors, prices were set based on what would win the yard orders without regards to actual production costs, and CSSC lost huge amounts of money on many ships that were underbid. It wasn’t until the late 1980s that Chinese shipyards began to factor profit and loss into their operations. But while China’s shipbuilding industry was still behind the world leaders, CSSC’s shifting emphasis towards exports and transforming its operations to meet the needs of the market gradually bore fruit. By the late 1980s CSSC was producing half of its ships for export, up from 1/3rd in 1982. By 1991 China had exported ships to 30 different countries, and by 1992 it had become the third largest commercial shipbuilder in the world, up from 16th in 1982. Shipbuilding in the 1990sChina’s shipbuilding industry continued to slowly improve in the 1990s. Shipbuilders became increasingly cost-conscious, as CSSC headquarters had begun to more closely monitor shipyard bids to shipowners and reject any that they believed couldn’t be achieved profitably. Departments within shipyards began to sign contracts with each other that included delivery time and cost targets, and workers could earn bonuses by meeting them. Chinese shipyards began to walk away from bids if the price buyers demanded was too low. By 1994 maritime publication Lloyd’s List reported that “indifference to price is a thing of the past in China”, and by the mid-1990s shipbuilding was one of China’s most competitive export industries. In 1996, 85% of new merchant ships in China were built for export. During the 1990s China continued its efforts to acquire ship and shipbuilding technology by way of manufacturing licenses, joint ventures, and technology transfer agreements. China signed agreements with Japanese and European shipyards for the transfer of technologies like CAD/CAM software, metal cutting techniques, gearboxes, and diesel and gas turbine engines. By the early 2000s nearly every major marine engine manufacturer had established a manufacturing facility in China, and Chinese shipyards had widely adopted CAD/CAM ship design software (which had been rarely used in the early 1990s). Hundreds of Chinese shipyard workers were trained in Japanese shipyards, and Chinese yards gained continued exposure to foreign design practices by producing foreign-designed ships, inviting foreign consultants to lecture in China, and partnering with foreign ship design firms. This training, information exchange, and technology transfer all helped improve China’s shipyard operations. It enabled advancements like more efficient hull blocks, which minimized material use by intelligently locating joints, and it improved labor productivity by making greater use of pre-outfitting (installing systems on hull blocks before they’re attached to the ship). Chinese shipyards also expanded their shipbuilding capacity in the 1990s. In 1995, the shipyard at Dalian completed a 250,000 dwt-capacity drydock, the first dock in the country capable of building China also took its next tentative steps with shipyard joint ventures in the 1990s. In 1991, German shipping company Schierack Beteiligungs was so impressed with China’s delivery of two liquified petroleum gas (LPG) carriers that it established a joint shipyard with CSSC, Shanghai Edward Shipbuilding, to build more of them. And in 1994, the China’s shipbuilding industry was badly shaken following the 1997 By the end of the 1990s, the status of China’s shipbuilding industry was not all that different from the end of the 1980s. It remained a distant third behind Korea and Japan in terms of output. At the end of 1999, China’s orderbook was less than 1/10th the size of Japan’s or Korea’s, and it had just 3% of total international orders. Of the 40 largest shipyards in the world by number of orders, China had just 2 (Dalian at #18 and Hudong at #22). While China’s shipbuilding industry had made significant progress in improving its operations during the 1990s (as it had in the 1980s), China’s shipyards were still inferior to the best foreign yards in terms of efficiency, technological capabilities, and ship quality. Delivery times and quality had both improved, but they were still somewhat inconsistent, and Chinese yards were still “fairly well known” for delivering ships late and/or or poorly built: Foreign shipowners would send large numbers of advisors to Chinese yards to try and ensure the ships were built properly, but as late as 2006 Chinese yards were building ships that had to be scuttled after being rejected by the buyer for being unseaworthy. A substantial volume of ship steel (~15%) and ship components (~40%) still needed to be imported from abroad, and most ship engines were either imported or built in China from licensed foreign designs. Outside analyses of Chinese shipyards found that they often had trouble taking maximum advantage of the latest technology if they had it (and they often didn’t: In the 1990s, the majority of Chinese shipyards were estimated to have 1980s-level technology) and that Chinese yards still may not have known what their true costs of production were. Despite its efforts to build more advanced, complex ships China still had a reputation for being a cheap builder of the simplest ships, a status reflected in its orderbook. Chinese shipyards still had a sizable labor cost advantage compared to yards in Korea and Japan, but much of this advantage was offset by its low productivity. What’s more, productivity was improving very slowly as costs were rising, and there was concern that the industry was losing price and technological ground to foreign yards. China's 2003 Ship Orderbook Orderbook by type of ship. Orange indicates simpler ships, blue indicates more complex ships. By the new millennium, China’s shipbuilding industry had progressed significantly, but it remained in a lower league than Japan and Korea, who continued to dominate world ship production. Shipbuilding in the 21st centuryIn the year 2000, China’s Following these new policy priorities, state investment poured into the shipbuilding sector. It’s estimated that the government spent $90 billion subsidizing the shipbuilding industry between 2006 and 2013, contributing an estimated 15-20% of the cost of each new ship. Between 2004 and 2007, annual investment in Chinese shipyards rose by a factor of seven. Dozens of new shipyards began construction, including huge sites at Changxing Island, Longxue Island, and Bohai. In some cases, entire shipyards were relocated to new facilities: Jiangnan shipyard, historically one of China’s largest shipyards, was moved to Changxing Island to clear room for the Shanghai Expo 2010. These new shipyards were largely “greenfield” sites with plenty of space and huge drydocks, including a 1,000,000 dwt capacity dock at Yantai. They were designed for efficient material flows and incorporated modern shipbuilding technology. Much of this investment went into CSSC and CSIC-operated yards, but the industry also expanded outside of these two state-owned giants. Scores of smaller yards operating outside the auspices of CSSC and CSIC cropped up, many of them simple “beach” yards with little in the way of infrastructure or government oversight. And many large privately owned shipyards, operated by both foreign and local companies, were built as well. By 2012, only 8 of the 20 largest shipyards in China were operated by CSSC or CSIC. Prior to these initiatives, China has already been capturing a greater share of the world shipbuilding market: By 2005, it had reached nearly 14% of new deliveries, and 16% of the global orderbook (up from 5% and 9% in 2000). But the huge amount of investment in the sector threw gasoline on the fire: China’s orderbook surpassed Japan’s in 2007. It surpassed Korea’s in 2009. China met its goal of producing 15m dwt by 2010 in 2007, and met its goal of producing 22m dwt by 2015 in 2009. In 2010, China produced more ships (whether by number of ships, deadweight tons, or gross tons) than any other country in the world, and in 2012 it produced roughly as much tonnage as the entire world had in 2002. As China expanded its shipbuilding infrastructure and captured a larger share of the global market, it continued its efforts to acquire foreign shipbuilding technology through partnerships and joint ventures with Japanese, Korean, and European firms. In 2006, when reverting the rules for foreign investment to limit foreign ownership of shipyards to 49%, China also required that foreign partners set up technological transfer centers to transfer expertise to local partners. In 2009, an executive at CSSC published an article stating that Chinese shipbuilders should focus on “introducing, digesting, absorbing, and re-innovating” foreign technology. It apparently became common for Japanese and Korean engineers to offer consulting services to China and for Chinese shipyards to hire retired Korean engineers. It’s estimated that following the downturn of Korea’s shipbuilding industry in the late 2010s, roughly
China’s desire to absorb their expertise did little to dissuade foreign firms from entering China, enticed by China’s large market and low costs of labor. Foreign Investment in Chinese Shipyards Circa 2007 Foreign joint ventures and foreign-owned shipyards, ship repair facilities, and hull-block fabrication operations. Shipbuilding since the financial crisisThe huge expansion of China’s shipbuilding industry was derailed by the 2008 global financial crisis. Orders for new ships collapsed worldwide, and ship prices fell by roughly 50% (depending on the ship). Only after Covid has the shipbuilding industry shown signs of bouncing back: Orderbooks have risen 65% in the last 4 years, but orders and deliveries are still down from the pre-crisis peak. China was hit especially hard by the industry slowdown. Much of its expansion in capacity had come by way of building numerous small, inefficient shipyards poorly equipped to weather a major decline in the global shipbuilding market. By 2010, China was only using 75% of its shipyard capacity, and by 2015, that had fallen to 50%. Many shipyards went bankrupt or ceased operations. Rongsheng Heavy Industries, previously the largest privately-owned shipbuilder in China, As a result of its struggles, the Chinese government took steps to shore up the shipbuilding industry. It created a Largest Shipyards in the World Share of 40 largest shipyards in the world by country by orderbook. Darker color indicates share of 10 largest shipyards in the world. In relative terms, China’s shipbuilding industry managed to stay on top in spite of its struggles. China remained the world’s largest shipbuilder by output from 2010 to 2014, and while Korea regained the top spot in 2015 and 2016, China has held on to first place since 2017.¹³ Still, China’s shipbuilding industry faced perennial challenges throughout its expansion: While Chinese yards maintained a labor cost advantage compared to Japan and Korea, it was still less labor efficient in terms of output per man-hour (as well as in terms of output per square meter of shipyard) in the 2010s.¹⁴ Productivity improved slowly due to work being spread across a comparatively large number of shipyards, which hampered learning curve effects. China still had comparatively few engineering personnel in shipyards compared to Korea or Japan, and such personnel were mostly allocated to naval rather than commercial work. Shipyard turnover was high, and Chinese ships still took longer to build than Korean and Japanese ships. They were also still considered to have worse quality, being noisier, dirtier, and less fuel efficient than Japanese or Korean ships. The result was that Chinese ships sold at a discount compared to Korean and Japanese vessels, and they maintained much less of their value in the secondary market. Experts estimated that for many complex types of ships, China was still several years behind the world leaders. China also continued to struggle to produce many of the sub-components and materials needed for shipbuilding. While China became apt at building marine engines (based on licensed designs), it still needed to import many components including electrical equipment, navigation equipment, cabin outfitting equipment, and specialty steels (including the steel used for the exterior hull). Estimates in the mid-2010s pegged China’s level of domestic production for components at 55-60%, compared to 80-90% in Korea and Japan. A 2013 CSIC report noted that while the company excelled at “‘building the empty shells,’ we basically use foreign products inside the ships, including the propulsion system, the communication system and the navigation system with high added value and high technical contents.” And while China had successfully built complex vessels like LNG carriers¹⁵ (which need to be built to strict tolerances to ensure the liquified gas stays insulated and cold), it purportedly struggled to build them, and China’s share of the LNG market was in the single digits as late as 2021. Well into the 2010s, China’s bread and butter remained simpler ships like tankers and bulk carriers.¹⁶ But as it has since its inception, China’s shipbuilding industry has continued to march forward. China’s overall share of the world orderbook rose from 40% in 2010 to 57% at the end of 2024. It has now captured 30% of the LNG market, 45% of the LPG market, and 70% of the market for large container ships. In 2024, China secured 75% of new ship orders. It’s continued to partner with foreign firms across the shipbuilding value chain, and simultaneously increase its ConclusionIf you survey the arc of the development of China’s shipbuilding industry, you’ll see a trend of continuous (if sometimes plodding) progress, with the occasional interruption and reversion. After most 10-year periods, you could look back on the previous decade and see substantial improvement in China’s shipbuilding capabilities: China went from having virtually no shipbuilding industry at all to producing its first vessels in the 1950s, entering the export market in the 1970s, becoming an increasingly successful player in the 1980s and 1990s, and becoming the world’s largest shipbuilder in the 2000s. But you could similarly examine where China’s industry stood at most points in time and see an industry that was still behind many of its competitors. Until very recently China struggled to build ships that were as high quality or as complex as those from other countries. Even today, as the undisputed biggest shipbuilder in the world, it seems like China still lags in producing the most complex ships, in shipyard productivity, and in producing various marine components (most engines in Chinese ships, for instance, are still based on foreign designs) — though it wouldn’t surprise me if this gap continues to shrink. What’s notable to me isn’t that China became a major shipbuilding country. Most low-labor cost countries that have tried have been able to capture a substantial share of the world market, at least for a time. Japan and Korea are the obvious examples, but countries like Brazil, Poland, Yugoslavia and Taiwan also had major shipbuilding industries that were developed following WWII. Instead, what’s notable is how long it took China to become a major player. Compared to Korea, China’s shipbuilding industry seems to have advanced slowly. Like China, Korea had little shipbuilding capability following the end of WWII (in 1962 only 8% of South Korea’s shipping tonnage was steel ships), and Korea didn’t begin exporting ships until the 1970s. But in less than a decade, Korea’s Hyundai emerged from no previous shipbuilding experience to become the largest shipbuilder in the world. By 1984, Korea had captured 17% of the global ship orderbook, and by the end of the 1980s, Korea had the world’s largest orderbook. China, on the other hand, didn’t reach a similar share of world orders until 2005, and it didn’t have the world’s largest orderbook until 2010. (Compared to Japan, which became the world’s largest shipbuilder less than a decade after it began building up its industry following WWII, China is slower still, but this is less of a fair comparison since Japan entered the post-war era as a much more capable shipbuilder.) While Korea entered shipbuilding in the 1970s with a full-throated desire to become a major shipbuilder, as late as the early 1990s China was apparently “not thoroughly convinced of [shipbuilding’s] usefulness.” Progress accelerated when China’s government fully embraced shipbuilding in the late 2000s, though one wonders how successful this effort would have been without the previous three decades of export experience. Since the end of WWII, we’ve seen a regular emergence of new major players in the shipbuilding market. These countries almost always capture market share by leveraging their low costs of production (especially labor) and are often able clamber up the worldwide rankings following a major industry disruption. Japan displaced the UK as the largest shipbuilder in the world following WWII and the invention of modern shipbuilding methods; Korea emerged as a major shipbuilder following the collapse of the shipbuilding market in the late 1970s, eventually muscling Japan out of the top spot. China in turn displaced Korea following the huge expansion, then contraction, of its shipbuilding industry in the 2000s and early 2010s. It remains to be seen if a similar pattern will befall China (perhaps by a country like Vietnam, whose orderbook quadrupled between 2020 and 2024), or if China will be more successful at maintaining a hold over the industry. 1 There are several measures of ship capacity. Deadweight tons (dwt) is the total amount of weight a ship can carry. Displacement tons is the weight of the ship itself. [Gross tons](https://substack.com/redirect/7c2320f2-ad2f-4fc0-be42-e419c6acda4f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)(GT) is a measure of internal ship volume.[Compensated gross tons](https://substack.com/redirect/0f469604-97d4-4a11-bcac-49b6e7bc9b11?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)(CGT) is similar to Gross Tons but with an adjustment to try and correct for the fact that some ships are more complex to build than other types. It's a measure of effort it takes to build a ship, and is used to compare the output of different shipyards (or different countries) that might be producing very different types of ships.
2 Korea retook the lead in 2015 and again in 2016 on compensated gross tonnage produced, but since 2017 China has remained in the #1 spot. 3 4 China did manage to produce an all-welded cargo ship in 1947, prior to Japanese yards performing similar feats. 5 10,000 workers is less than what a single US WWII shipyard employed. Kaiser’s Swan Island Facility employed more than 30,000. 6 Even when focus shifted to building, China’s lack of shipbuilding capacity meant that most additions to China’s merchant fleet were still imports. 7 Shuttle tankers transport oil from offshore oil fields. 8 Chinese partner companies were China National Petroleum Company and Yantai City Mechanical Industrial Company. 9 Yantai Raffles, which was 100% foreign owned, was grandfathered in under the old rules. 10 In part because, despite its state of the art shipyard, it struggled to build actual ships. 11 Thanks to this program, between 2005 and 2015 European Banks’ share of ship financing fell from 70% to 30%. Over the same period Chinese banks rose from 2% to 18%. 12 Though some of these shipyards are adjacent to each other. Geographically, the largest shipbuilding facility in the world is likely Changxing Island. 13 Measured by CGT. 14 Though this isn’t necessarily a bad thing. If you have very cheap labor, it may not make sense to displace that labor with comparatively more expensive labor-saving technology. 15 China delivered its first LNG carrier in 2007. 16 It’s important to note that this emphasis on tankers and bulkers is to some extent a reflection of global demand for ships. China’s 2015 orderbook is not all that different from the world orderbook of 2015, though China has a lower proportion of complex ships. Construction Physics articles will always remain free, but if you find this work valuable, I encourage you to Construction Physics is produced in partnership with the Institute for Progress, a Washington, DC-based think tank. You can learn more about their work by visiting their You can also contact me on |