---
subject: "The Best of Don't Worry About the Vase"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-12-13 12:44:55
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Hello everyone! This is going to be a bit of a housekeeping post and a welcome to new subscribers. My writing can be intimidating. There is a lot of it, and it’s often dense. As always, choose only the parts relevant to your interests, do not be afraid to make cuts. I attempt to make every post accessible as an entry point, but I also want to build up a superstructure over time. This seemed like a good time to recap some of the very best of my old writing and talk about what I’m up to. Over many years, this blog has morphed from focusing on rationality to COVID to AI. But not only those things. I’m interested in almost everything. I write periodic updates about housing policy, childhood, fertility, medicine and health, gaming and grab bags of everything else. In addition to writing, I also run a small 501c(3) with one employee called Balsa Research. Balsa is dedicated to laying groundwork on a few key issues to make big civilizational wins possible, starting with repeal of the Jones Act. Underlying it all continues to be my version of the principles of rationality. RationalityA lot has changed What is rationality? To me, a rationalist continues to be someone who highly values, and invests in, the version of this process and the art thereof that they believe in, both in themselves and others. If you're wondering why anyone would think this way, my best responses to that are If you're interested in going deeper, you should try I think rationality and the sequences are pretty great. The sequences were created by Eliezer Yudkowsky, in the hopes that those who learned to think well in general would also be able to think well about AI. Whether or not you have any interest in thinking about AI, or thinking about it well, I find it valuable to think about everything well, whenever and to the extent I can. While I do consider myself a Rationalist, I do not consider myself an Effective Altruist. That is a very different set of norms and cultural constructs. The Evergreen PostsThese are to me the ten posts most worth reading today, along with a pitch on why you might want to read each of them. Only one is directly about AI, exactly because AI moves so quickly, and my top AI posts are listed in the next section down. The top ten are in alphabetical order, all are listed again in their appropriate sections. If you only read one recent post and are here for AI, read If you only read one fully evergreen older post, read [An Unexpected Victory: Container Stacking at the Port of Long Beach](https://substack.com/redirect/9468fec8-361f-43e2-9575-47f2557d5e20?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). This is still highly underappreciated. How did Ryan’s boat ride and Tweetstorm cause a policy change? Could we duplicate this success elsewhere in the future? How?[Asymmetric Justice](https://substack.com/redirect/d3fa5637-d3c8-4a47-b8b8-83865d4adf71?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). A concept I wish more people knew and understood. Many moral and financial systems effectively reward only good effects caused intentionally, while they punish any and all bad effects. This creates a strong bias towards inaction. If fully applied with enough knowledge, no one does anything.[Book Review: Going Infinite](https://substack.com/redirect/15c2087c-3cf8-4257-b04b-2155552fc195?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). A world tour of everything Sam Bankman-Fried and FTX, starting with the book by Michael Lewis, and going on to explore lots of questions including the foundational problems with Effective Altruism, how Lewis could fail to realize Sam was doing all of the crime, and how the whole incident is a metaphor for accidentally misaligned artificial intelligence with maximalist goals that could kill us all.[How to Bounded Distrust](https://substack.com/redirect/93b93210-5621-4fa9-beb5-c87ab43d7e6c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Important practical advice on how to process incoming media information in an era when you can trust them in some ways, but not in other important ways. This is especially hard because the rules they play by continuously change.[Mazes Sequence Summary](https://substack.com/redirect/f2164d47-575c-44fc-9de4-ece2a1a9176c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). This is a proxy for the Moral Mazes sequence, which is effectively an entire book about what happens in large organizations and to those caught in their webs.[Motive Ambiguity](https://substack.com/redirect/5e4e8443-c53e-4909-98bd-54eebd146102?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Another key concept to understand. People care quite a lot about what motives others attribute to them. Often, when faced with choices on how to accomplish a task, people intentionally make the worse choice, so that others know that the central task was the central task motivating them, and they didn’t instead care about something else.[On Car Seats as Contraception](https://substack.com/redirect/a5b6c027-3cc3-4c11-94d0-8e909f549b59?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). My top post by hits to this day. It turns out we have enough information to model this, and yes car seat requirements do reduce fertility so much that repealing them would be an efficient intervention for that reason alone.[OpenAI: The Battle of the Board](https://substack.com/redirect/50fe06cd-279e-4d73-bb32-b2becd841451?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). I put together, in real time, a picture of my best guess of what happened at OpenAI in November 2023. There are details we do not know, but reports continue to confirm the core story here, and to contradict mainstream media reports and widely expressed viewpoints on Twitter. It was widely linked as the best explanation of events. I was asked if I had private sources on this. I didn’t quite have zero, but all the key information was public and I put it together. As Michael Samuel once said: My guesswork is better than your intel.[Simulacra Levels Summary](https://substack.com/redirect/c3ddf104-5634-4055-b611-c798fda48f91?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). This is the shorter version of the series of posts on the simulacra levels, which I recommend reading in full if you are sufficiently interested. I consider this one of the key concepts I use to think about things.[Slack](https://substack.com/redirect/6232f80d-5b3c-44aa-aa48-610c338c8ed4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Slack is the absence of binding constraints on behavior. Slack is also life. Humans need slack to survive, and they need slack to do anything worthwhile. You need to fight for it, and the fight begins by realizing its importance.
Honorable Mentions: AIThe problem with AI is that if we do not solve a bunch of impossibly hard problems on the first try, then we will all die. The far less serious problem with writing about AI is that this is all happening so quickly it makes your head spin. That also means a lot of what you write is quickly deprecated. What is still relevant and likely to hold up? If you’re reading this right away, of course, you can Other than that, here are the posts I think best stand up in their entirety. [OpenAI: The Battle of the Board](https://substack.com/redirect/50fe06cd-279e-4d73-bb32-b2becd841451?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). I expect this to be relevant for some time. We will continue to learn details, and the saga will continue, but this is your essential guide to What The Hell Happened At OpenAI.[On the Executive Order](https://substack.com/redirect/12ec7638-b074-4e97-9047-2c1df0501dd7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). The Executive Order is the most important American government action on AI. This analyzes what it actually says.[The Dial of Progress](https://substack.com/redirect/7257f6ce-0bae-43d4-bf94-29bbc3831e78?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). I continue to endorse this theory of the more well-meaning of those who oppose on principle any move that could slow down AI development, and dismiss all safety concerns. It all makes me sad.[Gemini 1.0](https://substack.com/redirect/53ea0ef1-988f-4967-8497-6accf0bde2e2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Until we get our hands on Gemini Ultimate this is what we know about Gemini, one of the two most important LLMs going forward.[On AutoGPT](https://substack.com/redirect/65feb4ce-e661-4d2a-854a-5254fb76bc89?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). It has been a while, but many of these thoughts remain relevant.[AI: Practical Advice for the Worried](https://substack.com/redirect/24354c29-776c-434d-b0d4-31b4eb0ea73d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Pretty much everything here still applies.[Response to Tyler Cowen on Existential Risk and AI](https://substack.com/redirect/dec614ee-0ee1-418a-b919-b73ebdca0aaa?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). While a lot has happened since, I believe both sides of this argument think their arguments still apply.[On RSPs](https://substack.com/redirect/f339b96d-eef8-41b5-a2fd-48778ab7799b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Only for those who want to go deep on this question.[On the UK Summit](https://substack.com/redirect/688192b4-9145-4125-b0b5-d1d86823d868?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Seems likely to remain relevant for a while.[On AGI Ruin: A List of Lethalities](https://substack.com/redirect/49ac7b07-5942-4e38-8721-35e338a6f0c6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Technical questions in detail.[On AI and Interest Rates](https://substack.com/redirect/525aa665-7712-4d0a-897e-f170741df2a0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Why there is no easy path to riches.
I owe a debt of one (1) post that outlines what I think about existential risk and what we should do about it, in plain language. There are a lot of sections of weekly posts that are still highly relevant, but someone has to go through them and figure out which ones they are. There’s a lot to go through. Even when reading this week’s post this week, I expect and advise most readers to be selective. General Rationality and Principles of Life and Thinking
Also see the Choices Sequence below, especially the very important World Modeling
Oh, Yeah, That Happened
Gaming Fun
A lot of posts in the older archives are about computer games or about Magic: The Gathering. Some of those are great fun, especially if you like TCGs or rogue deckbuilders half as much as I do. Alas, I realized a while ago that when I put out gaming posts, I lose subscribers, and interest was low. So I almost entirely stick to short comments in the monthly roundups now. Fertility, School and ChildhoodThese aren’t a sequence, but as a parent all of this is of great interest to me. [Something Was Wrong](https://substack.com/redirect/30545849-31be-493f-bac2-436918ad998b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Recommended, won’t say more.[The Case Against Educatio](https://substack.com/redirect/b7e1f6df-8e5c-4266-ac3f-d4ee2826e03c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)n. Covers Bryan Caplan’s excellent book.[Against Active Shooter Drills](https://substack.com/redirect/f3361f9a-2012-48ba-865b-3595bf5b75e8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Somehow I needed to write this.[The Kids are Not Okay](https://substack.com/redirect/259cd137-f9aa-4ab3-9d6d-4727a4460179?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Why? I do primarily blame phones and social media.[On Car Seats as Contraception](https://substack.com/redirect/a5b6c027-3cc3-4c11-94d0-8e909f549b59?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). This went highly viral, I think for good reason.[Formula for a Shortage](https://substack.com/redirect/4c172dad-95a0-43ff-8ebc-59babda2c320?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). The shortage of baby formula. Really about economics.
Unlike many other topics, roundups on these subjects remain relevant: CovidI did not intend to end up writing weekly Covid posts. That sort of happened. While I warned my coworkers and friends earlier, I did not write anything in public until March 2, when I wrote I wrote
Now that it is all over, what is worth looking back on? Mostly I think it is time to move on, but here are a few. [Key Mostly Outward-Facing Facts From the Story of VaccinateCA](https://substack.com/redirect/ef527d7e-d35e-4d83-8d15-d2246af0b843?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), telling the story of the effort by Patrick McKenzie. Mind blowing.[The Long Long Covid Post](https://substack.com/redirect/e1a7f1d1-c5cd-4efc-b7f3-f0d36afb2ba6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), my analysis of Long Covid.[Omicron Variant Post #1: We’re F***ed, It’s Over](https://substack.com/redirect/082cc6be-8aae-4b9b-8ab7-317a39dd2d68?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). A good one to look over to think about what it was right to think at the time, with what level of confidence.[My Current Model (from May 31, 2020).](https://substack.com/redirect/25ce9c5c-91c9-4180-8f65-c327878a1ddc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Good place to look back and postmortem.
The Simulacra Levels SequenceI find the Simulacra Levels to be a vital concept for thinking about the world. Different people and different communications are on different levels. By appreciating the differences, and what level or levels everyone is operating on, you can better understand what is happening, and model what people will do. One definition that is quick but not precise is these four meanings for ‘there is a lion across the river’:
I wrote a The Moral Mazes SequenceIn December of 2019 I essentially wrote a book about Moral Mazes, based on the book by Robert Jackall, where those that are in large organizations or otherwise disconnected from underlying reality end up abandoning all else to devote all their time and resources to manipulation of the system, seeing such actions as intrinsically good and worthy of reward, and forming a coalition with all other such players against anyone playing the game any differently. I later wrote Later I wrote I continue to find these concepts important, and recommend reading at least the summary. (Not part of sequence, but note: I would still like at some point to turn this into an actual book. If you are a publisher and would like to do that, please reach out. The Choices SequenceThis series of posts from 2017 explores many related concepts around choices, having slack and the importance of observing the Sabbath. I still think about and refer back to them often. [Change Is Bad](https://substack.com/redirect/ce06505b-bc17-4b82-b05b-4e3587ea3f7a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Almost all changes are bad.[Choices Are Bad](https://substack.com/redirect/4e04e397-4954-4920-927e-d399da396970?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Choices have inherent disutility trading against potential gains.[Complexity Is Bad](https://substack.com/redirect/fb456f5b-e9af-42fc-be82-0b51c19f5e17?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). All complexity is expensive, keep things simple at their core.[Choices Are Really Bad](https://substack.com/redirect/48b009c2-488e-4acd-885e-36129cd69627?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Many more costs to having choices. It gets expensive.[Play in Easy Mode](https://substack.com/redirect/402dca0c-003b-4b53-a211-a7d99b215f86?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)and[Play in Hard Mode](https://substack.com/redirect/8df68eb7-1420-45b0-a41c-309b06a231c6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Choose wisely.[Out to Get You](https://substack.com/redirect/6398f189-5542-4b30-839e-b5d8004c2261?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Some things are Out to Get You. Recognize. Know your options.[Slack](https://substack.com/redirect/6232f80d-5b3c-44aa-aa48-610c338c8ed4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Slack is the absence of binding constraints on behavior. Slack is life.[Bring Back the Sabbath](https://substack.com/redirect/4dd60d26-a06f-4320-b03c-edc1bddb7aa9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). We need a restful time, free from work and also choice.[Sabbath Commentary](https://substack.com/redirect/4e76ef38-679b-4455-ba79-480a537a8566?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Extended thoughts and tangents on Sabbath questions.
Game Theory, Gambling and Prediction MarketsThese three posts sum up my views on prediction markets. Prediction markets are great tools, I especially love Manifold and the fast user-created markets but also If you do bet, here is my post on A fun sequence of three posts about a cool game I played in college: Completely non-vital but related and fun are Bonus Content: A Newly Salient Question for 2023Before we begin, my spoiler-free John Wick 4 review is: This movie lived its best life. Now that the fourth movie is out, we can return to Spoils for entire series will follow. In the second movie we have Rule of Man. In the third we have Rule of Law. Which is it? John Wick 4 attempts the reconciliation. We have Rule of Law and also Rule of Man. Fealty is central to the world now. Also fealty is part of the Rule of Law. In particular, like a marker, it is part of contract law. The law is thou shalt keep thy word. You do not owe fealty because The Table said so. You owe fealty because you swore fealty. You spoke the arc words. Once you swear fealty, you get what was agreed to, but in exchange you are below the table. If you agreed to it, as many do, the table will have an open ended infinite set of markers on you. It will enforce consecration as part of that deal, but it can undo that consecration if you break the deal. Do not forget your fealty. Or, if you decide something else matters more, do it with eyes open, on purpose. Ultimately, John Wick 4 confirms that The Table keeps its word. It is a system of laws. If you engage in a dual and win the right to have all obligations to the table lifted, or your position reinstated, then that is it. It shall be done. Strictly business. The Table only has power over those who give it that power. You're currently a free subscriber to |