---
subject: "DeekSeek v3: The Six Million Dollar Model"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-12-31 15:06:12
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
What should we make of DeepSeek v3? DeepSeek v3 seems to clearly be the best open model, the best model at its price point, and the best model with 37B active parameters, or that cost under $6 million. According to the benchmarks, it can play with GPT-4o and Claude Sonnet. Anecdotal reports and alternative benchmarks tells us it’s not as good as Claude Sonnet, but it is plausibly on the level of GPT-4o. So what do we have here? And what are the implications? What is DeepSeek v3 Techncially?I’ve now had a chance to The big thing they did was use only 37B active tokens, but 671B total parameters, via a highly aggressive mixture of experts (MOE) structure. They used Multi-Head Latent Attention (MLA) architecture and auxiliary-loss-free load balancing, and complementary sequence-wise auxiliary loss. There were no rollbacks or outages or sudden declines, everything went smoothly. They designed everything to be fully integrated and efficient, including together with the hardware, and claim to have solved several optimization problems, including for communication and allocation within the MOE. This lets them still train on mostly the same 15.1 trillion tokens as everyone else. They used their internal o1-style reasoning model for synthetic fine tuning data. Essentially all the compute costs were in the pre-training step.
This is in sharp contrast to what we saw with the Llama paper, which was essentially ‘yep, we did the transformer thing, we got a model, here you go.’ DeepSeek is cooking. Our Price CheapIt was a scarily cheap model to train, and is a wonderfully cheap model to use. Their estimate of $2 per hour for H800s is if anything high, so their total training cost estimate of $5.5m total is fair, if you exclude non-compute costs, which is standard. Inference with DeepSeek v3 costs only $0.14/$0.28 per million tokens, similar to Gemini Flash, versus on the high end $3/$15 for Claude Sonnet. This is as cheap as worthwhile models get. Run Model RunThe active parameter count of 37B is small, but with so many different experts it does take a bit of work to get this thing up and running.
My presumption is that DeepSeek v3 decided It Had One Job. That job was to create a model that was as cheap to train and run as possible when integrated with a particular hardware setup. They did an outstanding job of that, but when you optimize this hard in that way, you’re going to cause issues in other ways, and it’s going to be Somebody Else’s Problem to figure out what other configurations work well. Which is fine.
Talent SearchBefore we get to capabilities assessments: We also have this thread about The Amazing Incredible BenchmarksCheck it out, first compared to open models, then compared to the big guns.
The question now is how these benchmarks translate to practical performance, or to potentially dangerous capabilities, and what this says about the future. Benchmarks are good negative selection. If your benchmarks suck then your model sucks. But they’re not good positive selection at the level of a Claude Sonnet. My overall conclusion is: While we do have CNBC got a bit hoodwinked here.
It’s a great model, sir, it has its cake, but it does not get to eat it, too. One other benchmark where the model excels is impossible to fake: The price. Underperformance on AidanBenchA key private benchmark where DeepSeek v3 underperforms is AidanBench:
There’s some weirdness in the rest of the Aidan ratings, especially in comparing the o1-style models (o1 and Thinking) to the others, but this seems like it’s doing various good work, but is not trying to be a complete measure. It’s more measuring ability to create diverse outputs while retaining coherence. And DeepSeek v3 is bad at this.
I don’t see this as ‘the problem is AidanBench’ so much as ‘DeepSeek is indeed quite poor at the thing AidanBench is measuring.’ As Tortaxes notes it’s got terrible output diversity and this is indeed a problem. Indeed, one could argue that this will cause the model to overperform on standard benchmarks. As in, most benchmarks care about getting a right output, so ‘turning the temperature down too low’ in this way will actively help you, whereas in practice this is a net negative. DeepSeek is presumably far better than its AidanBench score. But it does represent real deficits in capability. Model in the ArenaWe’re a long way from when Arena was the gold standard test, but it’s still useful.
Other Private BenchmarksHere is another private benchmark where DeepSeek v3 performs well for its weight class, but underperforms relative to top models or its headline benchmarks:
It is odd that Claude Haiku does so well on that test. Other ratings all make sense, though, so I’m inclined to find it meaningful. A traditional simple benchmark to ask new LLMs is Which version is this?’
That tells several things, one of which is ‘they did not explicitly target this question effectively.’ Largely it’s telling you about the data sources, a hilarious note is that if you ask Gemini Pro in Chinese it sometimes thinks it is WenXinYiYan from Baidu. This doesn’t have to mean anyone trained directly on other model outputs, because statements that an AI is GPT-4 are all over the internet. It does suggest less than ideal data filtering. AnecdataAs usual, I find the anecdata reports enlightening, here are the ones that crossed my desk this week, I typically try to do minimal filtering. Taelin is impressed, concluding that Sonnet is generally smarter but not that much smarter, while DeekSeek outperforms GPT-4o and Gemini-2.
Here are some people who are less impressed:
There’s somewhat of an infinite repetition problem (thread includes example from coding.)
On creative writing Quintin Pope reports it follows canon well but is not as good at thinking about things in general - but again note that we are doing a comparison to Sonnet.
There’s also this, make of it what you will.
I presume that a lot of people are not especially looking to do all the custom work themselves. For most users, it’s not about money so much as time and ease of use, and also getting easy access to other people’s creations so it feels less like you are too much in control of it all, and having someone else handle all the setup. For the power users of this application, of course, the sky’s the limit. If one does not want to blatantly break terms of service on and jailbreak Sonnet or Opus, this seems like one place DeepSeek might then be the best model. The others involve taking advantage of it being open, cheap or both. If you’re looking for the full Janus treatment, Implications and PolicyIt is hard to know exactly where China is in AI. What is clear is that while they don’t have top-level large frontier models, they are cooking a variety of things and their open models are generally impressive. What isn’t clear is When the Chinese do things that are actually impressive, there’s no clear path to us hearing about it in a way we can trust, and when there are claims we have learned we can’t trust those claims in practice. When I see lists like the one below, I presume the source is rather quite biased - but Western sources often will outright not know what’s happening.
I can’t say with confidence that these other companies aren’t doing the ‘best’ at these other things. It is possible. I notice I am rather skeptical. I found
I do not remember when “they” told us China had no interest in doing this, for any contextually sensible value of this. Of course China would like to produce a high-quality model, and provide good ease of use and interface in the sense of ‘look here’s a chat window, go nuts.’ No one said they wouldn’t try. What “they” sometimes said was that they doubted China would be successful. I do agree that this model exceeds expectations, and that adjustments are in order. So, what have we learned from DeepSeek v3 and what does it all mean? We should definitely update that DeepSeek has strong talent and ability to execute, and solve difficult optimization problems. They cooked, big time, and will continue to cook, and we should plan accordingly. This is an impressive showing for an aggressive mixture of experts model, and the other techniques employed. A relatively small model, in terms of training cost and active inference tokens, can do better than we had thought. It seems very clear that lack of access to compute was an important constraint on DeekSeek here. They had to use a limited supply of H800s. Yes, this meant they got better at solving optimization and efficiency than they would have otherwise, but I see this as arguing in favor of strong export controls rather than against them. We then get to the policy side. If this is what you can get for $5.5 million, how can we hope to regulate foundation models, especially without hitting startups? If DeepSeek is determined to be open including their base models, and we have essentially no leverage on them, is it now impossible to hope to contain any catastrophic risks or other dangerous capabilities? Are we now essentially in an unwinnable situation, where our hand is forced and all we can do is race ahead and hope for the best? First of all, as is often the case, I would say: Not so fast. We shouldn’t assume too much about what we do or do not have here, or about the prospects for larger training runs going forward either. There was a bunch of that in the first day or two after the announcement, and we will continue to learn more. No matter what, though, this certainly puts us in a tough spot. And it gives us a lot to think about. One thing it emphasizes is the need for international cooperation between ourselves and China. Either we work together, or neither of us will have any leverage over many key outcomes or decisions, and to a large extent ‘nature will take its course’ in ways that may not be compatible with our civilization or human survival. We urgently need to Pick Up the Phone. The alternative is exactly being locked into The Great Race, with everything that follows from that, which likely involves even in good scenarios sticking various noses in various places we would rather not have to stick them. I definitely don’t think this means we should let anyone ‘off the hook’ on safety, transparency or liability. Let’s not throw up our hands and make the problem any worse than it is. Things got harder, but that’s the universe we happen to inhabit. Beyond that, yes, we all have a lot of thinking to do. The choices just got harder. You're currently a free subscriber to |