---
subject: "The Nutgraf: The next 10 years of AI for India"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-08-16 04:46:42
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
Since it’s a long weekend, I expect most of my subscribers to be on holiday, a digital detox, or both. Thus, there’s a good chance that this edition of The Nutgraf will remain unread. So, I’ve decided to take advantage of this once-in-a-year opportunity and write something a bit more abstract and futuristic. Maybe you’ll like it. Maybe you won’t. Regardless, remember that part of the blame (or credit) lies with you for not taking advantage of this break.
One of the things I’ve been thinking about a lot this year is how AI will make India’s future stronger and brighter. Over the past several editions, I’ve tried to figure out answers to this, and haven’t really come up with anything substantial.
However, today, I’ve decided to throw all of them out, and approach it from a different direction altogether.
In all of my earlier analyses, I looked at AI as a technology evolving in a (mostly) predictable way, and focused on what India should do across policy, tech, capital, and labour to take advantage of it. Today, I’m flipping that around. I’m assuming India will behave more or less exactly as it has in the past, and instead, I’m looking at AI itself, and how it might evolve in ways that benefit India. In some ways, this is much more liberating, because trying to predict how products and platforms may evolve is sometimes easier than doing the same with people and policy.
Anyway, this edition is my take on how AI could benefit India, based on my predictions of how the technology could evolve. A lot of this is fanciful and wishful, but these are the scenarios where India wins… or at least still holds on for the next decade.
Define your new career—join The Ken
Today’s edition is about how AI will change India over the next 10 years.
Coincidentally, next year, The Ken will also turn 10 years old. And for the last few days and weeks, we’ve been thinking a lot about what The Ken will look like over the next decade… and more importantly, who will play a key role to get us there.
I don’t think we have all the answers, which is why we’re inviting you to tell us what you’d like to do at The Ken. Help us reimagine and build the future of The Ken in all aspects—products, business, brand, and journalism. And in the process, you’ll get to build and shape your career exactly the way you want it.
If this is something that interests you, just tell us a bit about yourself, and what you’d like to do at The Ken, and we’ll take it from there.
Here’s the link: [https://theken.typeform.com/to/lF79Lsm9](https://theken.typeform.com/to/lF79Lsm9)
Now, on to today’s edition.
Scenario 1: AI technology plateaus, with no meaningful breakthroughs
Last week, OpenAI released GPT-5 and it was met with widespread disappointment. It’s not that GPT-5 was terrible, it’s that users thought it performed more or less as well as GPT-4 (several users even [demanded](https://www.engadget.com/ai/openai-brings-gpt-4o-after-users-melt-down-over-the-new-model-172523159.html) to retain access to the older model… and succeeded). Some notable people started to wonder if maybe we had reached some kind of a limit in generative AI technology.
One of these people was Cal Newport, whom you probably know from his book about deep work and avoiding distractions. Newport also happens to be an MIT-trained computer science professor at Georgetown University. In his article in The New Yorker [titled](https://www.newyorker.com/culture/open-questions/what-if-ai-doesnt-get-much-better-than-this), “What If A.I. Doesn’t Get Much Better Than This?”, he raises the possibility that perhaps AI’s future trajectory of scaling won’t look like the past anymore, and things will get much slower. He also notes that GPT-5 feels “more like the targeted improvements you’d expect from a software update than like the broad expansion of capabilities in earlier generative-A.I. breakthroughs”.
If that’s true, what are the implications of this?
If these moderate views of A.I. are right, then in the next few years A.I. tools will make steady but gradual advances. Many people will use A.I. on a regular but limited basis, whether to look up information or to speed up certain annoying tasks, such as summarizing a report or writing the rough draft of an event agenda. Certain fields, like programming and academia, will change dramatically. A minority of professions, such as voice acting and social-media copywriting, might essentially disappear. But A.I. may not massively disrupt the job market, and more hyperbolic ideas like superintelligence may come to seem unserious.
What If A.I. Doesn’t Get Much Better Than This?, [The New Yorker](https://www.newyorker.com/culture/open-questions/what-if-ai-doesnt-get-much-better-than-this)
Assuming this scenario is true, and if it’s true that future AI developments increase linearly and not exponentially, well, this is good news for India. I’ve written in the past that the better AI gets, the more likely it is to disadvantage countries who currently use labour arbitrage to drive down the costs of software. There are about 5.5 million people who work in India’s IT and IT-enabled services sector. These industries thrive because, for most companies around the world, “renting” this talent is cheaper and more efficient than building the capability locally. But put these people head to head against machines, and that equation starts to look very different. From a technology standpoint, it’s in India’s interest to hope that AI’s capabilities slow down, so that all these people can still remain relevant for the most part. I know it’s fashionable for Indian tech CEOs to use words like “reskilling” or “reinvention”, but the fact of the matter is that all these take time. Considerable time. And above all, India needs time.
Tune in to The Ken’s premium audio experience
From original podcasts to writer-narrated versions of our subscriber newsletters, existing Premium subscribers can listen to all our premium audio, available exclusively via our subscriber apps. Discover them all at[ the-ken.com/podcasts](https://the-ken.com/podcasts), including the [latest volume](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/the-nutgraf/the-next-10-years-of-ai-for-india/) of this newsletter.
Not a Premium subscriber? You can subscribe to[ The Ken Premium](https://podcasts.apple.com/in/channel/the-ken-premium/id6744577070) on Apple Podcasts for an easy monthly price (Rs 299 in India).
Even if you see things from a historical perspective, this possibility doesn’t look that outlandish. Technological jumps happen quickly and exponentially, and then things just slow down and everyone gets a chance to take a deep breath. Smartphones haven’t fundamentally changed in the last five years at least, which is why more and more people seem to be [happy](https://www.lifewire.com/more-iphone-owners-keeping-older-phones-8712160) with their older models. Maybe OpenAI is seeing a similar version of this?
So what does this future look like?
Well, here’s Adam Butler (whose X bio describes himself as a CIO of Solve Asset Management) in his post about why the AI cycle is over for now:
“What comes next is not the next spectacular demo but the quiet absorption of today’s tools into the 80% of the economy that still runs on Excel and email. Code will ship with more AI-authored lines, but senior devs will still sign the diffs. Customer-support bots will escalate the 5% of tickets that matter; the other 95% will vanish so smoothly customers won’t notice. Radiologists will still stare at scans, except now a model will have pre-read every slide and flagged the one-in-a-thousand the tired resident would have missed. And yes, you’ll still need a PhD to notice that the portfolio weights got renormalised, but you’ll build the new clustering module in five minutes instead of an afternoon.”
This is not exactly great news for the millions of Indians who work in tech services—but it gives them a fighting chance.
Scenario 2: Countries develop nationwide, closed AI platforms tailored for their domestic markets
As more and more people start using AI, an inevitable consequence will be that they’ll start using it in more and more intimate ways. And I don’t mean harmless things like finding recipes or writing their college application essay, but real, personal things. Like uploading their Form-16s, Aadhaar, and payslips into ChatGPT and asking it questions like, “Tell me how to avoid income tax next year.” Or logging in to ask whom they should vote for in the next election. Or using it as a way to learn and discover radical ideologies.
None of this is new. It’s just an extension to how consumer technology was always used in the past. Except, last time around, countries would haul up company country heads before parliament and lecture them about content moderation, data protection, and the companies would (mostly) agree to set some rules and guardrails. However, there’s one big difference this time around. Nobody can ultimately predict what this can or cannot do, not even the companies who built them. This is a probabilistic system, not a deterministic one.
So what will countries do?
Well, what countries have always done well—they’ll ban those products, and push local alternatives.
That’s the extreme case though. The more likely scenario is that nations will cripple AI platforms, especially consumer ones, and create circumstances where preferred products emerge that do the same thing. Nations have done this when the stakes were much smaller. Tiktok got banned in multiple countries because powerful people were worried how algorithms could be weaponised to show the wrong kind of 30-second videos. India built a completely new payment architecture/protocol/payment system using QR codes and [kneecapped](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/how-india-defeated-the-evil-of-recurring-payments/) credit cards to make sure it worked and was adopted.
Is it really so difficult to imagine countries doing the same with AI?
The additional incentive this time around though is that it’ll also help India ‘protect’ its domestic market from Silicon Valley tech companies. If models get commoditised more or less, then restricting applications and platforms is something that India knows really well. Think of a future where an Indian AI platform will be “orchestrated”, and companies will have to use it to build applications to access India’s consumers and businesses. Of course, there will be ways to ensure that domestic companies ultimately have an edge and advantage in building these products. We just need to look at the companies who’ve built products on top of UPI and payments in India, and how many of them are international, to see how this may play out.
Once multiple countries grow wary of how their citizens are sharing data with foreign AI companies—and of the deep, intimate connections they are forming with them—AI policy will emerge at remarkable speed.
India, as always, will be at the forefront of this, and it’ll ultimately help the country deal with AI in a more controlled way.
Scenario 3: AI reshapes the physical constraints of air, water, and road infrastructure in cities
If the previous two scenarios were about placing limits on how fast AI will expand, this one is the opposite—it assumes AI will advance so rapidly that one of its second-order effects will be solving a challenge India has long struggled with in the physical world, i.e., the living conditions of its urban population.
This one is the most outlandish possibilities… and it’s hard to see how it’ll play out.
But the reason why I’ve put it here is because we all ultimately recognise that India’s biggest problems right now and for the foreseeable future aren’t digital. We can build the most sophisticated applications and products in the world, but first, we have to battle through four hours of traffic. We can sell to global consumers, companies, and small businesses far more effectively if we’re not preoccupied with making sure our children use the right air purifiers every day. We can hire and scale companies, but too often, we’re busy choosing locations that won’t flood or run out of water.
These are deep, complicated problems. I have no idea how AI will create the political and social incentive to solve these problems, but I’m hoping that through some accident, it will create the circumstances that do it. The chances of this happening are remote. If a phone with a camera in the hands of most city residents can’t shame, pressure, or provoke those in power into making change, I’m not sure AI will. But one thing we do know about technology is that its second-order effects are far harder to predict than its obvious outcomes.
And sometimes, those effects turn out to be positive, even when the technology itself is, at its core, destructive.
That’s the hope.
Happy Independence Day.
Regards,
Praveen Gopal Krishnan