---
subject: "The Women’s Sports Boom Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-04-25 10:50:47
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Scott Lachut (SL) is a Brooklyn-based consultant who specializes in Scott here. Why is this interesting? Despite a legacy of trailblazing athletes and incredible milestones (the US Women’s soccer team's 1999 World Cup-winning celebrations are etched in my memory) it feels like women’s team sports are only now finally starting to achieve mainstream acceptance. Just ask Caitlin Clark, who after a record-breaking season and 2nd place finish in the NCAA women’s championship saw her jersey retired, made a cameo on SNL’s Weekend Update, and showed up to the WNBA draft (where she was selected with the number 1 pick) clad in Prada. And while she may be the face of the current moment, so much more is happening behind the scenes. As a brand marketer, I’ve noticed the entire sports marketplace— from media to investors and sponsors—catching on to the quality of the women’s games and the significance of the opportunity. While the men’s side still holds a comfortable lead in dollars and eyeballs, that’s just because for most of its existence it's been the only game in town. At this point, it’s a well-trodden market with a high cost of entry that makes it inaccessible for many brands and fans. By contrast, women’s sports are in full-on challenger mode, putting in the work to prove they belong. What’s more, they have the bona fides to back up their claims—a growing number of marquee athletes, a loyal fanbase, and a high caliber of competition and play that is on par with (or arguably even better than) the men’s game. As they grow, women’s teams and leagues are doing so much more than simply copying the traditional sports playbook. Instead, they're embracing innovation in all areas, from athlete support and fan engagement to ownership structures and brand partnerships. (Two examples: The Sports fandom generates a potent mix of emotions and sensations. Following a team can be uplifting and heartbreaking, often within the same hour. In a fractured media landscape, where both broadcasters and brands are hunting for an audience, the appointment nature and inherently social aspect of tuning into live sports become a huge differentiator. They’re even more valuable when you consider the impending onslaught of AI-generated content poised to take over our channels and feeds. The way I see it, the rise of the women’s game creates more opportunities to go around. While the brand marketer in me is thrilled by the renewed energy and attention being directed toward women’s sports, I’ve realized that this is only one part of my excitement. As the father of a two-year-old daughter, it’s amazing to anticipate the exponential effect this is going to have on her. Whether or not she becomes a fan, knowing that my daughter will grow up seeing more aspirational versions of herself in more places is incredible. That’s something worth rooting for. Quick Links: TCL, the second largest TV manufacturer in the world, provides an early glimpse of our AI-generated media hellscape with its [Next Stop Paris trailer](https://substack.com/redirect/373dc8d0-2e2f-44e3-b8ee-4af01add7097?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). (SJL)On that note, Ezra Klein and the Verge’s Nilay Patel recently discussed the consequences of an [internet overrun with AI-generated media](https://substack.com/redirect/05df6914-8b58-4949-96dd-57ab50149486?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). (SJL)Because humans still matter, [Hard Art](https://substack.com/redirect/7b2e92fa-d57a-4c2e-aaa8-f5f2ce984625?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)is a multidisciplinary artists’ collective helmed by Brian Eno, taking on the small task of saving the planet. (SJL)And for all the left-brainers out there, this explores [engineering’s role](https://substack.com/redirect/611d88c0-7037-4c7f-a3d9-f8a824a194a4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)in degrowth and steady-state economics for a more sustainable future. (SJL)
— Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Scott (SL) —
You're currently a free subscriber to |