---
subject: "What Lord Elgin Did"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-04-20 13:00:52
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Maybe I’m a bad person, but it kind of tickled me to learn that Lord Elgin had an unhappy life. Elgin (real name: Thomas Bruce) is the British nobleman who removed many of the sculptures from the Parthenon in Athens, eventually whisking them away to London, where they’ve controversially resided in the British Museum ever since. I’ll get to Elgin’s status as the avatar of greedy, thieving European imperialist archaeologists in a bit, but first let’s examine — and, if you don’t like Elgin, revel in — his misfortune. According to scholar Elgin married the heiress Mary Nisbet in 1799, and she accompanied him to an ambassadorial post in Constantinople, where the couple lived in extreme luxury. For a while, they seemed happy — Mary shared in her husband’s enthusiasm for collecting Greek archaeological treasures. But things went sour when Napoleon arrested Elgin (he was placed under very comfortable house arrest). During this time, one of their children died, and Mary suffered a traumatic childbirth. She After Mary returned home, the Elgins’ neighbor, Robert Ferguson, courted her. Elgin, furious, demanded a divorce — something that was generally not done, especially among the nobility. The divorce trial became the talk of London, turning the Elgins’ unhappy union into fodder for the early newspaper industry. It should be said that Mary’s disinterest in Elgin may have been connected to another problem — he seems to have lacked a nose. The divorce court
The “ague” that took Elgin’s nose might have been syphilis, or he might have lost his nose due to unsuccessful treatments for some other nose-related ailment. Either way, he was Though Elgin won the divorce trial, securing the act of Parliament that was necessary to finalize his divorce, the scandal ruined his reputation. He lost access to Mary’s sizable fortune along with his place in the House of Lords. He left politics and eventually fled to France to get away from his creditors. Despite the immense wealth and privilege to which he was born, Lord Elgin’s life does not seem to have been particularly happy. Perhaps this is part of what drove his obsession with ancient history, causing him to commit the acts that made him one of history’s most notorious figures. Wood even draws a
Thanks for reading! This post took a lot of work. If you’re enjoying it, you can subscribe to the newsletter. If you want to help keep this project going, please consider purchasing a paid subscription. Paid subscribers — it’s only about 75 cents a week! — get access to the archives, the satisfaction of supporting work they enjoy, and my undying gratitude. To support my work, please click the button below: I’ve seen the Elgin Marbles; then again, I haven’t. I’ve been to Athens but not the British Museum, so I’ve visited the excellent Acropolis Museum. Suspended above an excavated archaeological site, the modernist building houses a tremendous collection of artifacts from the Acropolis area. The design of the building is clever — just as ancient Athenians once climbed to the “high city” to reach the Parthenon, as visitors ascend higher in the museum, they pass through artifacts from the Acropolis, getting closer to the Parthenon sculptures. The only problem is that the Parthenon sculptures at the top of the museum aren’t real — they’re painstakingly constructed replicas of the actual Parthenon marbles, which Elgin took and eventually sold to the British government two centuries ago. The museum is an unusual one because it serves as both a collection of beautiful artifacts from Greek history and a monument to Greece’s anger that some of its greatest cultural treasures have resided in London for 200 years. It’s an institution powered by bitterness, designed for two purposes: to celebrate ancient history and make the case that the British — and Lord Elgin in particular — have committed a great crime against Greece. So what, exactly, did Elgin do, and why was it so bad? First, we should understand the area he was working in. Athens had declined in importance and size under Ottoman rule — it was a town of about 10,000 people by the 1700s. The Parthenon itself had been used in many different ways over the millennia. At times, it served as a church, and that church was later made into a mosque. The area may have looked something like this in the 1670s: But, in 1687, disaster struck — an Ottoman army used the Acropolis as a fortification during a war with Venetian invaders; the Venetian bombardment exploded a bunch of ordnance that the Ottomans had been storing there. Some of the building’s walls collapsed, and many of its sculptures fell into the rubble. Over the course of the 1700s, the site was mostly neglected as Ottoman authority declined; a second, smaller mosque was built inside its walls. Here’s another drawing of the mosque, from 1835: And another angle, showing where the statue of Athena would have been located in ancient times. Meanwhile, Europeans who had become besotted with ancient Greece during the Enlightenment began to flock to Athens, making pilgrimages to the “birthplace of Western civilization.” Some felt free to collect souvenirs, even chipping chunks off of the sculptures and taking them back home. Elgin was, depending on who tells the story, either the worst of these vandals or the man who saved the Parthenon sculptures from them. From here, the narrative gets murky. Elgin claimed that he had clear Elgin’s first move was to hire a painter named Giovanni Lusieri to survey the site and make casts of the sculptures. Though many of Lusieri’s paintings have been destroyed, we do have some of his renderings of the Parthenon. In them, the Parthenon retains many of its sculptures but is otherwise less intact than what you’ll see if you visit Athens today (many of its columns have been reconstructed in modern times): Lusieri and other outsiders believed that the Parthenon sculptures were in great danger. Not only were tourists taking chunks of the building home with them, but there was a race to plunder the Parthenon’s biggest prizes. In 1788, a French ambassador had On top of that, local people were scavenging the ruins for building material. Contemporary British accounts
So Lusieri pressed Elgin to go further, and Elgin agreed: they had to take what they could get, not only removing the sculptures that lay in the rubble around the building but sawing off the ones that remained in place. Elgin’s crews took 21 sculptures from the pediment (the triangular part at the top of the building), 15 metope panels (square reliefs that sat below the pediment, depicting mythical battles), and 75 meters of the frieze, which ran around the interior of the building, portraying the Panathenaic procession. Lusieri and his crews hacked these sculptures free of the building, using techniques that would be considered incredibly destructive today. They And Edward Dodwell depicted the precarious lowering of a metope from the building. Lusieri painted the much emptier Parthenon once all of the marbles had been removed. If we are to believe Elgin, his main motivation was to save the sculptures from an unsafe and uncertain situation. Again, there are two stories here: Elgin’s critics Elgin’s claims that the sculptures were safer in his hands were dubious at best because the ship he hired to take them to England sank in 1802. The Mentor hit some rocks in a storm, and 14 pieces of the frieze sank to the bottom of the Aegean. Divers were able to recover the pieces, but it was not an auspicious start to a new life for the sculptures. Whether Elgin had always intended to publicly display the marbles or had tried to keep them all for himself, run out of money due to his divorce, and sold the monuments to the government, they ended up in the hands of the British Museum. The purchase wasn’t popular with everyone in England — this cartoon depicts John Bull buying “stones” instead of “bread” for the British public: By 1816, they were displayed in this room: This is another view of the museum’s early display of the marbles: Here’s artist John Henning leaning jauntily against one of the friezes (or maybe one of his plaster casts of them) in the 1840s: Meanwhile, the Parthenon continued to stand atop the Acropolis, denuded of its decoration. Here’s what it looked like in 1860: Though some of Elgin’s contemporaries were aghast at the removal of the marbles — But times changed, and the Greek government began insisting in the 1980s that the Parthenon sculptures come home. The two governments are actively negotiating, but the British seem The paternalistic claims of the British that they can take better care of the sculptures, if they ever had merit, are no longer true — Greece now has world-class museums with skilled curators. Many museums are returning treasures that they took during the colonial era, especially when there are legal clouds around their acquisition. Perhaps most importantly, as historian Paul Cartledge It seems like it’s time to undo the destructive acts of this strange, unhappy man. It’s time for the Parthenon marbles to head back home. This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are three ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: You can share the newsletter with others: You can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week! You're currently a free subscriber to |