---
subject: "AI #111: Giving Us Pause"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-04-10 13:51:15
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Events in AI don’t stop merely because of a trade war, partially paused or otherwise. Indeed, the decision to not restrict export of H20 chips to China could end up being one of the most important government actions that happened this week. A lot of people are quite boggled about how America could so totally fumble the ball on this particular front, especially given what else is going on. Thus, I am going to put these issues up top again this week, with the hopes that we don’t have to do that again. This week’s previous posts covered AI 2027, both Upgrades continue, as Gemini 2.5 now powers Deep Research, and both it and Grok 3 are available in their respective APIs. Anthropic finally gives us Claude Max, for those who want to buy more capacity. I currently owe a post about Google DeepMind’s Table of Contents[The Tariffs And Selling China AI Chips Are How America Loses](https://substack.com/redirect/f5bb69aa-5084-4c93-9118-e67babb06f47?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/f5bb69aa-5084-4c93-9118-e67babb06f47?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Oh no.[Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/127bc057-5902-40d3-951a-82303584b2b2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)They know more than you do.[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/d5e068bf-68a9-4053-939e-36f6ffd7e46d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)When you ask a silly question.[Huh, Upgrades](https://substack.com/redirect/ea6ba186-79fa-4661-9438-454abfab2974?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/ea6ba186-79fa-4661-9438-454abfab2974?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Gemini 2.5 Pro Deep Research and API, Anthropic Pro.[Choose Your Fighter.](https://substack.com/redirect/caa9d217-d057-44c2-adcc-cdaa74f67b17?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Gemini 2.5 continues to impress, and be experimental.[On Your Marks.](https://substack.com/redirect/030d5a3d-4b59-4621-ab17-5acef2c064e0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The ‘handle silly questions’ benchmark we need.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon.](https://substack.com/redirect/3ba69a0b-38fb-4ff8-8667-a9a24b61d613?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)How did you know it was a scam?[Fun With Image Generation.](https://substack.com/redirect/0804c270-2e6b-4f4b-a3e4-84d62d6d786e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The evolution of AI self-portraits.[Copyright Confrontation.](https://substack.com/redirect/18ba756d-a1a5-4456-aef4-a65895a7f1a1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Opt-out is not good enough for OpenAI and Google.[They Took Our Jobs.](https://substack.com/redirect/3fd6579c-dcc7-4a16-9b24-12493b18550e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Analysis of AI for education, Google AI craters web traffic.[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/3fbf8eba-0e8a-4d62-b458-2b85dc8c946c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)ARIA, and the 2025 IAPS Fellowship.[Introducing.](https://substack.com/redirect/72b994b4-bf59-4972-b23d-961adb7782b5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)DeepSeek proposes Generative Reward Modeling.[In Other AI News](https://substack.com/redirect/2bf80c6e-224e-4690-8555-d7ca5a97784d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/2bf80c6e-224e-4690-8555-d7ca5a97784d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)GPT-5 delayed for o3 and o4-mini.[Show Me the Money.](https://substack.com/redirect/cb2675d5-a844-4cee-9360-fbe6c9de19a4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)It’s all going to AI. What’s left of it, anyway.[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/1ebe9ed2-4a1a-4d7d-9454-e20b4bef9a6c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Giving AIs goals and skin in the game will work out, right?[The Quest for Sane Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/c3bf0e99-f473-4965-aece-0defe572701a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The race against proliferation.[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/7dded64b-2053-4a38-82dc-fab67879e261?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)AI 2027, but also the story of a deepfake porn web.[AI 2027.](https://substack.com/redirect/bd0a80d2-d0af-4973-9bb8-c7dcbdcfc057?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A few additional reactions.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/cde87473-2c2b-4bcd-b29e-62859e42bbf3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)What’s interesting is that you need to keep explaining.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/d35b9233-d24d-4abf-9bca-3be3d6b9cec3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Faithfulness pushback.
The Tariffs And Selling China AI Chips Are How America LosesThe one trade we need to restrict is selling top AI chips to China. We are failing. The other trades, that power the American and global economies? It’s complicated. The good news is that the non-China tariffs are partially paused for 90 days. The bad news is that we are still imposing rather massive tariffs across the board, and the massive uncertainty over a wider trade war remains. How can anyone invest under these conditions? How can you even confidently trade the stock market, given the rather obvious insider trading taking place around such announcements? This is a general warning, and also a specific warning about AI. What happens when all your most important companies lose market access, you alienate your allies forcing them into the hands of your rivals, you drive costs up and demand down, and make it harder and more expensive to raise capital? Much of the damage still remains.
For now we’re not on the path Adam warns about, but who knows what happens in 90 days. And everyone has to choose their plans while not knowing that. The damage only ends when Congress reclaims its constitutional tariff authority. Meanwhile, the one trade we desperately do need to restrict is selling frontier AI chips to China.
This is utterly insane. Investments in AI data centers? A million dollar, let’s say ‘donation’? These are utter chump change versus what is already $16 billion in chip sales, going straight to empower PRC AI companies.
Meanwhile, US chip production? Not all that interested:
It is mind blowing that we are going to all-out trade war against the PRC and we still can’t even properly cut off their supplies of Nvidia chips, nor are we willing to spend funds to build up our own production. What the hell are we even doing? This is how people were talking when it was only a delay in implementing this regulation, which was already disastrous enough:
Someone did wake up, and here chose the opposite of violence, allowing sales to the PRC of the exact thing most vital to the PRC. Again: What. The. Actual. Fuck. There are other problems too.
Oh, and we fired a bunch of people at BIS responsible for enforcing these rules, to save a tiny amount of money. If I didn’t know any better I would suspect enemy action. Language Models Offer Mundane UtilityThe question is, can they do it fast enough to make up for other events?
We consistently see that AI systems optimized for diagnostic reasoning are outperforming doctors - including outperforming doctors that have access to the AI. If you don’t trust the AI sufficiently, it’s like not trusting a chess AI, your changes on average make things worse. The edges here are not small.
One way to help get mundane utility is to use “mundane” product and software scaffolding for your specific application, and then invest in an actually good model. Sarah seems very right here that there is extreme reluctance to do this. (Note: I have not tried Auren or Seren, although I generally hear good things about it.)
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
Once again, I point out that even if this did come out of an LLM, it wasn’t a hallucination and it wasn’t even a mistake by the model. It was that if you ask a silly question you get a silly answer, and if you fail to ask the second question of ‘what would happen if I did this’ and f*** around instead then you get to find out the hard way.
It was not a ‘malicious’ action, and the AI was at most only unaligned in the sense that it didn’t sufficiently prominently scream how stupid the whole idea was. But yes, ‘the AI is too stupid to do this’ is very much a short term solution, almost always.
Their particular use case is in computer security spotting vulnerabilities, and LC reports that Sonnet 3.5 was a big leap, and 3.6 and 3.7 were small improvements, but nothing else has worked in practice. There are a lot of speculations about AI labs lying and cheating to pretend to be making progress, or the models ‘being nicer to talk to.’ Given the timing of the post they hadn’t tested Gemini 2.5 Pro yet. It’s true that, for a number of months, there are classes of tasks where Sonnet 3.5 was a big improvement, and nothing since then has been that huge an improvement over Sonnet 3.5, at least until Gemini 2.5. In other tasks, this is not true. But in general, it seems very clear the models are improving, and also it hasn’t been that long since Sonnet 3.5. If any other tech was improving this fast we’d be loving it.
Huh, Upgrades
That seems like highly reasonable pricing, but good lord you owe us a model card.
The API has no access to real time events. Without that, I don’t see much reason to be using Grok at these prices.
Or downgrades,
Choose Your FighterPerhaps it is still a bit experimental?
It still does the job pretty well.
I will continue to pay the $200/mo to OpenAI because I want first access to new products, but in terms of current offerings I don’t see the value proposition for most people versus paying $20 each for Claude and Gemini and ChatGPT.
If you believed in Arena as the One True Eval, which you definitely shouldn’t do, you would only use 2.5 Pro, Flash Thinking and 2.0 Flash.
This kind of thinking seems underrated. What matters for smaller or cheaper models is partly cost, but in large part what machines can run the model. There are big benefits to aiming for a sweet spot, and it’s a miss to need slightly more than [32 / 64 / 128 / 256 / 512 / 640] GB. On Your MarksIn light of recent events, ‘how you handle fools asking stupid questions’ seems rather important.
Also in light of recent events, on Arena’s rapidly declining relevance:
Yep. For the vast majority of queries we have saturated the ‘actually good answer’ portion of the benchmark, so preference comes down to things like syncopathy, ‘sounding smart’ or seeming to be complete. Some of the questions will produce meaningful preferences, but they’re drowned out. I do think over time those same people will realize that’s not what they care about when choosing their chatbot, but it could take a while, and my guess is pure intelligence level will start to matter a lot less than other considerations for when people chat. Using them as agents is another story. That doesn’t mean Arena is completely useless, but you need to adjust for context.
The future is so unevenly distributed that their scoring chart is rather out of date. This was announced on April 3, 2025, and the top models are Gemini 2.0 Flash and Claude 3 Opus. Yes, Opus. I don’t think the following is a narrative violation at this point? v3 is not a reasoning model and DeepSeek’s new offering is their GRM line that is coming soon?
On multi-turn text only, v3 is in 12th place, just ahead of r1, and behind even Gemini 2.0 Flash which also isn’t a reasoning model and is older and tiny. It is well behind Sonnet 3.6. So that’s disappointing, although it is still higher here than GPT-4o from November, which scores remarkably poorly here, of course GPT-4.5 trounces and Gemini 2.5 Pro, Sonnet 3.7 Thinking and o1 Pro are at the top in that order. On Humanity’s Last Exam, v3-March-2025 is I guess doing well for a small non-reasoning model, but is still not impressive, and well behind r1. The real test will be r2, or an updated r1. It’s ready when it’s ready. In the meantime, SEAL is very much in Gemini 2.5 Pro’s corner, it’s #1 by a wide margin. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
Fun With Image Generation
Scarcity, and having to earn things, makes things more valuable and more appreciated. It’s true. I don’t appreciate many things as much as I used to. Yet I don’t think the hedonic treadmill means it’s all zero sum. Better things and better access are still, usually, better. But partly yes, it is a skill issue. I do think you can become more of a child and enter the Kingdom of Heaven here, if you make an effort. Objectively, as Scott notes, the AIs we already have are true wonders. Even more than before, everything is awesome and no one is happy. Which also directly led to recent attempts to ensure that everything stop being so awesome because certain people decided that it sucked that we all had so much ability to acquire goods and services, and are setting out to fix that. I disagree with those people, I think that it is good that we have wealth and can use it to access to goods and services, including via trade. Let’s get back to that.
I like that we now have a mode where the AI seems to be able to respond as if it was situationally aware, so that we can see what it will be like when the AIs inevitably become more situationally aware. There are claims that Here’s a fun workaround suggestion for the refusals:
Copyright Confrontation
My presumption is that opt-out won’t work for the same logistical reasons as opt-in. Once you offer it, a huge percentage of content will opt-out if only to negotiate for compensation, and the logistics are a nightmare. So I think the right answer remains to do a radio-style automatic compensation schema. They Took Our JobsGoogle’s AI Overviews and other changes
The key is to differentiate between using AI to learn, versus using AI to avoid learning. A close variant is to ask how much of this is ‘cheating.’ Measuring that from Anthropic’s position is indeed very hard.
Anthropic does something that at least somewhat attempts to measure this, in a way, by drawing a distinction between ‘direct’ versus ‘collaborative’ requests, with the other central division being ‘problem solving’ versus ‘output creation’ and all four quadrants being 23%-29% of the total. However, there’s no reason you can’t have collaborative requests that avoid learning, or have direct requests that aid learning. Very often I’m using direct requests to AIs in order to learn things.
The thread is about solving Math Olympiad (IMO) problems, going over the results of a paper I’ve covered before. These are problems that approximately zero human teachers or students can solve, so o3-mini getting 3.3% correct and 4.4% partially correct is still better than almost everyone reading this. Yes, if you have blind faith in AIs to give correct answers to arbitrary problems you’re going to have a bad time. Also, if you do that with a human, you’re going to have a bad time. So don’t do that, you fool. Get InvolvedThis seems like an excellent opportunity.
Introducing
To do this as I understand it, they propose Self-Principled Critique Tuning (SPCT), which consists of Pointwise Generative Reward Modeling (GRM), where the models generate ‘principles’ (criteria for valuation) and ‘critiques’ that analyze responses in detail, and optimizes on both principles and critiques. Then at inference time they run multiple instances, such as sampling 32 times, and use voting mechanisms to choose aggregate results. They claim the resulting DeepSeek-GRM-27B outperforms much larger models. They intend to make the models here open, so we will find out. Claude guesses, taking the paper at face value, that there are some specialized tasks, where you need evaluation and transparency, where you would want to pay the inference costs here, but that for most tasks you wouldn’t. This does seem like a good idea. It’s one of those ‘obvious’ things you would do. Increasingly it seems like those obvious things you would do are going to work. I haven’t seen talk about it. The one technical person I asked did not see this as claiming much progress. Bloomberg also has a writeup with the scary title ‘
In Other AI News
No, they are not ‘converting away’ the nonprofit. They are trying to have the nonprofit hand over the keys to the kingdom, both control over OpenAI and rights to most of the net present value of its future profit, for a fraction of what those assets are worth. Then they are trying to have it use those assets for what would be best described as ‘generic philanthropic efforts’ capitalizing on future AI capabilities, rather than on attempts to ensure against existential risks from AGI and ASI (artificial superintelligence). That does not automatically excuse Elon Musk’s behaviors, or mean that Elon Musk is not lying, or mean that Musk has standing to challenge what is happening. But when Elon Musk says that OpenAI is up to no good here, he is right.
Keach Hagey wrote the WSJ post on what happened with Altman being fired, so this sounds like de facto confirmation that the story was reported accurately?
A Bloomberg longread on ‘
Show Me the Money
Quiet Speculations
Even if the ‘legal system’ were by some miracle able to hold and not get abused, and we ignore the fact that the AIs would of course collude because that’s the correct solution to the problem and decision theory makes this easy for sufficiently capable minds whose decisions strongly correlate to each other? This is a direct recipe for human disempowerment, as AIs rapidly get control of most wealth and real resources. If you create smarter, more capable, more competitive minds, and then set them loose against us in normal capitalistic competition with maximalist goals, we lose. And we lose everything. Solve for the equilibrium. We are not in it. And that’s with the frankly ludicrous assumption that the ‘legal system’ would meaningfully hold and protect us. It isn’t even doing a decent job of that right now. How could you possibly expect such a system to hold up to the pressures of transformative AI set loose with maximalist goals and control over real resources, when it can’t even hold up in the face of what is already happening?
You also have the issue of confounding. We can argue over what AI does to GDP or market prices, but if there’s suddenly a massive completely pointless trade war that destroys the economy, all you know about AI’s impact is that it is not yet so massive that it overcame that. Indeed, if AI’s impact was to enable this, or to prevent other similar things, that would be an epic impact, but you likely can’t show causation. Seb Krier, who works on Policy Development & Strategy at Google DeepMind, The Quest for Sane Regulations
As in, if you can ensure it takes a while before proliferation, you can use that time to harden defenses against the particular enabled threats. The question is, does this offer us enough protection? Helen agrees that on its own this probably won’t work. For some threats if you have a lead then you can harden defenses somewhat, but I presume this will be increasingly perilous over time. That still requires substantial non-proliferation efforts, to even get this far, even to solve only this subclass of our problems. I also think that non-proliferation absolutely does also help maintain a lead and help avoid a race to the bottom, even if as Helen Toner notes the MAIM paper did not emphasize those roles. As she notes, what nonproliferation experts are advocating for is not obvious so different from what Toner is saying here, as it is obvious that (at least below some very high threshold) we cannot prevent proliferation of a given strength of model indefinitely. Most importantly,
Once again: If an open model with catastrophic misuse risks is released, and we need to then crack down on it because we can’t harden defenses sufficiently, then that’s when the actual totalitarianism comes out to play. The intrusiveness required would be vastly worse than that required to stop the models from being trained or released in the first place. AB 501, the bill that was going to prevent OpenAI from becoming a for-profit, The Week in AudioGoogle continues to fail marketing forever is probably the main takeaway here.
AI 2027
Max then goes through the timeline in more detail. A lot of the disagreements end up not changing the trajectory much, with the biggest disagreement being that Max expects much closer competition between labs including the PRC. I liked the note that Agent-4 uses corrigibility as its strategy with Agent-5, yet the humans used interpretability in the slowdown scenario. I also appreciated that Max expects Agent-4 to take more and earlier precautions against a potential shutdown attempt.
The thing is, we really really are going to want these AIs talking to each other. The moment we realize not doing it is super annoying, what happens? As one comment points out, related questions are central to the ultimate solutions described in AI 2027, where forcing the AIs to communicate in human language we can understand is key to getting to the good ending. That is still a distinct strategy, for a distinct reason. A reminder that yes, the ‘good’ ending is not so easy to get to in reality:
If you keep noticing that you need to do that in order to get a good ending, either fix something systemic or you are going to get a bad ending. Rhetorical Innovation
They go on like this for a few exchanges but the point is made. Anarchists are wildly outnumbered and unpopular for very good reasons. Yet, in a situation where we are fast building new minds that will likely be smarter and more generally capable and competitive than humans, we constantly face calls for anarchism, or something deeply close it. Such folks often cry totalitarianism at the idea of regulating such activities at all, let alone on the level we already regulate humans and most human activities. This is, let us face it, both suicidal and deeply silly. Speaking of deeply silly:
You would think so, Colin. A superhuman entity will perform superhumanly. And yet, I can’t help but notice that a lot of people say that a superhuman entity would not perform superhumanly, or would cause only a marginal performance improvement. Others are revealing that they do not believe superhuman entities are possible, or even that superhuman performance in various domains is possible. There is usually no coherent explanation why such performance is impossible. Note that in most domains, reliably performing as well as the best human, but much faster and with access to all the information, is importantly superhuman.
Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is DifficultRyan Greenblatt partially pushes back on the implications of
The question is, which of the following are happening: The CoT in the study is unfaithful because opaque reasoning is better at getting the best answer than transparent reasoning. The CoT was unfaithful because opaque reasoning vibes with the situation. The CoT was unfaithful because they optimized it to be opaque without realizing. Transparent reasoning is better at getting the right answer. The CoT in the study is unfaithful because there’s no need for CoT in the first place, so there’s no optimization pressure on it to be useful, thus it isn’t transparent.
Or, more directly: Is an opaque or unfaithful CoT better or worse at creating the superior final answer than a faithful CoT? Does reasoning a lot mean a transparent CoT, or an unfaithful CoT? My interpretation of the study was that it was evidence that opaque was stronger, and was what would come out of optimizing for the best answers, in ways that were going to be extremely hard to prevent. Ryan is suggesting perhaps it is the opposite. The good news is that this seems like a very testable empirical question. We can’t test directly on the final answer until too late but we should have good alternatives. It’s also an important one. A lot of alignment approaches are very different depending on how easy or hard it is to get CoT to be transparent or opaque, faithful or unfaithful, especially at much higher levels of intelligence and complex thought.
You're currently a free subscriber to |