---
subject: "Why is Macon Interesting?"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-04-07 10:01:20
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Ryan here. Nestled just outside the geographical center of Georgia, Macon is a city of 150,000 people along the Ocmulgee River. For over 17,000 years people have called this little stretch of Southeast home, and that’s not something you can say about many places in North America. But Macon has seen some tough times. From 1970 to 2010 the city’s population dropped by 30,000, major employers were fleeing for bigger and better connected cities, and airlines were pulling routes out of the regional airport. All of the factors were there for a prolonged decline. Thankfully, over the last decade or two a growing number of proud Maconites, both native and transplants, have been investing in the city and helping turn it into a place worth seeing. But the fact of the matter is you can’t talk about Macon without talking about music. Nearly 50 years past the peak of its influence, it’s easy to forget how important Macon was to the success of Black artists, and the creation of Southern Rock. Macon keeps better company than you realize Macon is the birthplace of If your knowledge of Capricorn Records only extends to when the resurrected version of the label was pumping out gold records for 311 and Cake in the 1990s then boy do I have some news for you. In the late 60s, Phil and Alan Walden saw the opportunity to expand beyond managing Black artists like Otis Redding, With millions of records sold, their influence went far beyond just music. There’s an argument to be made that Capricorn Records, and The Allman Brothers Band in particular, put Jimmy Carter in the White House. Now, I’m not making that argument, but Also, if you spent time around Macon you knew there were 2 rules for talking to Gregg Allman. “Don’t ask about In more recent years, it’s where Mike Mills and Bill Berry met to begin forming what became So it should come as no surprise that there are great music festivals in this city. Chief among them being Bragg Jam, featuring what are honestly some of the best bookers in the country. Despite being a small festival with a limited budget it can feature one of Jason Isbell’s first shows after he restarted his career as a solo artist, and where you could see Rainbow Kitten Surprise in a 200 person space, 2 years before they got BIG LETTER BILLING at major festivals like Austin City Limits and Bonnaroo. What To Do In Macon Walk Around Macon’s downtown was designed with wide, expansive boulevards surrounding large city blocks bisected by active alleys. These alleys have evolved from simple pass-throughs into art installations, restaurant space, and other kinds of transformative interior development that deserve your time. Stay At
Eat At
Drink At
You’ll need to make a reservation and you only get to hang out for an hour at a time, but it’s worth making a point to go here. Listen to Music At
Get Outside At
Thankfully, many important parts of their history remain, including some of the most spectacular Mississipian era platform mounds in the region. At the same time, the local government has been working directly with the Muscogee (Creek) Nation to address what happened in the area, honor the history of the site, and hopefully Learn At
— Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Ryan (RJA) —
|