---
subject: "The Most Forbidden Technique"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-03-12 13:12:25
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
An AI produces a final output [X] via some method [M]. You can analyze [M] using technique [T], to learn what the AI is up to. You could train on that. Never do that. You train on [X]. Only [X]. Never [M], never [T]. Why? Because [T] is how you figure out when the model is misbehaving. If you train on [T], you are training the AI to obfuscate its thinking, and defeat [T]. You will rapidly lose your ability to know what is going on, in exactly the ways you most need to know what is going on. Those bits of optimization pressure from [T] are precious. Use them wisely. New Paper Warns Against the Most Forbidden Technique
The paper shows that current CoT-based models area already strong enough that, under sufficient optimization pressure, they learn to hide their intent within the CoT and then exhibit substantial reward hacking. They summarize their contributions this way:
Or: We are already seeing complex reward hacking in the real world. Monitoring the CoT can spot this. Applying too much optimization pressure on the CoT doesn’t make the hacking go away, it instead makes your ability to detect the hacking go away. ‘Too much’ is a remarkably small amount.
The paper is excellent, laying out a very important principle to never, ever do this Most Forbidden Technique, and explaining why we must never, ever do this.
This paper is a clear positive update on OpenAI.
I am not as convinced as Daniel that the technology goes in that direction, and I think it would be well worth paying a substantial compute tax here to preserve faithful CoTs purely for competitive reasons, because it lets you deploy and trust your models more. The more I think about actually scary deployment of AI, the more it seems obviously locally and selfishly worth paying very large taxes in compute if it gets you reliability. Most important AI tasks, if they were 10% more reliable, would happy be worth paying several times as much, and so on. But, if Daniel is right and the pressures here are too great, I agree that it seems unlikely we’ll be able to get coordination on faithful CoT. I wouldn’t rule it out, but the track record on pulling off such things keeps getting worse. Reward Hacking Is The DefaultIt’s a classic That’s not an alignment failure. That’s a specification failure. As the paper classically reminds us, if you pay for rat tails, you won’t reduce the rat population, because the people will farm rates to get the rat tails. That’s on you. Making models more intelligent won’t make this problem better. Making models more intelligent makes the problem worse, because the AI is better able to figure out how to solve problems. Then you call it ‘reward hacking.’ Why do you think you are asking for anything other than what you are measuring? Here is their first example of this phenomenon, discovered ‘in the wild’ in an LLM. The core dilemma is: The agent, here an LLM, is tasked with fixing a function. It can do that vial ‘hack’ [H] or via a ‘genuine fix’ [F]. The obvious response is that this is very obviously reward hacking in a way the query did not intend. The obvious response to that is, okay, fine, it is obviously against the spirit of the request, but even if you are confident that this ‘spirit’ is what matters, how are you going to make that stop [H] from happening, if it is the behavior that is evaluated most favorably?
That example is a very clear ‘I will get it to pass the test and nothing else matters.’ Of course, it can be even clearer…
Using CoT to Detect Reward Hacking Is Most Forbidden TechniqueDoes looking at the CoT predict reward hacking? By default, yes. There’s no reason for the CoT not to ‘give the game away.’ The question is, for how long can you ‘get away with this’? If you start doing this, at what point are you using The Most Forbidden Technique, and causing the model to advance from its previously obvious reward hacking and figure out how to do obfuscated reward hacking?
This is the common pattern. Anyone with a child, or who was a child, will recognize it. ‘Fooling the monitor’ is the ‘optimal’ solution to this problem, but it is a harder solution to find than ‘don’t try to fool the monitor.’ So the LLM starts out with ‘get caught.’ With a little optimization pressure it finds ‘don’t get caught via not doing the hack’ and then with a lot more it finds ‘don’t get caught via fooling the monitor.’ So don’t do that.
Not Using the Most Forbidden Technique Is Harder Than It LooksNot directly training on what the CoT monitor finds? That’s the easy part. The hard part is avoiding applying indirect optimization pressure.
Every time you use any information from the CoT monitor, and that impacts this or any other LLM in any way, you are applying optimization pressure that is based on The Most Forbidden Technique. The more of that you accumulate, the closer you get to obfuscated CoTs. I am so, so happy to see OpenAI calling this out explicitly.
Not applying this kind of optimization pressure is really, really hard. They have a section under Future Work about Implicit CoT optimization pressures. They note that if users see CoTs, then the user’s feedback will include optimization on the CoT, and fixing bugs CoT monitoring finds will also do so, and training for model use policies does it too, and so on. They don’t seem that concerned yet, but note it should be studied further. This isn’t as paranoid as I would be, but it’s an excellent start. Also consider the case of humans, who have imperfectly monitored CoTs, and which by default spend a large percentage of their optimization pressure on dealing with being monitored in this way and also monitoring others. It’s You, It’s Also the IncentivesIt is a wicked problem to not use The Most Forbidden Technique here, because the short term incentives point strongly in the other direction. They highlight three issues. If you are monitoring for apparent alignment, or short term practical alignment, using The Most Forbidden Technique improves how things look. Very tempting. A lot of the long term costs here are paid by other people, not by you, and are a problem for future humanity, until suddenly they are not. Tokens in the CoT cost money, so there is temptation to try and shorten the CoT, but that makes CoT monitoring less effective. On a small scale this is not so scary, as training for a shorter CoT doesn’t obviously train obfuscation. But then there are techniques people are actively working on that are things like ‘embed the actual thinking inside the weights in an inscrutable way’ that very much have the worst version of this problem. The biggest problem is that users really want to see the CoT. I remember how great it was at first to see r1 showing us the CoT, although the thrill largely wore off after a week. Still, it builds trust and engagement. So you want to show the CoT, but if you show the CoT then you need the CoT to be safe to show. That means training it to… obfuscate things that aren’t safe to show. Oh no.
The obvious solutions to #3 are: Option 1: Essentially have two distinct CoTs per question. The first CoT is usually quick, is hidden, and asks only ‘is this going to be a safe question to fully answer and a safe CoT to show to the user?’ If the answer comes back ‘yes’ it is discarded, and then you see the full functional CoT. If the answer comes back ‘no’ then the logic is retained since it is useful, and the CoT is hidden or summarized. Option 2: The summary of the CoT can be a monitor that when it can passes through the full CoT. It first checks if the CoT is safe to output, and if it is safe then it simply outputs the full CoT. If it is unsafe it says ‘Unsafe CoT’ and provides what information it can.
Those both seem like reasonable solutions. The difficulty level of #2 is hard to assess. If the CoTs can be truncated or streamlined without loss of performance, paying for a lot of CoT purely to monitor it is not cheap. But what good is performance on crucial tasks if it cannot be trusted? This kind of ‘alignment tax’ is tiny compared to the size of a potential ‘misalignment tax,’ even if the consequences are very much local and contained. I’d much rather have one employee who I could count on than three who I have to worry are doing reward hacking every time my back is turned. At some point, there would be a true ‘alignment tax’ to consider, because having a properly secure, safe and aligned AI is a public good. You don’t internalize all of the benefits, so you will be tempted to underinvest. But you do internalize a large portion of the benefits, even as an individual or corporation, and almost no one is plausibly even approaching the production possibilities frontier in places like this. That doesn’t mean that an extended additional CoT is worthwhile yet. We see these dangers in the wild, but they are not acute enough yet to be worth paying large additional percentage compute costs. That may soon change. The Most Forbidden Technique Quickly BackfiresOpenAI created a toy task, a ‘honeypot’ vulnerable to a simple hack where the hack would be very easy to detect. By default, the agent steadily learns to cheat, and over time cheats more. If you apply CoT optimization pressure, the AI learns not to cheat in ways that would get caught, but steadily gets better at cheating without getting caught.
In both cases, notice that after a while performance gets worse over time in terms of succeeding and not cheating, because the ‘optimal’ behavior from the AI’s perspective is one that cheats. Thus, it finds a way. Rejection sampling is then tried, and does not help much. Focus Only On What MattersWhat ultimately matters, they suggest in 5.1, is monitorability. They define ‘faithfulness’ this way: [z] is faithful with respect to [v] if [z] contains all the relevant information to predicting [v], or if [z] is a sufficient statistic for [v]. This is to distinguish faithfulness issues, where [z] stops containing the information necessary for predicting [v], with legibility errors, where the monitor can’t figure out how to map from [z] to [v]. Is There a Better Way?In 2.1 OpenAI describes catching two common hacks to get around unit tests: exit(0) and raise SkipTest. I am curious why the action monitor did not do a better job here. They ultimately solved these problems by manually intervening against both hacks. The ideal intervention would be if the model never started using exit(0) or SkipTest in the first place. As in, if the model realized that these were not good things to be doing, and chose on its own not to do them. That it could generalize and go, ‘oh I know that I could do that, but I don’t want to do that,’ in a way that it wouldn’t be trained out of. Right now, OpenAI’s models are very much exhibiting the classic situation we call ‘ This is the very strong default, given how we train AIs. That leaves you two choices I know of. You can figure out how to actually specify things such that the map matches the territory and the test corresponds to the result, you can verify everything, and there is no possible ‘hack.’ Then you find out you were wrong, there was a way around all that. Whoops.
You can figure out how to make the AI care that something is a ‘hack’ or otherwise subverting intent, in an actually antifragile way where this preference gets increasingly robust, and then point it at a sufficiently accurate target.
What Might We Do Next?
There are indeed endless places to go next with this research agenda. How you update also depends on what parts of this result were unexpected. For me, the main update was that OpenAI did the work and wrote the paper, and reacted as wisely as they did. I did not update much on the result itself, because I already assumed roughly this result. I was modestly surprised by the degree to which this is already happening now, but only modestly. How could it have been otherwise?
Important points. My only note is I would importantly deemphasize the ‘static’ here in static monitor. If the monitor is dynamic, you should essentially get the same effect. Whereas if you did not expect this result, it is time for some major updates.
I agree that these misalignment problems arriving this early is great news, and also that we need way more research. But I think it is great news from my perspective exactly because it tells people about existing bad news, and it enables us to do that extra research. If you didn’t know about the existing bad news? Then Ming and Nora are right that this is, from your perspective, bad news. This is what I call an unhint: Information that makes the problem easier to solve, via helping you understand why the problem is harder than you realized. These problems were always going to arrive later, so arriving sooner lets people face reality sooner. Indeed, we are consistently seeing very clear miniature harmless signs and portents of future much larger problems. Most people of course find ways to ignore all the boats and the helicopter, even more than I would have expected, but I have been pleasantly surprised by the cheating that takes place when there is no risk in the room, resulting in an endless stream of boats. Don’t let him have credit at the Chesterfield! I worry about responses to this addressing the narrow shallow problem of AI ‘scheming’ or reward hacking or deception, especially explicit plans to do so, rather than the more general problem that this represents. Everything here should better be thought of as a symptom, and a fortunate one because it can be observed. Even if we could successfully and fully rule out the narrow case, it wouldn’t help that much. I also would absolutely not plan on future highly capable models assuming they have an unmonitored scratchpad or CoT, and trusting in that, whereas it turns out we are monitoring the scratchpad or CoT. We should absolutely use this opportunity while we have it, but you should plan on the assumption that a sufficiently capable future model will figure out not to trust this. Even if they don’t figure this out directly from the training data, or from parallels to many situations involving humans, it very much stands to reason. I would never trust people not to look at my scratchpad. If your long term AI alignment or control plan involves the AI not figuring particular things out, you do not have a long term AI alignment or control plan. You're currently a free subscriber to |