---
subject: "Fuck the Niche,"
from: "\"River Kenna from In•Star\" <riverkenna@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-10 07:30:37
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "River Kenna", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3010718370428876194", "UNREAD"]
---
The past couple years, I’ve made my money mostly by teaching somatic meditation. People who know my work tend to know Which is exactly backwards, oddly enough. I never started out trying to talk about somatics. I ran a couple of workshops on Nowadays, I really only have a cursory interest in talking about somatic meditation or the imaginal. They’re both important and vital, but the places they’ve taken me are more interesting to me than those practices themselves are. Which is a bit of a problem, as I’ve kind of put myself in a niche of talking about somatics and the imaginal, and making my money by teaching somatic and imaginal practices. I’ve felt a bit trapped by that at times, the ways that I try to convince myself to Be Responsible and Make Legible Offerings so that I can Be Stable and Have Nice Things. The ways that I try to get myself to niche down and make a nice little home in this niche, a nice little engine that can drive and sustain the other interests in my life. Now I’m feeling like I just want to lean into the weirder stuff, actually. I sent out a proposal this week for a big weird art project slash film project slash inner work retreat slash friendly gathering. I want to run it later this year or next year, and I have no idea how I’m going to fund it or how it will turn out, but it’s big and cool and weird and I want to do it. My past year has largely been driven by visions of specific goddesses and spirit guides, and I want to write about it without worrying that it’ll scare off people who just wanted to meditate on their gut and read some essays on I keep getting pulled back to art projects and writing projects that I always yank myself away from because I Need To Make A Living — and I want to stop pulling myself back and simply trust that the impulse is going somewhere I need to be. I plan to run a Plotkin-style wilderness vision quest with a friend this year, and I want to do more stuff like that moving forward. I want to run not just meditation workshops on zoom, but transformative events in the woods, in the city streets, in guesthouses next to forgotten historical monuments. I spent 3 days straight last week poring back through my calendars and notes and texts to figure out exactly what was happening degree by degree throughout the Jupiter transit that stationed on my ascendant and then went retrograde when I went into the hospital last year. I’ve never been big into astrology but every few months I have a week or two where I get obsessive about another aspect of it without ever understanding why. I want to be able to lean into that without either overplaying it or apologizing for it. My entire past year or two has been a deep unfolding journey through the realities of the energy body, and it’s looking like the next few years will continue that journey — and I want to write about that and talk about it as the simple, matter-of-fact reality it is, rather than apologizing for it like it’s all new age pixie dust. I had a flash of manic insight two weeks ago where I sketched out a practical framework of lasting emotional/energetic change, and am now pulling together a small group to give it a test run. It doesn’t fit neatly into my current niche, but I really don’t want that to matter, I don’t want it taking up my headspace. Basically, I want to stop trying to control and narrow down what I’m here to do. That’s not me, that’s not how I work, that’s not how I thrive. If I’m to make my way in the world, I want to make my way in the world. So with all due respect and gratitude and love for the people who keep telling me I could make good money if I just knock off the weird stuff, change my bio to “Somatic Coach,” and take some good headshots: Thank you; I love you; No thanks. I gotta do this my way. That said, if you’re looking for somatic coaching, do get in touch; I’m starting up a group coaching offering. Infra is free and will stay free, but if you get something out of my work, consider giving something back. Share my writing with friends & followers, pick up my |