---
subject: "The Monday Media Diet with Ruddy Aboab"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-02-12 10:08:12
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
I recently wrote a WITI about the charm and ecclecticm of the French radio station FIP. Shortly after, I was put in touch with Ruddy Aboab who is in charge with the station. He’s a man of extreme taste, having worked at the excellent Radio Nova before. Here, he shares the things that are catching his attention in France. Also be sure to Tell us about yourself. I don’t love speaking about myself, but as I am here right now, writing you in a train going from Paris to Lille, listening Iranian songs, let’s go for it. I am a radio & music man. That has been almost all my life until today. I used to start and grow up in Radio Nova for 18 years, doing absolutely everything (mc, artistic direction, music direction, live events) and I am now since 2 years, the happiest man on earth. I am the head of Fip Radio, the best musical radio in the world. Fip is a French gem that I want to share to everyone. We are already quiet listen in US and especially in NYC. Fip, is the purest musical radio I could know: 99% of the radio is music programmed by hand with our ears, track after track, day after day. No repetition, no rotation, no commercials. Everyday is a new musical trip. From Past to Future, all kinds of styles. In addition to Fip, I am also co-talent buyer for Rock en Seine Festival. We are now finalizing our next line edition with my friend Arnaud Meerseman. Lana Del Rey, Massive Attack, LCD, Fred Again, Pj Harvey, Olivia Dean are on the 24 line up. Describe your media diet. My day starts with music like it ends with music. I woke up and usually listen to Fip to put all the family in a cool musical mood to wake up. Then, when we realize that we are, like every day, late for school, I switch on the webradio Fip Hip Hop, to adapt the rhythm we need. In the same time, in the bathroom, France info is tuned to be aware of the latest news without make the kids anxious. I am pretty obsessed with informations. After having a fight with my son in the car about who is gonna play which track, I sit down for a coffee nearby the school and just start to check my mail, and the Fip Radio social network. I also have a quick look at Le Monde app. Then during the day it will go with the mood, the flow and the time I would have. I love to mix my reading from different magazines on Cafeyn which is an press app with most of the magazines I love to read (So Foot, Society, Les Inrockuptibles, Libération, Beaux Arts, Time, Jazz Magazine) but of course also checking new releases on bandcamp, Radio France Discothèque, to try to impress my incredible music team but honestly it’s very hard to. What’s the last great book you read? « L’été des Charognes » by Simon Johaninn at Allia Edition. What are you reading now? « Nino dans la nuit » by Capucine & Simon Johaninn at Allia Edition. Actually, I am obsessed with this young French author. He has something in his writing that provokes emotions I didn’t feel for a long time. The words, the style are really raw, direct, punchy ones, but staying in the same time really poetic and precise. It’s definitely my total new crush. What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication? I used to read magazine I love from the beginning to the end, But now, I do not find the time anymore - except in summer holidays, which cause me massive luggage issues - so during the year I pick the articles I want to read, and I bring the copy at home, just in case. I love to read newspapers sometimes months after. It give me another clue to appreciate them. Who should everyone be reading that they’re not? Hum, the oslo accords? Just to keep a little hope and lucidity. What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone? I am not a massive app consumer, it’s already a total mess on my phone. But I would def say the Radio France application, and all the other channels of Radio France. Honestly, it’s famous in France but I guess not enough yet all over the world. All in one app, podcast, webradios, playlists, live. Plane or train? Can we still smoke in plane? No? Let’s go for train then. No kidding, I am very nostalgic of the plane in the 90’s, it used to be cool, chill trip while it’s kind of an absolute nightmare now. So definitely train with Alva Noto & Sakamoto in the headphones, always (except for the Iranian songs I am digging right now (see: first question). What is one place everyone should visit? The last place that I visited last summer that absolutely blasted my brain and my eyes: Casa Wabi near Puerto Escondido. But if you are in Europe, go to have a ballade at Les Puces de Saint Ouen and go to say hello to Mademoiselle Steinitz at Marché Paul Bert! Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into. Ok ok, we're supposed to tell each other everything here aren't we? So let's go. First of all I had to go to Google to understand what a rabbit hole meant. Then, the first one that instantly came to mind was from this summer. After seeing the superb documentary "The Deepest Breath" about the story of freediver Alessia Zechinni & her coach and lover Stephen Keenan, I became completely obsessive about freediving. I have always had a passion for the sea, but this discovery of radical apnea drove me crazy. I started watching all the competitions online, the archives, the techniques, the records the tutorials. My instagram suddenly became a sea & palms pages. I really believed that I too was going to be able to pass the 50 meter mark. Then I tried to last more than 1 minute in my bubble bath, and I failed. I have since returned to music (while starting to fall into the Wembanyama rabbit hole then) — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) — —
Invite your friends and earn rewardsIf you enjoy Why is this interesting?, share it with your friends and earn rewards when they subscribe. |