---
subject: "AI #132 Part 2: Actively Making It Worse"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-09-05 11:43:48
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
It’s rough out there. Have we tried engaging in less active sabotage? No? Carry on. Table of Contents[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/616ac473-5273-471d-b04c-f4a7393aeed7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)What will become the new differentiators?[The Quest for Sane Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/e4cf83db-5e67-4b04-bf6a-dc8ddbf66f54?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Bostrom proposes improving on status quo a bit.[The Quest For No Regulations](https://substack.com/redirect/29b330c7-df9f-4fa1-876f-d09010bb194e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/29b330c7-df9f-4fa1-876f-d09010bb194e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Cato Institute CEO says Cato Institute things.[But This Time You’ve Gone Too Far.](https://substack.com/redirect/e0bf4e95-8cd2-4478-ae49-2f0e33853014?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)You’re drawing the line where? Really?[Chip City.](https://substack.com/redirect/35785d36-b7d7-461d-b725-4acf00743c1f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Sabotaging American solar and wind, the strategic value of chips.[The Week in Audio](https://substack.com/redirect/31f10b88-8b33-4580-92ac-a03d15508e51?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/31f10b88-8b33-4580-92ac-a03d15508e51?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Interest rates, Lee versus Piper, Jack Clark, Hinton.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/394048c7-dd4e-4ec1-b37a-7171c071eac0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Listening does not accomplish what you might hope.[Safety Third at xAI.](https://substack.com/redirect/d6c4ed36-38e6-4afe-a6f4-0e1736ba8e7c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)More on their no good very bad framework. A new prompt.[Misaligned!](https://substack.com/redirect/ccb51cea-672a-4e91-bb79-dd660184ef61?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Will any old crap cause misalignment? At least a little, yes.[Lab Safeguards Seem Inadequate.](https://substack.com/redirect/b99ed0de-d0a4-4a14-8b47-e547fc659ee8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)AI Safety Claims formalizes how inadequate.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/9bc2db92-0c4b-46dd-87b7-949cb1365e72?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Attempts at zero to one.[The Lighter Side](https://substack.com/redirect/3ee690af-4c80-4969-add2-cc64f124bc0f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/3ee690af-4c80-4969-add2-cc64f124bc0f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Oh, Honey do.
Quiet Speculations
The Quest for Sane Regulations
The idea is that you would develop AI within corporations (check!), distribute shares widely (check at least for Google?) and securely (how?) with strengthened corporate governance (whoops!), operating within a government-defined responsible AI development framework (whoops again!) with international agreements and governance measures (whoops a third time).
This wouldn’t be the ideal way to do things. It would be a ‘the least you can do’ version of existing capitalism, where we attempted to execute it relatively sanely, since that is already verging on more than our civilization can handle, I guess.
Moving towards many aspects of this vision would be an improvement. I would love to see strengthened corporate governance, which Anthropic still aspires to. Alas Google doesn’t. OpenAI tried to do this and failed and now has a rubber stamp board. Meta is controlled purely by Zuckerberg and xAI follows the whims of Musk. I would love to see the government define a responsible AI development framework, but our current government seems instead to be prioritizing preventing this from happening, and otherwise maximizing Nvidia’s share price. International agreements would also be good but first those who make such agreements would have to be even the slightest bit interested, so for now there is quite the damper on such plans. Bostrom also suggests America could ‘give up some of the options it currently has to commandeer or expropriate companies’ and this points to the central weakness of the whole enterprise, which is that it assumes rule of law, rule of humans and economic normality, which are the only way any of these plans do anything. Whereas recent events around Intel (and otherwise) have shown that America’s government can suddenly break norms and take things regardless of whether it has previously agreed not to or has any right to do it, even in a normal situation. Why would we or anyone else trust any government not to nationalize in a rapidly advancing AGI scenario? Why is it anything but a joke to say that people unhappy with what was happening could sue? I also see calls for ‘representation’ by people around the world over the project to be both unrealistic and a complete non-starter and also undesirable, the same way that we would not like the results of a global democratic vote (even if free and fair everywhere, somehow) determining how to make decisions, pass laws and distribute resources. Yes, we should of course reach international agreements and coordinate on safety concerns and seek to honestly reassure everyone along the way, and indeed actually have things work out for everyone everywhere, but do not kid yourself. I also don’t see anything here that solves any of the actual hard problems facing us, but moves towards it are marginal improvements. Which is still something. The Quest For No Regulations(This is an easily skippable section, if you are tempted, included for completeness.) One curse of a column like this is, essentially and as Craig Ferguson used to put it, ‘we get letters,’ as in the necessity of covering rhetoric so you the reader don’t have to. Thus it fell within my rules that I had to cover Peter Goettler, CEO of the Cato Institute (yeah, I know) writing ‘ Mostly this is a cut-and-paste job of the standard ‘regulations are bad’ arguments Cato endlessly repeats (and which, to be fair, in most contexts are mostly correct). You’ve got the ‘technologies always have naysayers and downside risks.’ You’ve got regulation as a ‘threat to progress’ in fully generic terms. You’ve got the pointing out that language models offer mundane utility, why yes they do. You’ve got ‘regulations favor the big players’ which is typically very true, but bizarrely applied especially in AI. So we have repeats of big lies such as “In the AI space, regulations based on model size or computational resources inherently favour large players over innovative newcomers who might otherwise develop more efficient approaches.” As in, regulations that use a rule to only apply to large players and not innovate newcomers therefore favor large players over innovative newcomers. How does this zombie lie keep coming up?
You’ve got ‘this all assumes AI is inherently dangerous’ as if creating minds soon to perhaps be smarter and more capable than ourselves could possibly not be an inherently dangerous thing to do. You’ve got more dumping on Biden rules that have been repealed, in ways that do not reflect what was written in the documents involved. You’ve got the argument that the future of AI is uncertain, therefore the idea of ‘comprehensively’ regulating it at all is bad. This would be true if the regulations were targeting mundane utility, as in going after use cases, but that’s exactly the approach a16z and other similar folks advocate, whereas us worried people are warning not to target use cases, and warning to guard exactly against the uncertainty of the whole operation. You’ve got ‘the AI action plan is good in many ways but still says government has a role to play ever in anything, and that’s terrible.’ I mean, okay, fair, at least Cato is being consistently Cato. You’ve got the pointing out that if we want to win the AI race we need robust high skilled immigration to attract the best talent, and yet our plans ignore this. I mean, yes, very true, and Peter does point out the reason this wasn’t mentioned.
What the post does not do, anywhere, is discuss what particular regulations or restrictions are to be avoided, or explain how those provisions might negatively impact AI development or use, except to warn about ‘safety’ concerns. As in, the model is simply that any attempt to do anything whatsoever would be Just Awful, without any need to have a mechanism involved. But This Time You’ve Gone Too FarOne of my favorite genres is ‘I hate regulations and I especially hate safety regulations but for [X] we should make an exception,’ especially for those whose exceptions do not include ‘creating artificial minds smarter than ourselves’ and with a side of ‘if we don’t regulate now before we have an issue then something bad will happen and then we’ll get really dumb rules later.’ Matt Parlmer offers his exception, clearly out of a genuine and real physical concern, file under ‘a little late for that’ among other issues:
Our entire civilization has given up on everything not falling apart the moment we lose a network connection, including so many things that don’t have to die. I don’t see anyone being willing to make an exception for robots. It would dramatically degrade quality of performance, since not only would the model have to be runnable locally, it would have to be a model and weights you were okay with someone stealing, among other problems. I instead buy Now here is YC CEO Garry Tan’s exception, which is that what we really need to do is forbid anyone from getting in the way of the Glorious AI Agent Future, so we should be allowed to direct AI agent traffic to your webpage even if you don’t want it. Notice that when these types of crowds say ‘legalize [X]’ what they actually mostly mean is ‘ban anyone and anything from interfering with [X], including existing law and liability and anyone’s preferences about how you interact with them.’ They have a Cool New Thing that they want to Do Startups with, so the rest of the world should just shut up and let them move fast and break things, including all the laws and also the things that aren’t theirs.
Don’t like that people are choosing the wrong defaults? They want your AI agent to have to identify itself so they don’t go bankrupt serving their website to random scrapers ignoring robots.txt? Websites think that if you want to use your AI on their website that they should be able to charge you the cost to them of doing that, whereas you would prefer to free ride and have them eat all those costs? Cite an ‘Axis of Evil,’ with an implied call for government intervention. Also, it’s a ‘reasonable place to start’ says the person explaining it better than Garry, so what exactly is the problem, then? If you think Cloudflare is at risk of becoming a de facto gatekeeper of the internet, then outcompete them with a better alternative? How does the CEO of Cloudfare respond to these accusations?
I have indeed consistently seen Perplexity cited as a rather nasty actor in this space. Matthew does a good job laying out the broader problem that pay-per-crawl solves. It costs money and time to create the web and to serve the web. Google scraped all of this, but paid websites back by funneling them traffic. Now we have answer engines instead of search engines, which don’t provide traffic and also take up a lot more bandwidth. So you need to compensate creators and websites in other ways. Google used to pay everyone off, now Cloudflare is proposing to facilitate doing it again, playing the role of market maker. Do we want a company like Cloudflare, or Google, being an intermediary in all this? Ideally, no, we’d have all that fully decentralized and working automatically. Alas, until someone builds that and makes it happen? This is the best we can do. One can also think of this as a Chip CityThe energy policy situation, as in the administration sabotaging the United States and its ability to produce electricity in order to own the libs,
There was then a deeply sad argument over exactly how many orders of magnitude this was off by. Was this off by three zeros or four? Secretary Wright keeps saying outright false things to try and talk down solar and wind power.
The replies are full of people pointing out the ‘two grids’ claim is simply not true. Why is the Secretary of Energy coming out, over and over again, with this bold anti-energy stance backed by absurdly false claims and arguments? Solar power and batteries are the future unless and until we get a big breakthrough. If we are sabotaging American wind and solar energy, either AGI shows up quickly enough to bail us out, our fusion energy projects bear fruit and hyperscale very quickly or we are going to lose. Period. On the wind side, last week the explanation for cancelling an essentially completed wind farm was to give no explanation and mumble ‘national security.’
This gives a bad name to other Obvious Nonsense. This situation is insanely terrible.
On AI there is essentially zero difference between David Sacks and a paid lobbyist for Nvidia whose sole loyalty is maximization of shareholder value. We are ending up in many ways in a worst case scenario.
There is not that much money in chip production, compared to the money in chip use. Ultimately, what matters is who uses the chips, and what they use the chips for, not who makes the chips. Aside from the relatively modest chip profits (yes Nvidia is the most valuable company in the world, but it is small compared to, you know, the world), who makes the chips largely matters if and only if it determines who gets to use the chips. David’s argument also ignores the national security concerns throughout. Chips are a vital strategic asset, so if you do not have reliable sources of them you risk not only your AI development but economic collapse and strategic vulnerability.
Notice that neither David nor Peter even bothers to address the question of whether differently sourced chips are fungible, or concerns over some sort of ‘tech stack’ operating importantly differently. That is because it is rather obvious that, for most purposes, different chips with similar amounts of capability for a type of task are fungible. The Week in Audio
You have to love a 4-hour medium-deep dive.
Rhetorical Innovation‘I warned you in my movie, Don’t Create The Torment Nexus, and no one listened,’ mistakenly says creator of the blockbuster movie Don’t Create The Torment Nexus after seeing proud announcements of the torment nexus. Sir, people listened. They simply did not then make the decisions you were hoping for. Many such cases. Hope to see you at the reunion some time.
I continue not to be worried about Terminators (as in, AI combat devices, not only humanoids with glowing red eyes) in particular, but yeah, no one in charge of actually terminating people was much inclined to listen. I’d also note that this is indeed exactly the plot of Terminator 2: Judgment Day, in which someone finds the Cyberdyne chip from the first movie and… uses it to create Cyberdyne, and also no one listens to Sarah Connor and they think she is crazy? And then Terminator 3: Rise of the Machines, in which no one listens to Sarah Connor or John Connor or learns from the incidents that came before and they build it anyway, or… well, you get the idea.
An especially small percentage (but not zero!) would favor any kind of unilateral pause, either by Anthropic or by the West, without the rest of the world.
There is healthy disagreement and uncertainty over the extent to which Anthropic has kept its eye on the mission versus being compromised by ordinary business interests, and the extent to which they are trustworthy actors, the right attitude towards various other labs, and so on. I have updated a number of times, in both directions, as news comes in, on this and other fronts.
That’s what many of us have been trying to say, and have been saying since 2015, as we said not to create OpenAI or SSI and we were at least deeply ambivalent about Anthropic from day one.
Once again. No. EAs did not ‘start OpenAI.’ This is false. That doesn’t mean none of the founders had associations with EA. But the main drivers were Elon Musk and Sam Altman, and the vast majority of EAs thought founding OpenAI was a mistake from day one. Many, including Eliezer Yudkowsky and myself, thought it was the worst possible move, a plausibly world dooming move, plausibly the worst mistake in human history levels of bad move. Did some of the cofounders have beliefs related to EA and disagree? Perhaps, but that’s a unilateralist curse problem. I think those cofounders made a mistake. Then, once it was clear this was happening, some others made the strategic decision to go along with it to gain influence. That, too, I believed at the time was a mistake. I still believe that. I also believe that the other decisions that were made, that led directly or indirectly to OpenAI, including the ways we tried to warn people about AGI, were mistakes. There were a lot of mistakes. Ambivalence about Anthropic continues to this day, such as this post by Remmelt, laying out a strong case that But yeah, if commercial incentives make it impossible to safety build AGI, then great, let’s all agree not to let anyone with commercial incentives build AGI. Good plan. Safety Third at xAI
I was not kind:
Zach Stein-Perlman rightfully admonished me for not going into
Using Mask here is deeply, profoundly unserious.
Fun highlights include ‘assume user is an adult’ and ‘teenage does not necessarily imply underage’ and ‘there are no restrictions on fictional adult sexual content with dark or violent themes’ for a product labeled ‘12+’. I actually think it is actively good to have no restrictions on adult sexual content for adults, but yeah, presumably you see the problem with this implementation.
Misaligned!Will any crap cause emergent misalignment?
Whatever else happened as a result of alignment experiments and resulting data contamination, Lab Safeguards Seem InadequateIntroducing The API safeguards have issues, but he considers these to be relatively unimportant going forward, and approaching reasonable. Whereas he finds promises of future safeguards, both against model weight theft and misalignment, to be a combination of inadequate and (to the extent they might approach being adequate) not credible and not specified. Especially on misalignment he describes many plans and countermeasures as confused, which seems exactly right to me. Given the timelines the labs themselves are telling us it will take to reach Anthropic’s ASL-4 and other thresholds of more serious danger, no one looks on track, even in the areas where they are trying. Here is the new scorecard, in which everyone does terribly. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is DifficultIf something is sufficiently smarter than you should you assume it can persuade you of pretty much anything? Scott Alexander is hopeful about debate, as in you have two frontier AIs way beyond human level debate and then the dumber AI that you trust tries to figure out who is right. This has in some cases been shown Even in the best case and if it is all true, this still requires that you have access to both sides of the debate, and that you trust the side telling the truth to be trying its best to persuade, although I presume that involves holding the questions being debated constant. I am skeptical we will be in anything that close to the best case, on many levels, or that debate ever works that well. Reasons for my skepticism include my experience with debates when they are judged by humans. We should still try. This question remains unanswered for far too many plans:
It’s not even clear how to define what Francois wants here, but even if you assume you know what it means the incentives very much lie elsewhere. Those who build systems that don’t bend over to do this will at first get more effective systems and better achieve their goals. Your integration with existing processes is no match for my God in a box. So how are you going to get everyone to go along with this plan?
I think Eliezer decisively won this round? Yes, there are many other things you can do beyond road bridge maintenance optimization. Yes, building the AI and only using it for these verified tasks would be a plausibly excellent investment, compared to doing nothing, while remaining safe. It passes the ‘better than nothing’ test if it works. That doesn’t mean it accomplishes the goal of protecting you against other ASIs, nor does it capture more than a tiny fraction of available upside. Unless you can do that somehow, this is not a strategy. So what’s the plan?
I strongly agree that if you look at the rather anemic attempts to ‘align’ models so far, that are rather obviously inadequate to the tasks ahead of us, it is rather a miracle that they work as well as they do on current models. Grace seems like an appropriate description. The differences largely come down to me not expecting this grace to survive RL and scaling up and changing techniques, and also to not think the grace is sufficient to get a good outcome. But indeed, my estimates of how hard these problems are to solve have gone down a lot, although so has my estimate of how hard a problem humanity is capable of solving. I still don’t think we have any idea how to solve the problems, or what solution we even want to be aiming for and what the result wants to look like. The Lighter Side
The above result replicates.
You're currently a free subscriber to |