---
subject: "How Should Higher Education Be Financed?"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <byrne@thediff.co>"
to: ""
date: 2023-12-18 15:22:26
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
|
In this issue: - How Should Higher Education Be Financed?—Higher education is tricky to finance, because the people using it generally can't pay for it and everyone else is operating with uncertain information. There are obvious problems and non-obvious solutions, and the solutions generally start with thinking carefully about what higher education is for and then working backwards to how to pay for it.
- Accredited Investors—The SEC projects that, over time, the majority of American households will be accredited investors.
- Gambling on Gambling—A longtime short-seller flips to positive on sports betting companies.
- Price Discrimination—Apple makes it easier to bundle.
- In Play—US Steel agreed to sell; once there's an offer for a company, the odds are high that somebody will get it.
- Even More Product Convergence—Robinhood targets higher net worth investors.
- Diff Jobs
Today's issue of The Diff is brought to you by our sponsors, How Should Higher Education Be Financed?Normally, if there's a question about paying for something that's phrased in the passive voice, it's eliding the true question, which is more accurately phrased as "How should you pay for my..?" But education is a special case: it's extremely expensive, with direct costs totaling So higher education must be paid for through some combination of students’ earnings, parents' savings, school subsidies, government subsidies, loans, and special deals with employers. Unfortunately, all of these lead to problems one way or another. For example, if we're requiring everyone to fund their own education upfront, either directly through they're own earnings or indirectly through their parents', then we're setting up a system with an education shortage among people who didn't choose the right parents, or among people whose post-graduation incomes will be higher than their pre-graduation incomes. The possibility of spending "too much" on education is itself mostly missing from debates over how, and how much, to fund it. But it ought to be a genuine concern. Not just because college graduates have higher incomes, and - In many career tracks, there's a tradeoff between training and doing. This tradeoff is a lot more visible after a bit of doing, and theory can sometimes veer off in strange directions. (Someone might, for example, finish college, take a few years off to work in finance, then go get an MBA, where they may sit down in a class where they learn that the things they did when working in finance, i.e. selecting specific securities that will outperform a given benchmark on a risk-adjusted basis, is, as a foundational theory of the course, impossible. This isn't restricted to finance, of course; someone might spend a few years in marketing and then take a class in economics that assumes perfectly rational and well-informed consumers.
[[2]](https://www.thediff.co/r/b33a9435?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)) There’s a lot of learning on the job, and it’s often more applied and up-to-date than what schools offer, particularly for fast-moving fields. - The theory/practice tradeoff shows up in more artistic fields, too; there's a classic situation where someone writes a good first novel inspired by their summer job as a lifeguard, and then ends up writing novels whose protagonists are, increasingly, novelists. Comedy routines about the hijinks that ensue during a comedy tour, music about how heartbreaking it is to date as a famous musician, TV shows about all the behind-the-scenes drama involved in making a TV show, etc., also exemplify this—there is a point at which all art all the time leads to worse art.
- There's also a skills-matching problem, where someone might be 5% more productive with a master's degree, but will also spend 5% of their available working years getting one. That's especially pernicious because it sounds like an even-money trade, at which point a slight preference for school over work tips the balance—but it assumes a 0% discount rate.
- What should the discount rate be, if not zero? An education is a long-lived asset, but it's also an uncertain one, probably closer to equity than fixed income. Some of that uncertainty comes down to specific career risks, like graduating with a petroleum engineering degree right when oil prices plummet (a
[recurring problem](https://www.thediff.co/r/ee53dbe3?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)). But there's also the problem of getting a PhD in some field before realizing that teaching undergraduates that topic, even if it's an attainable outcome, isn't how one wants to spend their life, or finally wrapping up the JD or MD before concluding that law and medicine are, as careers go, a pretty bad deal.[[3]](https://www.thediff.co/r/5cae49d2?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
Meanwhile, the strength of the college bundle is weakening. College has always been a mix of different services—there's instruction, sure, but there's also socializing with a group of peers who've been selected as intellectual peers, a certain ideological environment, a chance for reinvention, the benefit of a prestigious brand name. And college, like a music festival, is a chance to party with lots of young people who don't have to wake up particularly early the next morning. 18-year-olds still have a lot to figure out, so there's an argument for giving them some time to do that in a low-stress environment. There's also a counterargument that a low-stress environment is the worst way to figure out what actually matters to you. When you're barely getting by, the way you spend your next free hour or next available dollar is going to be a lot more thoughtful. And figuring yourself out is a gradual, perhaps lifelong process, albeit with some breaks here and there. College works well for many people, but college-for-all as a default clearly isn't working in the aggregate. Nationwide college completion rates Even if the current system doesn't work very well, it's not as if all the talent involved is wasted. A lot of it is misallocated. So, some policy proposals: - Employer-linked ISAs: income-share agreements, where someone's education is partly paid for through a promise to share their future wage premium with whoever provided financial backing, occasionally get a bad rap. (Oddly, the people who oppose this are usually not in favor of abolishing taxpayer-funded education, which is exactly the same deal, just harder to opt out of.) An employer-linked ISA would be similar, but with a catch: Intel pays your MIT tuition, and you pay Intel 20% of your earnings above $100k—unless you make that money working for Intel. This is a decentralized version of the approach in countries with close union-corporate relationships, where employers are willing to subsidize training because they know that their employees will probably stick around and work for them, giving them the benefit of that training.
- Student loans could adopt a stricter disclosure regime, but mortgages went through a cycle of that and the result was that getting a mortgage means signing dozens of forms that endlessly rehash every permutation of "You are borrowing money, and will need to pay back the loan." A more appropriate setup would be a required standardized test, asking questions like "How long will you pay a loan at x% interest if you make the minimum payment?" or "What happens to a loan balance at that rate if the borrower defers payments and the interest accumulates?" It's not a universal standardized test for college admissions, since students who paid through means other than loans wouldn't need to take it. But it would save some heartache on all sides, and probably increase the quality of Twitter trending topics.
- Schools should be required to take the first loss on loans to their students. So if a student borrows $50k and can't pay it, the first $15k or so gets transferred from the school to the lender, while the lender eats the rest of the cost.
- On a related note, schools will need regulatory capital requirements, and a "living will" for gracefully winding down if they end up in a death spiral where low enrollment makes them economically non-viable and they're forced to shut down. A rule like this would kill off some schools, but as a broad financial claim, any time a kind of business has access to capital on advantageous terms, it encourages thinly-capitalized operators who are tossing a coin on getting enough subsidies to stay in business. The usual solution, which applies to banking and insurance, is to require them to have skin in the game and for that skin-in-the-game to take the first hit if they lose.
- If schooling is worth subsidizing, there's less and less of a case for having it take place in a physical school, as a full-time task for most attendees. There's a case for redirecting some university funding in liberal arts towards independent teaching instead. This raises all sorts of quality assurance questions—but these are questions that ought to be asked of regular schools, too! And even if you lose something on the theoretical quality of instruction, you'll make it back on the realized quality of attendance: people who voluntarily show up to a weekly Zoom class on various themes in Renaissance literature or Unix internals or whatever else are more likely to have done the required work, and more likely to participate in the discussion. And, after the inevitable attrition after the first few sessions, the quality of the survivors will be quite high.
You can't force employers to ignore college degrees, and if you subsidize hiring non-graduates you create all sorts of perverse incentives. That's a problem in both directions, incidentally: a big piece missing from the education discourse is the opportunity cost for students—it's counterintuitive that any four-year degree, regardless of topic, is a better option than any alternative. The higher someone’s pre-college income, the more worthwhile it is to think carefully about whether college is the best way to spend the next four years. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/12595917?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)In both cases, these are useful models for starting to reason rigorously about aggregate behavior. If you don't assume some kind of rationality, you can't say much at all about the economy. But these premises are taken too literally, too often. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/7dc0410b?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)One reason people get specific degrees is that there are particular jobs they really, really want that absolutely require those degrees as a condition of entry. If you're considering or pursuing such a credential for that reason, know this: your view of the job, its prestige, etc. is out-of-date. That perception formed when the job was newer, cooler, and less institutionalized, and has been decaying ever since then. When undergrads read Liar's Poker in the 90s and decided to become mortgage bond traders, they didn't know that the phones were being thrown less and the lunches were already less gluttonous. Someone who watched The Social Network and decided to start a startup incidentally chose to build one in a world where the big platforms had mostly been built, and where growth was less a matter of creating a viral hit and more one of optimizing ad spend on somebody else's now-impregnable viral hit. And if you have a counterexample, it may be a fake counterexample—if your law school professor really acts just like Professor Kingsfield, it's probably because your professor watched The Paper Chase, too, just like [wiretaps revealed that mafiosos all started talking like Mario Puzo characters after The Godfather came out](https://www.thediff.co/r/97dfe565?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99). It's not that there is no 'there' there, there was just a different there there back then.[↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/b8f771bd?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)If you figure out your true meaning in life right after having kids, for example, that's too bad, unless it turns out that the real meaning of life is being a good parent for the next couple decades. This applies, albeit usually to a lesser degree, for finding oneself after undertaking commitments incompatible with that new enlightenment. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/8b6415a9?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)Including a reverse-sheepskin effect, where it pays to finish coursework, get an excellent GPA, and refuse to take that last required class before you can be awarded a diploma. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/13d5b243?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
You're on The Diff's free subscribers list. Upgrade today to get full access—and stock up on reading material for the holidays. This week, paying subscribers read about A Word From Our SponsorsIntercom is a complete, AI and human customer service platform—and the only platform to combine a help desk, AI chatbot, and proactive support tools. It also comes equipped with a fully featured inbox, ticketing, help center, and messenger, making it not only complete—but also the most powerful support platform. On the planet. ElsewhereAccredited InvestorsThe SEC has a One of the cases for inflation is that it's a way to continuously adjust some quantities, like wages, that are otherwise sticky. It was almost certainly not part of the SEC's original reasoning, but it works well in this case: the amount of information available to investors has exploded; effectively no one outside of the finance industry knew what a hedge fund was in the early 1980s, but that knowledge is more common today. And the ceiling on sophistication, for both retail and institutional investors, has gone way up. At the same time, the complexity of products available has also expanded. As with higher education, fixed rules don't work as well as flexible ones, and given the growing incentive to market investment vehicles that are inappropriate, or at least high-fee and tax-inefficient, means that a switch from an income test ("you can afford to lose it if you don't know what you're doing") to a hybrid income- and exam-based one ("You know what you're getting into, or at least can afford to be wrong") works better. Gambling on GamblingA wise short-seller once argued that company management should be delighted to talk to shorts, since they're the only investors in the world who are guaranteed to be future buyers of the stock. Jim Chanos, who recently announced plans to shut down his longstanding short-focused hedge fund, (The Diff Price DiscriminationApple is now In PlayUS Steel Even More Product ConvergenceRobinhood's original pitch was that, however small an investor you were, you could get started with them and grow from there. If a $10 commission meant losing 10% of your account's value on either side of the trade, both you and your broker would be dubious about doing business together. Robinhood was fine with it. If you wanted to own shares of a company whose share price exceeded the total value of your account, that, too, was something Robinhood was happy to handle with fractional shares. But eventually, Robinhood reached the same conclusiont hat everyone else in finance does: it's nice to have lots of small customers, but the unit economics are much, much better from having the same dollar value controlled by fewer, bigger customers. So they're Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. See a sampling of current open roles below: - A company building the new pension of the 21st century and building universal basic capital is looking for a frontend engineer familiar with modern stacks. (NYC)
- A vertically integrated PE-backed cannabis company is looking for an Excel wizard with a background in supply chain. (Remote)
- A concentrated crossover fund is looking for a data platform lead—ideally someone with experience building recommender systems and UIs for interfacing with data. (SF)
- A well funded seed stage startup founded by former SpaceX engineers is building software tools for hardware engineering. They're looking for a full stack engineer interested in developing highly scalable mission-critical tools for satellites, rockets, and other complex machines. (Los Angeles)
- A private credit fund denominated in Bitcoin needs a credit analyst that can negotiate derivatives pricing. Experience with low-risk crypto lending preferred (i.e. to large miners, prop-trading firms in safe jurisdictions). (Remote)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. |
||
|
|
|
|||
|