---
subject: "Announcement: Childish Games"
from: "River Kenna from Inner Wilds <innerwilds@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-05-19 19:08:22
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "River Kenna", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3010718370428876194", "UNREAD"]
---
Carl Jung wrote these words about a moment in his life when he'd lost everything — which was also the moment that would ensure we all know his name. Without going too deep into the particulars (read Memories, Dreams, Reflections for that), Jung had come to a point in his life where he felt he knew nothing, that he had no path forward. His response was to submit himself to the unconscious, simply do whatever occurred to him, without consciously examining those actions. In his case, this meant returning to a childhood pastime: building little houses out of stones near the lake. As he played this childish games, he let his imagination wander, like he’d done as a child. His unconscious started moving again, flowering again, speaking again. From the years that followed, he experienced what is now recorded in his Red Book — and from his Red Book sprung the rest of his lifetime of psychological work. Jung isn't the only one whose life and work hit a turning point when he returned to his childhood interests — it’s a common experience if you keep your eye open for it. One of Buddha’s big turning points came when he was overtaken with a memory of himself as a child, feeling calm and peaceful in the fields, naturally dropping into a pleasant meditative absorption, long before he ever practiced meditation. After recovering this memory, he dropped his harsh ascetic lifestyle and forged a middle way between self-abnegation and excess. He made room for the childish pleasantness of experience. This pattern unfolds again and again in life after life: when we’re adrift, confused, hurting, or numb, there’s a good chance we can find our way back to aliveness by reconnecting with the spark of life we nurtured in childhood. At the beginning of June, I’m going to lead a light-hearted 2-week workshop on reconnecting with and nurturing the childish spark. We’ll be using Jung as the basic model, with the caveat that his model includes constant urgings along the lines of
So by following Jung’s model, we’re really looking to follow our own model and get out from under his shadow. Our basic intentions here are: Spend time daydreaming and remembering childhood — any games, books, activities, foods, music you liked… anything that left a mark on you, that felt alive to you. Revisit those things that left a mark. Play those games, eat those foods, listen to that music. Let go of any serious intentions, and just play childish games. Let your mind wander, let your imagination roam, let your unconscious push your awareness into its currents. “If we cannot see the wind, we can see the wind’s will.”: Over time, the unconscious currents strengthen and reveal themselves, bringing us back to the unlived life, if we have the courage to live it now (and the depth to grieve the time we spent away from it).
We’ll have four group calls for everyone to attend, and will group off into smaller crews to help each other, to listen and encourage each other. We’ll have a discord, journaling prompts, suggested practices to help unblock any obstacles, and hopefully we’ll have a lot of lackadaisical daydreaming on our way to opening up the flow of aliveness again. If you’re interested, pick up your ticket here: DetailsGroup meetings will be June 7, 10, 14, and 17 at 5pm CEST (11am EST, 8am PST) Meetings will be recorded for those who can’t make it.
Ideally, I’d like to organize everyone into crews of 4-5 members who will form a group chat and meet as they’re able to check in and encourage each other. I don’t know how many people will sign up or how many will want to opt out of a crew, so we’ll see how this goes.
Tickets are Pay-What-You-Want: Standard Price: $200 Minimum Price: $125 Paying over the standard price will help offset some financial aid I’ll be giving on request.
The workshop runs for 2 weeks, but the practice itself is highly individual, it may go on for weeks, months, or years — don’t put too much pressure on yourself for the 2 weeks we’re together; let yourself relax and play childish games.
Invite your friends and earn rewardsIf you enjoy Inner Wilds, share it with your friends and earn rewards when they subscribe. |