---
subject: "5-Bullet Friday — January 13, 2023"
from: "Tim Ferriss <tim@fourhourbody.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-01-14 04:35:56
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tim Ferris", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_7132466938079773548", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|||
Hi All!
Here is your weekly dose of 5-Bullet Friday, a list of what I’m pondering and exploring. Please feel free to forward this along to friends.
[Chemical composition analysis of 102 ayahuasca brews](https://click.fourhourmail.com/v8unvm27v9srhxd0gklcz/x0hph6hnmlp864i5/aHR0cHM6Ly90d2l0dGVyLmNvbS9iZWtwbGFudHMvc3RhdHVzLzE2MDc2MDA1NTQyNDY4MTE2NDg=). This is a great thread on (1) the difficulty of treating ayahuasca as a singular, standardized medicine and (2) the importance of collaborating with indigenous healers whose botanical knowledge far exceeds our limited grasp of these species. Brew method is another huge variable.
[Stutz](https://click.fourhourmail.com/v8unvm27v9srhxd0gklcz/6qheh8hp4d5vg4bo/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cubmV0ZmxpeC5jb20vdGl0bGUvODEzODc5NjI=). This doc was recommended to me by multiple friends, and it does a beautiful job of sharing both a loving relationship and effective therapeutic tools for changing your life. I was hesitant to watch this at first. I worried that it might dredge up old, painful personal issues that I feel I’ve spent enough time on, but it didn’t open Pandora’s box at all. As my friends correctly reassured me, it’s nothing but upside. Here’s the official description: “In candid conversations with actor [Jonah Hill](https://click.fourhourmail.com/v8unvm27v9srhxd0gklcz/kkhmh6h8p35gq7hl/aHR0cHM6Ly9lbi53aWtpcGVkaWEub3JnL3dpa2kvSm9uYWhfSGlsbA==), leading psychiatrist [Phil Stutz](https://click.fourhourmail.com/v8unvm27v9srhxd0gklcz/58hvh7h5wznpdph6/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cudGhldG9vbHNib29rLmNvbS9hYm91dC1waGlsLWFuZC1iYXJyeQ==) explores his early life experiences and unique, visual model of therapy.” Watch the trailer [here](https://click.fourhourmail.com/v8unvm27v9srhxd0gklcz/25h2hoh7xe8rpvh3/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cueW91dHViZS5jb20vd2F0Y2g_dj1VS0NtZWZRZHBsSQ==).
“[Second MAPS-Sponsored Phase 3 Trial of MDMA-Assisted Therapy for PTSD Completed](https://click.fourhourmail.com/v8unvm27v9srhxd0gklcz/qvh8h7h8304gm4fl/aHR0cHM6Ly9tYXBzLm9yZy8yMDIyLzExLzE3L21hcHAyLXNlY29uZC1tYXBzLXNwb25zb3JlZC1waGFzZS0zLXRyaWFsLW9mLW1kbWEtYXNzaXN0ZWQtdGhlcmFweS1mb3ItcHRzZC1jb21wbGV0ZWQv).” This is the first time a pivotal and confirmatory Phase 3 trial has been completed for a psychedelic therapy. Moreover, more than 12 million people in the U.S. alone suffer from the debilitating effects of PTSD, and it’s now estimated that before the end of 2024, these people will likely have access to MDMA-assisted psychotherapy as a novel treatment option. For those wondering why I’ve been personally involved with this for years and why this treatment fundamentally differs from conventional approaches, please [read this](https://click.fourhourmail.com/v8unvm27v9srhxd0gklcz/g3hnh5he2kl78nbr/aHR0cHM6Ly90aW0uYmxvZy8yMDIwLzA2LzE2L21hcHMtY2Fwc3RvbmUtY2hhbGxlbmdlLW1kbWEtcHRzZC8_dXRtX3NvdXJjZT1jb252ZXJ0a2l0JnV0bV9tZWRpdW09Y29udmVydGtpdCZ1dG1fY2FtcGFpZ249NWJm), or watch [this documentary](https://click.fourhourmail.com/v8unvm27v9srhxd0gklcz/9qhzhnhg8l6kv3h9/aHR0cHM6Ly90aW0uYmxvZy8yMDE5LzAzLzA5L3RyaXAtb2YtY29tcGFzc2lvbi8_dXRtX3NvdXJjZT1jb252ZXJ0a2l0JnV0bV9tZWRpdW09Y29udmVydGtpdCZ1dG1fY2FtcGFpZ249NWJm).
[A 5-Bullet Friday exclusive! A short motivational video from Arnold Schwarzenegger, just for you](https://click.fourhourmail.com/v8unvm27v9srhxd0gklcz/3ohphkhq8n265nbr/aHR0cHM6Ly95b3V0dS5iZS9wbkJSeG5LMzFvZw==). For more motivation and tactical advice from Arnold, [click here](https://click.fourhourmail.com/v8unvm27v9srhxd0gklcz/n2hohvhn4kxw9oi6/aHR0cHM6Ly9zY2h3YXJ6ZW5lZ2dlci5jay5wYWdlL2ZmNTc0NzUwOWI=) to sign up for his daily newsletter called The Pump Daily. On [the linked-to page](https://click.fourhourmail.com/v8unvm27v9srhxd0gklcz/n2hohvhn4kxw9oi6/aHR0cHM6Ly9zY2h3YXJ6ZW5lZ2dlci5jay5wYWdlL2ZmNTc0NzUwOWI=), you’ll also get a free ebook describing how Arnold sets and achieves goals, a simple home-based workout, and his hardcore 1970s chest and back workout for anyone who wants to risk a trip to the hospital.
And by the way… Arnold handwrites his emails. Check out this gem from earlier this week, shared with permission:
“Instruction does much, but encouragement, everything.”
— [Johann Wolfgang von Goethe](https://click.fourhourmail.com/v8unvm27v9srhxd0gklcz/48hvheh03npzd0tx/aHR0cHM6Ly9lbi53aWtpcGVkaWEub3JnL3dpa2kvSm9oYW5uX1dvbGZnYW5nX3Zvbl9Hb2V0aGU=)
([Click here to share on Twitter](https://click.fourhourmail.com/v8unvm27v9srhxd0gklcz/wnh2hghrd3k92wb7/aHR0cHM6Ly9jdHQuZWMvV29RUDQ=))
You can complement this edition of 5-Bullet Friday with [my interview with Arnold Schwarzenegger](https://click.fourhourmail.com/v8unvm27v9srhxd0gklcz/reh8hohqpe39lmf2/aHR0cHM6Ly90aW0uYmxvZy8yMDE1LzAyLzAyL2Fybm9sZC1zY2h3YXJ6ZW5lZ2dlci8_dXRtX3NvdXJjZT1jb252ZXJ0a2l0JnV0bV9tZWRpdW09Y29udmVydGtpdCZ1dG1fY2FtcGFpZ249NWJm) on psychological warfare, meditation, and much, much more.
And, as always, please give me feedback on Twitter. Which bullet above is your favorite? What do you want more or less of? Other suggestions? Please let me know. Just [send a tweet to @tferriss](https://click.fourhourmail.com/v8unvm27v9srhxd0gklcz/08hwh9hm4k906gul/aHR0cHM6Ly90d2l0dGVyLmNvbS90ZmVycmlzcw==) and put #5BulletFriday at the end so I can find it.
Have a wonderful weekend, all.
Much love to you and yours,
Tim
I love macadamia nuts and have been enjoying them often since keto expert Dr. Dominic D’Agostino recommended them on the podcast in 2015. They taste great, and with more healthy, monounsaturated fat than both olive oil and avocados, 27% fewer carbs than almonds, and more than 50% fewer carbs than cashews, they’re the perfect low-carb, keto-friendly, nutty snack. They’re also rich in omega-7s, which promote the natural production of collagen, an essential protein.
[House of Macadamias](https://click.fourhourmail.com/v8unvm27v9srhxd0gklcz/8ghqhohg8x2e69ak/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuaG91c2VvZm1hY2FkYW1pYXMuY29tL3RpbQ==) produces the best-tasting macadamia nuts I’ve ever eaten. That’s due, in part, to their location in the Mpumalanga province of South Africa, which provides the ideal temperature, altitude, soil composition, rainwater, and pristine mountain water for growing macadamias. Their founders are a brother and sister team with a macadamia-nut heritage—their grandfather was a macadamia farmer, and their father distributes sustainable irrigation technology. Now, they have partnered with the single largest macadamia producer in the world, comprising 94 independent farmers in South Africa, which gets them first pick of the highest quality macadamia nuts in the region to make their one-of-a-kind snacks, like their vegan, paleo, and keto-friendly [chocolate-dipped macadamias](https://click.fourhourmail.com/v8unvm27v9srhxd0gklcz/8ghqhohg8x2e69ak/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuaG91c2VvZm1hY2FkYW1pYXMuY29tL3RpbQ==). They really took their time to get these right, folks, with more than two years of flavor testing. I absolutely love them and have to force myself not to polish off several bags at a time. I’m also looking forward to trying their cold-pressed, extra-virgin macadamia oil, which has a higher smoke point than olive oil and is great for cooking. Ditto for variety with salads.
Now, subscribers of 5-Bullet Friday can use code TIM20 to get 20% off all first orders plus free two-day shipping across the US, UK, and African continent with the purchase of two or more boxes! If you order three or more boxes, you will receive a free, 4 oz. macadamia nut packet. If these are not the best macadamia nuts you have ever tasted, House of Macadamias will give a 100% full refund, guaranteed. Visit [HouseOfMacadamias.com/Tim](https://click.fourhourmail.com/v8unvm27v9srhxd0gklcz/8ghqhohg8x2e69ak/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuaG91c2VvZm1hY2FkYW1pYXMuY29tL3RpbQ==) to discover some of the most delicious and nutritious nuts on the planet.