---
subject: "At the Grand Egyptian Museum"
from: "Marginal REVOLUTION <donotreply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-02-15 19:16:26
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tyler Cowen", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2466199532210586699", "UNREAD"]
---
Neal Spencer has [a good review at the LRB](https://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=74e0a194f019d5323a4bee2ac9f653129f8a04b3ae2778b8df6a15ffda48b842&blog_id=42693868&post_id=92419&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=31aad8dc296f6ea97c38c8cc01764631&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cubHJiLmNvLnVrL3RoZS1wYXBlci92NDgvbjAyL25lYWwtc3BlbmNlci9hdC10aGUtZ3JhbmQtZWd5cHRpYW4tbXVzZXVt&email_id=3ee34a6899cdef1e2f1cc9fd4888942a), excerpt:
Over the past few decades, however, Egyptian museums have pivoted away from Europe and America. The National Museum of Egyptian Civilisation, which opened in 2021, rejected the traditional division of artefacts into pharaonic, Coptic, Greco-Roman and Islamic eras (a framework associated with European academic disciplines). The Grand Egyptian Museum, announced at the height of Hosni Mubarak’s rule and styled ‘the largest museum in the world dedicated to the people, history and culture of Ancient Egypt’, opened in November last year with a lavish ceremony broadcast round the world. It is estimated to have cost more than $1 billion ($300 million of which was a loan from Japan) and sprawls over an area the size of seventy football pitches. The financial crash of 2008, the Arab Spring and Covid meant that its construction took almost twenty years. Much has changed in that time. The last decade of construction took place under the military regime of Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, who installed one of his generals as its head – the first non-Egyptologist to direct a major Egyptian museum.
I saw the museum shortly after the opening and found it pretty spectacular, both the building/setting and the collection. It is worth making a trip to Cairo just to see this, and it now can be considered one of the world's great museums and history sites (yes I had seen the earlier incarnation of the museum, years ago). The very wise Rasheed Griffith [also gave the museum an A+](https://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=7c0813b3d891e07ad13254c42d5f8915a49be8c4b5b9004e1a207b08def7eafa&blog_id=42693868&post_id=92419&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=dc555fbc85c244c0fabe6657f8e8a019&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly94LmNvbS9yYXNoZWVkZ3VvL3N0YXR1cy8yMDIxNjM1MjkzMzE3OTMxNTE5&email_id=3ee34a6899cdef1e2f1cc9fd4888942a).