---
subject: "The giant sucking sound"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2019-04-15 02:35:44
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031"]
---
If you’re a fast moving consumer brand (FMCG) in India, that giant sucking sound you hear is modern retail groups replacing your products from their aisles. With their own private brands.
Future Group, India’s second largest retail chain, launches 300 of its own products every year. It offers 50 self-branded variants of wheat alone. Already, 1 out of every 5 products sold through their Big Bazaar line of hypermarkets is their own. And its own private brand share in food and FMCG has grown from around 20% 4 years ago to around 35% now.
Wanna know what’s the target Ashni Biyani, the MD of Future Group’s private brands, has in mind? 70%. Wanna hear another mind-boggling number? $40 billion. That’s the sales generated by US retail giant Costco’s private brand, Kirkland Signature. A single private brand that brings in more money than Kraft Heinz, Kellogg and Hershey put together.
The story of private brands is just getting started in India. Because modern retailers themselves account for less than 3% of India’s overall grocery market (nearly $367 billion last year). The problem with that low base though is that it can - and will - go only one way: up! And since Indians aren’t doubling the groceries they buy each year, as the share of retailers' own private brands increases, that of FMCG brands decreases.