---
subject: "The Monday Media Diet with Isabelle Levent"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-07-17 10:21:08
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Tell us about yourself. I’m a senior at Stanford studying Symbolic Systems, a combination of computer science, philosophy, psychology, and linguistics. My focus is human-centered AI. In college, I fell into the world of tech and startups. I’ve done AI ethics research and run a working group exploring the impact of generative AI on creative fields. Before this, I directed/produced short films, mainly documentaries, one of which was an investigation of minimalism in Gen Z and premiered at the Tribeca Film Festival. Most recently, my focus has been on understanding how generative AI is changing the way we create and consume culture through an I ask a lot of questions, speed walk, and own two typewriters. I believe story is at the core of everything and that museums are sacred spaces. The most unusual job I’ve had is working on large TV sets as a production assistant—among other things, I directed traffic. I’m currently asking myself what creative work looks like to me (building products? making films? writing?). Am I a creative in the tech world? A technologist in the creative? Figuring it out. Describe your media diet. My media consumption volleys between focused (topic-based deep dives or excavations of one author/ researcher) and arbitrary (whatever interesting I happen to come across). I have a few themes and big questions in the back of my mind—when I see something relevant, it goes to the top of my reading list.
I love short films. Every so often I peruse I also read a lot of AI and human-computer interaction research, especially when I’m preparing for an interview with someone in the field. I have a few researchers I follow and then I fall down a citation rabbit hole. What’s the last great book you read? What are you reading now? I’m perpetually between several books. I’m making my way through What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication? In the New Yorker I immediately turn to Tables for Two. Food first! In middle school, I ran a dessert blog, which was mostly an excuse to try every bakery and sweet shop in NYC. Who should everyone be reading that they’re not? In AI, I would read What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone? Robin Sloan’s Plane or train? Planes for practical reasons and because after multiple trips between New York and Stanford they’ve become a liminal space, perfect for untethered thinking. What is one place everyone should visit? Yukon, Canada. Robert Service describes the land beautifully in his poem “It’s the great, big, broad land ’way up yonder,/It’s the forests where silence has lease;/It’s the beauty that thrills me with wonder,/It’s the stillness that fills me with peace.” Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into. Robert Oppenheimer, the director of the Los Altos laboratory during World War II. I was writing a character who regretted her invention and was looking for a reference text or voice. I also discovered Thomas Midgley who developed Freon-12 and leaded gasoline, but didn’t live long enough to see the devastating impact of his work. (IL) WITI Classifieds: We are experimenting with running some weekly classifieds in WITI. If you’re interested in running an ad, Every week, Frontier writes a WITI-style essay about how design and creativity accelerate positive change. |