---
subject: "When automation played spoilsport"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-12-24 03:34:03
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
I recently had the jarring taste of being locked out of the system.
Let me be more specific by setting the scene. A new contemporary art museum opened in Shenzhen, with its debut exhibition featuring Chiharu Shiota, a Japanese artist who makes installations using spools of thick yarn. It was worth seeing, I felt, so I made the journey over.
It was a bright and shiny Saturday morning. And I realised I hadn’t been in Shenzhen since the pandemic’s onset—when the city was already under a partial lockdown and felt uncharacteristically dead.
A lot has changed since then. Most cars on the road are now electric or hybrid; the air was cleaner than I had ever experienced there, and things generally moved more smoothly than before.
With real anticipation, I marched up to the museum’s entrance and encountered a couple of smart gate systems. As it turned out, visitors had to register through a Wechat mini program—an embedded application that functions within the only real super-app. Then, they had to scan their ID card to gain entry. It was automated convenience! There was neither a ticket office nor staff on site to help anyone who wasn’t a local. The lone security guard told me to buzz off.
|
The photograph above shows one of Chiharu Shiota’s artworks at an exhibition, |
Feeling defeated, I left for a late, consolatory breakfast, but the first two eateries I walked into only accepted payments through Alipay and Wechat Pay. I don’t use either.
As you can tell, the trip was a bust. But I wasn’t disappointed. If nothing else, it reinforced in me a sense of where things are headed in one of the most technologically advanced countries. It’s still an awkward mix of great infrastructure and sketchy implementation. That can only change when the folks in positions of authority develop a feel for users’ needs, values, and limitations.
Now, moving onto our recap, here are some of the pieces The Ken published last week:
Our Big Story was about luxury homes, which are now all the rage in India. Even if buying one means big loans and hefty interest payments. In his [feature](https://the-ken.com/story/this-is-no-time-to-buy-a-luxury-house-but-homebuyers-dont-care/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter), Anand tells us why expensive houses have become the thing to have and puts cracks in the idea that the housing market slows down when interest rates increase.
In the Philippines, we looked at something that is slowing down instead. The Philippine Stock Exchange is now a “ghost town,” as Katrina learned from traders. Its average daily turnover is at a [12-year low](https://the-ken.com/story/the-philippine-stock-exchange-is-turning-into-a-ghost-town/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter). Investors have found more lucrative opportunities elsewhere, such as cryptocurrencies and high-yield digital bank deposits.
Back in India, real-gaming giant MPL is moving from poker, rummy, and carrom to what is being billed as a AAA battle royale title. Its subsidiary, Mayhem Studios, is spearheading the development of Underworld: Gang Wars, which was supposed to launch in August 2022. However, hiring and technical challenges are hindering its rollout. Gaurav has the [story](https://the-ken.com/story/real-money-games-made-mpl-a-unicorn-now-it-needs-millions-for-a-new-identity/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter).
As someone allergic to the idea of eating packaged meals brought to my doorstep, this week’s Trade Tricks still piqued my interest. Seetharaman considered how Zepto has managed to stay relevant as an instant grocery-delivery service, thinking back to a time when it was dismissed as a faddish platform that would burn out and go out of style. Read his [cogitations](https://the-ken.com/tradetricks/trade-tricks-the-year-quick-commerce-grew-up/).
Finally, if operating systems matter to you (they do to me), check out our Daybreak [episode](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/daybreak/forward-thinking-alone-may-not-guarantee-the-success-of-indias-indigenous-mobile-os/) that unpacks the hopes and dreams that Karthik Ayyar has for BharOS. It’s a mobile operating system developed in India by Ayyar’s company and positioned as an alternative to Android and iOS, both of which are being scrutinised for antitrust practices.
And here are the other stories, newsletters, and podcasts from the past week:
- How 2023 put the tech back in
[edtech](https://the-ken.com/edsetgo/ed-set-go-how-2023-put-the-tech-back-in-edtech/) - Indians can’t get enough of international
[schools](https://the-ken.com/story/indians-cant-get-enough-of-international-schools-the-fees-arent-their-only-problem/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter). The fees aren’t their only problem - Rapido rips up the Uber-Ola
[playbook](https://the-ken.com/story/rapido-rips-up-the-uber-ola-playbook-for-cabs/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter)for cabs - Day Zero: IIMs’ internship-to-placement pipeline is
[breaking](https://the-ken.com/dayzero/iims-internship-to-placement-pipeline-is-breaking-down/)down - Green Margins: Floods can wreck fossil-fuel
[vehicles](https://the-ken.com/greenmargins/green-margins-floods-can-wreck-fossil-fuel-vehicles-what-about-evs/). What about EVs? - All you need to know about the
[Sony-Zee](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/daybreak/all-you-need-to-know-about-the-sony-zee-merger/)merger - Ka-Ching! Razorpay’s new-found happiness hinges on the patience of
[merchants](https://the-ken.com/kaching/razorpays-new-found-happiness-hinges-on-the-patience-of-merchants/) [Strait Up](https://the-ken.com/sea/straitup/strait-up-indonesia-entices-ev-makers-with-new-tax-breaks-%f0%9f%94%8c%f0%9f%92%b0/): Indonesia entices EV makers with new tax breaks[Inciting Incident](https://the-ken.com/incitingincident/inciting-incident-the-shifting-sands-of-indias-medical-devices-policy/): The shifting sands of India’s medical devices policy- Paytm wants to know: where are the merchants without
[QR codes](https://the-ken.com/story/paytm-wants-to-know-where-are-the-merchants-without-qr-codes/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter)? - The big takeaways from
[Telecom Bill](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/daybreak/the-big-takeaways-from-telcom-bill-2023/?utm_source=web&utm_medium=homepage&utm_campaign=three_column_box_layout_Podcasts#:~:text=After%20many%20revisions%2C%20the%20bill,raises%20a%20some%20serious%20concerns.)2023
That’s all for the week. As it is Christmas tomorrow, we will take the day off from publishing. Starting Tuesday, we will put out a few blogs to look back at our highlights from 2023. Keep an eye out for them.
Merry Christmas!
Cheers,
Brady
[brady@the-ken.com](mailto:brady@the-ken.com)
P.S.: The Ken is conducting a [survey](https://theken.typeform.com/editorial2023) on what employees and employers want from each other in the new year. 2023 has been hard for both, and this survey’s intent is to gauge the top issues on employees’ and employers’ minds. The findings, we hope, can serve as a guide for both as we head into 2024. This survey is anonymous, so please do spare a few minutes to [take it](https://theken.typeform.com/editorial2023). We’ll publish the results on 1 January, 2024. Stay tuned!
What you just read is the personalised daily introduction to The Ken's story. Written by a different person each day. Often insightful, sometimes witty, and very rarely boring. Someone sent this to you? [Sign up for free](https://the-ken.com/?modal=register&utm_source=footer&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=morning_email_ind_shared). [Dont like these? You can unsubscribe](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/unsubscribe/?user_id=2349339&data=ZRcC50rE1z1IaM6BbWL7RxqJqfOKEeBUXxDOL6G1NIZoMDAwdTAwMKh7eHE8tV8s1hyIeLt_aOtEoy1EK7Kt2YRl7-Ny01n2EDNhLfqXPEk3gcB0iZBFt531_5Jv2yawr7v5bAsQe49BcSaiPigNt2ZscAcJ_2WMPnhHpMEKJN72_Ku6koGsR3QCopSBU40n9u6lvClipBZcR0p0wkvUCwmnWUWTd1hgWxqyaPFYmCxFSfgoB9nx_0g99Bw1k8I0rnbD2_848UDGNHoOhgL8PfSsAfmg0o1M_y6hb9bRIEmmnykKqD53we5yKruLNtYLEVNNvYt9fC_rlRJrU-kkEwCFavZ_oVbhqvEUb56IETO_PDdxkDcz9UjaptdVaoK77YlFn14noB8vUpIUZV13lE_3hT0t71DztxrXJk_kbnipN-s2Jgj8-jjENmVJXw8T9Xiw2wxUxj1HHfScrAdZbAlNyXg2fN8zLSmGQDDyIH9pIh5JmylMKwsuDpp2zPqVjLl4ngqen-ocxRArYYKsyjRbFWJ-cJdep6Eg2KVpNRQgX8MyjuXUxppSm8lxsiODOw7I013-3h8=) Dont want to hear from us again? [ Unsubscribe from our emails here](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/?user_id=2349339&data=ggPz5DmJqkLd_shV3ZE_KD431XPSlUiUMvhqNPZ0hdRoMDAwdTAwMCQfFy1n_9fpsUHxPDC5vXA9Jf8f1_sK2yxsKZInyQGfHrCCXC_JRPmZzLVqyDkYEjQrj_GVvomoPkxMFIFOjCzlYFMsplFOT2D4aapiXXSSYxyo-q21qsiXyTFKi9-fvEn8QISpnsi3ggqeFbmDXv4oRvGntyRElWIJa9eY8O2rXw1RYQ6ak_5XxTasLtjSGMZ51FbwdozSKMH85NpPSuwY4JrNReVZkwmXOoOi_83hMdQjOfRog8dlNxHU5cFqIdATrqMfMy5d932laZ46tMO8yJSULw-bywW3UEvxFD-aUSsqJCfeZWUOZLbtjAr26YrGdYGModgW7T3ZVR2PgFQ3yK3-V-vPuHXx0lOtf9atbl7LKR6AsZTz53GuRtE_2bHWSEXMtyyjL6dBqHPAAxproBZMoOsxCi5y_HoWUw7pOGzWY9TF4xT4GINeI2XxVcQXEtJ-LQAc5yImojUT7iT11JeqYp-rrc2RCZ9Bup7_1pAmPRxs3tnlR894yATgpw==).
Something wrong? Tell us at [support@the-ken.com](mailto:support@the-ken.com)