---
subject: "Only About 40% Of The Cruz \"Woke Science\" Database Is Woke Science"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-14 03:09:43
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
From
Most of the scientists I saw on Twitter Of the hundred: 40% were woke 20% were borderline 40% weren’t woke
This is obviously in some sense a subjective determination, but I think any good-faith examination would turn up similar numbers. Why would a list of woke grants have so many non-woke grants in it? After reading the hundred abstracts, I found a clear answer: people inserted a meaningless sentence saying “this could help women and minorities” into unrelated grants, probably in the hopes of getting points with some automated filter. For example, from Grant 1731:
Did you catch the last sentence?
Some version of this sentence was in most of the nonwoke grants that made it into Cruz’s database. They promised to investigate some totally normal scientific topic, and then at the end they said somehow it would cause equity for women and minorities. I assume somebody told them that if they didn’t include this sentence, the Biden NSF would ding them for not having enough equity impact. Typical examples include: We will do outreach, and probably some of it will inspire underrepresented minorities to go into STEM. We will employ undergraduate researchers, or PhD students, and probably some of them will be underrepresented minorities. People will benefit from our work, and probably some of the beneficiaries will be underrepresented minorities.
This was probably 90% of the false positives. But there were other categories, including grants that accidentally used scientific terms that had alternative woke meanings. For example, Grant 1424:
This one gets off to a rocky start by mentioning the word “cis” (a cis-regulatory pathway is when genes regulate the expression of other genes on the same DNA molecule). Then it ends with the words “promote diversity” - in context referring to how genes promote a diversity of beetle phenotypes, but probably this looks bad in a simple CTRL+F search. Other grants have both of these failure modes at once. Here’s 2456:
Is the problem here the claim that “the investigator will also address the technological and social challenges in sustainability by training women and underrepresented minorities”? Or is it the use of “intersection” in “intersection of chemical approaches to materials synthesis and surface chemistry”?
Did this one (2674) get caught because it boasted that its lead site, the University of Houston, was “a Hispanic-serving institution”? Because it used the word “trans” in describing itself as “trans-disciplinary”? Or because it mentioned “disability” too much in the process of talking about how it could cure disabled people? About 40% of the database was examples like these. I also marked another 20% as “borderline”, but I was being excessively generous: these were mostly also non-woke things with one sentence about minorities to pass a filter, but on topics that could possibly be viewed as political. For example (3047):
Realistically this got in because of the last sentence - the one saying that it will do outreach and this might attract underrepresented minorities. But I marked it borderline because maybe, possibly, Ted Cruz thought that studying COVID prevention was “woke”. The remaining 40% of grants were actually woke. But not all of them were stupid. About half of the woke grants were STEM Career Day type things which went too far in talking about how they would cater to underrepresented minorities (STEM Career Day grants which only included the usual single sentence got classified as borderline). Here’s a grant that got marked woke:
I couldn’t in good conscience mark this non-woke, with its discussion of Native Americans from marginalized communities and their integrated identities and so on. But the overall plan (try to get Native Americans to go into STEM) isn’t “neo-Marxist class warfare propaganda”. It’s just cringe and overdone. A small percent of the grants involved, maybe 10% - 20%, did strike me as extremely dumb, in exactly the way I imagine that Ted Cruz expects woke science to be extremely dumb. Here’s one of the worst offenders (2756):
I think this is bad - but it’s only 10 - 20% of the database. Still, if true that would be ~500 woke grants representing ~$250 million in funding. I’m definitely sympathetic to the concern that the government has funded a lot of woke garbage. Getting rid of it ought to be an easy win. But this just makes it even worse that the administration has bungled this easy task so humiliatingly that it makes the DEI establishment look like paragons of competence in comparison. When I discussed the Trump administration cancelling good USAID programs, some people objected that I was asking too much. The liberals (they said) had so carefully sunk their tentacles into everything that it would be impossible to sort the woke garbage from the genuinely important programs, and rather than let them use the genuinely important stuff as human shields, we should do away with all of it. I think this overestimates the difficulty of sorting. It took me one hour to review 100 of these grants and see which ones were really woke. That suggests it would take 34 hours - less than a work week for one person - to go through the entire set. The administration isn’t failing to do this because the liberals have made everything so confusing that they’re unfortunately forced to throw out the baby with the bathwater. They’re failing to do this because they’re screwing up an easy task so badly that they’re liable to push the American people back into the arms of Ibram X. Kendi or whoever. Grant 1542 is an attempt to come up with better treatments for ovarian cancer, which currently has a 60% mortality rate. After presenting a really interesting theory of how cells evade chemotherapy and how they might stop it, they dutifully include one sentence talking about how, if they cure cancer, they will do some outreach to underrepresented minorities in STEM about it. It reflects poorly on the Biden administration that you could only get a grant to cure cancer if you suggested you might teach an underrepresented minority child about it. But at least if you included the stupid sentence, you could get the grant to cure cancer. It reflects even worse on the Republicans when they propose it for cancellation just because it did include the sentence about minorities. JUST FUND RESEARCH TO CURE CANCER WITHOUT JUDGING IT ON WHETHER THERE IS A SENTENCE ABOUT MINORITY OUTREACH IN THE GRANT PROPOSAL! This is what the American people want out of their government! They kicked out the last government because it couldn’t provide! They can kick out this government too if it also fails at this staggeringly, staggeringly easy task! You're currently a free subscriber to |