---
subject: "The Key Art Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-11-25 14:42:52
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Today, we’re re-running a WITI classic, for both new and longtime subscribers to enjoy...
Rex here. I remember when I first noticed it. Maybe you noticed it too, around the same time. Something was changing. For the first time ever, an image was so evocative, so mysterious, so persuasive, that it alone beckoned me to watch a TV show. It seemed a fluke. But then it happened again, not long after: Now, it happens all the time. What magnificent images. Each is a real vibe. Don’t you want to tap on every single one? Knock-knock, can I please enter your world? There’s an industry term for these types of images, and I feel no embarrassment defining it, because the term is obscure enough to not yet warrant a Wikipedia entry. But if you are an art director or a TV producer, you know good key art when you see it. And lately, you see a lot of it. Among its unique properties, key art always appears in competition with other key art. Go head, open your favorite streaming service, and you’ll see rows of key art, neatly regimented in grid formation. Here’s the top of my Hulu right now: Such a tantalizing spread! They remind me of Good key art is elegantly efficient. It communicates so much so quickly. At a glance, you instantly know the universe within, like a pin in the map declaring YOU ARE HERE. I have never seen Intervention, but please please, let me visit, briefly, your suburb ensconced in a syringe. Netflix has produced Forget Uh-oh. Who hasn’t been there? Good key art is so evocative, so iconic, that it becomes the image that springs to mind whenever you think about a show: One neglected characteristic ties all these images together: They are all horizontal. It sounds trivial, but going wide helped differentiate TV key art as its own medium, distinct from book covers and movie posters. And because these images appear on streaming platforms, they are unencumbered by other marketing copy, like taglines, cast and credits, and multifarious blurbs. There is a simple purity to key art. Who would dare call that a “video thumbnail”? Now, every network, HBO to HGTV, produces standardized key art, always at the same 16:9 ratio. Each image contains a stark photo plus an imaginative typeface—that’s it. Those are the only rules. But rules make things interesting. Why is this interesting? I have a theory! (Why else would you be here?) I believe key art started becoming irresistibly good around the same time as another emergent media innovation— Macros are the wildly popular subset of internet memes, the ones with text superimposed on images. You know them when you see them, and when you see them, you see them everywhere. Key art functions similarly, binding text and image together in an intricate visual-linguistic dance. It works like math, or perhaps chemistry. With both memes and key art, you just instantly get it. And like memes, key art also has its own form of remix. Find the pattern, and then iterate: Netflix Unfortunately, the world’s largest streaming company also hates key art. I exaggerate. But let’s not mince words, Netflix is determined to drain the creativity out of this emerging medium. It all started in a 2017
Hang on, I got this one.... No! On Netflix, each user now sees different key art, based on their user activities and ultimately their To illustrate, I loaded up my wife’s Netflix profile next to mine. We got some of the same recommendations, but the artwork makes the shows look completely different: Worse than being different, the images are also just atrociously bad. That’s because Netflix uses algorithms to extract screenshots from the video, and then puts them in competition with other screenshots of the same show. The images don’t accurately represent the show; they merely outperform their competitors. Over time, this makes Netflix key art less iconic, less interesting. Instead of nurturing a vibrant art form, Netflix produces mere thumbnails—that related genre of imagery generated by the borg known as YouTube. In the midst of a golden age, Netflix is A/B testing their way to mediocrity. Which is upsetting, because logging into a streaming service already feels vaguely oppressive. You are immediately faced with stacks of options, each demanding 1.8 seconds of your attention. It’s the quintessential Knock-knock, please let me into your world. (RS) Invite your friends and earn rewardsIf you enjoy Why is this interesting?, share it with your friends and earn rewards when they subscribe. |