---
subject: "Yes, AI Continues To Make Rapid Progress, Including Towards AGI"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-09-09 14:52:20
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
That does not mean AI will successfully make it all the way to AGI and superintelligence, or that it will make it there soon or on any given time frame. It does mean that AI progress, while it could easily have been even faster, has still been historically lightning fast. It has exceeded almost all expectations from more than a few years ago. And it means we cannot disregard the possibility of High Weirdness and profound transformation happening within a few years. GPT-5 had a botched rollout and was only an incremental improvement over o3, o3-Pro and other existing OpenAI models, but was very much on trend and a very large improvement over the original GPT-4. Nor would one disappointing model from one lab have meant that major further progress must be years away. Imminent AGI (in the central senses in which that term AGI used, where imminent means years rather than decades) remains a very real possibility. Part of this is covering in full Gary Marcus’s latest editorial in The New York Times, since that is the paper of record read by many in government. I felt that piece was in many places highly misleading to the typical Times reader. Imagine if someone said ‘you told me in 1906 that there was increasing imminent risk of a great power conflict, and now it’s 1911 and there has been no war, so your fever dream of a war to end all wars is finally fading.’ Or saying that you were warned in November 2019 that Covid was likely coming, and now it’s February 2020 and no one you know has it, so it was a false alarm. That’s what these claims sound like to me. Why Do I Even Have To Say This?I have to keep emphasizing this because it now seems to be an official White House position, with prominent White House official Sriram Krishnan going so far as to say on Twitter that AGI any time soon has been ‘disproven,’ and David Sacks spending his time ranting and repeating Nvidia talking points almost verbatim. When pressed, there is often a remarkably narrow window in which ‘imminent’ AGI is dismissed as ‘proven wrong.’ But this is still used as a reason to structure public policy and one’s other decisions in life as if AGI definitely won’t happen for decades, which is Obvious Nonsense.
Rob Miles is correct here as far as I can tell. If imminent means ‘within the next six months’ or maybe up to a year I think Sriram’s perspective is reasonable, because of what GPT-5 tells us about what OpenAI is cooking. For sensible values of imminent that are more relevant to policy and action, Sriram Krishnan is wrong, in a ‘I sincerely hope he is engaging in rhetoric rather than being genuinely confused about this, or his imminently only means in the next year or at most two’ way. I am confused how he can be sincerely mistaken given how deep he is into these issues, or that he shares his reasons so we can quickly clear this up because this is a crazy thing to actually believe. I do look forward to Sriram providing a full explanation as to why he believes this. So far we we only have heard ‘GPT-5.’ It Might Be ComingNot only is imminent AGI not disproven, there are continuing important claims that it is likely. Here is some clarity on Anthropic’s continued position, as of August 31.
Anthropic’s valuation has certainly been on a rocket ship exponential. Do I agree that we are on track to meet that timeline? No. I do not. I would be very surprised to see it go down that fast, and I am surprised that Jack Clark has not updated based on, if nothing else, previous projections by Anthropic CEO Dario Amodei falling short. I do think it cannot be ruled out. If it does happen, I do not think you have any right to be outraged at the universe for it.
Which is still a lot, but a lot less than 90%.
I continue to be confused why he said it, it’s highly unstrategic to hype this way. I can only assume on reflection this was an error about diffusion speed more than it was an error about capabilities? On reflection yes I was correctly betting ‘no’ but that was an easy call. I dock myself more points on net here, for hedging too much and not expressing the proper level of skepticism. So yes, this should push you towards putting less weight on Anthropic’s projections, although primarily on the diffusion front. As always, remember that projections of future progress include the possibility, nay the inevitability, of discovering new methods. We are not projecting ‘what if the AI labs all keep ramming their heads against the same wall whether or not it works.’
My talks with AI insiders also say we will need new discoveries, and we definitely will need new major discoveries in alignment. But it’s not clear how big those new discoveries need to be in order to get there. I
A Prediction That Implies AGI Soon
Notice the goalpost move of ‘deep in that transition’ in 2030 versus saying full replacement by 2030, without seeming to understand there is any contradiction. These are two very different predictions. The original ‘by 2030’ prediction is Obvious Nonsense unless you expect superintelligence and a singularity, probably involving us all dying. There’s almost zero chance otherwise. Technology does not diffuse that fast. Plugging 2035 into the 2030 prediction is also absurd, if we take the prediction literally. No, you’re not going to have zero workers at Amazon, UPS and FedEx within ten years unless we’ve not only solved robotics and AGI, we’ve also diffused those technologies at full scale. In which case, again, that’s a singularity. I am curious what his co-podcaster David Sacks or Sriram Krishnan would say here. Would they dismiss Jason’s confident prediction as already proven false? If not, how can one be confident that AGI is far? Very obviously you can’t have one without the other. GPT-5 Was On TrendGPT-5 is not a good reason to dismiss AGI, and to be safe I will once again go into why, and why we are making rapid progress towards AGI.
The differences are dramatic, and the time frame between releases was similar. The actual big difference? That there was only one incremental release between GPT-3 and GPT-4, GPT-3.5, with little outside competition. Whereas between GPT-4 and GPT-5 we saw many updates. At OpenAI alone we saw GPT-4o, and o1, and o3, plus updates that didn’t involve number changes, and at various points Anthropic’s Claude and Google’s Gemini were plausibly on top. Our frog got boiled slowly.
Benchmarks can be misleading, especially as we saturate essentially all of them often well ahead of predicted schedules, but the overall picture is not. The mundane utility and user experience jumps across all use cases are similarly dramatic. The original GPT-4 was a modest aid to coding, GPT-5 and Opus 4.1 transform how it is done. Most of the queries I make with GPT-5-Thinking or GPT-5-Pro would not be worth bothering to give to the original GPT-4, or providing the context would not even be possible. So many different features have been improved or added. The Myths Of Model Equality and Lock-InThis ideas, frequently pushed by among others David Sacks, that everyone’s models are about the same and aren’t improving? These claims simply are not true. Observant regular users are not about to be locked into one model or ecosystem. Everyone’s models are constantly improving. No one would seriously consider using models from the start of the year for anything but highly esoteric purposes. The competition is closer than one would have expected. There are three major labs, OpenAI, Anthropic and Google, that each have unique advantages and disadvantages. At various times each have had the best model, and yes currently it is wise to mix up your usage depending on your particular use case. Those paying attention are always ready to switch models. I’ve switched primary models several times this year alone, usually switching to a model from a different lab, and tested many others as well. And indeed we must switch models often either way, as it is expected that everyone’s models will change on the order of every few months, in ways that break the same things that would break if you swapped GPT-5 for Opus or Gemini or vice versa, all of which one notes typically run on three distinct sets of chips (Nvidia for GPT-5, Amazon Trainium for Anthropic and Google TPUs for Gemini) but we barely notice. The Law of Good EnoughMost people notice AI progress much better when it impacts their use cases. If you are not coding, and not doing interesting math, and instead asking simple things that do not require that much intelligence to answer correctly, then upgrading the AI’s intelligence is not going to improve your satisfaction levels much.
Floor Versus Ceiling
Here’s another variant of this foolishness, note the correlation to ‘hitting a wall’:
New York Times Platforms Gary Marcus Saying Gary Marcus Things
That starts with the false title (as always, not entirely up to the author, and it looks like it started out as a better one), dripping with unearned condescension, ‘The Fever Dream of Imminent ‘Superintelligence’ Is Finally Breaking,’ and the opening paragraph in which he claims Altman implied GPT-5 would be AGI. Here is the lead:
Did you notice the stock market move in AI stocks, as those bets fell down to Earth when GPT-5 was revealed? No? Neither did I. The argument above is highly misleading on many fronts. GPT-5 is not AGI, but this was entirely unsurprising - expectations were set too high, but nothing like that high. Yes, Altman teased that it was possible AGI could arrive relatively soon, but at no point did Altman claim that GPT-5 would be AGI, or that AGI would arrive in 2025. Approximately zero people had median estimates of AGI in 2025 or earlier, although there are some that have estimated the end of 2026, in particular Anthropic (they via Jack Clark continue to say ‘powerful’ AI buildable by end of 2026, not AGI arriving 2026). The claim that it ‘couldn’t count reliably’ is especially misleading. Of course GPT-5 can count reliably. The evidence here is a single adversarial example. For all practical purposes, if you ask GPT-5 to count something, it will count that thing. Old riddles is highly misleading. If you give it an actual old riddle it will nail it. What GPT-5 and other models get wrong are, again, adversarial examples that do not exist ‘in the wild’ but are crafted to pattern match well-known other riddles while having a different answer. Why should we care? GPT-5 still is not fully reliable but this is framed as it being still highly unreliable, when in most circumstances this is not the case. Yes, if you need many 9s of reliability LLMs are not yet for you, but neither are humans. AI valuations and stocks continue to be rising not falling. Yes, the fact that OpenAI chose to have GPT-5 not be a scaled up model does tell us that directly scaling up model size alone has ‘lost steam’ in relative terms due to the associated costs, but this is not news, o1 and o3 (and GPT-4.5) tell us this as well. We are now working primarily on scaling and improving in other ways, but very much there are still plans to scale up more in the future. In the context of all the other facts quoted about other scaled up models, it seems misleading to many readers to not mention that GPT-5 is not scaled up. Claims here are about failures of GPT-5-Auto or GPT-5-Base, whereas the ‘scaled up’ version of GPT-5 is GPT-5-Pro or at least GPT-5-Thinking. [Gary Marcus clarifies](https://substack.com/redirect/3f04cc0c-a9f3-4968-80aa-ee11e959f843?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)that his actual position is on the order of 8-15 years to AGI, with 2029 being ‘awfully unlikely.’ Which is a highly reasonable timeline, but that seems pretty imminent. That’s crazy soon. That’s something I would want to be betting on heavily, and preparing for at great cost, AGI that soon seems like the most important thing happening in the world right now if likely true?The article does not give any particular timeline, and does not imply we will never get to AGI, but I very much doubt those reading the post would come away with the impression that things strictly smarter than people are only about 10 years away. I mean, yowsers, right?
The fact about ‘many users asked for the old model back’ is true, but lacking the important context that what users wanted was the old personality, so it risks giving an uninformed user the wrong impression. To Gary’s credit, he then does hedge, as I included in the quote, acknowledging GPT-5 is indeed a good model representing a step forward. Except then:
Um, no? No it doesn’t. That’s silly.
Again, no? That’s not the strategy. Not ‘merely’ doing that. Indeed, a lot of the reason GPT-5 was so relatively unimpressive was GPT-5 was not scaled up so much. It was instead optimized for compute efficiency. There is no reason to have to rethink much of anything in response to a model that, as explained above, was pretty much exactly on the relevant trend lines. I do appreciate this:
As in, the ‘hitting the wall’ claim was back in 2022. How did that turn out? Look at GPT-5, look at what we had available in 2022, and tell me we ‘hit a wall.’ Gary Marcus Does Not Actually Think AGI Is That Non-ImminentWhat does ‘imminent’ superintelligence mean in this context?
Notice the subtle goalpost move, as AGI ‘by 2027’ means AGI 2026. These people are gloating, in advance, that someone predicted a possibility of privately developed AGI in 2027 (with a median in 2028, in the AI 2027 scenario OpenBrain tells the government but does not release its AGI right away to the public) and then AGI will have not arrived, to the public, in 2026. According to my sources (Opus 4.1 and GPT-5 Thinking) even ‘remote’ still means on the order of 2% chance in the next 16 months, implying an 8%-25% chance in 5 years. I don’t agree, but even if one did, that’s hardly something one can safety rule out. But then, there’s this interaction on Twitter that clarifies what Gary Marcus meant:
That’s a highly reasonable position one can take. Awfully unlikely (but thus possible) in four years, likely in 8-15, median timeline of 2036 or so. Notice that on the timescale of history, 8-15 years until likely AGI, the most important development in the history of history if and when it happens, seems actually kind of imminent and important? That should demand an aggressive policy response focused on what we are going to do when we get to do that, not be treated as a reason to dismiss this? Imagine saying, in 2015, ‘I think AGI is far away, we’re talking 18-25 years’ and anticipating the looks you would get. The rest of the essay is a mix of policy suggestions and research direction suggestions. If indeed he is right about research directions, of which I am skeptical, we would still expect to see rapid progress soon as the labs realize this and pivot. Can Versus Will Versus Always, Typical Versus AdversarialA common tactic among LLM doubters, which was one of the strategies used in the NYT editorial, is to show a counterexample, where a model fails a particular query, and say ‘model can’t do [X]’ or the classic Colin Fraser line of ‘yep it’s dumb.’
I mean, that’s very funny, but it is rather obvious how it happened with the strawberries thing all over Twitter and thus the training data, and it tells us very little about overall performance. In such situations, we have to differentiate between different procedures, the same as in any other scientific experiment. As in: Did you try to make it fail, or try to set it up to succeed? Did you choose an adversarial or a typical example? Did you get this the first time you tried it or did you go looking for a failure? Are you saying it ‘can’t [X]’ because it can’t ever do [X], because it can’t ever do [X] out of the box, it can’t reliably do [X], or it can’t perfectly do [X], etc? If you conflate ‘I can elicit wrong answers on [X] if I try’ with ‘it can’t do [X]’ then the typical reader will have a very poor picture.
Counterpoint
I am confused how one can claim Shakeel is being intellectually dishonest. His statement is flat out true. Yes, of course the decision not to scale It tells me that they want to scale how much they serve the model and how much they do reasoning at inference time, and that this was the most economical solution for them at the time. JB is right that very, very obviously GPT-4.5 is a bigger model than GPT-5 and it is crazy to not realize this. ‘Superforecasters’ Have Reliably Given Unrealistically Slow AI Projections Without Reasonable JustificationsA post like this would be incomplete if I failed to address superforecasters. I’ve been over this several times before, where superforecasters reliably have crazy slow projections for progress and even crazier predictions that when we do make minds smarter than ourselves that is almost certainly not an existential risk. My coverage of this started Now that the dust settled on models getting IMO Gold in 2025, it is a good time to look back on the fact that domain experts expected less progress in math than we got, and superforecasters expected a lot less, across the board.
Note that even Yudkowsky and Christiano had only modest probability that the IMO would fall as early as 2025.
Or, as I put it back in the unrelated-to-AI post
Thus:
Hindsight is hindsight, and yes you will get a 98th percentile result 2% of the time. But I think at 2.3% for 2025 IMO Gold, you are not serious people. That doesn’t mean that being serious people was the wise play here. The incentives might well have been to follow the ‘nothing ever happens’ rock. We still have to realize this, as we can indeed smell what the rock is cooking. What To Expect When You’re Expecting AI ProgressA wide range of potential paths of AI progress are possible. There are a lot of data points that should impact the distribution of outcomes, and one must not overreact to any one development. One should especially not overreact to not being blown away by progress for a span of a few months. Consider your baseline that’s causing that. My timelines for hitting various milestones, including various definitions of AGI, involve a lot of uncertainty. I think not having a lot of uncertainty is a mistake. I especially think saying either ‘AGI almost certainly won’t happen within 5 years’ or ‘AGI almost certainly will happen within 15 years,’ would be a large mistake. There are so many different unknowns involved. I can see treating full AGI in 2026 as effectively a Can’t Happen. I don’t think you can extend that even to 2027, although I would lay large odds against it hitting that early. A wide range of medians seem reasonable to me. I can see defending a median as early as 2028, or one that extends to 2040 or beyond if you think it is likely that anything remotely like current approaches cannot get there. I have not put a lot of effort into picking my own number since the exact value currently lacks high value of information. If you put a gun to my head for a typical AGI definition I’d pick 2031, but with no ‘right to be surprised’ if it showed up in 2028 or didn’t show up for a while. Consider the 2031 number loosely held. To close out, consider once again: Even if you we agreed with Gary Marcus and said 8-15 years, with median 2036? Take a step back and realize how soon and crazy that is. You're currently a free subscriber to |