---
subject: "Our Ideas about the Psyche Affect the Psyche"
from: "\"River Kenna from In•Star\" <riverkenna@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-05-08 11:26:06
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "River Kenna", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3010718370428876194", "UNREAD"]
---
|
Have you heard that thing where people thought it was impossible to run a 4 minute mile — but then after one person did it, a lot more people were suddenly able to do it? Or how people's relationship to willpower changes based on whether they believe that willpower is a muscle you can build or that it's a resource that gets depleted? Or how if you tell people that people like them are bad at a certain task, they’ll perform worse at the task than they otherwise would?
James Hillman wrote "Our ideas about the psyche affect the psyche." This isn't just true on individual levels, but on the levels of community, culture, society, governance, everything. What we believe about the psyche shapes the way we experience the world, which in turn shapes the world itself.
Hillman also said "I’ve come to the conclusion that psychological language does do damage, it isn’t the language of the soul."
The language we use affects the psyche. The concepts we use affect the psyche. The unconscious schemas and assumptions and impressions we absorb affect the psyche.
If we persistently treat Psyche as a clinical problem, as a medicalized object, this is how we will come to relate to ourselves. This is how we think matters of the heart and mind are solved, is in the clinic, via medical procedure and medical personnel.
If we act as if knowledge of the collective psyche is best gained by creating graphs and charts and statistical models, we will come to act more and more like averages. We will come more and more to conform ourselves and reduce ourselves to a set of measurements — to understand ourselves as the type of thing that can be understood by measure.
If we treat people as if they are full of Original Sin, and nothing they've ever done or will ever do is redeemable, and their only hope is to surrender to someone else who did all the work, they will come more and more to see themselves as worthless, to see the world as centered around a handful of special people who are better than them and who can save them without their needing to do much except sit back and feel badly about themselves.
Our ideas about the psyche affect the psyche. These ideas matter.
And this is by no means just "ideas" in the intellectual sense. Under this umbrella also falls embodied schemas, cultural narratives, unconscious tendencies, neurotic patterns, family dynamics, attachment styles, so on and so forth. All these things that shape our relationship to the world and to the psyche. Our stance towards the psyche can shape the way the world operates — either to enforce an existing order, to pull back to an older one, or to create and propagate further ones.
For example: we could take this whole train of thought with a stance that all of this makes the psyche contingent and arbitrary. That human minds will bend towards any pattern they're fed often enough and widely enough, so it doesn't matter which patterns we bend to, we could all just pick a couple of them and get on the same page. Any page will do.
This stance will inevitably drive us into a nihilistic anything-goes doldrums. Even — and this is crucial — even if that stance is used to get everyone on the same page of some kind of perfect love-and-light, community, pulling together, sacred flourishing, everyone rises together type of worldview... even with the best intentions towards the best of contingent worldviews, because of the stance behind it, it will crash and burn and take us all with it.
Any stance that is distanced, mechanical, clinical, statistical — that wants to simply look and measure and poke and optimize — will eat away the soul. And the whole time, we will be told over and over again that we're being silly, there has been no confirmed measurement of any kind of "soul-eating" effect of this line of inquiry.
We could also take this train of thought with a stance that notices certain facts about people, and about our psyches, both individual and collective: namely, that people are, over and over again, driven towards love, beauty, and truth. These drives get distorted and perverted, true — but they are real, and they are deep deep deep in us.
We could also see clearly that there are certain stances towards the psyche, towards our shared humanity, that are more beautiful, and some stances that are more ugly. There are some stances that are more true (rather than merely more measurable), and others that are less true. Stances that are more loving, and stances that are less.
There are certain scents in the psychosphere that draw us in, that compel us — pheromonal pulls towards what nourishes us, towards what drives our growth and evolution, as individuals, as collectives, as species, as consciousness-unfolding-through-cosmos.
It matters that our ideas about the psyche — our implicit schemas and beliefs and impressions about what kind of beings we are, what kind of universe we inhabit — tend towards beauty and truth and love and goodness and the pheromonal draw of what drives consciousness higher.
It matters that we don't believe humans to be lazy or complacent or trapped in the spiderweb of statistical behavioral approximations. It matters that we don't believe our deepest needs are for convenience, ease, and control. It matters that we believe, and that we act and speak in accord with this belief, that the human psyche tends towards the sacred, towards beauty, towards truth and the unfolding aliveness of an evolving universe. That we believe that we are good, that we are enough, that we can do hard things and that our joy comes from attuning to and following the life force that courses through us.
James Hillman wrote another sentence, a very dense one that needs some unpacking, but that I absolutely love. He wrote, "Myths are the metaphors that translates libido into configurations."
Basically, that unpacks to something like "our implicit, embodied beliefs are the deciding factor in how our life energy gets arranged and deployed."
Which, to unpack the implications of that a little bit further: the way that life energy is arranged and deployed is like... the only thing that matters in this life. I'm not sure if I stand by that sentence a hundred percent, but like... idk, 85% no problem. The reason you're reading this article at all right now is because something inside you — something you didn't consciously choose — is telling you that it's somehow worthwhile to do. There's some story, some narrative, some configuration of life-energy inside of you that's telling you this is a worthwhile thing to do. I know that for a fact, because you're still reading this sentence.
This is the only reason you do anything, is because you hold some narrative or schema or libidinal pattern that drives you to expend energy on it. That's why wars are fought, it's why we buy one stapler versus another, it's why people break up or get married or chop down trees or invent new manufacturing protocols or buy Pringles.
So when we realize that our ideas about the psyche affect the psyche, and that the language and metaphors and stances we adopt can either damage the psyche or empower it — and when we notice that all of this is an essential part of how life-energy gets configured, which is THE essential part of how individuals and societies decide what types of actions it makes sense to take or not take in the world...
It matters that our beliefs about the psyche lead to a good, true, and beautiful psyche. It matters that we reject anything that nurtures the impression that the psyche is driven by convenience and power, that the psyche can be reduced to measurements, that the best ways to learn about the psyche are 3rd person methods rather than 1st person experience.
It matters that we know that Psyche is sacred, is beautiful, is powerful and poetic and unfolding towards the north stars we all hear calling us.