---
subject: "Robot Dexterity Still Seems Hard"
from: "Construction Physics <constructionphysics@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-04-24 12:18:00
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Construction Physics", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8588207018748827248", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
You can’t throw a rock these days without hitting someone trying to build humanoid robots. The Other manufacturers are existing companies trying their hand at humanoids. Tesla is developing its These humanoids are also getting increasingly capable. Boston Dynamics has been Beyond these sorts of demos, humanoids are also starting to be tested in the field to see if they can do useful work. Agility Robotics’ Digit is While a lot of these capabilities are impressive, robot progress still seems somewhat uneven to me. It’s cool to see these robots move in such human-like ways, but as former OpenAI Chief Research Officer Dexterity is hardRobots have long had the ability to make extremely precise movements. What robots have traditionally struggled with isn’t controlled, precise movements, but dexterity, which is something like “the ability to manipulate a broad variety of objects in a broad variety of ways, quickly and on the fly.” Humans can complete almost any object manipulation task you ask them to do — folding a piece of clothing, opening a gallon of milk, wiping up a spill with a cloth — even if it's an object and/or task they’ve never encountered before. With robots, on the other hand, while it’s usually possible to automate any specific task (given the right hardware, enough time, and a narrow enough task definition), building a robot that can flexibly perform a variety of actions in a novel or highly variable environment is much harder. Robotic flexibility has improved over time (it’s much easier today to program a welding robot to follow a new path, for instance), but this flexibility still exists within a very narrow range of acceptable variation. The delta robot system above can grab randomly positioned objects, but would almost certainly require reprogramming if the size and shape of the objects changed, and I wouldn’t be surprised if even varying the color of the objects was enough to disrupt the existing automation. This is an instance of what’s known as Humanoids and dexterityThe current crop of humanoid robots seem to be making progress on dexterity, but are still nowhere near human capabilities. In the TED Talk above where 1X’s Neo displays its capabilities, the robot starts by picking up a vacuum cleaner and pushing a button to turn it on, but it doesn’t push the button smoothly (its finger seems to first miss the button then slide over). When Neo grabs a watering can, it has a hard time putting its fingers around the handle and gripping it tightly, and withdrawing the hand when it's done (Neo ultimately has to use its other hand to help free it from the can). In Aside from folding the shirt (which Neo doesn’t appear to completely fold), none of these tasks are particularly dexterously demanding. They all involve manipulating relatively large, rigid objects that behave predictably, without a great deal of precision. For more dexterously demanding tasks, it’s obvious Neo would struggle even more. It’s also notable that Neo’s actions are done with a combination of automation and teleoperation (where a human remotely controls Neo), so its actual autonomous capabilities are even less than what we see. I used Neo as my first example since there’s a lot of available footage of it manipulating objects, but its performance seems to be broadly comparable to other humanoids. The factory-type tasks done by Figure’s 02, Boston Dynamics’ Atlas, and Apptronik’s Apollo all appear to involve moving large, rigid objects in relatively straightforward ways, and they often seem to struggle with precise, subtle movements. 02 moves large parts on fixtures aligned to receive them (probably allowing some imprecision in where the robot drops it), though to its credit 02 does this fairly smoothly and quickly. Apptronik’s Apollo is The robotic dexterity problem is such that humanoid demos and deployments will often avoid complex manipulation tasks. Agility’s Digit, for instance, seems to be often equipped with The fact that humanoids (and robots in general) still struggle with dexterity isn’t exactly a secret. Roboticist Rodney Brooks recently There are some examples of impressive-looking robotic dexterity demonstrations. Five years ago OpenAI It’s also my sense that many Related to this, it’s also often difficult to tell how “real” robotic capabilities are from videos. There’s always the possibility of careful editing to make capabilities look more impressive than they are, or of filming many attempts and only showing the successful ones, or of teleoperation (where a human controls the robots’ movements). We noted above that many of 1X’s actions are in practice teleoperated, and most of the impressive-looking demonstrations of Tesla’s Optimus (such as Dexterity difficultiesFrom what I can tell, difficulties in dexterous manipulation are partly a hardware problem and partly a software problem. On the hardware side, current robotic manipulators are very far from being as capable as a human hand. Human hands are very strong while being capable of complex and precise motions, and it’s difficult to match this with a robot hand. Robot hands are often surprisingly weak. An More importantly, human hands are extremely sensitive, and capable of providing a lot of tactile feedback to help guide our actions. A human hand has around Dexterous robot hands also tend to be extremely expensive. The Robonaut 2 hand apparently cost on the order of But getting better, cheaper hardware is (probably) only part of the dexterity problem. Humans are capable of being incredibly dexterous without hands at all: amputees Dexterity evalsA popular area of focus with AI right now is “ Put on a pair of latex gloves Tie two pieces of string together in a tight knot, then untie the knot Turn to a specific page in a book Pull a specific object, and only that object, out of a pocket in a pair of jeans Bait a fishhook with a worm Open a childproof medicine bottle, and pour out two (and only two) pills Make a peanut butter and jelly sandwich, starting with an unopened bag of bread and unopened jars of peanut butter and jelly Act as the dealer in a poker game (shuffling the cards, dealing them out, gathering them back up when the hand is over) Assemble a mechanical watch Peel a piece of scotch tape off of something Braid hair Roll a small lump of playdough into three smaller balls Peel an orange Score a point in ladder golf Replace an electrical outlet in a wall with a new one Do a cat's cradle with a yo-yo Put together a plastic model, including removing the parts from the plastic runners Squeeze a small amount of toothpaste onto a toothbrush from a mostly empty tube Start a new roll of toilet paper without ripping the first sheet Open a ziplock bag of rice, pull out a single grain, then reseal the bag Put on a necklace with a clasp
These all require some combination of rapid or precise movements, adjusting motions based on subtle tactile feedback, and manipulating small, fragile, or deformable objects. Completing these tasks at all would be impressive, and the faster they could be done the more dexterously capable the robot. As with AI evals, ideally these would be done without the system being trained on these tasks specifically (I haven’t looked, but it wouldn’t surprise me if there were purpose-built systems capable of doing these tasks right now). What progress will we see in dexterity?Humanoid robotic dexterity is improving, but as a non-robotics expert it’s not obvious to me what sort of improvement trajectory it's on. One potential path is that humanoid robots follow a path like self-driving cars: robots gradually get more and more capable and dexterous, but improvement is slow and painstaking, resolving edge cases is hard, and rollout is very slow. This is probably my default model for progress on something that requires gathering a lot of real-world training data, but I can easily imagine other trajectories. If software proves to be the primary bottleneck to performance improvement, and things like simulation and synthetic data allow for rapid performance increase without needing to collect a huge amount of real-world data, rollout might be much faster. On the other hand, I can imagine progress being much slower if performance improvement ends up requiring capturing a lot of high-fidelity tactile data from hardware that doesn’t exist yet. Self-driving cars also may not be the best reference class for humanoid robot deployment. A self-driving car needs to be very, very reliable before it can be usefully deployed given the high costs of an accident, but depending on where they’re deployed this may not be true for humanoid robots, especially if failures are along the lines of “move an object incorrectly and need to try again”. Slow, plodding task performance might be acceptable in many situations if the alternative is more expensive or otherwise undesirable. A Roomba doesn’t need to follow the most efficient path and clean the floor in the least amount of time to be useful, it just needs to work autonomously most of the time. Humanoid robots might be similar. And of course, even as dexterity improves (or doesn’t) there’s no guarantee that the humanoid form factor will win out. A humanoid robot has obvious advantages (it fits nicely into a world that has been designed for humans to work in), but for many tasks other form factors are likely superior. So it’s still far from clear to me what our robotic future looks like. Thanks to Ben Reinhardt and Hersh Desai for reading a draft of this and providing feedback. All errors are my own. Construction Physics articles will always remain free, but if you find this work valuable, I encourage you to Construction Physics is produced in partnership with the Institute for Progress, a Washington, DC-based think tank. You can learn more about their work by visiting their You can also contact me on |