---
subject: "On Writing #1"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-03-04 13:26:32
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
This isn’t primarily about how I write. It’s about how other people write, and what advice they give on how to write, and how I react to and relate to that advice. I’ve been collecting those notes for a while. I figured I would share. At some point in the future, I’ll talk more about my own process - my guess is that what I do very much wouldn’t work for most people, but would be excellent for some. How Marc Andreessen Writes
Marc is saying that first you write out your points and conclusion, then you fill in the details. He wants to figure it all out while his mind is buzzing, then justify it later. Whereas I learn what I think as I write out my ideas in detail. I would say that if you are only jotting down bullet points, you do not yet know what you think. Where we both agree is that of course you should write notes to remember key new ideas, and also that the organizing what goes where can be done later. I do not think it is a coincidence that this is the opposite of my procedure. Yes, I have some idea of what I’m setting out to write, but it takes form as I write it, and as I write I understand. If you’re starting with a conclusion, then writing an outline, and writing them quickly, that says you are looking to communicate what you already know, rather than seeking to yourself learn via the process. A classic rationalist warning is to How Sarah Constantin Writes
I also strongly agree with her arguments that you need to get the vibe right. I would extend this principle to needing to be aware of How Paul Graham WritesI think this is directionally right, I definitely won’t leave a wrong idea in writing:
However I also won’t leave a clumsy sentence that I wasn’t comfortable being in the final version. I will often go back and edit what I’ve written, hopefully improving it, but if I wasn’t willing to hit post with what I have now then I wouldn’t leave it there. In the cases where this is not true, I’m going explicitly leave a note, in [brackets] and usually including a [tktk], saying very clearly that there is a showstopper bug here.
I feel this way at conferences. You’re constantly context switching, a lot of it isn’t retained, but you go with the flow, try to retain the stuff that matters most and take a few notes, and hope others get a lot out of it. The worst of that was at EA Global: Boston, where you are by default taking a constant stream of 25 minute 1-on-1s. By the end of the day it was mostly a blur. When I write, however, mostly it’s the opposite experience to Graham’s writing - it’s constant context switching from one problem to the next. Even while doing that, I’m doing extra context switching for breaks. A lot of that is presumably different types of writing. Graham is trying to write essays that are tighter, more abstract, more structured, trying to make a point. I’m trying to learn and explore and process and find out. Which is why I basically can indeed do it with a scrambled brain, and indeed have optimized for that ability - to be able to process writing subtasks without having to load in lots of state. How Patrick McKenzie Writes
How Tim Urban Writes
I definitely have a lot of moments when I don’t feel productive, usually because my brain isn’t focused or on. I try to have a stack of other productive things I can do despite being unproductive while that passes. But over time, yes, I’ve found the writing itself does get easy for me? Often figuring out what I think, or what I want to write about, is hard, but the writing itself comes relatively easily. Yes, you can then go over it ten times and edit to an inch of its life if you want, but the whole ‘rewriting the same three paragraphs’ thing is very rare. I think the only times I did it this year I was pitching to The New York Times. How Visakan Veerasamy Writes
I do endorse the core thing this is trying to suggest: To explore more and worry about presentation and details less, on most margins. And to know that in a real sense, if you have truly compelling fuckery, you have wiggled your big toe. Hard part is over. I do not think the core claim itself is correct. Or perhaps we mean different things by resonant and coherent? By coherent, in my lexicon, he means more like ‘well-executed’ or ‘polished’ or something. By resonant, in my lexicon, he means more like ‘on to something central, true and important.’ Whereas to me resonant is a vibe, fully compatible with bullshit, ornate or otherwise. How Matt Yglesias Writes
How JRR Tolkien Wrote
How Roon Wants Us to Write
Perhaps some day I will learn how to write fiction. My experiences with AI reinforce to me that I really, really don’t know how to do that. When To Write the HeadlineI usually write the headline last. Others disagree.
As I said on Twitter, everyone as LessOnline instead gave the advice to not let things be barriers to writing. If you want to be a writer, write more, then edit or toss it out later, but you have to write. Also, as others pointed out, if you start with the headline every time you are building habits of going for engagement if not clickbait, rather than following curiosity. Other times, yes, you know exactly what the headline is before you start, because if you know you know. Do Not Write Self-Deprecating Descriptions of Your Posts
You can safely make the self-deprecating comments within the post itself. That’s fine. Do Not Write a BookDon’t write a book. If you do, chances are you’d sell dozens of copies, and earn at most similar quantities of dollars. The odds are very much doubleplusungood. Do you want to go on podcasts this much?
Finishable. If they don’t finish it, they won’t recommend it. So tighten it up. Unique OR Excellent. Be the best like no one ever was, or be like no one ever was. Memorable. Have hooks, for when people ask for a book about or for some X.
If you are thinking about writing a book, remember that Write Like No One Else is Reading
What is the number of readers that justifies writing something down? Often the correct answer is zero, even a definite zero. Even if it’s only about those who read it, twenty readers is actually a lot of value to put out there, and a lot of potential connection. Letting the AI Write For YouPaul Graham predicts that AI will cause the world to I think Graham is overstating the extent AI will free people from the pressure to write. Getting AI to write well in turn, and write what you actually want it to write, requires good writing and thinking, and involving AI in your writing OODA loop is often not cheap to do. Yes, more people will choose not to invest in the skill, but I don’t think this takes the pressure off as much as he expects, at least until AI gets a lot better. There’s also the question of how much we should force people to write anyway, in order to make them think, or be able to think. As Graham notes, getting rid of the middle ground could be quite bad:
Most jobs don’t require real thinking. Proof: Most people can’t write. One could argue that many jobs require ‘mid-level’ real thinking, the kind that might be lost, but I think mostly this is not the case. Most tasks and jobs don’t require real thinking at all, as we are talking about it here. Being able to do it? Still highly useful. On the rare occasions the person can indeed do real thinking, it’s often highly valuable, but the jobs are designed knowing most people can’t and won’t do that. Being Matt Levine
In particular, a Matt Levine has to shout things into the void, over and over, repeating simple explanations time and again, and the subject has to involve many rapidly-resolved example problems to work through, with clear resolutions. The place where I most epicly fail to be a Matt Levine in this model is my failure to properly address the beginner mindset and keep things simple. My choice to cater to a narrower, more advanced crowd, one that embraces more complexity, means I can’t go wide the way he can. That does seem right. I could try to change this, but I mostly choose not to. I write too many words as it is. The Case for Italics
It’s a great tool to have in your box. What I ultimately found was it is also a crutch that comes with a price. You almost never need italics, and the correct version without italics is easier on the reader. When I look back on my old writing and see all the italics, I often cringe. Why did I feel the need to do that? Mostly I blame Eliezer Yudkowsky giving me felt permission to do it. About 75% of the time I notice that I can take out the italics and nothing would go wrong. It would be a little less obvious what I’m trying to emphasize, in some senses, but it’s fine. The other 25% of the time, I realize that the italics is load bearing, and if I remove it I will have to reword, so mostly I reword. Getting Paid
I’ve been growing over time, but the ratios do get worse. I doubled my unpaid subscriber count in 2023, and then doubled it again in 2024. But my subscription revenue was only up about 50% in 2023, and only up another 25% in 2024. I of course very much appreciate paid subscriptions, but I am 100% fine, and it is not shocking that my offer of absolutely nothing extra doesn’t get that many takers.
I am continuously grateful that I can afford to not have a paywall, but others are not so fortunate. You have to pay the bills, even though it is sad that this greatly reduces reach and ability to discuss the resulting posts.
Ideally, we would have more writers who are supported by a patron system, in exchange for having at most a minimal paywall (e.g. I think many would still want a paywall on ability to comment to ensure higher quality or civility, or do what Scott Alexander does and paywall a weird 5% of posts, or do subscriber-questions-only AMAs or what not). Having Impact
In my case, I’m thinking about structure - the moves between different topics are designed to in various ways ‘make sense to humans’ but I worry about how they might confuse AIs and this could cause confusion in how they understand me and my concepts in particular, including as part of training runs. I already know this is an issue within context windows, AIs are typically very bad at handling these posts as context. One thing this is motivating is more clear breaks and shorter sections than I would otherwise use, and also shorter more thematically tied together posts.
My solution to the problem of ‘no place to do discourse’ is that you can simply do it on Substack on your own, respond to whoever you want to respond to, speak to who you want to speak to and ignore who you want to ignore. I do also crosspost to LessWrong, but I don’t feel any obligation to engage if someone comments in a way that misconstrues what I said. You're currently a free subscriber to |