---
subject: "10 reads for your summer vacation"
from: "web3 with a16z <a16zcrypto@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-07-02 15:32:55
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "a16zcrypto"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_2535365729249697677"]
---
What we're reading and technology changing reading
In a now-annual tradition, the a16z crypto editorial team discusses themes (and picks) from a16z crypto's What genres are we reading now, how, and why? How is technology — from AI and ChatGPT to the internet and audio — changing reading? And why are certain themes in the zeitgeist right now? Is all non-fiction just fiction now, and should we lean in to this for education? Are the kids alright? From irony, truth, and why context matters, to Machiavelli to Formula 1 to nautical non-fiction to memoirs, this episode has it all. (also check out From beach reads to basic economics: 10 books for your long weekendHere are a few of the books the a16z crypto team is reading and recommending this summer. Our latest list spans true stories, speculative fiction, and poetry with some clear through lines: striving for mastery, understanding edge cases (whether human, legal, or technical), and embracing unconventional thinking. Here are 10 recs, but you’ll find many more Business, economics, and strategyFocus: The ASML Way – Inside the Power Struggle over the Most Complex Machine on Earth, by Mark Hijink“ASML is a strange and fascinating company — it’s the quiet giant that builds the enormous, complicated machines that produce the vast majority of the world’s chips. The book provides an interesting look at its history and internal dynamics.” – Arianna Simpson, investing Basic Economics, by Thomas Sowell“It might be impossible to write a more cogent explanation of the fundamental economic principles that govern human behavior. This book is filled with the basic mental models that explain a lot of what makes the world tick.” – Ali Yahya, investing Nearly Perfect, by Thomas Drach“Hot off the presses this summer is this nearly perfect theory of the relationship between competitive advantage and product design. Easily the best book in-category I’ve read in years.” – Scott Duke Kominers, research Biography, history, and memoirA Cracking of the Heart, by David Horowitz“On the surface, it is a book about grieving, reckoning with regrets, ‘the cords of family’ pulling together, and stitching stories and truths told by and about a loved one after they are gone. But it is also a book about living on one’s own terms, making meaning and finding purpose in one’s life, understanding and connecting with each other despite differences in ideology, politics, and communication styles.” – Sonal Chokshi, editorial The River of Doubt: Theodore Roosevelt's Darkest Journey, by Candice Millard“Founders enmeshed in challenges of building can find perspective in the story of what Theodore Roosevelt and his son attempted and endured on their expedition to explore an uncharted river in the Amazon.” – Jason Rosenthal, operations Tunnel 29: The True Story of an Extraordinary Escape Beneath the Berlin Wall, by Helena Merriman“The almost unbelievable true story of a group of young, untrained students digging their way under the Berlin Wall to free dozens from East Germany. What makes it unforgettable is not just the danger or ingenuity, but the clarity of purpose: a small team risking everything to create freedom for others.” – Conner Brown, tech ops The Perfectionists: How Precision Engineers Created the Modern World, by Simon Winchester“I loved this book about how precision engineering has shaped the world we live in. Each chapter of Winchester’s book charts the evolution of exactitude by successive orders of magnitude, from steam engines to silicon chips.” – Robert Hackett, editorial Science and philosophyEndure: Mind, Body and the Curiously Elastic Limits of Human Performance, by Alex Hutchinson“An insightful foray into the history, evolution, and implications of sports science, with plenty of real-world examples that demonstrate how and why we can trick our brains and bodies into squeezing out better performances than we think we can.” – Jay Drain Jr., investing Open Socrates: The Case for a Philosophical Life, by Agnes Callard“It's how to really live an examined life if you dare to deal with the consequences of doing so. Callard, a University of Chicago philosopher, advocates — passionately!— for using the Socratic method to engage with others to disturb your preconceptions.” – Tim Sullivan, editorial FictionGlorious Exploits, by Ferdia Lennon“Set in Sicily after the Peloponnesian War, but narrated in contemporary Irish vernacular, this book starts with two unemployed potters on their way to feed prisoners at the local quarry. It then turns into a surprisingly high-production-value staging of Euripides. Funny, moving, and a little magical.” – Stephanie Zinn, editorial Books for builders and beyondIf your lists are still looking slim, see more of a16z’s recommendations in Bonus: You can also try playing around with — a16z crypto editorial team You’re receiving this newsletter because you signed up for it on our websites, at an event, or elsewhere (you can opt out any time using the ‘unsubscribe’ link below). This newsletter is provided for informational purposes only, and should NOT be relied upon as legal, business, investment, or tax advice. This newsletter may link to other websites or other information obtained from third-party sources — a16z has not independently verified nor makes any representations about the current or enduring accuracy of such information. Furthermore, the content is not directed at nor intended for use by any investors or prospective investors in any a16z funds. Please see a16z.com/disclosures for additional important details, including link to list of investments. subscribe to our podcast ' |