---
subject: "Reading List 12/07/24"
from: "Construction Physics <constructionphysics@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-12-07 13:02:35
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Construction Physics", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8588207018748827248", "INBOX"]
---
No essay this week; I’m working on a longer piece about the development of polycrystalline diamond compact drill bits, which will be out next week. This week on the reading list we look at GDP growth by metro, wind and solar bans, battery material consumption, carmaker struggles, Norway and startups, and much more! Around 2/3rds of each reading list is paywalled, so for full access become a paid subscriber. GDP growth by metro
Some interesting trends here: one is the obvious rapid growth of Texas, Florida, North Carolina, and Arizona (these are also the states seeing rapid population growth). It also seems notable that the Bay Area had such a high growth rate. Early during Covid there was a concern about a “techxodus” and predictions that Wind and solar bans by countyThis
The most obvious pattern here is the ban on wind in Tennessee and Kentucky, and the statewide impediments in Vermont and Connecticut (these seem to be burdensome A potentially underappreciated fact about wind and solar is that the energy they capture is very diffuse, so the infrastructure they require will naturally be more extensive than other energy sources. This creates a two-sided pressure against them: it means greater potential opposition to them (since more people will potentially be affected), and it means such opposition will be more disruptive (if you need a lot of land, it's harder to just move an offending operation somewhere else). Battery materialsDespite the name, there’s not all that much lithium in lithium-ion batteries: lithium makes up the ions that shuttle back and forth, but the lion’s share of the material is the anode and cathode that store them. This is why new cathode chemistries that require less expensive cobalt have been so important to falling battery costs. (For more on lithium-ion battery technology, see (via Rocket launchesThe reusable rocket aspects of SpaceX get most of the attention, but SpaceX has also managed to steadily increase its launch cadence. The company is close to launching as many rockets in a single year as the Space Shuttle did over the entire life of the program. Via
Arguably the Space Shuttle isn’t a very good point of comparison, since most Falcon 9 launches are astronaut-less satellite launches, but the Falcon 9 still looks impressive compared to other launch vehicles. Here’s China’s Long March launches by year, from Here’s total Russian launches, from And here’s US Titan launches, also from So not only is SpaceX close to exceeding lifetime shuttle launches in a single year, it’s already exceeded the number of launches the entire Soviet Union achieved at its peak. But it’s also notable how China has steadily been increasing its launch cadence. Submarine cablesHistorically telecom companies like AT&T were the major operator of undersea cables, but increasingly it’s tech companies that are building and operating them. From
In the wake of news about a Chinese ship
Subscribe to Construction Physics to unlock the rest.Become a paying subscriber of Construction Physics to get access to this post and other subscriber-only content. A subscription gets you:
|