---
subject: "Speculation Nation"
from: "Rex Woodbury <digitalnative@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-10-01 09:37:25
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Rex Woodbury", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_7409788299609491647", "UNREAD"]
---
Weekly writing about how technology and people intersect. By day, I’m building If you haven’t subscribed, join 70,000+ weekly readers by subscribing here: Speculation Nation: Prediction Markets and the Financialization of EverythingYou know you’ve made it as a startup when South Park makes an episode about you. Last week’s South Park episode covered prediction markets, with the show name-checking two startups: South Park did a pretty damn good job. The whole thing was pretty meta: 30 minutes before the episode aired, Kalshi was asking users to trade on what South Park would mention in the episode…including if Kalshi itself would be mentioned. Prediction markets are officially mainstream. At the end of last year, we wrote Halfway into 2025, we got not one, but two unicorn prediction market companies. On June 24th, Last fall was the first true “mainstream moment” for prediction markets, with Kalshi and Polymarket both featuring prominently in the U.S. presidential election. Each company saw a massive spike in users and trading volume (while also proving more accurate in predicting a Trump win than most pundits). I asked Fast forward to this week, and Kalshi has now surpassed those election highs. Check out The rise of predictions markets is the latest in a years-long cultural and technological trend: the financialization of everything. The Cultural Forces Behind Everything Being FinancializedFour years ago, I wrote a piece for The Atlantic called When I think everything being financialized, I think about three discrete events that sowed the seeds in a new generation: The Great Recession gave Millennials and Gen Zs a broad skepticism of the corporate ladder, as millions of people abruptly lost their jobs (including many parents of Millennials and Gen Zs). A decade later, the pandemic provided another shock to labor markets. And now, AI is making the job market wobble even more: many young people live in fear of AI taking their jobs, or are already having trouble finding entry-level positions. (Refer back to last month’s employment data in [How to Productize AI Anxiety](https://substack.com/redirect/e4f213ff-b004-4c5d-9a07-1bab831d9ca3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).)
These events collided with enabling technologies—the internet, crypto, now AI—to supercharge the capital markets and open up new avenues for wealth creation. FAFOnomics vs. Economic MobilityAn important backdrop for this phenomenon is just how unequal the capital markets have historically been in America. Only about 1 in 2 Americans has any exposure to the stock market, and that exposure is stratified by income: only 15% of families in the bottom 20% of income earners hold stock, while 92% of families in the top 10% of the income distribution own stock. The top 10% of income earners own 10 times as much of the stock market as the bottom 60%. And white investors own 3x as much stock as Black or Hispanic stockholders. This meant that the economic recovery from the Great Recession largely flowed to wealthy equity-holders, while wages stagnated for salaried and hourly workers. Limited access to the capital markets has long stymied economic opportunity and mobility: it’s nearly impossible to accumulate true wealth by renting your time; you have to own equity. What’s more, there are now fewer public companies to even own a share of! Check out this chart of listed companies: Today there are about half the number of U.S. public companies that were listed in 1996. Much of modern wealth creation happens in the private markets, behind closed doors: your average American isn’t getting access to Stripe or Databricks or SpaceX or Anthropic. But what if you could generate wealth by trading on stuff other than stocks? That’s what’s happening today with prediction markets. Kalshi didn’t invent the concept of “event contracts,” but it popularized them and created the first (and only) federally-regulated exchange in the U.S. where people can trade on the outcome of future events. Polymarket isn’t live in the U.S.—but the betting markets seem to think that will change soon: Prediction markets have been around for a while. Here’s an excerpt
When we wrote this, Kalshi was still 3.5 years away from its breakthrough moment. Sometimes startups feel like overnight successes, but they’ve been grinding it out for years behind the scenes. Looking at that Kalshi trading volume in the earlier charts, it was linear for a long time until it hit escape velocity. Finally, prediction markets are at their tipping point. And because of most people’s lack of access to capital markets, there’s an argument that they offer a noble savior, a vehicle for economic mobility. What if you know nothing about finance, but you’re a pop culture savant? You’re pretty sure that Bad Bunny will headline the Super Bowl; shouldn’t you be able to monetize that knowledge? Robinhood’s Vlad Tenev But there’s the other side of the argument: that prediction markets are a great way to unleash a risky new asset class on the masses. The legalization of sports betting sparks similar controversy. One of my favorite economic commentators, Kyla Scanlon, FAFOnomics does seem to be the approach for a new generation. Dismayed by static wages, high inflation, and a lethargic corporate ladder, millions have turned to riskier strategies with higher upside. An undercurrent of nihilism runs beneath FAFOnomics. There’s truth, of course, in both arguments: new financial products do offer a way to generate wealth, while also presenting risks. We need good policies in place, sure, but we also need good startups to underpin new economic models. What Startups Power This Shift?We’ve talked a lot about Kalshi and Polymarket. Even at current valuations, I’m bullish on prediction markets. The potential upside is massive. For reference, Charles Schwab is a $176B market cap company today. (Its eponymous founder started it in 1971.) Clearly, there’s a lot of upside in a nascent category of finance. But where else does the broader trend—people wanting to own equity upside—show up in Silicon Valley? We see a younger generation eschewing traditional careers in lieu of more unpredictable work with higher potential upside. The risk-return calculus has shifted. A number of startups underpin these new forms of work. The first iteration, of course, was the creator economy: remember the stats around 60%+ kids wanting to be influencers? We saw YouTube, TikTok, and Instagram support millions of new jobs, while Shopify and Etsy, in their own ways, underpinned new forms of entrepreneurship (albeit more traditional commerce, just through a new channel). Now we see a newer generation of players. Or what about AI companies that support new forms of monetizable work? A financial analyst has made $34K selling AI tools A Hollywood producer made a children’s AI learning mobile app. Submitted it to the App Store, aiming for $20K MRR. A real estate agent spun up an AI training portal, now sells $1K virtual sessions. A medical student made a CPR training mobile app, charges $85/mo.
You can envision a lot of careers being supported by the Anythings, Lovables, and Replits of the world. People want to have financial autonomy and economic upside—whether that’s betting on NFL games or launching text-to-AI apps. New technologies open up new avenues to earn an income (with often unbounded upside). New cultural shifts make people want to pursue these avenues for wealth creation, often at the expense of “old school” work. These forces are creating the biggest shocks to labor and capital that we’ll see in our lifetimes. Final ThoughtsHow does AI fit into this? We’ve written a lot about AI’s impact on work over the past few months, but I liked an example Derek Thompson wrote about last week.
Maybe AI doesn’t replace knowledge work; maybe it lowers the cost of generating ideas, content, and analysis, so much so that we all end up doing more knowledge work. Maybe this creates more jobs, and we all benefit from an increase in GDP per capital. Maybe. We’ll see. There’s also a world where you AI does most of our “work,” while we live in a speculation economy—an economy in which everything is financialized and tradable, with the capital markets gobbling up more of life and work. Either way, we’re seeing a massive shift in how a new generation views (1) work and (2) wealth. I expect we’ll see more Kalshi predictions, more sports betting, and more businesses launched on tech platforms. We’ll see more risk (definitely), more reward (probably), and—one can hope—some newfound economic mobility. Thanks for reading! Subscribe here to receive Digital Native in your inbox each week: |