---
subject: "How to Become a Time Billionaire"
from: "\"Sahil Bloom's Curiosity Chronicle\" <sahil@sahilbloom.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-04-26 13:09:49
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Sahil Bloom", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_1989028747625928812", "UNREAD"]
---
The Time Billionaireread and listen on read time 4 minutes Welcome to The Curiosity Chronicle, a weekly newsletter where I provide actionable ideas to help you build a high-performing, healthy, wealthy life. Today at a Glance:- Investor Graham Duncan coined the phrase "Time Billionaire" as someone who has over one billion seconds to live.
- To me, being a “Time Billionaire” isn’t necessarily about having the actual time, but about the awareness of the precious nature of the time you do have. It is about embracing the shortness of life and finding joy in ordinary daily moments of beauty.
- Treat time as your ultimate currency—it’s all you have and you can never get it back. Spend it wisely, with those you love, in ways you’ll never regret.
Today's newsletter is brought to you by I use InsideTracker to unlock the secrets of a longer and healthier life. Their science-backed approach analyzes your blood, DNA, and fitness trackers to provide you with personalized recommendations that are specifically tailored to your needs. From optimizing food choices and supplement intake, to providing ways to improve sleep and reduce stress levels - InsideTracker has you covered. Backed by dozens of peer-reviewed studies and founders that include experts at Harvard, Tufts and MIT, get ready for the best version of yourself! For a limited time, you can get a 20% off discount with code SAHIL at checkout.
The Time BillionaireIn 2019, Graham Duncan, the co-founder of East Rock Capital, appeared on an During the conversation, Duncan proposed a concept that changed my life: The Time Billionaire. "A million seconds is 11 days. A billion seconds is slightly over 31 years...I feel like in our culture, we’re so obsessed, as a culture, with money. And we deify dollar billionaires in a way...And I was thinking of time billionaires that when I see, sometimes, 20-year-olds—the thought I had was they probably have two billion seconds left. But they aren’t relating to themselves as time billionaires." The central point: Time is our most precious asset. When you're young, you are literally rich with time. At age 20, you probably have about two billion seconds left (assuming you live to 80). By 50, just one billion seconds remain. But as Graham Duncan pointed out, we don't relate to ourselves as the "Time Billionaires" that we really are. Most of us fail to realize the value of this asset until it is gone. On the Shortness of LifeIn his On the Shortness of Life, the stoic philosopher, Seneca, says, "We are not given a short life but we make it short, and we are not ill-supplied but wasteful of it." To me, being a “Time Billionaire” isn’t necessarily about having the actual time, but about the awareness of the precious nature of the time you do have. It is about embracing the shortness of life and finding joy in ordinary daily moments of beauty. My friend (and truly brilliant writer) As you fill in the weeks, it creates a very clear reminder of the time passed—and time remaining. I started thinking about this more with the birth of my son in May 2022. It’s scary to look at the data on the short time we get with our children. It peaks in our 30s and declines sharply thereafter. Key lessons: - The "Magic Years" will fly by if you let them.
- Be present in every moment. Slow down and embrace the sweetness.
Time with our parents and siblings is no better. It peaks in childhood and declines after age 20. Key lessons: - Time with family is limited.
- Time with parents declines sharply after age 20.
We have to prioritize and cherish every moment. Diminishing time with family and children is replaced by more time alone. It steadily increases throughout your life. Key lessons: - Embrace solitude.
- Flex your boredom muscle.
Find joy in the time you have to yourself—there will be a whole lot of it as you get older. Becoming a Time BillionaireLast summer I was on a walk with my newborn son and an older man approached me. He said: “I remember standing here with my newborn daughter. An old man came up to me and said ‘It goes by fast, cherish it.’ Well, my daughter is 45 now. It goes by fast, cherish it.” It hit me hard. The next morning, I had my son in bed and felt a profound sensation: For the first time in my life, I had enough. As ambitious people, we spend most of our lives playing a game: Everything we do is in anticipation of a future. When it comes, we just reset to the next one: - "I can’t wait until I’m 18 so I can [X]."
- "I can’t wait until I’m 25 so I can [Y]."
- "I can’t wait until I’m 45 so I can [Z]."
It’s natural, but it’s a dangerous game—one that we will lose...eventually. We waste a lot of energy on past and future when present is all that’s guaranteed. We push for more—but really, we need to find our enough. Never let the quest for more distract you from the beauty of enough. To be sure, there are no “right” answers here. No one can tell you WHAT to think about time. I’m just trying to provide insights on HOW to think about time. All of life's most important journeys start with asking the right questions. This is a good place to start. A simple closing reminder: Treat time as your ultimate currency—it’s all you have and you can never get it back. Spend it wisely, with those you love, in ways you’ll never regret. I'd love to hear from you: - How did this piece impact your thinking on time?
- What discussions did it spark (with yourself or others)?
Reply to this email or tweet at me @SahilBloom and I'll do my best to get back to everyone. P.S. My son is about to turn one and I can't believe it. As the saying goes, “The days are long but the years are short.” Sending love from me and mine to you and yours! Sahil's Recommendation ZoneLooking for incredible design work for your company, startup, brand, or personal project with flat, reasonable, transparent pricing? I liked their work so much that I recently became a part owner of the business! We're taking on a few more projects in the coming months. If you're interested, check out their work and connect with them Refer Friends, Earn Rewards!
If you enjoyed today's newsletter, please share it with your friends and family! If this email was forwarded to you, consider |