---
subject: "The Economics of Engineering Blogs"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <byrne@thediff.co>"
to: ""
date: 2023-06-26 12:44:59
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX"]
---
|
|
|
In this issue: - The Economics of Engineering Blogs
- Art Exchange
- Fraud
- Airlines
- The Long Tail
- Chinese IPOs
- Diff Jobs
The Economics of Engineering BlogsA company is valuable if it does something that customers value, and that other companies can't do. A consequence of this is that companies have a vested interest in keeping secret anything that would help their competitors copy them better or would help their customers solve the same problem in-house. So oil and gas companies usually don't go around telling everyone about which leases are undervalued, hardware companies try keep new devices under wraps, and traders don't talk about trades they're making (but do, of course, talk about trades they've already made from time to time—if you’ve made a bet that the consensus on something is wrong, popularizing your thesis is the fastest way to make it right), etc. And then there are software companies: a Google engineer is perfectly able to read It's a big enough category of content that Why? There are theories of varying levels of cynicism here. Two closely-related ones are the intimidation model and the wild goose chase approach. Why does Meta want you to know how to optimize datacenters? So you come away impressed with the cost advantage they've acquired, and worried about how much better they'll be by the time you catch up. You can read any “How we succeeded” post as a warning not to even try, at least in that domain. The wild goose chase model suggests that engineering blogs focus on projects that are much harder than they seem to be, and that require extensive upfront work just to demonstrate how much time the finished product will take. In this model, the result of a fascinating writeup on a cool project is wasting their competitor’s time. There are precedents for this; But these both point to a better model: engineering blogs focus on problems where the solution is a necessary but not sufficient part of what they do. And, ideally, they focus on problems that are complementary to scale that only the publisher of that post has. Take Netflix's recommendation, or pretty much any case where a huge company talks about applying machine learning at scale: the safest time to do this is when the scale of the problem is big enough that smaller companies wouldn't get similar results. That would explain why publishing doesn't have much downside. But what about the upside? There are a few cases here: - It's good for recruiting: people want to work on interesting problems, and sharing the results is one way to attract them. (In a way, this is the entire model of academia: a published paper is partly an invitation to build on or refute its results.)
- It's a way to get feedback, which could be a subset of recruiting, but not necessarily. Most of the time, there's a good answer to "Why didn't you just do X?" but occasionally there is some X that was actually worth doing. (This can be especially interesting when there's an obscure theoretical result that has relevance to the practical implementation. Especially in ML/AI, the pace of publications is too much to keep up with, and the lead time between starting and finishing a project can mean that the state of the art changes over the course of the implementation.)
- It helps with retention: there's some amount of
[labor alienation](https://www.thediff.co/r/9565a433?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)in being one of thousands of people making incremental contributions to some massive system. There are engineers at big companies who have, single-handedly, created human lifetimes worth of free time for people just by reducing the latency of some app.[[2]](#fn2)The numbers are similarly staggering when you consider monetary impact; spend enough time among people who work at big companies and you will meet individuals who have shipped features or even tweaks that can be rigorously shown to have produced hundreds of millions of dollars in value. Giving them an opportunity to take some credit for this in a blog post—to be able to tell friends and family members who use the service they contribute to that they helped to make it what it is—gives people another reason to keep doing more of the same. - Some engineering blog posts help demystify the product, or allay conspiracy theories. Why does Meta
[walk through the ranking algorithm for the news feed](https://www.thediff.co/r/65c41760?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)? To make it slightly harder to claim that somewhere in the code there's a line likeif source == russian_propaganda_mill then pin_to_top_of_feed . And even there, the point isn't to stop people from saying that, but to make those people seem less technically sophisticated than the people who don't think it's happening.[[3]](#fn3) - Earlier, we noted that traders don't publicize their ideas while they're putting on a trade, but will sometimes share them later. This doesn't apply to most engineering blogs, but it does work in some cases: publishing good documentation about impressive projects done using the company's chosen tech stack is a way to
[promote it as a standard and own part of that standard](https://www.thediff.co/r/92e93b52?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)($, Diff). It's bad for Shopify if someone else writes a giant e-commerce suite in Ruby, but it's overall good for them if more companies are using Ruby for huge projects, since it deepens the hiring pool. (Ocaml would probably be a much more obscure language without[Jane Street's promotion](https://www.thediff.co/r/273a76c6?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)(plus, they went even further than blogging and[wrote a book, too](https://www.thediff.co/r/a8a4de2c?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)). So there are a few cases of hyperstition going on, though it's less about blogging something into existence and more about using the blog to set a more favorable equilibrium.
Using an engineering blog as a recruiting tool essentially forces the company to raise its talent metabolism: it's easier to attract good people, but outside recruiters can see who published what, and the more impressive the project is the more likely its participants are to get attention from other employers. But for historical reasons, the marginal cost of this is lower in software than in other industries. The biggest cluster of software companies globally is in and around Silicon Valley, which means it's subject to California's labor laws—which include a notorious reluctance to enforce noncompete agreements. It's a small world, and there's a whole cohort of people whose job is to simultaneously be well-informed, be well-connected, and to catalyze people either leaving companies or starting them. So tech's talent metabolism has always been running hot, even before the software industry as such existed. As It's a lucky situation. Industries can thrive by keeping secrets, but if they're at least partly competing on openness, overall progress happens a lot faster. More industries are slowly moving in that direction; software had a head start because the barriers to entry are so low and because so much of the tacit knowledge can be passed down in text form. Video has made it easier for other fields to share information the same way. It won't go as far in other fields, both because of the path dependence behind software's openness and because nearly-zero marginal costs mean that when a software product gets commoditized, the price doesn't drop by 10% or 20% or 50%, but goes straight to zero and stays there forever. But in tech, it's not an advantage to practice this kind of openness; it's a competitive necessity. Which means that in other fields, being the first to do this, and to do it well, is a meaningful advantage. Thanks to Gergely Orosz of Disclosure: Long META, MSFT. In fact, this can be an implicit version of the wild goose chase thesis, if the effectiveness of some technique starts out lower but reaches a higher ceiling. And that seems to be the case generally; if the corpus of text is 1,000 tokens, you can get a better language model by hand-crafting some rules than by applying a model optimized for a larger dataset. And applying the big model will require more expensive overhead. It's fun to speculate here: what if one step the company takes before writing about some technique is to run it on a subset of their data equal to what their next-biggest competitor has, and confirm that the results are bad enough not to be worth it. [↩︎](#fnref1)The threshold of human perception is around 100 milliseconds. There are ~1.3bn iPhones in use today, and the average user checks their phone ~60 times a day. Suppose some Apple engineer speeds up the process of opening the phone by 10ms, i.e. an order of magnitude smaller than the amount a person can detect. The aggregate impact of this is that it saves roughly a decade of user-time every single day. [↩︎](#fnref2)You can't stop people from hating your company even for fairly ludicrous reasons, but you can arm the moderates with better data and nicer-looking diagrams. Silencing negative conspiracies is impossible, but it is at least possible to make their supporters look relatively more like stereotypical conspiracy theorists. [↩︎](#fnref3)
You're on the free list for The Diff. Subscribers-only pieces you missed this week included A Word From Our SponsorsMeet Fin. Intercom’s breakthrough AI bot for your support team. Fin can resolve half of your support tickets instantly, solving complex problems and providing safer, more accurate answers than any other AI bot. Simply pair Fin with your help center to learn your written history and hold natural conversations with your customers. ElsewhereArt ExchangeA company called Artex is FraudA few weeks after job training company Bitwise shut down amid accusations of fraud, AirlinesBoeing and Airbus The Long TailModern Retail has a Chinese IPOsSwiss chemicals company Syngenta was acquired by ChemChina in 2017, and is now being taken public in Shanghai, but Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. A sampling of current open roles: - A proprietary trading firm is seeking systematic-oriented traders with ML experience—ideally someone who has displayed excellence in DS and ML, like a Kaggle Master. (Montreal)
- A company building tools to enable zero-knowledge proofs is looking for multiple roles, including a full stack engineer. (Remote)
- A company building ML-powered tools to accelerate developer productivity is looking for a mathematician. (Washington DC area)
- A startup building a new financial market within a multi-trillion dollar asset class is looking for a senior ML engineer, especially someone interested in using LLMs to make unstructured data more tractable. (US, remote.)
- A hedge fund is looking for an experienced alternative data analyst who can help incorporate novel datasets into systematic strategies (NYC).
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. |
||
|
|
|
|||
|