---
subject: "ChatGPT Custom Instructions 🤖, Fed's instant payment system 🏦, GitHub Copilot Chat 👨‍💻"
from: "TLDR <dan@tldrnewsletter.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-07-21 10:17:08
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "TLDR", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_795315172960844453", "UNREAD"]
---
[ChatGPT can now remember who you are and what you want (3 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.theverge.com%2F2023%2F7%2F20%2F23801520%2Fchatgpt-openai-custom-instructions-chatbot%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018977f406c7-b9160edc-1368-464e-9d88-81d38787357c-000000/XI0AIWbN4FrEOmde_2vbNF1M46FdMTyjveMqqc7yqzg=310)
ChatGPT's new custom instructions feature lets users tell the chatbot things it should always know about them and how to answer questions. It is designed to make ChatGPT quicker and more helpful as a virtual assistant. Custom Instructions is available now for ChatGPT Plus subscribers everywhere but the UK and EU on an opt-in basis. The feature is still in beta. It works everywhere that ChatGPT does.
|
Science & Futuristic Technology |
[Fed set to launch long-awaited instant payments service, modernizing system (2 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.reuters.com%2Fbusiness%2Ffinance%2Ffed-set-launch-long-awaited-instant-payments-service-modernizing-system-2023-07-20%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018977f406c7-b9160edc-1368-464e-9d88-81d38787357c-000000/D2XnqCgu2MgaaiTboRviUkFUPD8smgojcxdMq6LSP4U=310)
The US Federal Reserve is set to launch FedNow, a service that will allow US citizens to send and receive funds in seconds. FedNow has been in the works since 2019. It will launch with 41 banks and 15 service providers, with more banks and credit unions to be onboarded later this year. FedNow payments will settle directly in central bank accounts. There will be no fees from FedNow to use the service. FedNow has a maximum payment limit of $500,000, but banks can choose to lower that cap if required. |
[Teaching Robots to Teach Other Robots (4 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fviterbischool.usc.edu%2Fnews%2F2023%2F07%2Fteaching-robots-to-teach-other-robots%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018977f406c7-b9160edc-1368-464e-9d88-81d38787357c-000000/k26jYvNlzh109iikIm2IXlWDkgRbcIqTU3a2Vuuq6xA=310)
Lifelong Learning (LL) is a growing area of machine learning research in which AI agents continually learn as they encounter new tasks while retaining knowledge of previous tasks. A team of LL researchers recently discovered that AI agents can quickly learn a wide range of tasks by sharing knowledge with each other at the same time. Their system has many similarities with the concept of crowdsourcing. The researchers believe that their technique could transform any field that requires vast, diverse knowledge or dealing with complex systems. |
Programming, Design & Data Science |
[GitHub Copilot Chat beta now available for every organization (4 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fgithub.blog%2F2023-07-20-github-copilot-chat-beta-now-available-for-every-organization%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018977f406c7-b9160edc-1368-464e-9d88-81d38787357c-000000/3AFAU-S-oxsHx2VCWPZeQNdyS-UEo4euHhgY7KUCWrc=310)
A limited public beta release of GitHub Copilot Chat is now available to enterprise companies and organizations on Visual Studio and VS Code. GitHub Copilot Chat turns GitHub Pilot into a context-aware conversational assistant, allowing developers to execute tasks with prompts. The feature will help developers create much faster and democratize software development as we know it. Information on how organization admins can enable the feature is available in the article. |
[Ollama (GitHub Repo)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fjmorganca%2Follama%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018977f406c7-b9160edc-1368-464e-9d88-81d38787357c-000000/y4y_AS_aicwEZiMTFyHY9mLtE4ETntdC927M8C5gF5o=310)
Ollama allows users to run and package large language models on macOS. It includes a library of open-source models, including Llama2, Orca Mini, Vicuna, and Nous-Hermes. At least 8 GB of RAM is needed to run the 3B models, 16 GB for the 7B models, and 32 GB for the 13B models. |
[AI companies will reportedly commit to safeguards at the White House's request (2 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.engadget.com%2Fai-companies-will-reportedly-commit-to-safeguards-at-the-white-houses-request-185646283.html%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018977f406c7-b9160edc-1368-464e-9d88-81d38787357c-000000/lxdhRoT7rqcycJqEFZO2JrEGgRy1PzPgXCWC10cuftY=310)
Several companies, including Microsoft, Google, and OpenAI, have committed to certain safeguards for their technology until Congress passes legislation to regulate AI. Officials want to make sure that the technology is developed responsibly and in a way that benefits society without negatively impacting the safety, rights, and democratic values of the public. The tech firms have agreed to eight measures, including letting independent experts test models for bad behavior, investing in cybersecurity, flagging societal risks, and watermarking AI-generated audio and visual content. A full list of the measures is available in the article. |
[TLDR is hiring a designer to help curate TLDR Design](mailto:jobs@tldr.tech)
TLDR is hiring a part-time curator to join our TLDR Design newsletter curation team. The newsletter already has over 250,000 subscribers pre-launch, it's a great way to build a personal brand within the designer community.The ideal candidate would work as a designer and enjoy keeping up with designer news and trends through channels like Twitter, Reddit, blogs, podcasts, and online communities. Time commitment is ~5-10 hours/week (Sunday through Thursday) paid at a rate of $100/hr, to apply please send your LinkedIn or resume to [jobs@tldr.tech](mailto:jobs@tldr.tech) along with a couple sentences on why you'd be a good fit! |
[GitID (GitHub Repo)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fgithub.com%2FInderdeepBajwa%2Fgitid%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018977f406c7-b9160edc-1368-464e-9d88-81d38787357c-000000/HJG1CzUcxnn931gp7cT0vjSJG4Gcw8ybAw1ZqzgzRSw=310)
GitID is a command-line tool that can manage and switch between multiple git SSH identities on a single user account. |
[TLDR Talent](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fdanni763618.typeform.com%2Fto%2FrSL4lOH3/1/0100018977f406c7-b9160edc-1368-464e-9d88-81d38787357c-000000/1r3h_TwDDHdqpaRu9n7kKiZ-1rV-rVckAwEfx7irMfI=310) is our exclusive community where we help world-class tech talent and get intros to companies of their choice, along with a number of exciting startups and tech companies curated by TLDR.
We give you full control of the process, you can specify if you’re actively searching or passively interested only if something amazing comes along. Set your preferred compensation, seniority/title/role, specific companies (or types of companies) you’d like to work for and more. [Click here to apply](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fdanni763618.typeform.com%2Fto%2FrSL4lOH3/2/0100018977f406c7-b9160edc-1368-464e-9d88-81d38787357c-000000/XWGIcvqsYlKCcm7VYBypznTJ6QXuLj2tzzPIfwrfJxQ=310). |
If your company is interested in reaching an audience of tech executives, decision-makers and engineers, you may want to [advertise with us](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fshare.hsforms.com%2F1OxvmrkcFS4qsxKpNXCi76wee466%3Futm_source=tldr%26utm_medium=newsletter/2/0100018977f406c7-b9160edc-1368-464e-9d88-81d38787357c-000000/laedsj7kpETow89qba8tQN8gC1-l1oUIwKFvKMG6HUY=310).
If you have any comments or feedback, just respond to this email!
Thanks for reading,
[Dan Ni](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2Ftldrdan/1/0100018977f406c7-b9160edc-1368-464e-9d88-81d38787357c-000000/qR-SEQ2kcP9xnNyqPvZ_OhsC5WT74027jt0Ss-bJoTQ=310) and [Stephen Flanders](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2FSteveFlanders22/1/0100018977f406c7-b9160edc-1368-464e-9d88-81d38787357c-000000/JFbqfKJpPZHXVI41pdxdrxsHQBDxoAdiSQctkH3HS-k=310)
|
|
| |