---
subject: "Making a Match"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <byrne@thediff.co>"
to: ""
date: 2023-09-18 13:00:38
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
|
In this issue: - Making a Match
- Diff Jobs
- Instacart: Ahead of the IPO
- Movie Clips and the Piracy Equilibrium
- EVs and Public Choice Theory
- Banks Retrench
- China's Lost Decade?
Making A MatchIt's not uncommon for someone to turn academic research into a business. There are plenty of examples of people turning academic research into real businesses, like One surprisingly complex example of economic research turning into a viable business with a real-world impact is the story of how med school students get matched to residencies. Every year, on This is a nontrivial problem, in three senses: - The theoretical number of potential matches is 48,000^40,000, though that assumes that everyone gunning for a neurosurgery would be fine with ophthalmology and vice-versa. There's just an unavoidable layer of transaction costs required to get each side to narrow down their preferences enough that it's tractable to compare them.
- In any situation where people are asked to state preferences that the other side will incorporate into their decision, whether it's haggling, hiring, dating, an auction, or a plea bargain, there's an incentive for each side to fib a bit in order to improve their negotiating position. And in matching in particular, there's an incentive to jump the gun: if everyone else makes a decision on day T, there's much less competition on day T-1, but as soon as everyone realizes this, that day becomes the new Day T, and the process repeats. Programs also had an incentive to make "exploding offers," giving students a tight deadline in which to make their decision. If this happened before they’d interviewed widely, it would weaken their direct negotiating position and mean they were operating with less information. Meanwhile, the student—who is making the choice one time—had to make a quick decision against a counterparty who did this multiple times a year and had many years of experience.
- For med school matches, and others, there are additional quirks. Some programs want an even-numbered set of applicants: four or six are preferable to five if you want people to either work in pairs or to have twelve-hour shifts that provide 24-hour coverage. Some medical students are in relationships with each other, and want programs in the same location.
Medical students and residencies faced that middle problem in the 1940s: schools kept recruiting earlier, and students tried to game that system to get the best placements. Everyone knew it was inefficient for both sides to invest so much effort in rearranging who went where instead of spending that time studying or practicing medicine, but there wasn't a good way to break the logjam. Then, in 1950, This basic model—rank choices on both sides, and match—has been in place ever since. And it turns out to be similar to the model in NMS's business is a bit like the classic open source model. It can't function if the algorithm itself is proprietary, since so much of the value comes from whether or not users trust it. But understanding an open technology well and being able to implement it means having a comparative advantage in offering adjacent services like application services, scheduling software, and analytics. So NMS is a sort of Mongodb of Matching, a for-profit entity whose model encourages it to care for and improve access to the commons. The optimal pricing for this ties into yet another Nobel-Memorial prize winner’s work: there’s a two-sided network, so there’s more than one stable arrangement regarding who pays. Usually the optimal arrangement is to subsidize the most price-sensitive side of the network, because its growth is an implicit subsidy to the other side. One part of that, and an essential part, was demonstrating that the algorithm used was, in fact, fair. There was a fierce debate about this in medical circles in the early 1990s, and a seminal contribution to the debate was This is a null result. But it's an incredibly valuable one, because what it tells people on both sides of the match is that they're getting a match that's hard to improve on. (Publishing socially valuable null results is somewhat analogous to the practice of doing lots of research to justify an investment that's obviously cheap. If a company is growing 10% annually and you can buy shares at a 10% free cash flow yield, that's obviously, blatantly, a good decision—which, of course, means that you need to work very hard to think of all the reasons someone might be selling those shares to you, and validate that these are not good reasons.) It won't be perfect, but another part of the paper dives into an important feature: the lower the transaction cost for applying, the more potential stable sets of matches there are. But with high transaction costs, there are fewer equilibria and most changes make both sides worse off. That's important as a theoretical matter, because it helps explain why residency matching can actually work. But it also has a practical application: the way the process works is that students reach out to programs and interview them, and that's how each side ends up on the others' target list. During the pandemic, these interviews switched to Zoom. And that cut a big deadweight travel cost from the process. And since that fixed cost is gone, In a narrow sense, matching is a zero-sum game: being the runner-up candidate for a spot you wanted means somebody else got it. But there's definitely value to be created in good matching; it's more realistic to think there's a rank-ordering of the best students for a given program than a rank ordering of the best medical students, period, because different sub-skills are rewarded in different domains. (A terrible bedside manner is less of a liability if the patients are usually sedated, for example). And the special thing about matching is that it involves both choosing and being chosen, so every match has to satisfy two parties. If it's positive-sum to match the right people, that means that it's socially useful to a) have a good algorithm, and b) have a trusted algorithm Looking at this system, a natural question arises: if there's a pretty fair model for matching talent to opportunities, why isn't it used more widely? It does get used in things other than medical school residencies, in fact; it gets used in the One natural place where this could theoretically work is in private equity, where recruiting schedules have been A big theme in economics is the quest to measure and maximize efficiency, where efficiency is specifically defined as the best allocation of resources. That itself is a big, complicated matching problem; arguably trillions of dollars of GDP are spent on matching (finance matches money to opportunities, advertising matches goods and services to their potential consumers, retail basically does this, too; the fact that Walmart carries a different set of products than Tiffany, and customers know what they're getting, is a testament to the value of a good match). Most of the time, this is a messy process with mistakes and deadweight loss on all sides. And, every once in a while, it works exactly the same way in the real world that it does in academic papers. Thanks to Elliott and Jonah Peranson at You're on The Diff's free list, so you're missing most of the content. This week, paying subscribers read about Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. A sampling of current open roles: - A company building ML-powered tools to accelerate developer productivity is looking for software engineers. (Washington DC area)
- A vertically integrated PE-backed cannabis company is looking for someone who has worked with complex operational and financial models in Excel. (Remote)
- An early-stage startup aiming to reduce labor costs by over 80% in a $100bn+ industry is looking for a part-time technical advisor with robotics experience; this has the potential to evolve into a full-time role. (NYC)
- A systematic hedge fund is looking for researchers and portfolio managers who have experience using alternative data. (NYC)
- A concentrated crossover fund is looking for an intellectually curious data scientist with demonstrated mastery in analytics. Experience with alt data, web scraping, and financial modeling preferred. (SF)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. ElsewhereInstacart: Ahead of the IPOInstacart has The big debate over Instacart is their growth. It was definitely a Covid story at one point (the point where it was raising at a $39bn valuation), and absolute order growth has slowed. But if you take their chart of Covid and non-Covid-related purchases, and strip out Covid, you get a growth rate in orders for the first half of this year that’s +9% Y/Y instead of +0.5% Y/Y. That’s still a big deceleration from before, but note that the “Covid-related” criterion is for products strictly related to the pandemic, not for demand induced by the pandemic-era shift towards online ordering. So Instacart’s order volume shows the decelerating-growth pattern one would expect from a high-growth company that reaches scale and from a company that benefited from a one-time shift in consumer behavior that partially reverted. Revenue growth is higher, both because they've gotten more efficient at managing deliveries (increasing their order fee revenue) and because ad targeting gets better with scale. Earnings are noisy because of a tax benefit last year, but if you take their pretax income and just put a 21% tax rate on it, Instacart's trailing net income for the last four quarters would be $356m. That puts their earnings multiple at 27x. Which is not cheap, of course, but not the kind of valuation growth investors blink at. (The Diff Movie Clips and the Piracy EquilibriumPiracy is as old as the existence of media that's expensive to create and cheap to duplicate, and media economics have always been defined by this relationship. (This means that the story of media is cyclical over incredibly long periods; both Taylor Swift and Homer made their big money from live performances.) Typically, there's a level of piracy that's tolerable, or even beneficial—people pirating desktop software in the 90s were also reinforcing software standards that would pay off as authentication got better and more products moved to subscription SaaS in the 2000s. In movies, short clips probably improve ticket sales, rental revenue, and streaming usage. But EVs and Public Choice TheoryIn the very long run, many technological shifts are inevitable: if there's a way to get more output from constant inputs, whoever adopts it first ends up owning their entire market or forcing incumbents to catch up. But the pace at which this happens, especially for technologies that have complex supply chains and network effects around consumption, is partly a matter of policy. For example: Containerization presents a nice precedent for how to resolve this: a union represents the interests of union members, who are specific people with a specific career span. But a corporation is immortal unless something kills it. So companies tend to have lower discount rates than unions, and can offer deals where current union members do very well but there are fewer union jobs after those members retire. That's how US ports got more automated (while the remaining union jobs Banks RetrenchHigher rates have China's Lost Decade?The Economist has a |
||
|
|
|
|||
|