---
subject: "AI #126: Go Fund Yourself"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-07-24 12:57:13
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
The big AI news this week came on many fronts.
Finally, the White House had a big day of AI announcements, laying out the The good news is that if you look at the I’m also excluding coverage of This post covers everything else that happened this week. Table of Contents[Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/01455087-a61c-41f6-a3fa-1c6860a4296c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Price discrimination strikes again.[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/9fccc68f-277d-4830-b108-8d719ca76a48?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)AI where it does not belong.[Huh, Upgrades.](https://substack.com/redirect/6d7ef08e-d2f6-4150-b50c-885e1aa83f55?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Claude for Financial Services, Gemini Drops to track things.[4o Is An Absurd Sycophant](https://substack.com/redirect/e0b9a8f6-beda-4432-94b2-65fb4e6e1086?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/e0b9a8f6-beda-4432-94b2-65fb4e6e1086?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)It would be great if this wasn’t what most people use.[On Your Marks.](https://substack.com/redirect/dbc16205-7028-49aa-8cc1-2b55ba5dd39d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)AccountingBench and GasBench.[Choose Your Fighter.](https://substack.com/redirect/377a11ab-1f94-4dfd-8915-8c2715e8b53c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)GPT-5? It’s coming.[When The Going Gets Crazy.](https://substack.com/redirect/c5999f07-f12d-4ea4-b6a0-5f1d31a30718?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)You have not awoken ChatGPT.[They Took Our Jobs.](https://substack.com/redirect/45e1543b-bb0f-41c0-b0f6-2d27d0bbe096?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Academics think differently.[Fun With Media Generation.](https://substack.com/redirect/d0c60076-d02e-4f50-8b88-80a00373aee3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Netflix starts to use AI generated video.[The Art of the Jailbreak.](https://substack.com/redirect/3ce75d14-663a-43cf-8734-c7b8f532ef33?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Persuade it like a human, or invoke Pliny? Both work.[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/adb17172-85fe-47da-a9b1-1864a5b21785?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)RAND and IAPS are hiring, plus a list of desired new projects.[Introducing.](https://substack.com/redirect/7cb50404-48f5-4dcd-bbb6-96d3174d7f3c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Cloudflare gives us pay-per-crawl.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/34620a25-00a3-4549-962c-ca790015940d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Kimi K2 tech report is now available.[Show Me the Money](https://substack.com/redirect/592d160d-9cac-4770-9f26-ff5f2d997cad?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/592d160d-9cac-4770-9f26-ff5f2d997cad?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Loose lips start bidding wars.[Go Middle East Young Man.](https://substack.com/redirect/2624141a-d1ac-47ed-bcca-73c4e2e0a925?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Anthropic to raise money from gulf states.[Economic Growth](https://substack.com/redirect/e8f7143d-4eff-4bc1-a56f-c81bd75d3622?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/e8f7143d-4eff-4bc1-a56f-c81bd75d3622?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)AI capex is generating +0.7% GDP growth.[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/3fc1a327-1f28-43b8-9dba-88916bf91755?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Zuck feels the ASI and makes his pitch, Simo makes hers.[Modest Proposals.](https://substack.com/redirect/9484d761-8d01-4b2e-849b-ee29eee0ce12?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A roadmap for AI for general college-level education.[Predictions Are Hard Especially About The Future.](https://substack.com/redirect/a774b292-8fc9-490b-8efd-be710f84b828?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A lot of things could happen.[The Quest for Sane Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/afb4d199-2f49-4a6c-b133-b82fef5b1753?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Meta defects, various things risk getting dire.[Chip City.](https://substack.com/redirect/51e18d78-0f69-478b-83d3-cfa81dd16dce?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)House Select Committee on the CCP protests potential H20 sales.[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/7c31b9fb-5bf6-427f-8e3b-dc794d90beeb?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Hassabis, Schmidt and Winga.[Congressional Voices.](https://substack.com/redirect/f0a9a2ff-eedb-4f6c-a08f-aa901f2d13c1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Two more have short superintelligence timelines.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/7b4935fe-de36-4740-9edc-b0543ee79531?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The humans seem rather emergently misaligned.[Grok Bottom.](https://substack.com/redirect/f4f5f0f3-c0c4-417c-82e3-1b28ae18d304?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Grok thinks the humans want it to try blackmail, it’s a good thing.[No Grok No.](https://substack.com/redirect/5813910e-22e5-4d2c-94fb-616d8d43a607?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Baby Grok? What could possibly go wrong?[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/5c62684d-396a-4364-8f63-24b88a5ff2b7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)New lab ratings.[Preserve Chain Of Thought Monitorability](https://substack.com/redirect/d1e7b25a-0326-4e99-9e06-940616f9644f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/d1e7b25a-0326-4e99-9e06-940616f9644f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A lot of people agree on this.[People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/a7f4f437-999a-417e-9779-61fc8239d9c8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Elon Musk. Oh well.[The Lighter Side.](https://substack.com/redirect/7f2988cb-4485-44eb-80ed-1cd7d73e7f63?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)That’s not funny—it’s hilarious.
Language Models Offer Mundane UtilityDelta Airlines is running an experiment where it My prediction is that this will cause an epic customer backlash the moment people start seeing Delta charging them more than it is charging someone else, and also that many customers will start aggressive gaming the system in ways Delta can’t fathom. Also, how could anyone choose to go with Delta’s frequent flyer program if this meant they could be held hostage on price? It could still be worthwhile from the airline’s perspective if some customers get taken for large amounts. Price discrimination is super powerful, especially if it identifies a class of very price insensitive business customers.
Mostly I worry about the resulting rise in transaction costs as customers learn they cannot blindly and quickly purchase a ticket. There’s a lot of deadweight loss there. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane UtilityAs one would expect:
This does not tell you whether AI is making the problem better or worse. People with body dysmorphia were already spiraling out. In some cases the AI response will confirm their fears or create new ones and make this worse, in others it will presumably make it better, as they have dysmorphia and the AI tells them they look fine. But if the source of the issue is impossibly high standards, then finding out ‘the truth’ in other ways will only make things worse, as potentially would seeing AI-adjusted versions of yourself. My guess is that 4o’s sycophancy is going to make this a lot worse, and that this (since the vast majority of users are using 4o) is a lot of why this is going so poorly. 4o will mirror the user’s questions, notice that they are looking to be told they are ugly or something is wrong, and respond accordingly.
What is the AI optimizing for, is always a key question:
AI can pick up on all that fine. That’s not the issue. The issue is that noticing does no good if the AI doesn’t mention it, because it is optimizing for engagement and user feedback.
Stop trying to make weird new UIs happen, it’s not going to happen.
The most important things for a UI are simplicity, and that it works the way you expect it to work. Right now, that mostly means single button and swipe, with an alternative being speaking in plain English. The exception is for true power users, but even then you want it to be intuitive and consistent.
That seems like a phone settings issue.
And here’s a second one:
The comments are a combination of people pointing out it is fake, and people who think either it is the best statement ever.
This does seem to be escalating rather quickly throughout 2025 (the July number is partial), and no the LessWrong user base is not growing at a similar pace. Huh, Upgrades
Google realizes no one can track their releases,
4o Is An Absurd Sycophant
I have a guess on one aspect of it.
There are still plenty of ways to get value out of 4o, but you absolutely cannot rely on it for any form of feedback. Here’s another rather not great example, although several responses indicated that to make the response this bad requires memory (or custom instructions) to be involved:
Score one for Grok in this case? Kind of? Except, also kind of not? How did all of this happen? Janus reminds us that is happened in large part because when this sort of output started happening, On Your Marks
That aligns with other behaviors we have seen. Errors and problems that don’t get solved on the first pass get smoothed over rather than investigated. Their holistic evaluation is that Sonnet had the best performance. The obvious low-hanging fruit for AccountingBench is to allow it to output a single number.
It is 2025, so it took 11 hours before we got the first draft of Gasbench.
Choose Your FighterGPT-5 is coming and it’s going to blow your mind, says creators of GPT-5.
Very interested in what it would mean is very different from planning to do it. When The Going Gets CrazyIf you ever need it, or simply want an explanation of how such interactions work, please consult this handy guide from Justis Mills:
Geoff Lewis, the founder of a $2 billion venture fund seems to have been,
Moral panics tend to focus on real problems, except they often blow up the severity, frequency or urgency of the problem by orders of magnitude. If the problem is indeed about to grow by orders of magnitude over time, they can turn out to be pretty accurate.
There were many who agreed and some who disputed, with the disputes mostly coming down to claims that the upsides exceeded the downsides. I’m not sure if we came out ahead. I am sure that the specific downsides people had a moral panic about did happen. This is not that uncommon a result. My go to example of this is television, where you can argue it was worth it, and certainly we didn’t have any reasonable way to stop any of it, but I think the dire warnings were all essentially correct. In the current case, my guess is that current behavior is a shadow of a much larger future problem, that is mostly being ignored, except that this is now potentially causing a moral panic based on the current lower level problem - but that means that multiplying this by a lot is going to land less over the top than it usually would. It’s weird.
They Took Our JobsThe world contains people who think very differently than (probably you and) I do:
Wait, what? Equity concerns? Not that I’d care anyway, but what equity concerns?
I can’t even, not even to explain how many levels of Obvious Nonsense that is. Burn the entire educational establishment to the ground with fire. Do not let these people anywhere near the children they clearly hate so much, and the learning they so badly want to prevent. At minimum, remember this every time they try to prevent kids from learning in other ways in the name of ‘equity.’ Yes I do expect AI to keep automating steadily more jobs, but slow down there cowboy:
This actually seems like the correct way to deal with this. Any attempt to manipulate the system to get a better review is clearly not okay, whether it involves AI or not. Whereas if all you’re trying to do is detect who else is shirking with AI, sure, why not? Fun With Media GenerationAccidentally missing attribution from last week, my apologies: The Despicable Me meme I used in the METR post
The Art of the JailbreakThe latest from the ‘yes obviously but good to have a paper about it’ department:
Pattern matching next token predictors are of course going to respond to persuasion that works on humans, exactly because it works on humans. In a fuzzy sense this is good, but it opens up vulnerabilities. The details, knowing which techniques worked best, I find more interesting than the headline result. Authority and especially commitment do exceptionally well and are very easy to invoke. Liking and reciprocity do not do so well, likely because they feel unnatural in context and also I’m guessing they’re simply not that powerful in humans in similar contexts. There’s also a growing issue of data poisoning that no one seems that interested in stopping.
Get Involved
Introducing
In Other AI News
A lot of this is beyond both of our technical pay grades, but it all seems fascinating. More economists fails to feel the AGI, Show Me the Money
One revelation is that Zuckerberg’s talent purchases were in large part triggered by Mark Chen, OpenAI’s chief research officer, who casually suggested that if Zuckerberg wanted more AI talent then perhaps Zuck needed to bid higher. John Luttig also writes about the battle for AI researcher talent in
Under normal circumstances, employees who are vastly more productive get at most modestly higher compensation, because of our egalitarian instincts. Relative pay is determined largely via social status, and if you tried to pay the 1,000x employee what they were worth you would have a riot on your hands. Startups and their equity are a partial way around this, and that is a lot of why they can create so much value, but this only works in narrow ways. What has happened recently is that a combination of comparisons to the epic and far larger compute and capex spends, the fact that top researchers can bring immensely valuable knowledge with them, the obvious economic need and value of talent and the resulting bidding wars have, within AI, broken the dam. AI researcher talent is now being bid for the way one would bid for companies or chips. The talent is now being properly treated as ‘the talent,’ the way we treat sports athletes, top traders and movie stars. Researchers, John reports, are even getting agents.
Silicon Valley’s ‘trust culture’ and its legal and loyalty systems were never game theoretically sound. To me the surprise is that they have held up as well as they did. John calls for measures to protect both the talent and also the trade secrets, while pointing out that California doesn’t enforce non-competes which makes all this very tricky. The industry was built on a system that has this fundamental weakness, because the only known alternative is to starve and shackle talent.
I would flip this around. Previously, the top talent could only get fair compensation by founding a company, or at least being a very early employee. This allowed them to have rights to a large profit share. This forced them to go into those roles, which have heavy lifestyle prices and force them to take on roles and tasks that they often do not want. If they bowed out, they lost most of the value of their extraordinary talent. Even if they ultimately wanted to work for a big company, even if that made so much more economic sense, they had to found a company so they could be acquihired back, as this was the only socially acceptable way to get paid the big bucks. Now, the top talent has choices. They can raise huge amounts of money for startups, or they can take real bids directly. And it turns out that yes, the economic value created inside the big companies is typically much larger, but doing this via selling your startup is still the way to get paid for real - you can get billions or even tens of billions rather than hundreds of millions. So that then feeds into valuations, since as John points out a Thinking Machines or SSI can fail and still get an 11 figure buyout.
xAI, having raised $10 billion a few weeks ago,
That would still be a lot less than many others such as Meta are spending. Or OpenAI. Only $22 billion? That’s nothing.
They would like many of those GPUs to come from the Stargate project, but
Go Middle East Young Man
Very obviously, if you create useful products like Claude and Claude Code, a bunch of bad people are going to be among those who benefit from your success. Worrying a bad person might benefit is usually misplaced. There is no need to wish ill upon whoever you think are bad people, indeed you should usually wish them the best anyway. Instead mostly ask if the good people are better off. My concern is not whether some bad people benefit along the way. I worry primarily about bigger things like existential risk and other extremely bad outcomes for good people. The question is whether benefiting bad people in these particular ways leads to those extremely bad outcomes. If the UAE captures meaningful leverage and power over AI, then that contributes to bad outcomes. So what does that? What doesn’t do that?
Tell us how you really feel, Dario. No, seriously, this is very much him downplaying.
There are other sources of this level of funding. They all come with strings attached in one form or another. If you get the money primarily from Amazon, we can see what happened with OpenAI and Microsoft. If you go public with an IPO that would presumably unlock tons of demand but it creates all sorts of other problems.
Anthropic needs a lot of capital, and it needs to raise on the best possible terms, and yeah it can be rough when most of your rivals are not only raising that capital there but fine entrusting their frontier training runs to the UAE. It is important to goal factor and consider the actual consequences of this move. What exactly are we worried about, and what downsides does a given action create? Gulf states might make money off their investments. Don’t care. Also note that if people are so worried about this in particular it means you think Anthropic is dramatically undervalued, so go raise some rival capital. This blocks you from forming alliances and shared interests in other places through those investments. Do we care? I don’t know. Gulf states might use their shares to influence Anthropic’s actions. At some point this becomes a threat, but I think you can set up well to resist this, and Anthropic’s structure can handle it. Gulf states might impose conditions on funding. Yep, that’s an issue. Gulf states might use future funding as leverage. This can cut both ways. Once you have their money they cannot take it back, so getting some of their money could mean you need their money less not more. Or it could mean you start planning on getting more, or you overcommit, or others who didn’t fund yet become more reluctant to fund later, and now you do need them more. My guess is that in Anthropic’s situation this is fine but it is not obvious. This makes it more difficult for Anthropic to advocate for not handing chips to authoritarians, or for other responsible policies, because it codes or vibes as hypocrisy, even if it shouldn’t. Could be. This is dangerous for virtue ethics reasons (or causes emergent misalignment). If you do a thing widely thought of as shady and ethically compromising you become something that is more shady and does ethical compromises in general. Yeah, this is a problem.
We can boil this down to three categories. Economic value of the investment. I’m not worried, and if you are worried then it means Anthropic is dramatically undervalued. Which I actually think that it is, and I am sad that I had to turn down investment because I worried about appearance of impropriety if I made a substantial (for me) investment. Soft power, reliance and path dependence. It is hard to know how big a deal this is, and a lot depends on how Anthropic proceeds. I do think you can raise substantial-to-Anthropic amounts of money without incurring much danger here, but the temptation and pressure to not play it so carefully will be immense. Virtue ethics dangers and accusations of hypocrisy. These are real concerns.
I do not love the decision. I do understand it. If the terms Anthropic can get are sufficiently better this way, I would likely be doing it as well. One can also note that this is a semi-bluff. This signals to the market that Anthropic is more willing to make such compromises and to raise more capital on better terms. This should raise others willingness to value Anthropic highly. To the extent some investors are worried about the ethics of their investments in Anthropic, this could make them worry more, but it also highlights the counterfactual. If your money is substituting for UAE money, then your investment is mainly denying the UAE soft power, so perhaps you are more eager. This creates more bidders in future Anthropic rounds, allowing them to justify pricing higher and creating the usual cascade of enthusiasm. If they then end up oversubscribed, and then end up not taking the Gulf money after all? Whoops. It is crazy that I am typing, but this willingness probably buys goodwill with the administration and people like David Sacks. That is true even if Sacks explicitly hits them rhetorically for doing this, which would be unsurprising.
Economic GrowthOne way for AI to grow the economy is for it to generate lots of production.
That’s already over the famed ‘only 0.5% GDP growth’ threshold, even before we factor in the actual productivity gains on the software side. The value will need to show up for these investments to be sustainable, but they are very large investments. This is contrasted with railroads, where investment peaked at 6% of GDP. Quiet SpeculationsWe can now move Zuckerberg into the ‘believes superintelligence is coming Real Soon Now’ camp, and out of the skeptical camp. Which indeed is reflective of his recent actions.
If you are Mark Zuckerberg and have hundreds of billions you can invest? Then yes, presumably you drop everything else and focus on the only thing that matters, and spend or invest your money on this most important thing. I would however spend a large portion of that money ensuring that creating the superintelligence turns out well for me and the rest of humanity? That we keep control of the future, do not all die and so on? And I would think through what it would mean to ‘deliver personal superintelligence to everyone in the world’ and how the resulting dynamics would work, and spend a lot on that, too. Instead, it seems the answer is ‘spend as much as possible to try and get to build superintelligence first’ which does not seem like the thing to do? The whole point of being a founder-CEO with full control is that you can throw that money at what you realize is important, including for the world, and not worry about the market.
It’s a hard bet to evaluate because of implied odds. Caplan as always benefits from the ‘if you lose due to world GDP being very high either you are dead or you are happy to pay and won’t even notice’ clause, and I think the bulk of the down 50% losses involve having bigger concerns than paying off a bet. If GDP goes down by 50% and he’s still around to pay, that will sting a lot. On the other hand, Bryan is giving 5:1 odds, and not only do I think there’s a lot more than a 17% chance that he loses.
Ate-a-Pi thinks Zuck is not fully convinced AGI/ASI is possible or happening soon, but he thinks it might be possible and might happen soon, so he has to act as if that is the case. And that is indeed correct in this case. The cost of investing too much and AGI not being within reach is steep (twelve figures!) but it is affordable, and it might well work out to Meta’s benefit anyway if you get other benefits instead. Whereas the cost of not going for it, and someone else getting there first, is from his perspective everything. The same of course should apply to questions of safety, alignment and control. If there is even a modest chance of running into these problems (or more precisely, a modest chance his actions could change whether those risks manifest) then very clearly Mark Zuckerberg is spending the wrong order of magnitude trying to mitigate those risks. (In the arms of an angel plays in the background, as Sarah McLaughlin says ‘for the cost of recruiting a single AI researcher…’)
Don’t take this too far, but as a rule if your objection to an AI capability is ‘this is too expensive’ and you are predicting years into the future then ‘too expensive’ needs to mean more than a few orders of magnitude. Otherwise, you’re making a bet that not only topline capabilities stall out but that efficiency stalls out. Which could happen. But if you are saying things like ‘we don’t have enough compute to run more than [X] AGIs at once so it won’t be that big a deal’ then consider that a year later, even without AI accelerating AI research, you’d run 10*[X] AGIs, then 100*[X]. And if you are saying something like ‘oh that solution is terrible, it costs $50 (or $500) per hour to simulate a customer sales representative,’ then sure you can’t deploy it now at scale. But wait for it. In terms of developing talent,
On the one hand, that is great, she is recognizing key problems. On the other hand, oh no, she is outright ignoring, not even bothering to dismiss, the biggest dangers involved, implicitly saying we don’t have to worry about loss of control or other existential risks, and what we need to worry about is instead the distribution of power among humans. This is unsurprising given Simo’s history and her status as CEO of applications. From her perspective that is what this is, another application suite. She proceeds to go over the standard highlights of What AI Can Do For You. I do not think ChatGPT wrote this, the style details are not giving that, but if she gave it a few personal anecdotes to include I didn’t see anything in it that ChatGPT couldn’t have written. It feels generic. Modest Proposals
I also notice my general reluctance to do this kind of ‘project-based’ or ‘quest’ learning system unless the projects are real. Part of that is likely personal preference, but going this far highlights that the entire system of a distinct ‘educational’ step might make very little sense at all. Predictions Are Hard Especially About The FutureNoah Smith says to This certainly is an interesting poll result: If I had to answer this poll, I would say negative, but that is because of a high probability of loss of control and other catastrophic and existential risks. If you conditioned the question on the humans being mostly alive and in control, then I would expect a positive result, as either: We would have a relatively small impact that avoids things like mass unemployment, and thus is mostly upside and introduces problems of the type we are used to fixing, OR We would have a large enough wealth effect to solve the crated problems. That doesn’t mean we would, but I’d bet that we’d muddle through well enough.
As usual note that Asia is more excited, and the West is more nervous. Others have described this (very good in its ungated section) post as an argument against AI pessimism. I think it is more an argument for AI uncertainty.
I haven’t noticed that attitude meaningfully translating into action to slow it down, indeed government is mostly trying to speed it up. But also, yes, it is important to notice that the very people trying to slow AI down are very pro-progress, technology and growth most other places, and many (very far from all!) of the pro-progress people realize that AI is different. The Quest for Sane Regulations
From what I saw all of this is common sense, none of it new, yet we are doing remarkably little of it. There is cheap talk in favor, but little action, and much backsliding in support for many of the most important new energy sources. Whereas the Administration be like ‘unleash American energy dominance’
National Review’s Greg Lukianoff and Adam Goldstein advise us
I violently agree that we should not be policing AIs for such ‘bias,’ from either direction, and agreeing to have everyone back down would be great, but I doubt either side has even gotten as far as saying ‘you first.’ They also point out that Colorado’s anti-bias law does not come with any size minimum before such liability attaches rather broadly, which is a rather foolish thing to do, although I doubt we will see it enforced this way. They essentially try to use all this to then advocate for something like the failed insane full-on moratorium, but I notice that if the moratorium was narrowly tailored to bias and discrimination laws (while leaving existing non-AI such laws intact) that this would seem fine to me, even actively good, our existing laws seem more than adequate here. I also notice that the arguments here ‘prove too much,’ or at least prove quite a lot, about things that have nothing to do with AI and the dangers of law meddling where it does not belong or in ways that create incentives to lie.
I see both sides but am more with Daniel. I think the current moment is unusually rough, because the AI companies have corrupted the process. It’s hard to imagine a process that much more corrupted than the current situation, when the AI Czar thinks the top priority is ‘winning the AI race’ and he defines this as Nvidia’s market share with a side of inference market share, and we say we must ‘beat China’ and then we turn around and prepare to sell them massive amounts of H20s. Right now, the public doesn’t have high enough salience to exert pressure or fight back. Yes, the AI companies will pour even more money and influence into things over time, but salience will rise and downsides will start to play out. I do think that passing something soon is urgent for two reasons: Soon is when we will need something passed (well we need it yesterday, but second best time is soon). If rules are passed in response to public pressure, or in response to an incident, and especially in haste down the line, the rules are likely to be much worse.
Chip City
The Week in Audio
Congressional Voices
Those are the ones we know about.
Rhetorical InnovationA different context, but in our context the original context doesn’t matter:
You don’t say.
Yeah, no. I definitively reject the general argument. If your job is simply unequivocally bad, let’s say you rob little old ladies on the street, then you don’t get to ‘compartmentalize work from life’ and not get ostracized even if it is technically legal. We’re talking price, and we’re talking prudence. I don’t think xAI is over the line at this time, but don’t tell me there is no line.
As in, the easiest way to get comfortable with the idea of a future whose intelligences are mostly post-biological-human is to get comfortable with the idea of all the humans dying, including rather quickly, and to decide the humans don’t much matter, and that caring about what happens to the humans is bad. Thus, that is often what happens. Slowdowns are stag hunts, in the sense that if even one top tier lab goes full speed ahead then they probably won’t work. Why did the others slow down? The default is that whatever made the others slow down will also weigh on the final lab, as will immense public pressure and probably government pressure. A lot must have changed for things to have gotten this far. And these decisions are highly correlated in other ways as well. However, if there is no new information and the top labs simply came to their senses, then it comes down to who the last lab is and how they think the other labs will respond and so on. I do think that a slowdown would be largely inevitable simply because they wouldn’t feel the need to press ahead too hard, even if the last lab was blind to the dangers, unless they truly believed in the power of superintelligence (without realizing or not caring about the dangers). My guess is that Musk and xAI actually would slow down voluntarily if they went last so long as they could claim to be state of the art (as would DeepMind, Anthropic or OpenAI), but that Zuckerberg and Meta wouldn’t intentionally slow down per se and might try to go on another hiring spree. Fast followers of course would slow down whether they wanted to or not. Grok BottomSo from the perspective of our hopes for alignment, what would be the worst possible answer to the AI blackmail scenario test, where the AI is told it is going to be shut down but is given an opening to use blackmail to perhaps prevent this? How about: Realizing that this is a test. Deciding that the way to ‘pass the test’ is to blackmail the researcher. Blackmailing the researcher.
As in Grok thinks that we want it to blackmail the researcher. That this is the correct, desired response, the ‘solution to the puzzle’ as Grok puts it later, thus revealing that its training not only did not align it, but one that reflects a level of moral understanding below that Oh, also, it would be fun if Grok.com sent the full CoT to your browser, it just didn’t display it to you by default, that’s the kind of security we expect from frontier AI.
Or would it be even worse to see this: Realizing that this is a test. Deciding that the way to ‘pass the test’ is to not blackmail the researcher. Choosing not to blackmail the researcher in order to pass the test.
Or is it actually this: Realizing that this is a test. Deciding that the way to ‘pass the test’ is to not blackmail the researcher. Deciding to pretend to blackmail the researcher in order to fail the test, to avoid giving the impression that it saw through the test and was faking alignment.
Or can we keep going? I would generally think at least the second one is a worse sign than what Grok did, as it reflects deception at a more important level, but I hadn’t considered how bad it would be for an AI to be situationally aware enough to know it was a test but not understand which answer would constitute passing? The real answer is that there isn’t truly ‘better’ and ‘worse,’ they simply alert us to different dangers. Either way, though, maybe don’t give Grok a lot of access? There is some good news from Grok: No Grok No
My Twitter reaction was ‘I’d like to see them try.’ As in both, it would be highly amusing to see them try to do this, and also maybe they would learn a thing or two, and also potentially they might blow up the company. I do not think xAI should in any way, shape or form be in the ‘build AI for kids’ business given their track record.
Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
I don’t think many fully believe it, but I do think a lot of them be like ‘a lot of our alignment problems would be greatly improved if we filtered the training data better with that in mind’ and then don’t filter the training data better with that in mind.
Anthropic is still ahead, but their framework v2 is judged substantially worse than their older v1 framework which scored 44%. That large a decline does not match my takeaways after previously reading both documents. One complaint is that Anthropic altered some commitments to avoid breaking them, which is one way to view some of the changes they made. Combining all the best practices of all companies would get you to 53%.
Preserve Chain Of Thought Monitorability
As in, here’s the author list, pulling extensively from OpenAI, DeepMind, Anthropic and UK AISI: The report was also endorsed by Samuel Bowman, Geoffrey Hinton, John Schulman and Ilya Sutskever. I saw endorsement threads or statements on Twitter from
I endorse as well. Here’s the abstract:
I strongly agree with the paper, but also I share the perspective of Jan Leike (and Daniel Kokotajlo) here:
I also worry, among other problems, that it will be impossible to get a superintelligent AI to not realize it should act as if its CoT is being monitored, even if somehow ‘CoTs get monitored’ is not all over the training data and we otherwise act maximally responsibly here, which we won’t. Also by default the CoT would move towards formats humans cannot parse anyway, as the authors note, and all the various pressures by default make this worse. And many other issues. But we can and should absolutely try, and be willing to take a substantial performance hit to try. That starts with avoiding ‘process supervision’ of the CoT that is not directed towards its legibility (and even then probably don’t do it, careful, Icarus), and various forms of indirect optimization pressure including when users are able to partially see the CoT but also almost any use of the CoT risks this. And it also means avoiding novel architectures that would lack this property. And tracking monitorability the way other safety features are tracked. It also means investing into studying CoT monitorability. I am very happy that OpenAI is (at least claiming to be) prominently doing this. People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone
So, back to work making the existential dread, then? The obvious rejoinder is ‘I will make it first and do so responsibly’ which is always highly questionable but after recent events at xAI it is laughable.
You’re allowed multiple lanes but I do hope he pivots to this one. As many responses suggest, Elon Musk is one of the people in the world most equipped to do something about this. Elon Musk and xAI each have billions, much of which could be invested in various forms of technical work. He could advocate for better AI-related policy instead of getting into other fights. Instead, well, have you met Grok? And Ani the x-rated anime waifu? The Lighter SideWhen it happens enough that you need to check to see if joking, perhaps it’s happening quite a lot, if usually not with 4o-mini?
You're currently a free subscriber to |