---
subject: "The Salt Shaker Theory, Minimalist Marketing, & More"
from: "\"Sahil Bloom's Curiosity Chronicle\" <sahil@sahilbloom.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-12-01 10:03:49
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Sahil Bloom"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_1989028747625928812"]
---
The Salt Shaker Theory, Minimalist Marketing, & Moreread and listen on read time 4 minutes Here are 5 interesting ideas to spark your curiosity heading into the weekend. Today at a Glance:- Question: Letting go of the uncontrollable.
- Quote: Do not wait.
- Framework: Batteries included.
- Tweet: Minimalist marketing lessons.
- Article: The Salt Shaker Theory.
Want to level up your career? Consult your Imagine surrounding yourself with a small group of supportive peers (including Fortune 500 execs and innovative start-up CEOs) who have best-in-class experience in their industry for advice, diverse perspectives, and raw feedback to catalyze your professional growth. That’s today’s partner, Sidebar. The impact is tangible: 93% of members say that Sidebar has made a significant difference in their career trajectory. Nothing will accelerate your career like having a powerful peer group— it’s a true competitive advantage. Learn more at
Letting go of the uncontrollable:Where am I allowing the uncontrollable to impact my life? This image from Carl Richards hangs on the wall of my office. It's a daily reminder of an important fact: There are very few things that matter—and even fewer that I am actually in control of. Letting go of the uncontrollable is one of the single greatest unlocks for life. Most of us waste a lot of energy on that which is entirely out of our control—we complain, we resent, we focus, we bemoan. But our energy is finite. Every ounce given to the uncontrollable is an ounce that cannot be deployed into the controllable. Every single moment that you focus on the uncontrollable, you are making an active decision to allow it to negatively impact your life. Remember: When you let go of the uncontrollable, you are free. The illusion of the "right" moment:"Do not wait; the time will never be just right. Start where you stand, and work with whatever tools you may have at your command, and better tools will be found as you go along." - George Herbert If you wait to feel prepared, you'll never start. Don't wait, act. Mental model on energy creation:Energy Creators vs. Energy AbsorbersMy simple mental model for two types of people: - Energy Creators: Create energy for others.
- Energy Absorbers: Require energy from others.
Energy Creators are those individuals who somehow breathe life into a room. When you're around them, you feel more alive. When they leave, you want to go for a run or crank on your focus work because you've been infused with their spark. Energy Absorbers are those individuals who somehow suck the life out of a room. When you're around them, you feel drained, because the burden is on you to create the energy that they absorb. When they leave, you want to have a nap because you've been exhausted of your energy stores. I've encountered the generalized version of this mental model in different contexts (professional model Here is my current running list of the traits of Energy Creators: - Movement Bias: Movement creates collisions. Collisions release energy.
- Curious: Deep intellectual curiosity. Desire to learn.
- Growth Mindset: Fundamental belief in the ability to change. Does not waste time with self-limiting beliefs.
- Internally Motivated: Does not need a consistent drip of external rewards. Creates internal motivation to perform and grow. Finds enjoyment in process.
- Consistent: Shows up in the same way, day-in-day-out.
Fill your work and personal life with Energy Creators. Be an Energy Creator for those around you. Visuals worth a thousand words:I'm a sucker for simple visuals that convey a thousand words in seconds. This thread is filled with them. I loved it.
Essay on setting your standards: Brilliant essay on famed restauranteur Danny Meyer that draws upon a story from his memoir on the importance of setting your standards and avoiding frustration. My favorite passage: Your staff and your guests are always moving your saltshaker off center. That’s their job. It is the job of life. It’s the law of entropy! Until you understand that, you’re going to get pissed off every time someone moves the saltshaker off center.
It is not your job to get upset...Your job is just to move the shaker back each time and let them know exactly what you stand for. Let them know what excellence looks like to you.
And if you’re ever willing to let them decide where the center is, then I want you to give them the keys to the store. Just give away the fuckin’ restaurant!
Lesson: Your job is to let them know exactly what you stand for. Let them know what excellence looks like to you. In Case You Missed It:In Survivorship Bias is the error resulting from systematically focusing on survivors (successes) and ignoring casualties (failures) that causes us to miss the true base rates of survival (the actual probability of success) and arrive at flawed conclusions. It's all around us: - We read books on the common traits of successful people, but fail to consider all of the unsuccessful people who possessed those same traits.
- We applaud the belief when we hear that an entrepreneur took out a second mortgage and succeeded, but fail to consider all of the entrepreneurs who did the same and went bankrupt. We celebrate the "bet on yourself!" success stories but ignore the causalities of the same mantra.
- We study the cultural strategies of the most successful companies, but fail to consider all of the companies that followed those same strategies and fell apart.
To avoid the trap, we must consider the unseen evidence just as much as the seen. Remember: What is unseen often has just as much value as what is seen. Sahil's Recommendation ZonePerfect your morning routine with my partner I get asked about my morning routine all the time. It changes from time to time, but It replaced an entire cabinet of supplements for me in one daily scoop—seriously, its latest iteration covers a multivitamin, multi-mineral, prebiotics, probiotics, adaptogens, greens, and more. It keeps me feeling healthy and strong throughout the year, even when I'm traveling (thanks to the travel packs). Athletic Greens is offering Curiosity Chronicle subscribers an exclusive deal:
Refer Friends, Earn Rewards!
|