---
subject: "The Nutgraf: 10-minute delivery is eating 40-minute food delivery"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-12-14 04:32:42
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
Decades from now, when we look back at 2024, we’ll probably remember it as the year when 10-minute deliveries witnessed a sudden, surprising [resurgence](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/the-surprising-resilience-of-10-min-grocery-deliveries/) in India. All year, as most companies struggled to find product-market fits and venture capital, quick-commerce companies were raising billions of dollars without breaking a sweat, and reporting double-digit—sometimes triple-digit—annual growth rates. Last week, I wrote about how the quick-commerce monster demands greater sacrifices and is about to consume categories like pharmaceuticals and alcohol.
Well, it turns out that the quick-commerce monster is now forcing companies to make the ultimate sacrifice: themselves.
Zepto and Blinkit were both in the news last week, for the same reason:
In a strategic move to capture the burgeoning quick food delivery market, Zomato’s quick-commerce subsidiary, Blinkit, has introduced ‘Bistro’, a platform promising delivery of snacks, meals, and beverages within 10 minutes. The launch came just a day after rival Zepto unveiled its initiative, the Zepto Cafe. Currently, Bistro is accessible on the Google Play Store, with plans to roll it out on the Apple App Store in the future, according to media reports.
Blinkit’s Bistro is seen as the rival of Zepto Cafe. This is the second such attempt by Zomato to try in the instant food and grocery delivery segment. Earlier, Zomato had launched Zomato Instant which was shut later, according to a report by Moneycontrol.
Race for instant food heats up: Blinkit launches Bistro to rival Zepto Cafe, [Business Standard](https://www.business-standard.com/industry/news/race-for-instant-food-heats-up-blinkit-launches-bistro-to-rival-zepto-cafe-124121300393_1.html)
Just so we all understand what’s going on, here’s the situation: Zomato, the food-delivery app, owns Blinkit, the 10-minute delivery app, which just launched Bistro, a 10-minute food-delivery app. And Zepto spun out Zepto Cafe, their 10-minute food delivery service, into a separate app. Lest we forget, Swiggy has a 10-minute food delivery service as well; it’s Bolt, and it [lives](https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/technology/tech-news/swiggy-launches-new-10-minute-food-delivery-service-bolt-here-are-the-cities-it-has-launched-in-and-other-details/articleshow/113949421.cms) inside their original app. Oh, and there’s a hot, new 10-minute food-delivery app in town. It’s called Swish, and it recently got a chunk of [funding](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/tech/funding/food-delivery-startup-swish-raises-2-million-in-maiden-round-led-by-vc-firm-accel/articleshow/115425695.cms?from=mdr).
One way to think about this is that it’s another indulgence. Has quick commerce reached a point where players are so paranoid that they’re trying to hold on to customers who think that a food delivery that takes 40 minutes is too slow?
Deepinder Goyal, CEO of Zomato, believes this is the case.
“For sure. Blinkit is fast, but that has made Zomato seem slow. In some areas, we take 40 minutes to deliver and 40 minutes is very, very slow.
So customer expectation is moving, and food delivery will have to change. More restaurants will open up close to customer locations, or a 10-minute food format, some canteen food kind of format, will come up to meet customer expectations.
Think samosas, patties, sandwiches, chai, coffee, nimbu paani (lime water), etc. being delivered in 10 minutes, could be the next frontier which restaurants haven’t even attacked yet. This is canteen-type food but in an organised fashion. It’s an interesting space. So, this could be the next big thing and this is canteen food for people who don’t do and eat canteen right now, so it will be a whole new market and additional demand being created.
That could be the next big growth engine for restaurants.”
Deepinder Goyal, [CEO of Zomato](https://www.moneycontrol.com/news/business/startup/food-delivery-will-have-to-change-10-minute-deliveries-can-be-a-gamechanger-says-zomatos-deepinder-goyal-12837692.html)
It’s only fitting that 10-minute food deliveries are now eating 40-minute food deliveries. Essentially, quick commerce is creating a great positioning reset in India, and everyone is paranoid about losing their association with customers’ needs.
I’ll explain.
Over a decade, multiple e-commerce companies spent hundreds of millions, possibly billions, of dollars to educate and tell customers to think of those platforms whenever they want something. Flipkart and Amazon trained customers to remember them whenever the urge struck to buy things like electronics, books, or appliances. Myntra taught users to recall them when there was a need to purchase fashionable clothes and sneakers. 1mg and Pharmeasy created an association within customers who needed to buy medicines. Millions of Indians almost unthinkingly unlock their phones and open Zomato or Swiggy when they feel like eating something.
This is the power of brand association. It’s the culmination of innovative, persistent storytelling across channels, done over years. This imprint—where people associate an emotion or a need with a company—is the holy grail. This is brand marketing. When companies do this consistently and repeatedly over years or decades, it makes them practically immune to disruption. Just ask Coca-Cola, Nike, or Louis Vuitton.
Until early this year, most Indian e-commerce companies were doing fine as they went down this path.
And then quick commerce came along and upended everything.
In brand marketing terms, 10-minute deliveries changed everyone’s positioning. Consumers had spent years being trained to think of, say, Flipkart when they wanted to buy a new mobile phone, but started thinking about Blinkit because they’d be able to get it in 10 minutes. Want to buy vegetables? People subconsciously opened the Bigbasket app, only to realise that Zepto would deliver it to them right away. Have a party next week and want to buy a pack of UNO cards? Forget Amazon and open Swiggy Instamart. This is India’s great positioning reset of 2024 in online shopping.
Around three years ago, when Blinkit, which was called Grofers at the time, announced that it would start doing 10-minute grocery deliveries, the response from consumers wasn’t elation, but outrage. People were surprised and vocally angry that anybody would want anything delivered in less than 10 minutes. They were upset by the pressures this would place on delivery partners. Albinder Dhindsa, CEO of Grofers, even had to release a statement for clarification.
That week, I wrote about brand associations, both in the context of food delivery and 10-minute deliveries.
So, why do companies prominently advertise their delivery times for groceries?
It’s the same reason why Zomato made ads at porn websites. Because they want to create an association in your mind about themselves as a brand and service.
The idea of 10-minute delivery by Grofers is not about pushing its riders to deliver in 10 minutes and penalising them if they don’t, but to create an association in your mind that the fastest delivery for groceries out there is Grofers. Grofers knows that you don’t care if the order is delivered in 15 or even 30 minutes, but when you open your phone and wonder where to order from, Grofers wants you to pick it over BigBasket, Dunzo, and Swiggy.
And to do this, it’s willing to do lots of crazy things. All to put that association in your head.
Just like how Zomato was willing to do all those things to create the association of being a progressive company in your head. And other associations which couldn’t be wiped away thanks to an ad with Hrithik and Katrina.
It’s all about creating associations.
And right now, newer associations are being created.
Two stories about brand association, [The Nutgraf](https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/two-stories-about-brand-association/) (September 2021)
It worked. Everyone jumped on the bandwagon and advertised themselves as a 10-minute delivery company.
In fact, Swiggy Instamart initially positioned itself as a company with deliveries that reach you in “15–30 minutes”.
By 2024, it joined the others and became a 10-minute delivery company.
Now that delivery time is no longer a differentiator (unless someone comes along and positions themselves as a two-minute delivery company), the only reason why a consumer would pick, say, a Zepto over a Blinkit is selection.
This is why quick-commerce companies are fighting to own specific inventory in their warehouses and an association in the minds of consumers. All through 2024, in category after category, everyone is fighting to win this. Fresh vegetables. Groceries. Toys. Electronics. Mobiles. Medicines. Pet food. Alcohol. And now, we’re finally at the end. There are no more new categories left to conquer. So quick-commerce companies have decided to try to create associations in categories like food delivery, hoping to sway users who automatically recall Swiggy and Zomato when they think of their next meal.
Quick-commerce apps are widely seen as a virtual version of a kirana store, but they’re now going further. After all, kirana stores have multiple customer personas—some users go there on Sundays to buy their weekly groceries. The same customer may go there in the middle of the weekday for a cup of tea, a cigarette, and maybe an egg puff, then again go there on their way back home to pick up some toothpaste and some shampoo because they’d just run out. These are the same customers, going to the same kirana store, under different circumstances.
Customers go to the same kirana store because of its proximity to where they are. This is what gives one offline store a differentiator over another—its location.
But in a world where all quick-commerce dark stores are 10 minutes away, what is the new differentiator?
The only point of advantage is to be the first quick-commerce app that the customer thinks of when they want to buy something. Brand association becomes everything. Want to do weekly grocery shopping? Most people will gravitate toward one app. Want cigarettes and a cup of tea? There’s an app for that. Want toothpaste and shampoo? Here’s this other app.
There’s a future where a customer lands on one app when they think of any of these cases.
One company that believes in that future is Swiggy.
Swiggy has resolutely doubled down on the idea that it can house all of its offerings in a single app, which it says gives it some advantages, even though it isn’t clear what these synergies are. It even had a slide that expressly called this out in its pre-IPO press conference.
Perhaps Swiggy is right, but there’s another version of the future. And that’s what Zepto and Blinkit believe in—the future where there’s “one app for a customer need”.
Seen through this lens, quick commerce is the driving force behind the ultimate unbundling of the kirana store—because it unbundles the customers themselves.
If you understand this, then you understand why Blinkit and Zepto are spinning out Bistro and Cafe as separate apps. In fact, the original rationale behind launching Zepto Cafe was to [boost](https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/business/india-business/zepto-bags-200-million-funding-at-1-4-billion-valuation-becomes-the-first-unicorn-of-2023/articleshow/103065135.cms) the average order value of grocery purchases on Zepto. Earlier this year, a Harvard Business School case study on Zepto also suggested that it could use Zepto Cafe to increase order value. The assumption was that customers would add items from Zepto Cafe while making grocery purchases.
I don’t know this with certainty, but now that Zepto is spinning out its Cafe into a separate app, I suspect Zepto has discovered that customers don’t behave like they’d originally expected. People don’t order egg puffs and groceries at the same time. These are distinct purchasing behaviours, done at different times, with separate retention patterns. Zepto and Blinkit would rather take a chance at creating new associations for specific, narrow behaviours by rolling out separate apps, rather than figure out how to make customers perform both behaviours in one purchase flow contained in a single app. It’s somewhat counterintuitive, but it’s bold.
And right now, quick-commerce companies can afford to take unconventional bets, because the risk of playing it safe is far too high.
Regards,
Praveen Gopal Krishnan