---
subject: "The Dazzle Camo Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-06-15 13:08:43
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Ryan here. Last summer, I was in the parking lot of my local Whole Foods when a strange sight appeared—an at-the-time unreleased Why is this Interesting? Back in 1918, a sailor and artist in the British Royal Navy named Norman Wilkinson came up with an idea. While the open sea provided little cover for more traditional camouflage tactics, using alternating black and white geometric patterns broke up the outlines of the ships, thus making them harder to target by German subs (BMW Automotive companies would face a similar (though far less lethal) challenge starting in the 1950s. This saw the rise of the very first “spy photography” for automotive prototypes when some German photographers captured images of these vehicles out testing and published them in a magazine in a section called Erlkönige (named after a Goethe poem which contained the line “Who rides there so late through the night dark and drear?”). This was a new threat to auto manufacturers—suddenly, the proliferation of spy photography meant that their precious IP would be revealed to the public (and their competitors) much sooner, giving away a competitive advantage in the market. Something had to be done. (A quick aside here on why test mules, or prototypes, need to test out in the open: these vehicles tend to be fairly far along in development but their engineering and design needs real-world validation. Test vehicles need thousands of real miles before a manufacturer can feel confident about signing off on a release. Sometimes this might be durability testing, other times it might be performance at altitude, in extreme climates, or even for NVH—Noise, Vibration, and Harshness. Wind tunnels and test chambers are used extensively but can only tell you so much, and even private company test tracks are So the automakers found themselves in a similar boat to the Royal Navy: if they can’t conceal through camouflage, maybe they can confuse. Thus the reintroduction of dazzle camo in an entirely new capacity. Starting in the 1980s auto manufacturers would paint high-contrast, geometric patterns on their erlkings to break up the shape and design of the vehicle to make them harder to discern. This embraced a paradox: By covering the vehicles in this camo they would immediately signal to anyone paying attention that it was, indeed, a prototype. But the risk was mitigated through the camouflage—if it did its job, the damage of exposure would be minimal. Enter back to the current decade, and back to that Whole Foods parking lot, and we observe a new mutation of the classic automotive dazzle camo—one that seeks attention, rather than hides from it. The spy photography of the 1950s pales in comparison to the proliferation of camera phones and video and social media—suddenly, a prototype’s exposure is far more likely and far more constant. So while subterfuge and disguise still have their part to play in the early development of new vehicles ( Quick Links: [This thread from Sam Bankman-Fried on hiring is definitely worth the read](https://email.mg2.substack.com/c/eJwlUMuOhSAM_ZrL0oA8hAWLmcX9gZnF7AxCVTKKRurc-PcD19DQNm1Pe453CNN2XHbfMpL69XjtYBO88gKIcJAzw9HHYJmQinNmSLAiMC01ibkfD4DVxcXicQLZz2GJ3mHcUp3oKKVktkKzjmvuDffglRzpSL0cJBMOBJhxvNe6M0RIHiz8wXFtCYjf1hUSViSy2Blxzw_-8WifxfAV63FN6SnZ1-ezf37_lCijwzOXgEnOjVAd41wpqbRRLYm2pW1LFZOMUy14U14HfhxF6QEVhAwPQdepbfI5FCT_W_HJYWOeXWoqz1Kfqn8XCt2-HnmmiFcPyQ0LhFsJvAV9a9NPkOAoQofeoWVKytZoKVrNzU29EJRGGiqlIGVz2MpUsq_5ihnnmGMqTCFjTNM_EUaPpA). FTX only has 25 engineers. (NRB)I have felt this pain with the ESPN NBA coverage for a while, but this article helps put it into words: [ESPN’s NBA Halftime Show Remains An Unmitigated Disaster](https://email.mg2.substack.com/c/eJwlkcmOhCAQhp-muWmQxeXAYS7zGoalVNIKBsrp9u0HugOhgFp--MpqhDWmW50xI6nLjPcJKsAr74AIiVwZ0uyd6oTsOe8m4pRw3ShH4vO8JIBD-11huoCcl9m91ehjqBkDpZRsylnKjLRWGgHa9ovhZuqkHoZJyEEY95XVl_MQLCj4g3THAMTG44CAtRLZ1YZ45gf_ebDfMq8zxfe7LSHl4PxRHrGWHeQzNMHoZtP7guW6yVt8NYsPes_Np2CyXu-NSaCfuakhJY14xShjtO9kx-koeFvGAHZZBO976J2Q7iHosbI2Xyajts8qTZLyedOhrQSKf6324ygg5qp2BY_3DEGbHdyXEX5Rf6jNKwRIpQVu1qi6Xko2jVKwkU9fKOXrcpITlVKQouxiyQrqtd0-4-azD6VBkNGH9R8RVp2e)(NRB)
— WITI x McKinsey: An ongoing partnership where we highlight interesting McKinsey research, writing, and data. The value of the digital age. A new episode of the McKinsey Global Institute’s Forward Thinking podcast discusses how to measure the value of the digital age. Professor Avinash Collins, who talks through his work on creating a data dashboard that could help. — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Ryan (RMM) —
You’re a free subscriber to |