---
subject: "The Big Nonprofits Post"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-11-29 16:00:05
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
There are lots of great charitable giving opportunities out there right now. The first time that I served as a recommender in the Survival and Flourishing Fund (SFF) was back in 2021. How the world has changed in three years. I recently had the opportunity to be an SFF recommender for the second time. This time I found an embarrassment of riches. Application quality was consistently higher, there were more than twice as many applications, and essentially all applicant organizations were looking to scale their operations and spending. That means the focus of this post is different. In 2021, my primary goal was to share my perspective on the process and encourage future SFF applications. Sharing information on organizations was a secondary goal. This time, my primary focus is on the organizations. Many people do not know good places to put donations. In particular, they do not know how to use donations to help AI go better and in particular to guard against AI existential risk. Until doing SFF this round, I did not have any great places to point them towards. (Not all the applications were about AI. There is also a lot of attention to biological existential and catastrophic risks, some to nuclear threats, and a number of applications that took entirely different approaches.) Table of ContentsOrganizations where I have the highest confidence in straightforward modest donations now, if your goals and model of the world align with theirs, are in bold. [Do Not Think Only On the Margin, and Also Use Decision Theory.](https://substack.com/redirect/edd25709-1ad8-402e-9040-3893bcfd3aea?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[Organizations Focusing On AI Non-Technical Research and Education.](https://substack.com/redirect/d15902db-7923-4a01-bbed-7edce4d7e200?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[Organizations Doing Math, Decision Theory and Agent Foundations.](https://substack.com/redirect/d600ed78-2c00-419a-9b6e-7f4dd99e8212?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[ALTER (Affiliate Learning-Theoretic Employment and Resources) Project.](https://substack.com/redirect/b9178487-4f24-466a-a661-567ad3e2be77?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[MSEP Project at Science and Technology Futures](https://substack.com/redirect/c8e74c51-5c03-4aa0-a844-bab145d8ffcb?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[(Their Website).](https://substack.com/redirect/c8e74c51-5c03-4aa0-a844-bab145d8ffcb?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[German Primate Center (DPZ) – Leibniz Institute for Primate Research.](https://substack.com/redirect/a4ceca64-6902-46f0-8b96-b90021192e24?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[Organizations That then Regrant to Fund Other Organizations.](https://substack.com/redirect/cc13a34b-4968-48c1-9fb7-9c13f06342af?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[Centre for Enabling Effective Altruism Learning & Research (CEELAR).](https://substack.com/redirect/8b75871c-e8d7-47ff-9476-4db4205c2b99?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[Principles of Intelligent Behavior in Biological and Social Systems (PIBBSS).](https://substack.com/redirect/7dd4b45e-6da1-49ae-9bb2-e75e9daca55d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)
A Word of WarningThe SFF recommender process is highly time constrained. Even though I used well beyond the number of required hours, there was no way to do a serious investigation of all the potentially exciting applications. Substantial reliance on heuristics was inevitable. Also your priorities, opinions, and world model could be very different from mine. If you are considering donating a substantial amount of money, please do the level of personal research and consideration commensurate with the amount of money you want to give away. If you are considering donating a small amount of money, or if the requirement to do personal research might mean you don’t donate to anyone at all, I caution the opposite: Only do the amount of optimization and verification and such that is worth its opportunity cost. Do not let the perfect be the enemy of the good. For more details of how the SFF recommender process works, see In addition, note that donations to some of the organizations below may not be tax deductible. Use Your Personal Theory of ImpactDo not let me, or anyone else, tell you any of: What is important or what is a good cause. What types of actions are best to make the change you want to see in the world. What particular strategies seem promising to you. That you have to choose according to some formula or you’re an awful person.
This is especially true when it comes to policy advocacy, and especially in AI. If an organization is advocating for what you think is bad policy, don’t fund them! If an organization is advocating or acting in a way you think is ineffective, don’t fund them! Only fund people you think advance good changes in effective ways. Not cases where I think that. Cases where you think that. Briefly on my own prioritization right now (but again you should substitute your own): I chose to deprioritize all meta-level activities and talent development, because of how much good object-level work I saw available to do, and because I expected others to often prioritize talent and meta activities. I was largely but not exclusively focused on those who in some form were helping ensure AI does not kill everyone. And I saw high value in organizations that were influencing lab or government AI policies in the right ways, and continue to value Agent Foundations style and other off-paradigm technical research approaches. Use Your Local KnowledgeI believe that the best places to give are the places where you have local knowledge. If you know of people doing great work or who could do great work, based on your own information, then you can fund and provide social proof for what others cannot. The less legible to others the cause, the more excited you should be to step forward, if the cause is indeed legible to you. This keeps you grounded, helps others find the show (as Tyler Cowen says), is more likely to be counterfactual funding, and avoids information cascades or looking under streetlights for the keys. Most importantly it avoids adverse selection. The best legible opportunities for funding, the slam dunk choices? Those are probably getting funded. The legible things that are left are the ones that others didn’t sufficiently fund yet. If you know why others haven’t funded, because they don’t know about the opportunity? That’s a great trade. Unconditional Grants to Worthy Individuals Are GreatThe process of applying for grants, raising money, and justifying your existence sucks. A lot. It especially sucks for many of the creatives and nerds that do a lot of the best work. If you have to periodically go through this process, and are forced to continuously worry about making your work legible and how others will judge it, that will substantially hurt your true productivity. At best it is a constant distraction. By default, it is a severe warping effect. A version of this phenomenon is doing huge damage to academic science. As I noted in my AI updates, the reason this blog exists is that I received generous, essentially unconditional, anonymous support to ‘be a public intellectual’ and otherwise pursue whatever I think is best. My benefactors offer their opinions when we talk because I value their opinions, but they never try to influence my decisions, and I feel zero pressure to make my work legible in order to secure future funding. As for funding my non-Balsa work further, I am totally fine for money, but I could definitely find ways to put a larger budget to work, and shows of support are excellent for morale. If you have money to give, and you know individuals who should clearly be left to do whatever they think is best without worrying about raising money, then giving them unconditional grants is a great use of funds, including giving them ‘don’t worry about reasonable expenses’ levels of funding. This is especially true when combined with ‘retrospective funding,’ based on what they have already done. Not as unconditionally, it’s also great to fund specific actions and projects and so on that you see not happening purely through lack of money, especially when no one is asking you for money. Do Not Think Only On the Margin, and Also Use Decision TheoryResist the temptation to think purely on the margin, asking only what one more dollar can do. The incentives get perverse quickly, as organizations are rewarded for putting their highest impact activities in peril. Organizations that can ‘run lean’ or protect their core activities get punished. Also, you want to do some amount of retrospective funding. If people have done exceptional work in the past, you should be willing to give them a bunch more rope in the future, above and beyond the expected value of their new project. Don’t make everyone constantly reprove their cost effectiveness each year, or at least give them a break. If someone has earned your trust, then if this is the project they want to do next, presume they did so because of reasons, although you are free to disagree with those reasons. And the Nominees AreTime to talk about the organizations themselves. Rather than offer precise rankings, I divided by cause category and into three confidence levels. High confidence means I have enough information to be confident the organization is at least a good pick. Medium or low confidence means exactly that - I have less confidence that the choice is wise, and you should give more consideration to doing your own research.
Low confidence is still high praise, and very much a positive assessment! The majority of SFF applicants did not make the cut, and they had already undergone selection to get that far. If an organization is not listed, that does not mean I think they would be a bad pick - they could have asked not to be included, or I could be unaware of them or their value. I know how Bayesian evidence works, but this post is not intended as a knock on anyone, in any way. Some organizations that are not here would doubtless have been included, if I’d had more time. I try to give a sense of how much detailed investigation and verification I was able to complete, and what parts I have confidence in versus not. Again, my lack of confidence will often be purely about my lack of time to get that confidence. Indeed, unless I already knew them from elsewhere, assume no organizations here got as much attention as they deserve before you decide on what for you is a large donation. I’m tiering based on how I think about donations from you, from outside SFF. I think the regranting organizations were clearly wrong choices from within SFF, but are reasonable picks if you don’t want to do extensive research, especially if you are giving small. In terms of funding levels needed, I will similarly divide into three categories. They roughly mean this, to the best of my knowledge: Low: Could likely be fully funded with less than ~$250k. Medium: Could plausibly be fully funded with between ~$250k and ~$2 million. High: Could probably make good use of more than ~$2 million. These numbers may be obsolete by the time you read this. If you’re giving a large amount relative to what they might need, you might want to check with the organization first. A lot of organizations are scaling up rapidly, looking to spend far more money than they have in the past. Everyone seems eager to double their headcount. But I’m not putting people into the High category unless I am confident they can scalably absorb more funding (although some may have now already raised that funding, so again check on that to be sure). The person who I list as the leader of an organization will sometimes accidentally be whoever was in charge of fundraising rather than strictly the leader. Partly the reason for listing it is to give context and some of you can go ‘oh right, I know who that is,’ and the other reason is that all organization names are often highly confusing - adding the name of the organization’s leader allows you a safety check, to confirm that you are indeed pondering the same organization I am thinking of! Organizations that Are Literally MeThis is my post, so I get to list Balsa Research first. (I make the rules here.) If that’s not what you’re interested in, you can of course skip the section.
|