---
subject: "Why the US South Is Poorer than the North, and Why This Is Now Changing"
from: "Tomas Pueyo from Uncharted Territories <unchartedterritories@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-09-12 15:20:17
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tomas Pueyo", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_28238133486362596", "UNREAD"]
---
160 years after the end of the Civil War, the US South is more poor, sick, uneducated, mentally distressed, crime-prone, incarcerated, unemployed, religious, socially disconnected… Why? Is it a consequence of the Civil War, or something else? In the first article in this series, we saw how The Financial Legacy of the Climate Civil WarThe Legacy of the Pre-War EraFor decades, the North spent its capital building railroads, trains, canals, ships, machines, cities, industries… It automated farm work, which allowed laborers to leave the farm and go to the city, where they worked in industries and benefited from cities’ agglomeration effects: Indeed, cities generate more money per person than farmland. Meanwhile, the South invested all that capital in buying slaves.¹
So, very early on, the North and South diverged: The North developed an industrialized economy, while the South went down the path of a resource extraction economy (extracting value from slaves). A bit like a European vs a Caribbean economy. These trajectories take incredible amounts of time to curb, which is one reason why nearly every European country today is richer than nearly every Caribbean country. The Legacy of the Actual Civil WarThen, the War tore down the South, destroying what little industry it had. Between government spending, physical destruction, loss of human capital, decline in consumption, emancipation, and the effect on cotton prices, the Civil War was over Once it ended, all the capital locked into slaves vanished. Of course this was the right outcome: In effect, it meant ex-slaves would no longer be abused as much, and that they had to be paid fair wages. Financially though, it meant that the upfront, fixed capital to secure years of practically unpaid work² had vanished, and instead, workers had to be paid a monthly, variable amount. This also destroyed the profits of Southern plantations. Many became unprofitable and closed. This was beneficial in the long term, because more productive enterprises could take over the worst ones. But in the short term, it meant a financial shock for the South. When we looked at Instead, This was not the only way this aristocracy of landowners was maintained: By Prisoners (mostly Black) were de facto slaves, used as plantation workers. [Anti-enticement](https://substack.com/redirect/bbeb3594-56f6-4097-8575-1c619e5f127b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)laws prevented laborers from finding the best employer.The controlling Elite kept taxes low (they would have been the ones taxed) and thus didn’t invest in infrastructure for the region. [Jim Crow Laws](https://substack.com/redirect/11417a47-56de-4546-98bd-3622ffa580d9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)maintained[segregation](https://substack.com/redirect/5dcf0655-afdf-4c61-b2c1-386a5367a497?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)in the South, making access to services like healthcare or education nearly impossible for Blacks.
Unsurprisingly, Blacks eventually decided to leave. The Great MigrationMost Blacks remained in the South after the Civil War, as they didn’t have many options outside it, nor connections or savings to get them out. This changed in the early 20th century. WW1 was especially beneficial for Blacks in that it offered incredible professional opportunities: Lots of Northern workers had to support the war effort, through both the war industries and military service in Europe. European immigration dropped by [75%](https://substack.com/redirect/740789b9-518d-4d21-a5f3-8f06640aa69f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)between 1914 and 1915.
Wages in the North could be 2x those in the South, so Blacks moved there en masse. The Great Migration started around 1910 and lasted until the 1970s. The result is that the Black share of population in the South halved! This had several effects on the respective economies of North and South: The South’s economy shrunk proportionately to the number of Black people it lost. The North’s economy benefited from more workers. Most newcomers went to cities, where they were more productive than on farmland, thus further enriching the local economy.
So now, the South suffered, on top of everything else, a loss of population and workers. And as a result, wages had to rise to attract other workers, further compressing the profits of local companies and causing inflation. Of course, we should add to all these problems the endemic malaria, yellow fever, and hookworm we discussed in The result of all these factors was that the South’s economy stayed weak and small for decades after the Civil War. In summary, climate caused the economic divergence of North vs South, it caused the Civil War, it made the South lose the War, and for a century afterwards, the South was unable to reverse the resulting economic depression. Luckily, over the last few decades, it has. The South Catches Up...Keep reading with a 7-day free trialSubscribe to Uncharted Territories to keep reading this post and get 7 days of free access to the full post archives. A subscription gets you:
|