---
subject: "How to Get Lucky: The 4 Types of Luck"
from: "\"Sahil Bloom's Curiosity Chronicle\" <sahil@sahilbloom.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-01-18 14:12:35
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Sahil Bloom", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_1989028747625928812", "UNREAD"]
---
The 4 Types of Luckread and listen on read time 6 minutes Welcome to The Curiosity Chronicle, a weekly newsletter where I provide actionable ideas to help you build a high-performing, healthy, wealthy life. Today at a Glance:- The Oxford Languages English dictionary defines luck as "success or failure apparently brought by chance rather than through one's own actions."
- But all you need to do is perform a simple search of the phrase "quotes on luck" to reveal a great many perspectives that differ from this definition. Maybe there is more to luck than meets the eye. Perhaps it's possible, as these quotes suggest, to manufacture luck.
- The most valuable framework I've encountered for thinking about luck: The 4 Types of Luck. The 4 types of luck are (1) Blind Luck, (2) Luck from Motion, (3) Luck from Awareness, and (4) Luck from Uniqueness.
This newsletter is brought to you by Make better investment decisions, faster. If you are evaluating investment opportunities, then you know the process requires labor-intensive manual searching to sift through mountains of data to uncover insights. It can be a huge time suck, but those who do it best are able to sort quality signals from the noise at speed. Those investors use - Combining the power of on-demand expert calls with a 50k+ transcript library
- Has workflows to streamline research across company disclosures, management presentations, earnings calls and filings
- Over 4k company models & benchmarks with every KPI and comparison that matters
For a limited time, readers of Curiosity Chronicle can The 4 Types of LuckThe Oxford Languages English dictionary defines luck as "success or failure apparently brought by chance rather than through one's own actions." But all you need to do is perform a simple search of the phrase "quotes on luck" to reveal a great many perspectives that differ from this definition: "Diligence is the mother of good luck." - Benjamin Franklin "Luck is where opportunity meets preparation." - Seneca "Luck is a dividend of sweat. The more you sweat, the luckier you get." - Ray Kroc “Luck has nothing to do with it, because I have spent many, many hours, countless hours, on the court working for my one moment in time, not knowing when it would come.” - Serena Williams So maybe there is more to luck than meets the eye. Perhaps it's possible, as these quotes suggest, to manufacture luck. In today's piece, we will walk through the most valuable framework I've encountered for thinking about luck: The 4 Types of Luck. The 4 Types of LuckIn 1978, a neurologist named Dr. James Austin published a book entitled Chase, Chance, & Creativity: The Lucky Art of Novelty. In it, Dr. Austin proposed that there are four types of luck: - Blind Luck
- Luck from Motion
- Luck from Awareness
- Luck from Uniqueness
Here's how to think about each type: Type I: Blind Luck"The good luck that occurs is completely accidental. It is pure blind luck that comes with no effort on our part." Type I Luck is completely out of your control. It includes: - Where you are born
- Who you are born to
- Base circumstances of your life
- "Acts of God"
Type I Luck covers the truly random occurrences of the universe. Type I Example: You win the lottery. Type II: Luck from Motion"Something else has been added—motion...A certain [basic] level of action 'stirs up the pot', brings in random ideas that will collide and stick together in fresh combinations, lets chance operate." Type II luck is a result of your motion. You’re creating motion and collisions through hustle and energy that you are inserting into an ecosystem. Type II Luck is derived through the expansion of your luck surface area from simple movement. The increase in collisions opens you up to more lucky events. Type II Example: You start a new job and start saying yes to every opportunity that comes your way. You're working hard, running around, meeting new people, and connecting new connections whenever possible. You connect two of the people you met through taking on these opportunities and they start a business together and make you a small advisor because you connected them. It becomes a big business and you make $1 million. Your hustle and motion created this "lucky" event. Type III: Luck from Awareness"[Luck] presents only a faint clue, the potential opportunity exists, but it will be overlooked except by that one person uniquely equipped to observe it, visualize it conceptually, and fully grasp its significance. [Type III Luck] involves involves a special receptivity, discernment, and intuitive grasp of significance unique to one particular recipient." Type III Luck is a result of your awareness and depth of understanding of a specific domain. This depth of understanding within a given arena allows you to become very good at positioning yourself for lucky breaks to benefit you. The entrepreneur and investor Naval Ravikant summarized this type of luck beautifully: "You become very good at spotting luck." You can “spot luck” from a mile away because of your depth of knowledge and experience. Type III Example: You're an entrepreneur and you see the impressive pace at which generative AI is developing for creating images and art. You had been building around the NFT profile picture craze of 2021/22 and believe that generative AI profile pictures may represent a market with similar potential. You build a generative AI profile picture app and charge people to use it, making millions. Your mind was prepared for the "lucky" opportunity given your experience set. Type IV: Luck from Uniqueness"[Type IV Luck] comes to you, unsought, because of who you are and how you behave...the links of [Type] IV can be drawn together and fused only by one quixotic rider cantering in on his own homemade hobby horse to intercept the problem at an odd angle...[This type] favors those with distinctive, if not eccentric hobbies, personal lifestyles, and motor behaviors." Type IV Luck occurs when your unique set of attributes attracts specific luck to you. It actually seeks you out. Type IV Example: You've spent years tinkering with generative AI models (way before they were cocktail party fodder). Your unique passion and earned expertise means that you're often called on by founders and CEOs building at the forefront of AI, and you're able to earn equity in a variety of interesting projects that will likely return millions. Your unique and quirky hobby attracts luck to you. The Art & Science of LuckTypically, Type I, Type II, and Type III Luck will arrive in stages: - Type I dictates the early years of your life.
- Type II comes into play as you begin to hustle in your 20s.
- Type III sets in as you develop deep experience in your 30s and beyond.
Type IV is more dislocated from age dependency. To help remember this framework, here is a beautiful infographic you can reference in future. As a useful rule of thumb for your journey, always consider my Luck Razor: When choosing between two paths, always choose the path that has a larger luck surface area. Ask yourself: Which of the two paths is more likely to lead to me getting lucky? Act accordingly. Sahil's Recommendation ZoneNail your 2023 health goals with I get asked frequently, “What is the one supplement you can't live without?” My answer is always I started taking it in 2011 after spending time with the founder and have been hooked ever since. It replaced an entire cabinet of supplements for me in one daily scoop—seriously, its latest iteration covers a multivitamin, multi-mineral, prebiotics, probiotics, adaptogens, greens, and more. Today, Athletic Greens is offering Curiosity Chronicle subscribers an exclusive deal: Sahil’s Hiring ZoneTalent Collective There have been a lot of layoffs lately. But my talent collective currently has 40+ companies across the tech landscape who are actively hiring. If you’re open to hearing about new opportunities, apply to my Talent Collective and get introduced to over 40 of my favorite companies. You can join publicly or anonymously, and leave anytime. Completely free for candidates. Use the link If you’re hiring, request access to start meeting world class candidates open to new opportunities. I send out a new drop every two weeks. Learn more or request access Refer Friends, Earn Rewards!
If you enjoyed today's newsletter, please share it with your friends and family! If this email was forwarded to you, consider |