---
subject: "AI progress has plateaued at GPT-4 level"
from: "Erik Hoel <erikhoel@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-11-14 16:07:28
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Erik Hoel", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_2504961760700514996", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
According to inside reports, Orion (codename for the attempted GPT-5 release from OpenAI) is not significantly smarter than the existing GPT-4. Which likely means AI progress on baseline intelligence is plateauing. Here’s
If this were just a few hedged anonymous reports about “less improvement,” I honestly wouldn’t give it too much credence. But traditional funders and boosters like Marc Andreessen are also saying the models
I know that there is a huge amount of confusion, fear, and hope that creates a fog of war around this technology. It's a fog I've struggled to pierce myself. But I do think signs are increasingly pointing to the saturation of AI intelligence at below domain-expert human level. It’s false to say this is a failure, as some critics want to: if AI paused tomorrow, people would be figuring out applications for decades. But a stalling makes sense because, honestly, we haven’t yet gotten a model that feels significantly smarter than the original GPT-4 (released early 2023). Sure, there have been some advancement on the benchmarks, but there’s been no massive leap in real-world performance other than (a) an increase intelligence to at best an occasional “GPT-4.5ish” level, but not a GPT-5 one, (b) a useful decrease in hallucinations, and (c) a pleasing task-relevancy of responses (but we wait longer for them). How much this matters to users depends greatly on the task. E.g., metrics like the ranked persuasiveness of AI-generated political messages Here’s the successive increases in official performance on the flagship Massive Multitask Language Understanding benchmark (the MMLU is a bunch of hard tasks ranging from math to law). At first it looks impressive, but if you look close no model has made significant progress since early 2023. And we now know that models are often
One issue with discerning the truth here is that researchers who release the models aren’t unbiased scientists, so they don’t test on every single benchmark ever. They are more likely to choose benchmarks that show improvement in the announcement. But I’ve noticed online that private benchmarks often diverge from public ones. E.g., independent researchers and users were I think it’s likely that over the past year private benchmarks show more variable performance (e.g., not always going up across the models) compared to the public benchmarks everyone uses (this often In which case, it’s pretty meaningful news that models like Orion/GPT-5 are not improving universally across the tests like they used to. As a recent article in
Another sign of stalling is that, despite all the hype, companies like OpenAI are now regularly not releasing internal models to the public, almost certainly because they don’t work as well as the hype claims. For instance, the simple explanation for why OpenAI’s video-generating AI Sora isn’t publicly available—after nearly a year!—is because it sucks. If OpenAI did release Sora it would be met with mostly laughter and mocking. As I argued in “ In addition to keeping some models locked behind closed doors, recent deployed models, like GPT-4 Turbo or GPT-4o, are likely already-failed attempts at GPT-5, and have consistently been stuck at the same roughly “GPT-4.5ish” level (which is what Turbo and 4o and now 4o1 basically are). Many have speculated that the expectations are so high that OpenAI keeps renaming failed GPT-5 attempts as “GPT-4-whatever” to not expend the built-up hype (in fact, they may Why is this stalling out happening? The first hypothesis was given during the initial wave of criticism against deep learning: that these systems lack symbolic reasoning and therefore couldn’t ever “truly” reason. These objections have turned out to have far less teeth than predicted—e.g., Gary Marcus used to lean heavily on the idea that The second hypothesis behind the stall is one Of course, there’s still the question of whether or not synthetic data can get around this. But there are well-known downsides, like model collapse, and this seems the sort of obvious solution that I suspect the companies have been trying Why AI is stalling out is probably some combination of the two standard reasons. There was always some sketchiness to the degree of which deep learning was mimicking real human reasoning (but critics called “the wall” early by several orders of magnitude). And this sketchiness could be papered over, but only via huge amounts of data, which these companies have run out of. Perhaps we should not dwell too closely on the question of why it is that the sum of human civilization’s data fed into deep learning techniques plateaus at something smart—but not that smart—lest we see ourselves too clearly in the mirror. What to make then, of the claim that researchers have I think this new axis of scaling will matter far less than people expect and will not keep the train of improvements chugging along anywhere near the previous rate. First, this new type of scaling appears limited to certain domains: it makes the models no better on English language tasks or provides only minimal improvements for questions about biology, for instance. Second, there are good reasons to believe that this sort of scaling will be much more expensive: linear improvements for extreme sums of money. Here’s OpenAI’s chart on this new scaling law (shown only for a math benchmark, notably), released alongside their most-recent As tech journalist Garrison Lovely
But I think people focusing on price or the domain-specificity of improvements are missing the even bigger picture about this new supposed scaling law. For what I’m noticing is that the field of AI research appears to be reverting to what the mostly-stuck AI of the 70s, 80s, and 90s relied on: search. I don’t mean searching the web, rather, I mean examples like when this summer Google DeepMind
This sort of move makes sense, because search was the main advantage for AIs against humans for a very long time (e.g., in Chess, whereas Go cannot be brute-forced in a similar manner). But AI relying too much on search has been criticized before. In the infamous I think the return to search in AI is a bearish sign, at least for achieving AGI and superintelligence. This is for a very simple reason: search over a vast number of possibilities is not at all like human thought! Nor is it qualitatively the same as having one singularly smart big artificial neural network (like a big super brain). Rather, it is merely a coupling of the traditional superiority of computers—search over huge numbers of possibilities—with some sort of roughly-GPT-4.5ish-level intelligence that mainly just proposes and evaluates. In fact, the entire new axis of scaling touted by the companies to replace the old failing scaling laws is arguably just search given a makeover (Noam Brown, a foundational contributor to GPT-4o1,
People (both in the field, but also the writers for Reuter) are keen to describe this sort of thing in mentalese. Yet actually, both the leading avenues—“test time training” and “test-time compute”—look an awful lot to me like just fancy search! In “test-time training” the model rapidly adjusts its own parameters (like fine-tuning) in order to find the parameters best suited for that particular test. In other words, it searches over parameter space. In “test-time compute” there are hidden iterative refinement stages to the official output where multiple draft outputs are evaluated or averaged or voted on. Either way, these methods require more and more time and more and more resources in order to explore possibilities, and no matter how much search you do you’re still fundamentally bounded by the place you started, which is converging across models to some sort of roughly GPT-4.5ish level intelligence. Some version of search is what researchers are leaning on everywhere now; e.g., recent gains on the Continued improvements are going to happen, but if the post-GPT-4 gains in AI came mainly from adding first better prompts (chain-of-thought prompting) and now more recently the addition of search to the process (either over many potential outputs or over the model’s parameters itself) this is different than actually constructing baseline-smarter artificial neural networks. It indicates to me a return to the 70s, 80s, and 90s in AI. A mini thought experiment. Who do you think can make breakthroughs in physics? One Einstein or 1,000 physics undergraduates? Barring that none of the undergraduates just happens to be an Einstein-in-waiting, the answer is one Einstein. We already know that very large numbers of people are rarely as good as a dedicated small team or even a lone individual in terms of creativity, knowledge, and impact. These new scaling techniques are the creation of an algorithmic pipeline that gives better answers via “cloning” or “varying” an already-saturated-near-max intelligence. Does this new reliance on search-based techniques obviate all concerns about For the sake of human culture not being filled with unconscious AI slop, for the sake of our children being able to find meaning in their own expertise and abilities and intelligence, and for the sake of risk-blind primates who thought it a good idea to try to make entities more intelligent than themselves—I personally hope I'm right about a return to search being bearish. I can’t offer much more than that. You're currently a free subscriber to |