---
subject: "Robust Yet Fragile"
from: "Maxim Raginsky from The Art of the Realizable <realizable@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-02-07 03:34:56
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Maxim Raginsky", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3440436245007788095", "UNREAD"]
---
The Swedish control engineer Karl Åström famously called control One of the signatures of uncontrolled complexity is instability. When control engineers talk about instability, they refer to systems that can exhibit violent divergence from intended behavior and, once they enter this dangerous zone, are incredibly resistant to corrective control actions. Properly designed controls keep systems in their stable regions, but the sheer scale of possible dangers calls for Air traffic safetyAfter the horrific plane crash in DC, there was a renewed conversation about air traffic safety in general. So-called “near misses” seem to occur VaccinationVaccination is one of our most successful control technologies, explicitly designed for systems with potentially highly destructive unstable modes (epidemics and pandemics). Its efficacy derives both from feedback control that keeps the populations of pathogens in check and from network effects on the level of human populations that result in herd immunity. It certainly feels like highly infectious diseases, such as measles, mumps, chicken pox, or polio, are basically a thing of the past. The resulting reduction of complexity overlays on the general lack of awareness of the feedback loops needed to keep these diseases in check. The interplay of these two effects leads to complacency on the one hand and to vaccine skepticism on the other. The growing numbers of people choosing not to vaccinate their children even against measles and chicken pox threaten to upend the carefully maintained stable equilibrium state precisely because this stable equilibrium state has such low externally perceived complexity. Public administration and rationalityAs we speak, Elon Musk’s DOGE operatives are
That first sentence, “the power of rationality emerges mostly in the absence of confrontation and naked power makes rationality appear as a relatively fragile phenomenon,” is a crisp statement of the phenomenon noted by Åström in the context of the public sphere and its relation to power.¹ Rationality, understood in The Åström critiqueActors in socioeconomic systems are capable of reflecting on being controlled and acting as a result of this reflection. This can manifest itself in different ways. For example, the
A colorful (and currently relevant) example of the Lucas critique in action is about whether the government should keep investing in expensive protective measures for various facilities that had never been compromised in the past. However, if this investment is eliminated, then the facts on the ground will change, and a security violation may occur thus invalidating the predictive model. The Åström critique, if I may call it that, points to a related but different phenomenon. Applied to sociotechnical contexts, it describes the state of affairs where the agents in a system are so inured to the complexity-reducing function of control that they become completely oblivious both to the dangers of uncontrolled complexity and to the ever-present need for control mechanisms to keep this complexity at bay. Like the Lucas critique, the Åström critique is also a story about microfoundations, but here the individuals or institutions alter their behavior not because of a perceived change in policy, but because of a perceived absence of complexity. Because the control mechanisms have been working as intended, the participants in the system may begin acting as if the controls were not there at all. If this keeps going, we may one day forget what these controls were in the first place and how to implement them. This is our Weberian moment, the rationality must be secured. 1 Thanks to Adam Elkus for making me aware of Flyvbjerg’s article in a Bluesky thread. The Art of the Realizable is free today. But if you enjoyed this post, you can tell The Art of the Realizable that their writing is valuable by pledging a future subscription. You won't be charged unless they enable payments. |