---
subject: "The unbearable lightness of being in a new place"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-09-10 03:32:41
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
Moving to a new city isn’t anything like in the movies. You don’t just casually bump into your new best friend or, in my case, find a “chaddi buddy” or soul sister in your roommate. I had to come to terms with the fact that as amazing as I thought myself to be (I promise I’m not as narcissistic as I sound), no one is going to catapult out of thin air and make it all better.
It’s been a little over two months since I moved from Mumbai to Bangalore, but I’ve slowly started to grasp these facts: a) Making new friends is very hard; b) You can’t survive without money in this economy; and c) Did I mention that it’s pretty damn hard making new friends?
So I’m doing what a newbie in town does: go out to popular places, check out cafes and bookstores, and, most importantly, come to terms with the idea of spending time alone. It’s not all that bad, I’m actually making progress. Baby steps.
This week’s stories at The Ken were all about exploring newer avenues and pushing past the status quo.
On Monday, Rounak wrote about [credit-card whizzes](https://the-ken.com/story/credit-card-whizzes-outsmart-banks-at-their-own-game/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) or cheaters who have smartly created a system of exploiting reward points provided by banks. It’s a racket funnelled through WhatsApp, Telegram, and Discord channels, using a loophole that banks are unable to fix swiftly.
On Tuesday, Anand had a story on why [Stable Money](https://the-ken.com/story/this-fintech-aims-to-sail-where-google-pay-sank/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) thinks Fixed Deposits (FD) are the shiniest investment vehicles on the block and how it has a plan to make it bigger and better. But before you go all out to don the investor hat, I highly recommend you check out his entire counterthesis with Sourabh Jain to understand its plans to soar where Google Pay plummeted.
It might seem like all edtech equations are resulting in awry results (coughs *Byjus*), but as Alifiya found in Wednesday’s story, [Cuemath](https://the-ken.com/story/hard-selling-was-edtechs-undoing-cuemath-has-the-opposite-problem/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) has decided to use a completely different formula by prioritising tutoring over aggressive sales tactics. Tutor-founder-CEO Manan Khurma isn’t walking the tried-and-overly-tested road with his $400M-worth company, but rather, after considerable “thinking and learning”, he’s bringing all his employees with him to the drawing board.
If you frequently travel via domestic airlines, then Anushka’s story on Thursday will be a relatable journey of sorts. [Digiyatra](https://the-ken.com/story/what-airports-really-want-to-do-with-digiyatra/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter), the government initiative pegged as the “Future of Air Travel”, has problems in taking off. Passengers are being hounded, scratch that, more like coerced by airport employees in paparazzi fashion. And it’s not picture-worthy. The prospect of streamlining airport travel through a biometric-entry system has more hurdles than what meets the eye.
On Friday, Shaswata had an interesting story about [Legalpay](https://the-ken.com/story/legalpay-funds-corporate-showdowns-but-who-wins/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) and its business of funding corporate showdowns. Think the American legal drama Suits and if Pearson Specter—the fictional corporate law firm—funded the legal cases they took on. Legalpay meticulously selects cases with an acceptance rate of only 5%. The company is building a presence and trying to master the art of third-party litigation while, on the other hand, aiming to make it big with legal funding in India.
That’s all for this week. Please feel free to write back to me about your experience of moving to a new city. If there’s anything that worked out for you, do send those tips along my way.
Have a fulfilling weekend!
Regards,
Nuha Bubere
[nuha@the-ken.com](mailto:nuha@the-ken.com)
What you just read is the personalised daily introduction to The Ken's story. Written by a different person each day. Often insightful, sometimes witty, and very rarely boring. Someone sent this to you? [Sign up for free](https://the-ken.com/?modal=register&utm_source=footer&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=morning_email_ind_recap). [Dont like these? You can unsubscribe](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/unsubscribe/?user_id=2349339&data=o6ozak5YZpw_f7dUFWHX9m7GcaeuvMw6ZcjcwlRckK5oMDAwdTAwMPIOzDi5PNKPiZ_urFRdWdM8DUOLlPkso-7WcFECl6P5iPHXJm1aQi0T2sR9k0J9S5mG9sZXQZaY4mcTXursgEnRroh5E_saa0Y6fZPQsCEnCBRmYttM6L4WGXvujmVy4D-kIwIx1tS0ABherWdxIR_9cxAaU7b9xKd2EkZ5a5OQJKEPnMBkJST-2BE7UuiZCepHohdvnbvFaffiNl8aFCHL1JFj-OfgziKD5S8gQD5pEKTPzcUPPr-4V0w4WAzMbAvA4BLvl9vqaAEk7WPQ3pJfDeIPxGyJIZiwCwxllOLLiCIKt-qKpLgWW4l53BeYYH2NxFWkBNzZAdbax69LJhAyIl3d34EF-oy6w15RQsi2W6P-EuKl4XVVKqTm2XDv3bc-WHzdqCqCMhhkiZP6gMnj855jd6stcspy_qi7zLSFXE_itvoX-6nGX_6D-S7wNPZRtBTwsaUKeIfMF4Tdi9E8svle0MFo9KEmvJSsK4mz7xHhTYCIiCksmX8oBoiE1CfGx8SQkCKZek_YP4rtqLA=) Dont want to hear from us again? [ Unsubscribe from our emails here](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/?user_id=2349339&data=cmtBYeb6EV8V0UG8jmYWODqaB_hFA2Cxaa0fli9DP3FoMDAwdTAwMEzna_cIEzOjfUHQth2RJrRuFO-h5U1Reyo7ENC8cuMP0Pfog3VVXM9fUuSd9OOmB0nQijv9HQ5WgCcQjr0kMiPqHplCC6D3yiTR-mulHI7OxgDci8h17C0POZS30yi57SEPGUAv9mpdhC4fCeLmT_eY98b1B_tqQ5SNOJji1noDXNEC8XS735ZeIBQo-8xr9qE2qaYh2Dlfiub8X78FosvzUSYQ9zCCG33MaCyPMjsCTMRMQ2CT8DiAOEf5cYsXtpM99TIWDo2nOJ6lBOlksrorvHKfy59GK7O5ivDLDRoJFxEviFPLJ5W_TyZwXCyQSwRkTh6W9q1rzhW-AJTZXVgMEBtO0FXCM6ZN0PiT6QJ5MtrFm1aIH6pPsPPU7dWXwA18K0cbFXccdVjP7RNsv6VhAJscJ0DbO8NVLESnP8Ia8lZZ66fyKMOEQzxSUItl_GSJbIR8VspNH0DerdMLNxfRT8xHkJlk5GG2leQfT6I5dl7CdsIRqKqBUBvdco6hbQ==).
Something wrong? Tell us at [support@the-ken.com](mailto:support@the-ken.com)