---
subject: "how to build with tokens; news you can use; latest trends"
from: "web3 letter from a16zcrypto <a16zcrypto@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-08-10 15:01:33
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "a16zcrypto"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_2535365729249697677"]
---
🛠️💪 Your guide to tokens: How to design, launch, structure rights in term sheets, and moreTokens are the technology So in this special series of posts continuing our We also share how to structure deals involving token rights and restrictions — including especially how to 🌍⚡ Spotlight: Where innovation happensWhere do entrepreneurs and startups — and with that, economic growth — thrive? In a special episode of our web3 with a16z podcast, we cover innovation ecosystems at both a structural and individual talent level. We cover what does and doesn’t work when it comes to top-down government involvement and bottom-up community. We explore when is the best time to intervene in entrepreneurial talent; the nature of ambition, yearning, and finding one’s path; and more broadly, mindsets for navigating risk/reward and dynamism in different regions including London and Europe. We also discuss new ways of funding breakthrough R&D at a national level, tech trends of interest including crypto, and much more. Our special guest is Matthew Clifford, the co-founder and Chair of Entrepreneur First and also the Chair of the UK’s Advanced Research and Invention Agency (ARIA). Matt was also the Prime Minister’s representative for the AI Safety Summit; and was recently
see also: [How embracing new tech policy can propel UK forward](https://substack.com/redirect/201d397c-8197-4d25-846d-ff149129a235?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)by[Anthony Albanese](https://substack.com/redirect/059d853e-622c-4980-bf38-22f0dcf7eda1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[Writeup on our most recent crypto startup accelerator Demo Day in London](https://substack.com/redirect/f3c39182-9e9c-40f8-a614-b58507d7444f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)
📰🪪 News you can use: digitizing the DMVCalifornia is a global leader in technology innovation, and the fifth largest economy in the world (according to the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis). Now, the state is integrating blockchain into its government operations — including with its Department of Vehicles (DMV). Just a couple weeks ago, it was On a related note, the state’s DMV has also 📝📄 Latest in research: reasoning about the risks of restakingUnder what conditions can validators be safely reused across multiple services? A new paper by Naveen Durvasula and Tim Roughgarden (Head of Research at a16z crypto and Professor in the Computer Science Department at Columbia University) offers a framework to reason about the risks of restaking. The paper answers when a restaking network is “robustly secure” — that is, a small shock (like a bug causing slashing and the sudden loss of stake) won’t cause a catastrophic attack. The authors characterize the robust security of a restaking network as a function of the buffer between the costs and profits from attacks. They also provide local analogs of these overcollateralization conditions and robust security guarantees that apply specifically for a target service or coalition of services. Finally, the authors bound the maximum possible length of a cascade of attacks. The findings suggest measures of robustness that could be exposed to the participants in a restaking protocol.
🔆🌐 Trend resource: decentralized energyA couple years ago, we In recent years, we have indeed seen broader deployment of distributed energy resources — like solar panels, battery powerwalls, smart thermostats, and other connected devices — which can reduce load (or supply power during peaks) to the energy grid. But these sources are often individual households or businesses that don’t have a clear incentive to provide support when needed. Solving this collective action problem would be invaluable for our energy grid. There is also a large untapped market for better information about such connected devices at the edge of the grid — since energy utilities still have little visibility into these resources, and it takes too long for them to aggregate the information. This is where a For those interested in learning more about the topic of decentralized energy, a16z crypto’s Guy Wuollet has put together a list of books, articles, podcasts, reports, and code so others can also explore this complex topic. Whether it’s to learn more about other kinds of networks — or because you’re interested in atoms not just bits — there’s something in here for anyone who is curious about infrastructure.
You’re receiving this newsletter because you signed up for it on our websites, at an event, or elsewhere (you can opt out any time using the ‘unsubscribe’ link below). This newsletter is provided for informational purposes only, and should NOT be relied upon as legal, business, investment, or tax advice. Furthermore, the content is not directed at nor intended for use by any investors or prospective investors in any a16z funds. Please see a16z.com/disclosures for additional important details, including link to list of investments. subscribe to our podcast ' |