---
subject: "Seeming Like a State"
from: "Maxim Raginsky from The Art of the Realizable <realizable@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-11-15 22:58:00
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Maxim Raginsky", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_3440436245007788095", "UNREAD"]
---
The tragedy of Ireneo Funes, the subject of Borges’ short story We take our ability to form and remember compressed summaries of the past for granted. Yet it is precisely the ability that underlies the concept of state in systems theory. The history of this idea is interesting in its own right. It was present in Turing’s 1936 paper on computable numbers (his machines had internal states that, together with the contents of the tape and the position of the read/write head, determined their behavior). Shannon, in his 1948 paper that introduced information theory, formalized the operation of encoders and decoders in communication systems using the idea of a discrete transducer, i.e., a finite-state automaton whose internal state was determined by the incoming stream of input symbols and would, together with the input, determine the outgoing stream of output symbols. Although Shannon did not cite Turing in 1948, he had an article on the relative capabilities of deterministic and probabilistic Turing machines in Automata Studies, which he edited in 1956 together with John McCarthy. In addition to Shannon and McCarthy themselves, the list of contributors was a who’s-who in the theory of automata and computation (Davis, Kleene, Minsky, Moore, von Neumann) and cybernetics (Ashby, Culbertson, McKay, Uttley), so the idea of state as encapsulation of system memory was already in the air. When The concept of state from the rationalist perspectiveMost of the early works that invoked the idea of state as the encapsulation of system memory were motivated either by introspection or by practical engineering experience. As an example of introspection, take Turing’s 1936 paper. He was interested in Hilbert’s Entscheidungsproblem, the question of whether there exists a mechanical procedure for solving every mathematical problem, provided it is expressed in a suitable formal language. Turing’s answer in the negative was based on abstracting the thought process of a mathematician into such a mechanical procecdure. This led to the idea of the internal state, e.g., for storing intermediate results of a computation. Shannon’s idea of the finite-state transducer, on the other hand, was most likely inspired by his extensive experience with modeling, building, debugging, and operating computing machines, from Vannevar Bush’s The concept of state from the empiricist perspectiveOn the other hand, one can take a complementary, externalist perspective: Suppose we could observe the operation of a Turing machine from the outside. Suppose we could only keep track of the contents of its tape and the motion of its read/write head. Could we then reconstruct the state of the Turing machine based on such sense data? We could even take a skeptical, Humean tack and ask how we could even be sure in the first place that the device scurrying to and fro along the tape is built internally like a Turing machine instead of just memorizing everything it had seen so far, Funes-style. Unlike the above rationalist concept of state, which was firmly tied to system building from first principles, this is an empiricist perspective linked to system modeling from data. Viewed from this angle, the state is any attribute of the system which, in conjunction with the current input, is sufficient for determining the future output. In systems theory this idea is known as Nerode equivalence, after Interestingly,
Ashby’s book came out in 1956, just like Nerode’s paper. By the end of the 1960s, control theorists were broadly aware of Nerode equivalence and its relation to their formulation of state-space systems. Researchers like Michael Arbib (who eventually switched from control theory to neuroscience) started speaking of the The state as an abstractionNow we see, either from the formal definition of Nerode equivalence or from Ashby’s vivid example, that the state is often an abstraction which may be useful for the purposes of modeling or prediction, but not necessarily internally instaniated in that particular system. Jan Willems, in his The realization problemThe problem of constructing a state-space description of a system based on an input-output description is known as the These ideas are relevant in the context of large language models. Unlike recurrent neural nets, LLMs based on the transformer architecture do not have an internal state which is updated recursively. On the other hand, since LLMs are autoregressive models, the contents of their finite context window together with the next generated token can be thought of as a state. However, given GPT-4 context lengths of 10k to 100k tokens and the statistical regularities of natural language, this state representation is highly unlikely to be minimal. It would be very interesting to see what form the Nerode equivalence classes take in LLMs and what they tell us about the internal architecture of language. The Art of the Realizable is free today. But if you enjoyed this post, you can tell The Art of the Realizable that their writing is valuable by pledging a future subscription. You won't be charged unless they enable payments. |