---
subject: "From the comments"
from: "Marginal REVOLUTION <donotreply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-09-20 04:27:44
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tyler Cowen", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2466199532210586699", "UNREAD"]
---
I am a high school teacher. As this study finds, banning phones hurts our best students. Unlike Tyler, I do have a problem with these policies. Studies like this dont even measure the ways that phones help our best students the most: they allow students to access real teachers, better teachers, sources of knowledge and learning that are beyond what they are stuck with in our public schools. There are many actions we could take that would boost grades. We could adopt singapore's culture or the Japanese juku system. We could become as draconian as you like to boost grades for low-performing students. But to what end? Maybe there is one Peter Scholze who could boost his early learning by 5 pct, even 100 or more pct depending on what schhol he is in, with a phone. Is banning it from him worth boosting the algebra 1 scores of 20,000 future real estate salesman by 3 percent? Phones are new. Teachers have no idea how to use them. They are devices that contain the entire world's knowledge and kids want to use them - and we are banning them? Any teacher who wants to ban phones is taking the easy way out.
That is [from Frank](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=5eda606972229d748a73be21751164cc3b134cacaf6d65923881d524a38b45c6&blog_id=42693868&post_id=91477&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=65d7074155f5452b755da2dd144de12c&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly9tYXJnaW5hbHJldm9sdXRpb24uY29tL21hcmdpbmFscmV2b2x1dGlvbi8yMDI1LzA5L2EtbmV3LXJjdC1vbi1iYW5uaW5nLXNtYXJ0cGhvbmVzLWluLXRoZS1jbGFzc3Jvb20uaHRtbCNjb21tZW50cw=&email_id=8a0765e839c3b69def73ad93b06b9476). A broader but related point is that a school without smartphones probably cannot teach its students AI -- one of the most useful things for a person to learn nowadays. As Frank indicates, you should be very suspicious that the smart phone banners take absolutely no interest in measuring their possible benefits. We economists call it cost-benefit analysis. If you wish to argue the costs are higher than the benefits, fine, that can be debated. If you are not trying to measure the benefits, I say you are not trying to do science or to approach the problem objectively.
And [from a later post](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=89eebfdc8083cafdf76ba1e85225e21c19b2ec5c6d0bd4d41f9b1afd53aa0d69&blog_id=42693868&post_id=91477&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=2db16dcecbd09942e7896ed79658115b&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly9tYXJnaW5hbHJldm9sdXRpb24uY29tL21hcmdpbmFscmV2b2x1dGlvbi8yMDI1LzA5L3R1ZXNkYXktYXNzb3J0ZWQtbGlua3MtNTM0Lmh0bWwjY29tbWVudHM&email_id=8a0765e839c3b69def73ad93b06b9476), again Frank:
asdf wrote: