---
subject: "The Microdosing Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-09-21 09:25:56
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
One from the archives today. Back tomorrow. -Colin (CJN) Joseph Dana (JD) is a longstanding friend of WITI and a South Africa-based writer. He is the senior editor at Joseph here. Microdosing psychedelics such as magic mushrooms and LSD has been One remarkable aspect of the microdosing boom is how difficult it is to find My relationship with microdosing used to be ambivalent. In South Africa, microdosing is popular among the health food and yoga crowd, so I associated it with something you might do between activated charcoal juices and raw cacao smoothies. But it’s moved far beyond this crowd. I recently discovered that many friends and family have been microdosing for years with excellent results. My path to microdosing came after I embarked on a so-called psilocybin journey. The experience entails consuming a “hero’s dose” of 5 grams of dried magic mushrooms alone or with a guide, in a quiet setting, usually wearing a blindfold. Such a journey provokes deep introspection and, in my case, deep emotional healing. Strangely enough, this journey was my only experience with psychedelics of any kind, and it was life-changing. I detailed the trip in Having experienced a profound connection with the plant’s consciousness while on my journey, I began to think that microdosing could hold great value for me. I understand that it might sound crazy to say that I have connected with a plant, but it’s the only way to describe my journey. This connection made me think about microdosing differently. It’s as if the plant and I have gotten to know each other and can work together going forward. Why is this interesting? After the journey, I took the plunge into microdosing, and my results have been fantastic. I have been following the rough guideline of the The challenge with microdosing is finding what dose and frequency work for you. I started with a small dose and gradually increased it until I found something that worked. This isn’t regular pharmaceutical medicine; there is no doctor who I can call to help with these variables. Thus, a certain amount of self-guidance is required, which might turn off a large number of potential microdosers. That being said, I’m not totally on my own. The guide who assisted on my journey has helped me through the initial stages of microdosing. There are other mushroom guides focused specifically on microdosing and offer professional services, mostly on WhatsApp. As society opens itself up to the power of these medicines to transform mental health, we need to figure out a way to tap into the knowledge and experience of these guides. This is easier said than done. By and large, guides operate in the shadows because the substances they work with are often still illicit. Finding a guide for A reckoning of sorts is bound to occur as the industry formalizes and more medical professionals begin prescribing psychedelic treatments. Microdosing might not be for everyone, but it's a powerful treatment for depression and general malaise when used wisely. (JD) — WITI x McKinsey: An ongoing partnership where we highlight interesting McKinsey research, writing, and data. How industrial technology is creating a more inclusive economy. McKinsey reveals 35 cutting-edge companies in the industrial tech sector, highlighting a robust “titanium economy” that creates American jobs and fuels innovation. They’re some of the fastest-growing and most profitable in the US. — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Joseph (JD) —
You’re a free subscriber to |