---
subject: "Inciting Incident: Love or hate Gen Z, you still have to learn to work with them"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-11-01 10:32:12
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
Inciting Incident
Fri, 01 Nov 24
Inciting Incident is our weekly newsletter about the most powerful tool of our age—stories. Stories told by businesses, leaders, governments..
Good Evening Ishan,
It’s Mishka this week for Inciting Incident, and I am an intern with The Ken’s learning vertical.
Festivals are occasions where entire families, not just in India but all over the world, come together to celebrate—probably the only times during the year that multiple generations spend time in a single room these days. And I wanted to use this Deepavali to talk about the emerging disconnect between Gen Z and older generations.
This isn’t something that’s only confined to family dining rooms; in fact, it’s a ‘problem’ that several business leaders who’ve enrolled in [The Ken’s Narrative Thinking Programme](https://the-ken.com/learning/) have brought up during our workshops. They want to find a way to connect with the future leaders of their companies, mentor them, and even learn from them. But apparently, that’s neither easy nor straightforward.
This may seem too simple an assessment, but in my view, this is a classic problem. If you think of organisations and leaders as storytellers, then their Gen Z colleagues are a section of the audience they’re struggling to connect with. The solution to this, as with any other similar disconnect, is to first listen.
For organisations mulling their futures, this is becoming an increasingly urgent matter. [Estimates now say](https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/mckinsey-explainers/what-is-gen-z) that Gen Z-ers will make up a quarter of the population of the Asia-Pacific region by 2025. So no matter what you feel about my generation (and yes, I’m a Gen Z-er myself), it is imperative to understand where we are coming from, and what we want and need.
And meeting these needs and expectations is particularly important for a country like India.
The youth dividend widely considered to become India’s most powerful springboard to dive into “developed” territory looks more and more now like a trampoline on which policy experts and government mavens do an annual ritual dance. According to projections, by 2041 almost 59 per cent of India’s population will be of working age, among the highest such ratios in the world. Such a youth bulge comes but once in the lifetime of a growing nation and, if exploited to its fullest, can not only mean a prodigious working population churning out goods and services for the world, but also an equally large market with a high disposable income. The next decade, therefore, is crucial. But data for 2024 shows that unemployment in the 20-24 age group is at a high 45 per cent. The bigger cause for worry—what the economist Sujoy Chakravarty calls a “sinister trend”—is that employment numbers are falling as academic qualifications increase.
How India squanders its demographic dividend, [Frontline Magazine](https://frontline.thehindu.com/economy/india-must-tap-demographic-dividend-gen-z-needs-jobs-youth-population/article68746930.ece)
Much of the reportage on the divide between Gen Z and older generations, across major international publications, shows a pretty strong common thread running through most of these conflicts: Gen Z are questioning one of the basic tenets of capitalism. To quote Adam Smith, Scottish economist, philosopher, and a person rather famously dubbed the father of capitalism: “It is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, or the baker, that we expect our dinner, but from their regard to their own interest”.
But it is becoming increasingly apparent that, for Gen Z, transactional self-interest is just not enough.
Let me quote a BBC [report](https://www.bbc.com/worklife/article/20240307-gen-z-casual-workplace-language) from March, which talks about how Gen Z’s “laid-back” language is leading to workplace friction because older colleagues define professionalism in comparatively more rigid ways.
Older generations have nearly always looked down on younger ones, often arguing they are weaker, less serious or less prepared – especially at work. But experts say the current clash over Gen Z’s work language extends beyond standard-issue generational divides. Instead, it’s emblematic of how much life and work have changed throughout the past several years—and a harbinger of things to come.
Not all employers are tolerating Gen Z’s laid-back language, [BBC](https://www.bbc.com/worklife/article/20240307-gen-z-casual-workplace-language)
The story goes deeper into why Gen Z wants their work and personal identities to be one and the same. In short, it says it may be because we started entering colleges and workplaces during the pandemic, when the lines had begun to blur between ‘work’ and ‘home’. Now, with work from home being a fixture in many situations, the lines separating the two are no longer apparent. This, and other factors, have fundamentally affected the way my generation experiences life and the world around them.
Earlier this year, The Atlantic wrote about how the challenges that 20-somethings face are unique, and perhaps larger in scope than older generations. The [article](https://www.theatlantic.com/family/archive/2024/08/young-adult-mental-health-crisis/679601/) focuses on the US, but some of these findings are universally applicable.
So perhaps you’d be surprised to hear the results of a Harvard Graduate School of Education survey on mental health in America: Young adults are the ones most in crisis. Even Richard Weissbourd, who led the study in 2022, was taken aback. His team found that 36 percent of participants ages 18 to 25 reported experiencing anxiety and 29 percent reported experiencing depression—about double the proportion of 14-to-17-year-olds on each measure. More than half of young adults were worried about money, felt that the pressure to achieve hurt their mental health, and believed that their lives lacked meaning or purpose.
[…]
The phase between adolescence and adulthood has long been daunting: You’re expected to figure out who you are, to create a life for yourself. That might sound exciting, as if all the doors are wide open, but much of the time it’s stressful—and modern challenges are making it harder. Young adults are more vulnerable than ever, but much of American society doesn’t see them that way.
The social, emotional, and even financial challenges that Gen Z face globally have changed what we need from the workplace. It is now as much about work-life balance, gender equity, and [our employers actually caring](https://www.livemint.com/news/business-of-life/the-companies-gen-z-swipes-right-on-11584370278224.html) about lowering their carbon footprints as it is about the salary. Toxicity and stress are clearly negative attributes.
Gen Z also expects more involvement from workplaces—here’s a list of wants featured in a recent [Entrepreneur](https://www.entrepreneur.com/leadership/are-you-giving-gen-z-what-they-want-from-their-employers/475250) magazine article:
-Establish a dedicated learning and development program.
-Pair up new hires with a peer.
-Assign a senior mentor.
-Set up a 90-day feedback session.
-Create opportunities to acclimate to company culture, whether you’re in-person, hybrid or remote.
And yes, this generation is also willing to quit jobs and look for new opportunities as many times as feels right—88% of Gen Z-ers [considered](https://www.indiatoday.in/magazine/trends/story/20240408-gen-z-working-on-their-own-terms-2520768-2024-03-29) a job switch in 2023, according to a Linkedin survey. But make no mistake, even if this is a generation that cares about travel, fitness, and personal improvement, it is also one that’s very [focussed](https://indianexpress.com/article/jobs/gen-z-devoting-1-hour-in-a-week-to-upskilling-for-career-growth-udemy-report-9621099/) on advancing careers. Especially in India.
As per insights from the 2024 Instagram Trend Talk by Meta-owned Instagram, a significant 43% of Gen Z individuals in India are poised for a self-improvement era, dedicated to personal growth and development. Corroborating this trend, a recent report from LinkedIn indicates that in India, Gen Z workers are 1.3 times more inclined than Gen X to aspire to acquire AI skills, and a notable 2.4 times more likely than Baby Boomers. Furthermore, Gen Zers are actively engaging in learning digital skills encompassing Programming Languages, Cloud Computing, and Data Analysis.
Indian Gen Z aims to enter the ‘career-oriented’ era in 2024, says Instagram’s data, [CNBC-TV18](https://www.cnbctv18.com/education/indian-gen-z-aims-to-enter-the-career-oriented-era-in-2024-says-instagrams-data-18492651.htm)
So what do employers do?
Some, like the ones mentioned in the BBC story on workplace language, are [choosing](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/tech/information-tech/top-two-tech-firms-shed-gen-z-flab-gain-silver-muscle/articleshow/110238724.cms?from=mdr) to either fire, or not even hire, Gen Z employees who do not fit inside traditional work culture norms.
Last month, I met my friend for coffee, where I was introduced to a popular term used in the world of HR: frequent applier. My friend, let’s call her Joy, is the head of hiring at a DC-based consulting firm where she often receives resumes from “frequent appliers,” or applicants who’ve held multiple jobs over a short span of time and apply to a series of new roles in rapid succession. This practice is more commonly known as job hopping. “We tend to give frequent appliers less consideration than candidates who have been in the same roles for decades,” she told me. “Job hopping demonstrates disloyalty at work.” This sentiment was shared by the CEO of a Chicago-based recruiting firm, who recently told The New York Times, “Employers start to question the candidate’s decision-making ability and judgment.”
How to Explain Job Hopping in an Interview, [Harvard Business Review](https://hbr.org/2024/09/how-to-explain-job-hopping-in-an-interview)
Others, of course, are consciously and deliberately evolving their workplace policies and culture to become more inclusive, as articles like [this one](https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/business/india-business/gen-z-effect-companies-gamify-employee-rewards/articleshow/112359353.cms) have documented this year.
That’s a wrap for this week. Please let me know what you think about this newsletter. Write to me at [inciting-incident@the-ken.com](mailto:inciting-incident@the-ken.com), and we’ll be back in your inbox at 4 pm India time next Friday.
Have a nice weekend!
Yours,
Mishka Garg
P.S: You can apply to enrol your team in a Storytelling Workshop by The Ken [here](https://the-ken.com/learning/).