---
subject: "The Monday Media Diet with Lauren Sherman"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-11-27 17:02:54
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Lauren Sherman (LS) is a friend of WITI and the best reporter around on the fashion beat. We’re happy to have her with us. Have a great week. -Colin (CJN) Tell us about yourself. I’m a reporter. I write a Describe your media diet. News: Because I live in LA, I usually scan the fashion trades (WWD and BoF only, sorry Vogue biz) right before I go to bed to make sure there’s not any big news that I didn’t know about. Public radio in the morning. KPCC (now called LAist…) in Los Angeles. WNYC in New York. BBC World in Paris or London. Marketplace Morning Report, always. I used to get most of my news from Twitter, but obviously that’s not as easy as it used to be. I get all the breaking emails from the New York Times and Page Six. Zero televised news. I also subscribe to the LA Times, Washington Post, and SF Chronicle. Print: NYmag (like everyone, I used to read it with more regularity; also it arrives several weeks late in LA, but it’s still a superior product), The New Yorker, Garden and Gun, The Gentlewoman, Konfekt (with reservations; it’s too homogenous, even for a bourgeoisie white girl like me). I do read a good amount of Vogue and GQ, but almost exclusively online. Newsletters: Everything from Style and shopping newsletters: Youtube: I watch tons of cooking segments to relax, mostly ex-Bon Appetit people—Alison Roman, Molly Baz, Carla Lalli Music, Claire Saffitz—but I also love NYT Cooking’s Eric Kim, Yewande Komolafe, and Vaughn Vreeland. Podcasts: I have almost zero desire to listen to anything about fashion. I pop in weekly to: A Thing or Two, Jam Session, The Big Picture, Poog. Occasionally: Marc Maron, The Rewatchables, How Long Gone. I’m really enjoying the new Critics at Large podcast from the New Yorker. For narrative, I loved The Girlfriends. For interviews, I sometimes dip into Print is Dead. (Recommend the Adam Moss episode.) What’s the last great book you read? Fierce Attachments by Vivian Gornick. (Suggested to me by the smart writer Mattie Kahn.) What are you reading now? I have about five books on my side table right now. I’m about halfway through Martin Amis’ London Fields, Unscripted by James B Stewart and Rachel Abrams, and Murakami’s Novelist as a Vocation. I will probably finish London Fields only, but trying to stay positive. What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication? I tend to go super, super quickly through the entire thing just to see what I have to work with and then I read the smaller, more digestible bits before diving into a bigger item. Unless, of course it’s a must-read like that Gagosian piece the New Yorker, which I half-read and half-listened to the audio just to be able to get through it as quickly as possible. Who should everyone be reading that they’re not? Plenty of people are reading her, but I don’t think you can undersell Amanda Mull at The Atlantic. What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone? None at the moment. I used to love Exit Strategy. Plane or train? Train to the airport. What is one place everyone should visit? Bell’s in Los Alamos. Best restaurant in America! Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into. I don’t really have time for rabbit holes. My entire job is going down rabbit holes. But I am constantly on the hunt for stenographers’ notebooks that are not gregg ruled. (Meaning they don’t have a line down the center.) I like a reporter’s notebook just fine, but they’re very narrow. I used to buy Life’s college-ruled stenographers’ notebooks in bulk, but I can’t find them anywhere now; they only sell the gregg-ruled or grid version now. If you know of a stenographers’ notebook that is not gregg-ruled, call me. (LS) — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Lauren (LS) —
You're currently a free subscriber to |