---
subject: "Apple's 3D printing ⌚, blackhat ChatGPT alternative 🎩, prompt engineering for devs 👨‍💻"
from: "TLDR <dan@tldrnewsletter.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-07-18 10:17:43
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "TLDR"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "Label_795315172960844453"]
---
[Apple Watch Ultra 2 to have 3D printed parts (1 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.geeky-gadgets.com%2Fapple-watch-ultra-2-to-have-3d-printed-parts-17-07-2023%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018968817c93-5bba61ea-1b3e-4746-ac8a-ed2e841fa5cc-000000/5mqzEtNp6FRuH9VJCSY_ZkMjq5v0hVT6S3zdipzFoV4=310)
The Apple Watch Ultra 2 is expected to launch this year along with the Apple Watch 9. A microLED version of the watch will launch in 2025. This year's Apple Watch Ultra will come with 3D printed parts. Some of the titanium parts will be 3D printed, even though they will still go through a CNC process. The new process will improve production time and reduce costs. |
[The $1 billion gamble to ensure AI doesn’t destroy humanity (28 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.vox.com%2Ffuture-perfect%2F23794855%2Fanthropic-ai-openai-claude-2/1/0100018968817c93-5bba61ea-1b3e-4746-ac8a-ed2e841fa5cc-000000/g0hHje1u10YM5kiQiHLy8gGERE0FwCfLcGDy4uNTsUw=310)
Anthropic's founders left OpenAI to create a new firm because they wanted to build a safety-first company from the ground up. The company is currently building a system that is purposely deceptive to see what kind of techniques can prevent malicious behaviors. The goal is to create an AI that continues to lie even when standard reinforcement learning with human feedback is used. Anthropic plans to cede control of its corporate board to a team of experts whose financial benefit from the company will be limited to help keep the company ethical. |
Science & Futuristic Technology
|
[This company plans to transplant pig hearts into babies next year (10 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.technologyreview.com%2F2023%2F07%2F17%2F1076392%2Fthis-company-plans-to-transplant-pig-hearts-into-babies-next-year%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018968817c93-5bba61ea-1b3e-4746-ac8a-ed2e841fa5cc-000000/WzuNqHebDrqCl6SDszsUOLTAbq_FZvSj0i4zmG16O40=310)
A company based in Massachusetts has developed a technique to edit pigs' genomes so that their organs can be transplanted into other species. The gene-edited pig hearts have so far been transplanted into two infant baboons. Neither of the animals survived beyond a few days. The company is still optimistic and hopes to start human trials next year. Its goal is to be able to transplant pig hearts into babies born with heart conditions in order to buy the infants more time to wait for a human heart. |
[Eli Lilly drug shown to slow Alzheimer’s progression (2 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Farstechnica.com%2Fhealth%2F2023%2F07%2Feli-lilly-drug-shown-to-slow-alzheimers-progression%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018968817c93-5bba61ea-1b3e-4746-ac8a-ed2e841fa5cc-000000/-tS20FKJ0FYhhevApslh7yYPC1tC5EnTleMKIgUVgxE=310)
Trial results for Eli Lilly's latest Alzheimer's treatment shows that the drug significantly slows down memory loss and cognitive decline. Donanemab slowed progression by about 35 percent in the early stages of the disease. Eli Lilly has submitted the drug for FDA approval. A decision on its approval is expected before the end of the year. The company has not yet set a price for the drug, but similar drugs cost around $26,500 a year. |
Programming, Design & Data Science
|
[A developer’s guide to prompt engineering and LLMs (20 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fgithub.blog%2F2023-07-17-prompt-engineering-guide-generative-ai-llms%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018968817c93-5bba61ea-1b3e-4746-ac8a-ed2e841fa5cc-000000/O8uekelGaamGwbY68pddWvc-OP6ng8qb9YleBQLpMD0=310)
This article tells the story of GitHub's work with large language models (LLMs) to help other developers learn how to best make use of the technology. It describes at a high level how LLMs function and how to build LLM applications. The article uses GitHub Copilot code completions as a case example of an LLM-based application. |
[WebGPU — All of the cores, none of the canvas (34 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fsurma.dev%2Fthings%2Fwebgpu%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018968817c93-5bba61ea-1b3e-4746-ac8a-ed2e841fa5cc-000000/2BIeiuVK1IuDu7IlrqgSI9b9UuebAJj82BfhcoN4-CE=310)
WebGPU is an API that gives developers low-level, general-purpose access to GPUs. This blog post aims to make WebGPU accessible for web developers. It doesn't focus on using WebGPU to generate graphics, but instead uses the API to access the raw computing power a GPU provides. The post was written by someone learning WebGPU, so while it can teach readers how to use the API effectively, the techniques described within may not be the most efficient. |
[WormGPT Is a ChatGPT Alternative With 'No Ethical Boundaries or Limitations' (2 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.pcmag.com%2Fnews%2Fwormgpt-is-a-chatgpt-alternative-with-no-ethical-boundaries-or-limitations%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018968817c93-5bba61ea-1b3e-4746-ac8a-ed2e841fa5cc-000000/SUTu47xI_zTjnQc7D53YYINFrTE26_P7MJlAzWWNYRY=310)
WormGPT is a chatbot designed to assist cybercriminals. Its developer is selling access to the AI on a popular hacking forum. WormGPT doesn't have any guardrails preventing it from responding to malicious requests. It allows its users to do anything blackhat related, for example, it can produce malware and provide tips on crafting malicious attacks. Access to WormGPT currently costs 60 Euros per month, or 550 Euros per year. |
[Want to join the TLDR team full time? (Sponsor)](mailto:jobs@tldr.tech)
Hey everyone, TLDR is looking for a resourceful, tech-savvy senior sponsorship sales director to join our fully remote team of six and work with our head of sales Danny Miller (who previously started the ads business at StackOverflow) to lead the next phase of our revenue growth.We are growing at a rate of 10% month over month and we're looking for someone who is highly entrepreneurial and thrives in a fast-paced environment. Total compensation including commission will be between $150,000 - $200,000. If you know someone who would be a good fit, please refer them to us and we will send you $1000 if we hire them. To apply, please send your resume or LinkedIn profile to [jobs@tldr.tech](mailto:jobs@tldr.tech) along with a few sentences on why you would be a good fit. |
[dt (GitHub Repo)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fbooniepepper%2Fdt%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/0100018968817c93-5bba61ea-1b3e-4746-ac8a-ed2e841fa5cc-000000/O2x98nnW85tPFL53KUAayY6rmmOdtipa4GRewwEcS20=310)
dt is a readable programming language for doing small stuff in Unix pipes quickly and easily. |
[TLDR Talent](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fdanni763618.typeform.com%2Fto%2FrSL4lOH3/1/0100018968817c93-5bba61ea-1b3e-4746-ac8a-ed2e841fa5cc-000000/JjKQDXHiiCfrVU6ZKcPIHncXq9W380qvNc5QkgChFxQ=310) is our exclusive community where we help world-class tech talent and get intros to companies of their choice, along with a number of exciting startups and tech companies curated by TLDR.
We give you full control of the process, you can specify if you’re actively searching or passively interested only if something amazing comes along. Set your preferred compensation, seniority/title/role, specific companies (or types of companies) you’d like to work for and more. [Click here to apply](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fdanni763618.typeform.com%2Fto%2FrSL4lOH3/2/0100018968817c93-5bba61ea-1b3e-4746-ac8a-ed2e841fa5cc-000000/GChzmgbsaLk-c61rNCSRxQaavfzzBhUuunq1zZZd95Y=310).
|
If your company is interested in reaching an audience of tech executives, decision-makers and engineers, you may want to [advertise with us](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fshare.hsforms.com%2F1OxvmrkcFS4qsxKpNXCi76wee466%3Futm_source=tldr%26utm_medium=newsletter/2/0100018968817c93-5bba61ea-1b3e-4746-ac8a-ed2e841fa5cc-000000/6tzwMXOYT3wAWUPYrhWJdOIyJsJhHTIHOFf9Zj7w62g=310).
If you have any comments or feedback, just respond to this email!
Thanks for reading,
[Dan Ni](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2Ftldrdan/1/0100018968817c93-5bba61ea-1b3e-4746-ac8a-ed2e841fa5cc-000000/E2nskqAIBQe_VadsmntkxBHvZm91ZCLsq6WQCl7t3KI=310) and [Stephen Flanders](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2FSteveFlanders22/1/0100018968817c93-5bba61ea-1b3e-4746-ac8a-ed2e841fa5cc-000000/B6HlUVGTRZbGauWHzZy9MsMv6v73J_K7k1RAw4Veb5Y=310)
|
|
|
|