---
subject: "Economics Roundup #1"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-03-26 13:57:31
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
I call the section ‘Money Stuff’ but as a column name that is rather taken. There has been lots to write about on this front that didn’t fall neatly into other categories. It clearly benefited a lot from being better organized into subsections, and the monthly roundups could benefit from being shorter, so this will probably become a regular thing. They Took Our JobsQuite the opposite, actually. Jobs situation remains excellent. Whatever else you think of the economy,
Which is, of course, what both of them would always say no matter what. I do presume that now that the UAW has raised the price and expected future price of dealing with them, Ford is now placing a higher priority in getting new factories and jobs outside the reach of the UAW. Company Formations Seem Permanently Higher
High-propensity applications means businesses likely to hire employees with payroll. The number was holding steady for a decade at 100k such applications per month, then it jumped and is now stable at closer to 150k, with other applications a similar percentage above previous trend. This really is a big game. Whoops
Falling for this scam was unbelievably stupid. I do not understand how they pulled this off and she fell for it. However writing the details of this up is a public service, as is admitting that this happened to you, so we thank her for that.
I mean yes, that is true, it is possible to be good at figuring out index funds while still falling for scams. Indeed, a key reason to invest in index funds is that you do not have good judgment, the whole idea is that index funds do not use judgment. I still do think that there is a common factor that I want present wherever I seek advice. Vibecession Via Healthcare Spending
As always, one can check the data. Even if you think GDP is not a good measure, the healthcare share of GDP should check out. Health care spending continues to rise as a share of GDP, but it is clearly not growing so fast that we lack other RGDP gains. It does seem valid to say that marginal healthcare spending is Hansonian, as in spending more does not lead to better health or less death, so any such increases in spending should be considered wasted, and not count as people being better off. (As usual, standard caveat that of course much of healthcare is highly valuable, as was driven home to me this past two weeks. I am fine now.) Similarly, Moses claims service inflation is still too high, but we should expect service inflation to exceed general inflation, and indeed want that to drive up real wages. And he complains that consumer spending is down: Is higher consumer spending the goal, a cause, or both? I get confused about that. If people think the economy is bad so they cut their spending, that can make things bad, but if they do that and the economy remains good then that seems great and should lead to more savings and investment? Vibecession Look at All the Nice Things and Good NumbersYet another round of ‘
I continue to think that we can simultaneously live in what in many ways is great material abundance, and also be materially worse off. Yes, the basket of goods we currently buy was impossible to access in the past and would have been immensely costly. Yes, we have much better material possessions in many, even most, ways. None of that matters if mandatory largely signaling and positional goods, especially education, health care and housing, are eating everyone’s budgets alive, to the point where many people feel they cannot afford children, and few feel they can afford four or more children. No cell phone or fast car is going to make up for that. Our houses and apartments are bigger, but a lot of that is that they are required to be bigger, from a mix of regulations and cultural expectations. Being forced to buy more housing than you need, that you cannot afford, is not doing you any favors.
Scott Sumner also makes the case that yes, I do think people are making the mistake of not comparing conditions to the right counterfactuals, not considering the initial conditions of the pandemic and previous administration’s choices, and not having reasonable expectations going forward. Compared to what could have been reasonably expected, compared to how others are doing, we are doing well. Given those conditions, Biden needed to manage expectations, to explain the consequences of our Covid economic policies. Instead, he did not explain any of that, and then spent more. Also people do not remember what the past was like, and imagine people used to be much richer than they were, with better consumption of goods then they had, and less stupid annoyances and time sinks than there were.
As some commenters point out, to the extent people are moving up in the general, that does not move up people overall in relative terms. So if your sense of ‘middle class’ membership, and what it means for middle class people to do well, is mostly relative, then this chart is a problem for those not in that new upper third. Vibecession via Inappropriate Price IndexScott Sumner asks a related question more generally.
One index has to create one number. Then that number is equated to multiple different things. It gets even more complicated if the quality of those goods also rises 10%/year, for varying versions of quality.
You want to know all of these things. You definitely want to know what it costs to get the things people typically get, so you can feel like you are keeping up, maintaining social status and dignity, buying what you are entitled to. The Iron Law of Wages covers what families expect to need, not the theoretical bare minimums. It is also valuable to have the option to buy a really terrible today but fine 40 years ago television for $5 (remember, down 99%!) instead of a good one for $500 or great one for $2000, or to spend $0 and use your phone or tablet you have anyway as a TV potentially better than what you used to have growing up. A lot of the problem today is that the metaphorical cheap TV, or the option to go without one, is not available. Consider what it would cost to get the 40-years-ago quality car, or school, or healthcare, or housing, or childcare, or even food. It is easy to forget how universally worse was the quality of most goods and services back then, of course with notably rare exceptions. In many ways it would suck to have to, today, consume that 1984 basket, even if you got to also pick some cheap stuff from the 2024 basket like a discount cell phone and all the free internet services. But the option to go with that basket to save money, to be confident you could keep your head above water? That would be great. And also there are some places where you would happily take the discount, whereas society is forcing you to buy cars with various features, childcare from college students on ground floors and hyper expensive health insurance that has not been shown to improve health, and so on. This is related to my thoughts Also related is the increasing complexity of life, and the fact that the ‘intelligence waterline’ required to navigate things reasonably keeps rising. We largely self-segregate by intelligence and it is very easy to be completely out of touch with the lived experience of the majority, and especially of a substantial minority. Vibecession Anyway
I have a hard time believing that only 20% of ‘non-elite’ voters are seeing their finances improve. Here elite is defined as more than 150k in income, living in a high-density area and with a postgraduate degree, which should be a single-digit percentage of the population. Most people’s finances should be improving most of the time, since you get older and likely avoid extreme bad outcomes. Also, the post claims these ‘elites’ have 77% support for “strict rationing of gas, meat, and electricity.” To contain climate change, you see. Support for rationing of electricity is certifiably nuts, as nuts as the ‘only four flights in a lifetime’ proposal. When people say they believe the economy sucks for people like them, I continue to believe them. If your response is a bunch of economic statistics saying otherwise, you are asking the wrong questions.
Vibecenssion via Interest RatesLarry Summers echoes that And of course people do not think about or care about the forward rate of change of the price level, they care a lot about current prices versus past prices and versus their pocketbooks, and they notice some prices more than others. So Nor does ‘food and clothing are actually outrageously cheap, historically speaking, you should be focused on the newly expensive things like health care and housing and education’ although that is very true.
That is a very clear sign of feeling poorer, whether or not one is actually poorer. This is not about overall meat consumption or veganism, Prediction Markets
So what can you do? The answer is simple. You let everyone participate, but you track who does what, and you figure out what the fair price is given everyone’s trades and track records. I have some experience with this. If you knew what everyone in market was doing, you would often say that the market price and the ‘fair’ price were distinct. There is no reason you could not also do this with prediction markets, or with the stock market. If you know who is on both sides of every trade, and you pay attention, you can be a profitable trader indeed. The Efficient Market Hypothesis is False
Failed Markets in Everything
As usual the answer is transaction costs, and general inability to make this sufficiently smooth and easy. Still, I do think there are many things to be done in such a space. I even have ideas about how one can use AI to do this better - you can privately indicate what you want in plain English, and then there is a background universal matching system of sorts.
They want it to be one way. I am pretty sure it is the other way. I say three cheers for most forms of surge pricing. Alas, most others disagree.
Yep. There are three kinds of restaurants, those who are much cheaper at lunch, those that are closed for lunch, and those that are neither. If there was a place that gave a discount at 2pm or 3pm? I can (often) happily wait. But the places that are packed for lunch usually are, if not always as cheap as Wendy’s, also not so expensive. In this case, the question is whether the cognitive cost and stress associated with changing prices is worth the efficiency of moving consumption to less utilized hours. My presumption is that fully dynamic pricing is several bridges too far on this, even without the public reaction, so it is good that Wendy’s backed down. There simply is not enough benefit here. A constant discount for quiet hours (with raised menu prices otherwise), however, does seem like a good idea?
Also, yes. Everyone hates all the things that would actually make food cheaper. Failed Markets in TransparencyOnce again we confirm the finding that
The abstract attempts to somewhat bury the lede, that average wages are down, emphasizing all the other good effects that still combine to lower average pay to ask the title question, ‘Is Pay Transparency Good?’
It is not good. Pay transparency is even worse than that. It means that your pay must be socially determined as a function of your status and title. The equality of pay means that firms cannot pay extra to superior employees without also giving them the required social status or lifting everyone else’s pay. This not only makes them bargain harder and lowers wages, it means inefficient allocations of labor, such as when pay transparency made me unable to retain a highly valuable software engineer because the other software engineers in the company saw his pay, a small fraction of the value he produced, and threatened to revolt. It also means that everyone around you knows exactly how much you make, which is kind of an obnoxious privacy issue, one might say. Never ask a man his salary. Unprofitable Markets in Air Travel
In which case, okay, fine, pay for it elsewhere, because that is clearly an efficient allocation and families need subsidies that won’t induce bad behavior, and not doing this increases stress on families. Should we overall be happy that we use this price discrimination scheme, where you can fly remarkably cheaply if you accept a worse experience? Yes, I think the optionality and ability to price discriminate outweigh the deadweight losses. I say this as someone who, although I obviously don’t have to, readily accepts the cheapest options, and accepts a slightly smaller seat in the back boarding last without a carry-on bag and so on, because I learned while being a Magic: The Gathering professional how to make that work. The flip side is that The ultimate version of this: The hourly rate on it was amazing even when you sold out cheap, and you could spend the time reading a book or listening to music. I love this as an example of something that some will say ‘exploits’ poor people when it does nothing of the kind, and call to be banned driving up ticket prices. Unprofitable Markets in Ground Transportation
Presumably there is then a doom loop, where demand drops so wait times increase, and because of minimum wage for down time you can’t get enough drivers standing by, so there is no viable service. Which is a shame. I am not saying I would be happy if rideshare prices doubled, but if there are no easy hailable cabs, the chances I would pay double for a given ride is substantial, especially for shorter ones. Presumably, of course, Uber and Lyft also want to make a point and send a message to any other cities that might try this. They will survive without Minneapolis. They also would have looked terrible if they had actually doubled prices in the city, whereas they look a lot better withdrawing, the same way everyone hates surge pricing. Paying minimum wage of $15/hour does not seem so prohibitive as to cause the doom loop. This, however, is something different.
Then you would need to somehow pay Lyft or Uber more on top of that. Not a reliable source, but I saw a claim that in August 2023 driver pay was $1 base fare, plus $0.20 per minute, plus $0.90 per mile. So yes. If that is close to accurate, this jump could plausibly cause a doom loop. It is not completely unheard of, if this discounts time between rides. For comparison: New York City yellow taxis charge $4-$6 up front, $3.50 cents per mile above 12 miles per hour, or 70 cents per minute in slow traffic (so effectively minimum 12 miles per hour in terms of payment). That is solidly more than Minneapolis is requiring.
If the city does not back down, I do not expect Uber and Lyft to do so. We would then be about to do a natural experiment in so many ways. How much would this cause rents to drop, and how much would good locations rise in relative value? Detroit, Georgianism
One is that Detroit might use this to net raise property taxes by undoing the cut on buildings while keeping the tax on land. This is always possible but I don’t think it is likely, the two taxes are too clearly similar and correlated. A second is that landowners might try to lower their tax burden by developing low-quality housing, whereas land speculators might otherwise be able to hold out on such low-value uses until they can do something more valuable. If the landowner is profit maximizing, we have made it more profitable to build now but even more additionally profitable to build whatever is net most valuable. Whatever a landowner who is not liquidity constrained chooses to do should be efficient? With the concern that people with negative cash flow often don’t long term maximize. But why would someone like that not simply sell the land to someone else? And in general, I find it hard to think that if this does the job of inducing more construction and more cleanup and such, that this could be net bad. Beyond that, the big danger is indeed that this might simply not do much. California Approaches the Tax Tipping Point
Taxing On the Margin
Scott and Sumner I are thinking on different margins. Scott’s point is that currently the tax system penalizes savings and rewards consuming now over consuming later, because it taxes income where it should tax consumption. I agree with him, and would support such a move. However, once we have made that decision to mostly tax income rather than consumption, making an exception in particular for retirement accounts seems like a clear mistake to me given everything we now know, if we assume the revenue deficit is made up for by higher income taxes elsewhere. Occupational License as Security Bond
It is hard to throw someone in jail, it is hard to fine people serious money. It is much easier to take away their piece of paper. So you can keep such people on a much tighter leash.
There are obviously much better ways to punish offenders, but in practice are we capable of doing them? Otherwise they do not help. We have a wise legal principle that punishment legal requires high barriers in terms in terms of both burden of proof and the nature of wrongdoing. However, in order to make many systems incentive-compatible, it needs to be possible to punish people for much lesser offenses, with a much lighter process that has a much lower burden of proof. If your homeowners association had to go to criminal court every time you failed to mow your lawn, you are not going to be forced to mow your lawn. This suggests a simple compromise. Let those who would enter the profession have a choice. They can choose to go through the training and licensing process as it exists today. Or they can choose to post an actual bond for $X00k, perhaps via insurance. If something goes wrong, you have now agreed to forfeit some or all of that bond via a much lighter process with a much lower punishment threshold than the courts. To be clear, regardless of the alternatives, this is all a deeply stupid reason to throw up huge barriers to people doing useful things. There are indeed many obvious superior solutions. But you do have to deal with the problem that this is helping to solve. This might beat doing nothing, given the brokenness of our default systems. The Work From Home DebateC The current best theory seems to be that on a given day productivity is often better at home, but that you learn skills, build a team and coordinate better at the office, so the costs of remote largely only show up over time. Patrick McKenzie Explains it All
This would suggest I am underpricing at $10, since my comparables are all over $20, usually for a lot less content. But of course those Substacks mostly paywall their content, whereas I paywall absolutely nothing. So the value proposition is in that sense not so great. The $0 deal is, from one’s own perspective, even better. Still, what a deal. In Brief
Meanwhile yes, things mostly don’t seem great for Ferengi or on Ferenginar, and the author admits there is far too much greed for greed’s sake (and of course the writers give Ferengi many negative attributes not related to being capitalists), but they can get things done. Most of the things shown as wrong with Ferengi society are not actually economically efficient. That they have not long since been eliminated tells you a lot about how that society actually works.
You're currently a free subscriber to |