---
subject: "AI #106: Not so Fast"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-03-06 15:35:44
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
This was GPT-4.5 week. That model is A judge delivered a different kind of Not So Fast back to OpenAI, threatening the viability of their conversion to a for-profit company. Apple is moving remarkably not so fast with Siri. A new paper warns us that under sufficient pressure, all known LLMs will lie their asses off. And we have some friendly warnings about coding a little too fast, and some people determined to take the theoretical minimum amount of responsibility while doing so. There’s also a new proposed Table of ContentsAlso this week: [Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/0bad83c9-a055-459e-a583-e8ee48280906?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Don’t get caught being reckless.[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/2ba8e571-d4f2-42a4-a44f-e0a782597bc0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Your context remains scarce.[Choose Your Fighter.](https://substack.com/redirect/e21996ef-6046-4d19-b004-b18e08dea439?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Currently my defaults are GPT-4.5 and Sonnet 3.7.[Four and a Half GPTs.](https://substack.com/redirect/f0d847b9-6165-4d8f-9171-fdd1c8b805ef?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)It’s a good model, sir.[Huh, Upgrades.](https://substack.com/redirect/e656c0ee-fd75-46e8-91d5-dd645a1a4f77?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)GPT-4.5 and Claude Code for the people.[Fun With Media Generation.](https://substack.com/redirect/2ba1cee4-fbca-4d7d-9073-887c28dfd045?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)We’re hearing good things about Sesame AI voice.[We’re in Deep Research.](https://substack.com/redirect/aaee0071-75c5-4b40-aa28-d28fb8357221?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)GIGO, welcome to the internet.[Liar Liar](https://substack.com/redirect/8aca7e21-d6d0-4886-b2aa-092894334897?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/8aca7e21-d6d0-4886-b2aa-092894334897?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Under sufficient pressure, essentially all known LLMs will lie. A lot.[Hey There Claude.](https://substack.com/redirect/a8a9ecb2-d826-451c-acd8-f59af1cfd347?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Good at code, bad at subtracting from exactly 5.11.[No Siri No.](https://substack.com/redirect/6ab3064b-a69e-4510-aa5f-ee6025165f41?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)It might be time for Apple to panic.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon.](https://substack.com/redirect/27ccc363-6b32-4f45-979b-612d5e7f73a0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Rejoice, they come bearing cake recipes.[They Took Our Jobs.](https://substack.com/redirect/14111d91-380b-43bf-a615-f51f95dac5de?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)More claims about what AI will never do. Uh huh.[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/6d50aeae-22dc-45e7-98b8-8cd955cb474a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Hire my friend Alyssa Vance, and comment on the USA AI plan.[Introducing.](https://substack.com/redirect/f1163c59-1fab-4b48-bfc5-521a97a30b5e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Competition is great, but oh no, not like this.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/169eb617-a031-4064-99cb-800b34e52029?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)AI agents are looking for a raise, H100s are as well.[Not So Fast, Claude.](https://substack.com/redirect/c2ee5b0f-47d0-4fe8-ad3f-8afcf4227784?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)If you don’t plan to fail, you fail to plan.[Not So Fast, OpenAI](https://substack.com/redirect/debf8a1a-e18c-4506-82fd-6e96297678cd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/debf8a1a-e18c-4506-82fd-6e96297678cd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Convert to for profit? The judge is having none of this.[Show Me the Money.](https://substack.com/redirect/c8f037bb-6ff9-454f-8012-501ca3787f91?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)DeepSeek has settled in to a substantial market share.[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/d07b8f5a-77e9-408e-8508-c11e32565739?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Imminent superintelligence is highly destabilizing.[I Will Not Allocate Scarce Resources Using Prices.](https://substack.com/redirect/695caeea-246e-4404-941f-46b3e9452d65?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)That’s crazy talk.[Autonomous Helpful Robots.](https://substack.com/redirect/c8574ee0-070b-49e6-8770-e03dc1442b48?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)It’s happening! They’re making more robots.[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/997b8975-4be4-48b9-bd3e-068c48451227?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Buchanan, Toner, Amodei, Cowen, Dafoe.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/d512b6dd-4524-419d-889f-9cd0b7465787?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Decision theory only saves you if you make good decisions.[No One Would Be So Stupid As To.](https://substack.com/redirect/50148edb-7b7f-4a28-87bb-22f344f07811?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Oh good, it’s chaos coding.[On OpenAI’s Safety and Alignment Philosophy.](https://substack.com/redirect/716de2ab-e900-4b6b-9c6b-6fe0d7eeb9aa?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Beware rewriting history.[Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult.](https://substack.com/redirect/dcff69b7-c4e0-4ce0-aa11-1173162b017a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Back a winner?[Implications of Emergent Misalignment.](https://substack.com/redirect/ed2f1d1d-911e-44d8-8db9-9127c3dfa1d7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Dangers of entanglement.[Pick Up the Phone.](https://substack.com/redirect/852e809a-9ee0-4596-8f88-e650b168a2d6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)China’s ambassador to the USA calls for cooperation on AI.[People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/e8c52692-f7a6-4813-b343-7007a05db535?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Is p(superbad) the new p(doom)?[Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone.](https://substack.com/redirect/759d1e8a-a429-469f-8c04-792823484534?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Worry about owls?[The Lighter Side.](https://substack.com/redirect/3248104a-2b58-40bf-8b5e-005c89793e03?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)You’re going to have to work harder than that.
Language Models Offer Mundane UtilityA large portion of human writing is now LLM writing.
False positive rates in the pre-ChatGPT era were in the range of 1%-3%.
LLMs hallucinate and make factual errors, but have you met humans? At this point, LLMs are much more effective at catching basic factual errors than they are in creating new ones. Clean up your data, such as
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
Choose Your FighterI am currently defaulting mostly to a mix of Deep Research, Perplexity, GPT 4.5 and Sonnet 3.7, with occasional Grok 3 for access to real time Twitter. I notice I haven’t been using o3-mini-high or o1-pro lately, the modality seems not to come up naturally, and this is probably my mistake.
Strictly speaking, when you have a hard problem you should be much quicker than you are to Four and a Half GPTs
So no, GPT-4.5 is not a good choice for Arc, Arc favors reasoning models, but o3-mini is on a higher performance curve than r1.
Huh, Upgrades
I remain terrified to try it, and I don’t have that much time anyway. Fun With Media GenerationAll the feedback I’ve seen on
I’ve long considered the existence of such offerings priced in. The mystery is why they’re taking so long to get it right, and it now seems like it won’t take long. We’re in Deep ResearchThe core issue with Deep Research? It can’t really check the internet’s work. That means you have a GIGO problem: Garbage In, Garbage Out.
Liar LiarHey there. Yeah, not so much.
They put it in scenarios where it is beneficial to lie, and see what happens. It makes sense, but does not seem great, that larger LLMs tend to lie more. Lying effectively requires the skill to fool someone, so if larger the model, the more it will see positive returns to lying, and learn to lie. This is a huge gap in honest answers and overall from Claude 3.7 to everyone else, and in lying from Claude and Llama to everyone else. Claude was also the most accurate. Grok 2 did even worse, lying outright 63% of the time. Note the gap between lying about known facts versus provided facts. The core conclusion is that there is no known solution to make an LLM not lie. Not straight up lying is a central pillar of desired behavior (e.g. HHH stands for honest, helpful and harmless). But all you can do is raise the value of honesty (or of not lying). If there’s some combination enough on the line, and lying being expected in context, the AI is going to lie anyway, right to your face. Ethics won’t save you, It’s Not Me, Hey There Claude
Claude 3.7 gets 8.9% on Humanity’s Last Exam with 16k thinking tokens, slightly above r1 and o1 but below o3-mini-medium.
In one sense, $6.40 on one query is a lot, but also this is obviously nothing. If my Cursor queries reliably worked like this and they cost $64 I would happily pay. If they cost $640 I’d probably pay that too. I got into a discussion with Colin Fraser
Colin says he came up with the 5.11 - 5.9 question and other questions he asks as a one-shot generation over two years ago. I believe him. It’s still clearly a de facto adversarial example, as his experiments showed, and it is one across LLMs.
The wrong answer it gives to (5.11 - 5.9) is 0.21. Which means it’s giving you the answer to (6.11 - 5.9). So my hypothesis is that it ‘knows’ that 5.11>5.9 because it’s doing the version number thing, which means it assumes the answer is positive, and the easiest way to get a positive answer is to hallucinate the 5 into a 6 (or the other 5 into a 4, we’ll never know which). So my theory is that the pairs where it’s having problems are due to similar overlapping of different meanings for numbers. And yes, it would probably be good to find a way to train away this particular problem. We also had a discussion on whether it was ‘doing subtraction’ or not if it sometimes makes mistakes. I’m not sure if we have an actual underlying disagreement - LLMs will never be reliable like calculators, but a sufficiently correlated process to [X] is [X], in a ‘it simulates thinking so it is thinking’ kind of way.
But also my expectation is that the reason this happens is that they can’t overcome the pattern matching they do to similar common questions - if you asked similar logic questions in a way that wasn’t contaminated by the training data there would be no issue, my prediction is if you took all the goat crossing examples out of the training corpus then the LLMs would nail this no problem. I think my real disagreement is when he then says ‘I’ve seen enough, it’s dumb.’ I don’t think that falling into these particular traps means the model is dumb, any more than a person making occasional but predictable low-level mistakes - and if their memory got wiped, making them over and over - makes them dumb.
I don’t think it works this way, but worth a ponder.
I don’t gender Claude at all, nor has it done so back to me, and the same applies to every AI I’ve interacted with that wasn’t explicitly designed to be gendered. Meanwhile, the Pokemon quest continues.
No Siri No
Apple Intelligence has been a massive flop. The parts that matter don’t work. The parts that work don’t matter. Alexa+ looks to offer the things that do matter. If this is Apple’s timeline, then straight talk: It’s time to panic. Perhaps call Anthropic. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
Then there’s the other kind of bot problem. Good eye there. Presumably this is going to get a lot worse before it gets better.
I presume Claude 3.7 could one-shot this app if you asked nicely. How long before people feel obligated to do something like this? How long before bot accounts are doing this, including minimizing predicted identification of it as a bot? What happens then? We are going to find out. Diffusion here has been surprisingly slow, but it is quite obviously on an exponential. If you use an agent, you can take precautions to prevent prompt injections and other problems, but those precautions will be super annoying.
For now, it seems fine to use Operator and similar tools on whitelisted trusted websites, and completely not fine to use them unsandboxed on anything else. I can think of additional ways to defend against prompt injections. What is much harder are defenses that don’t multiply time and compute costs and are not otherwise expensive. Some problems should have solutions that are not too bad. For example, he mentions that if a site allows comments, this can allow prompt injections, or the risk of other slight modifications. Could do two passes here, one whose job is to treat everything as untrusted data and exists purely to sanitize the inputs? Many of the attack vectors should be easy for even basic logic to catch and remove, and certainly you can do things like ‘remove comments from the page,’ even a Chrome Extension could do that.
They Took Our Jobs
Aside from ‘most workers are not managers, how many jobs do you think are left when we are all managers exactly?’ I don’t expect to spend much time in a world in which the ‘on the line’ intellectual workers who aren’t managing anyone are AIs, and there isn’t then usually another AI managing them.
My answer is that we already take humans out of loops all the time, are increasingly doing this with LLMs already (e.g. ‘vibe coding’ and literally choosing bomb targets with only nominal human sign-off that is barely looking), and also doing it in many ways via ordinary computer systems. Yes, loss of Hayekian knowledge can be a strike against this, but even if this wasn’t only one consideration among many LLMs are capable of learning that knowledge, and indeed of considering vastly more such knowledge than a human could, including dynamically seeking out that knowledge when needed. At core I think this is purely a failure to ‘feel the AGI.’ If you have sufficiently capable AI, then it can make any decision a sufficiently capable human could make. Executive assistants go ahead and book flights all the time. They take ownership and revise goals and make trade-offs as agents on behalf of principles, again all the time. If a human could do it via a computer, an AI will be able to do it too. The only new barrier is that the human can perfectly embody one particular human’s preferences and knowledge, and an AI can only do that imperfectly, although increasingly less imperfectly. But the AI can embody the preferences and knowledge of many or even all humans, in a way an individual human or group of humans never could. So as the project gets more complex, the AI actually has the Hayekian advantage, rather than the human - the one human’s share of relevant knowledge declines, and the AI’s ability to hold additional knowledge becomes more important. Will an AI soon book a flight for me without a double check? I’m not sure, but I do know that it will soon be capable of doing so at least as well as any non-Zvi human. Get Involved
Introducing
Yeah, we all know that’s not real, even if it is in some sense technically correct. That’s Meta creating AI-related abominations in Facebook and Instagram and WhatsApp (and technically Threads I suppose) that then count as ‘active monthly users.’ Let’s all have a good laugh and… oh no… you don’t have to do this…
Please, Altman. Not like this. Qwen releases QwQ-32B, proving both that the Chinese are not better than us at naming models, and also that you can roughly match r1’s benchmarks on a few key evals with a straight-up 32B model via throwing in extra RL ( I notice that doing extra RL seems like a highly plausible way to have your benchmarks do better than your practical performance. As always the proof lies elsewhere, and I’m not sure what I would want to do with a cheaper pretty-good coding and math model if that didn’t generalize - when does one want to be a cheapskate on questions like that? So it’s more about the principle involved.
In Other AI News
Reminder that the US Department of Justice has
Which lab has the best technical team?
Also it seems Perplexity already
|