---
subject: "When to flip the fee switch"
from: "web3 with a16z <a16zcrypto@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-08-02 17:47:22
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "a16zcrypto"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_2535365729249697677"]
---
|
Scott Duke Kominers
The question isn't to fee or not to (take) fees, but when.
Many marketplaces heavily subsidize user activity to bootstrap initial growth and liquidity by giving their product or service away for free (or at a steep discount). But that’s not sustainable: At some point, a business has to start taking fees so that it’s valued for its business.
Flipping the “fee switch” can seem scary because when you start charging for something that was previously free, surely usage will go down? And yet it's important to remember that while raising prices can divert some customers away in the short run, it also means making more money from those who stay — and creating a more sustainable business model for tokens.
Too many businesses wait too long to flip the fee switch, or set prices too low. So here’s how to reason about the what, why, how, and when to turn on fees in a network.
Emily Westerhold
There are many, many things that founders — especially those in the crypto industry — can’t control: Markets are volatile, regulations are evolving, expectations are high.
That’s why it’s so important for founders to focus on what they can control, which is where operating plans come in. In concept, an operating plan is simple — it’s keeping track of everything your business is doing. But keeping track of everything can get complicated, which is why having a plan to organize it all helps.
An operating plan isn’t a strategic plan, though. It translates vision into velocity, without burning your runway or your team, because it focuses on people, cost, and timelines. We cover where founders can start, how budgeting works, and some common mistakes to avoid.
The White House recently released its first [comprehensive report](https://substack.com/redirect/cdc2fc66-20c7-4aed-9baa-9cc100bd71ea?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) on digital assets. The report covers the nuances of the [DeFi](https://substack.com/redirect/bb9ac0ea-9a42-4ebc-910d-3e2767f518e1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) tech stack; [stablecoins](https://substack.com/redirect/c3ab8dc8-99e6-452d-a072-47de27899162?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) as a means to protect the primacy of the dollar-based international monetary system; approaches to countering [illicit finance](https://substack.com/redirect/927b8a91-acc7-4eea-89d2-43494070eff2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o); and many other top-of-mind topics.
We’ve come a long way in a short time — so what’s next? Most importantly, the Senate building on the [CLARITY](https://substack.com/redirect/ca1730d1-b9e9-4d05-925a-f3c0ddc6a16d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) market structure legislation, which recently passed the House with broad bipartisan support…
The Digital Asset Market Clarity Act or “CLARITY Act” recently passed the House with broad bipartisan support. The bill is now with the Senate, which has [proposed](https://substack.com/redirect/b1c0c530-4b04-4e1e-bea2-a19d023d60b6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) its own market structure legislation preserving the core tenets of CLARITY.
So [what do we think](https://substack.com/redirect/908a1470-5ca7-4a20-b8f8-c15c14b238fb?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) of the Senate’s draft? It’s a meaningful step forward — it asks the right questions and reflects broad consensus that the industry didn’t have a year ago. We’ve proposed meaningful improvements and clarification on key issues [here](https://substack.com/redirect/c84a06e9-bff4-42b5-af6c-048688aa33fd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) and [here](https://substack.com/redirect/3b2e5a44-c4e6-4095-ad07-0f8aeeb7b4ea?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).
By leveraging and integrating the broad industry effort and support that went into CLARITY, this legislation can create clear, lasting rules — and help make the U.S. a leader in crypto.
Congress passed the Guiding and Establishing National Innovation for U.S. Stablecoins Act (GENIUS) Act on July 18 — the first clear rules of the road for stablecoins in the U.S., and the culmination of years of bipartisan efforts. Why does this matter? And what did it take to pass it, including the recent high-stakes vote in the House of Representatives?
Our Head of Policy Miles Jennings, and Government Affairs partners Ben Napier and Michael Reed share what went into the bipartisan efforts that passed this groundbreaking bill, in conversation with web3 with a16z show host Robert Hackett.
… [USDCeased ](https://substack.com/redirect/ab141097-4adc-4452-bb51-778a7da4f1ac?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)💀
— a16z crypto editorial team
You’re receiving this newsletter because you signed up for it on our websites, at an event, or elsewhere (you can opt out any time using the ‘unsubscribe’ link below). This newsletter is provided for informational purposes only, and should NOT be relied upon as legal, business, investment, or tax advice. This newsletter may link to other websites or other information obtained from third-party sources — a16z has not independently verified nor makes any representations about the current or enduring accuracy of such information. Furthermore, the content is not directed at nor intended for use by any investors or prospective investors in any a16z funds. Please see a16z.com/disclosures for additional important details, including link to list of investments.
subscribe to our podcast '[web3 with a16z](https://substack.com/redirect/77e0e413-8d1a-4fd7-9c45-7b4e06a6d2e6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)' | follow us on [Twitter](https://substack.com/redirect/04010d18-73a1-4c48-9e24-80d7a164ae1a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), on [Farcaster](https://substack.com/redirect/3784c921-5031-4311-a8cf-b7904d977307?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), on [LinkedIn](https://substack.com/redirect/14a0ae64-574f-484f-9551-6a9f1ab03a5a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) | subscribe to our [YouTube channel](https://substack.com/redirect/f98bcfc2-ba02-495b-a9c2-c61ac276c88d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) | catch up on the [newsletter archives](https://substack.com/redirect/961f4021-0138-4669-a563-2996e6ff4637?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) | visit [a16zcrypto.com](https://substack.com/redirect/c84daf16-bee6-41ae-bedd-13a00a147b22?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) | buy the [Read Write Own](https://substack.com/redirect/c8aab755-3ece-46e0-a921-ba96c0dcb9b9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o) book