---
subject: "Public Opinion Is Culture"
from: "Robin Hanson from Overcoming Bias <overcomingbias@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-11-04 01:10:20
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Overcoming Bias", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8616244883382228708", "UNREAD"]
---
Until the last century or two, states had far weaker capacities to intervene in their societies. Even so, they typically used a big fraction of what state capacity they had, and they were plausibly adaptive cultures. This suggests that until recently the non-libertarian stance was in fact typically adaptive, even if maybe it didn’t make people happy or fit your moral intuitions. In my last In general, the strongest proximate cause of govt policy seems to be “public opinion”, i.e. the opinions of voters in a democracy, or of a “selectorate” in other systems. In either case, elite opinion has a disproportionate influence over this opinion. And while on some technical topics public opinion defers to well-calibrated expert opinion, usually public opinion is more strongly determined by ancestral origins, copying the prestigious, compelling art, and fights by cultural activists. That is, most public opinion on policy is set by culture. You may recall that, by analogy with organisms and species in biology, I In this framing, “private opinion” is the opinions set by that within-culture selection process, while “public opinion” is the opinions set by that between-culture selection process. Thus govt interventions are set by public opinion which is set by cultural evolution. Such opinions used to be roughly adaptive, but have become quite maladaptive in the last few centuries. Framed this way the explanation is obvious: because of cultural drift. Activities and areas of life not handled by govt tend to be subject to within-culture evolution, making them roughly efficient and adaptive. But when govt takes over an area of life, its behavior re that area tends to be set by public opinion, which is a part of a society’s shared culture. This used to be roughly adaptive centuries ago, when we had healthy between-culture evolution. But now after centuries of cultural drift the public opinions set by culture have become maladaptive, and this induces inefficient govt policy. And that’s why libertarian policy seems roughly adaptive and efficient today, when it usually wasn’t until a few centuries ago. You're currently a free subscriber to |