---
subject: "Trump may have seriously wounded India’s—and the world’s—CBDC projects"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-08-28 01:31:59
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
Ka-Ching!
Thu, 28 Aug 25
A weekly newsletter about how finance is getting supercharged by tech in India, and how you can make money work for you.
Good Morning Ishan,
When was the last time you paid in e-rupees?
Wait, let me amend that. When have you ever paid in e-rupees?
The Reserve Bank of India’s (RBI) pet CBDC—or central bank digital currency—has always been a rare beast on the ground, regardless of the fact that it was first launched as early as 2022. As of March 2025, India was purportedly running the world’s second-largest CBDC pilot (after China), with around Rs 1,000 crore of e-rupees in circulation ($122 million)—a 334% jump from the previous year. But that, and the 5 million total users it has, are minuscule in the context of India’s 1.4 billion population. Less, if you account for the fact that active users number only 400,000.
About 17 banks and fintechs have so far launched e-rupee wallets for their users, but the enthusiasm seems to be fading before even the first leg is done. For instance, several users told The Ken that digital-rupee wallets on Cred, one of the fintechs that launched them, have now disappeared from the app.
I can understand why few people have been interested in exploring the e-rupee. Why use them when you can transfer regular rupees from bank account to bank account just as easily, through UPI or bank apps or other wallets? Why keep track of all these different (albeit colourful) denominations?
Tim Draper, an American billionaire and venture capitalist who is one of the bigger crypto sector investors in the world, with a portfolio of over 50 crypto startups, did not hold back on his disinterest in CBDCs in a recent chat with me. “They are ridiculous,” he said, “China has one, and people hate it, too.” Instead, he touts stablecoins and bitcoins as the route to a great crypto economy.
Setting aside Draper’s own motivations, and interests, he isn’t the only one who seems to be thinking along these lines. US President Donald Trump, too, has been openly betting on stablecoins over CBDCs for a while.
In fact, his GENIUS Act, signed into law in the US in July, puts most global CBDC projects at risk—including India’s.
To get down to brass tacks, CBDCs are all issued by central banks, and are intended to serve as blockchain versions of regular currencies and function as legal tender. Most stablecoins, on the other hand, are privately issued, with liabilities firmly tied to whichever entity is the issuer. They are just supposed to be pegged to a particularly solid benchmark to prevent excessive volatility; in many cases, that peg is the US dollar.
But Trump’s GENIUS Act—while providing the country’s first federal regulatory framework for dollar-pegged stablecoins and requiring stablecoin issuers to back their tokens with liquid assets, such as US dollars and short-term Treasury bills—also [bars the US Federal Reserve](https://cointelegraph.com/news/us-house-adds-cbdc-ban-defense-policy-bill) from ever issuing a CBDC. This opens up the game to private issuers like banks and corporations (as long as they meet the liquidity requirements) and allows stablecoin usage to expand beyond just institutional transfers to a host of other use cases.
This is bound to have ripple effects across the world, especially in the 49 countries, including China and India, that have been piloting CBDC projects.
| Source: Status of CBDC projects published in The Atlantic |
Globally, 98% of stablecoins are already pegged to the US dollar, but more than 80% of stablecoin transactions happen outside the US. For Washington, this reinforces dollar dominance. In order to issue $1 billion worth of US dollar-backed stablecoins, the issuer must hold $1 billion in US Treasuries, cash, or similar reserves.
For countries like India, already [one of the](https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/money-and-banking/cryptocurrency/stablecoins-gaining-increasing-currency-among-indian-investors/article69751626.ece) [largest](https://business.cornell.edu/article/2025/04/stablecoins-importance-in-emerging-markets/#:~:text=According%20to%20blockchain%20firm%20Chainalysis's,transactions%2C%20including%20those%20involving%20stablecoins.) users of stablecoins, this makes dollarisation a potential danger.
India, and many other countries, have been working on CBDCs as wholesale instruments to facilitate more efficient cross-border payments. But Trump’s new law makes that difficult anywhere the US is involved.
No surprise, then, that Italy’s finance minister Giancarlo Giorgetti recently [called](https://www.reuters.com/business/finance/amundi-warns-us-stablecoin-policy-could-destabilise-global-payments-system-2025-07-03/) US dollar-backed stablecoins “an even more dangerous” threat to European financial stability than Trump’s trade tariffs. Easy access to dollars for citizens could hollow out local monetary policy, Giorgetti claimed.
And that is not a hypothetical risk. From [Ecuador](https://pecc.org/resources/finance-1/573-economic-and-social-effects-of-dollarization-in-ecuador/file#:~:text=Per%20capita%20income%20dropped%20by,devaluation%20of%20the%20national%20currency.) to [Zimbabwe](https://www.economist.com/middle-east-and-africa/2016/07/09/bailing-out-bandits) to [Argentina](https://businessday.ng/opinion/article/broader-perspectives-on-dollarisation-argentinas-unfolding-scenario/?utm_source=chatgpt.com), dollarisation has historically had adverse impacts on economies once citizens started dumping their own currencies in favour of dollars. This leaves such countries with no monetary control in their own jurisdictions, reduced tax bases, and other serious problems.
For India, according to one former RBI executive director I spoke to, the concern is two-fold. First, stablecoins could erode bank deposits if they become popular enough that people start shifting to dollar-backed tokens. Second, the RBI’s motivations for CBDC-driven crypto—i.e., reducing cash usage, boosting payment efficiency, and promoting inclusion—will become hard to pull off if people simply side-step the e-rupee.
And with the US starting to lean so heavily against CBDCs of any kind, increasing e-rupee adoption—for some use cases at least—has only become harder.
So, can India jump on a stablecoin bandwagon of its own too?
Well, I think not—at least, not the way it’s been regulating the sector so far.
While the Indian government has been busy collecting 30% tax over all crypto gains, and 1% TDS on every transaction beyond this threshold, millions of Indians have become the victims of crypto-related thefts and scams.
India’s relationship with crypto is complicated. On one hand, it’s among the top countries in the global crypto adoption index; on the other hand, it remains unwilling to regulate the sector meaningfully. This vacuum has allowed scams to fester. Last month, India’s apex agency on Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, Narcotics Control Bureau, and crypto marketplace Binance took down a darknet empire run by Edison Babu, alias “Ketamelon”, which was entirely powered by crypto transactions. A month earlier, Dubai police [arrested](https://coinstats.app/news/ef9792bc1de0f168097b893723a8356398e6238301d11c1261fbb735c52b1aa7_BREAKING%3A-Crypto-scammer-Sahil-Arora-arrested-in-Dubai-with-%2420M%2B-assets-seized-Responsible-for%3A-%E2%80%A2-Celebrity-memecoin-scams-(eg%2C-JENNER%2C-MOTHER)-%E2%80%A2-Pump-and-dump-schemes-profiting-%242-65M-%E2%80%A2-%24957B-BROCCOLI-rug-pull-(CZ's-Dog-theme)-/) memecoin scammer Sahil Arora, who [duped](https://x.com/FFVV1211/status/1914724773114077367) celebrities like American artist Jason Derulo, rapper 50Cent, and Olympic gold medal-winning decathlete Caitlyn Jenner. CoinDCX lost $44 million to a hack. WazirX investors lost a total of $235 million last year to a security breach.
In fact, Indian retail investors may have well collectively [lost](https://inc42.com/features/12-crypto-scams-inr-72000-cr-lost-why-indias-probes-into-biggest-crypto-scams-have-failed/) over Rs 1 lakh crore in crypto-related scams so far.
And yet, policymakers have dragged their feet, waiting for a “global framework” that Prime Minister Modi has repeatedly [called](https://www.ndtv.com/india-news/pm-modi-calls-for-global-framework-for-ethical-use-of-ai-4334037#:~:text=%22Now%2C%20there%20is%20a%20challenge,global%20and%20domestic%20business%20leaders.) for to take shape.
Can India afford to drag its feet when Indians are already the most numerous users of crypto instruments?
And if the world’s largest economy is no longer willing to entertain dealing in CBDCs, where should India go with its e-rupee?
Write to [kaching@the-ken.com](mailto:kaching@the-ken.com), or leave a comment on our website or app, and let me know what you think. We’d love to hear your thoughts on the matter.
See you next Thursday.
Regards,
Suprita Anupam