---
subject: "Racial Disparities in Mortality by Sex, Age, and Cause of Death"
from: "Marginal REVOLUTION <donotreply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-06-10 16:13:06
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tyler Cowen", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2466199532210586699", "UNREAD"]
---
Racial differences in mortality are large, persistent and likely caused, at least in part, by racism. While the causal pathways linking racism to mortality are conceptually well defined, empirical evidence to support causal claims related to its effect on health is incomplete. In this study, we provide a unique set of facts about racial disparities in mortality that all theories of racism and health need to confront to be convincing. We measure racial disparities in mortality between ages 40 and 80 for both males and females and for several causes of death and, measure how those disparities change with age. Estimates indicate that racial disparities in mortality grow with age but at a decreasing rate. Estimates also indicate that the source of racial disparities in mortality changes with age, sex and cause of death. For men in their fifties, racial disparities in mortality are primarily caused by disparities in deaths due to external causes. For both sexes, it is racial disparities in death from healthcare amenable causes that are the main cause of racial disparities in mortality between ages 55 and 75. Notably, racial disparities in cancer and other causes of death are relatively small even though these causes of death account for over half of all deaths. Adjusting for economic resources and health largely eliminate racial disparities in mortality at all ages and the mediating effect of these factors grows with age. The pattern of results suggests that, to the extent that racism influences health, it is primarily through racism’s effect on investments to treat healthcare amenable diseases that cause racial disparities in mortality.
In other words, much of the discourse on this topic is quite off. That is from [a new NBER working paper](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=47b0cd3e1f7933496cbc57f2e4251f749804202c662f791a796735cac12863aa&blog_id=42693868&post_id=90851&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=21b5a27d7b1e90015b8ee40d3bac3cb0&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cubmJlci5vcmcvcGFwZXJzL3czMzkwNSNmcm9tcnNz&email_id=7ad44fb1b54c6946c86ec14e8326a7cb) by Robert Kaestner, Anuj Gangopadhyaya, and Cuiping Schiman.