---
subject: "“I’m on it”"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-10-01 03:32:31
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
Last week was a busy one for my team.
First, let me introduce them—Adhithi and Aishwarya. We call Aishwarya “Steve” because I made an unfortunate but definitely the right decision to hire her. “Unfortunate” because she and I have the same name!
They are exceptionally talented designers, reluctant office attendees, and pop-culture aficionados. They are tasked with creating graphics for The Ken’s stories and newsletters.
And I’d like to take you through last week’s work from their point of view.
We started on Saturday itself, discussing Alifiya’s story on India’s coaching capital, [Kota](https://the-ken.com/story/kotas-rs-6k-cr-coaching-business-may-never-be-the-same-again/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter). It was to be published on Monday. The town’s infamous test-preparation centres, dubbed “Kota factories”, are finding fewer takers—parents are spooked by the rising student suicides; edtech competition is intensifying. Adhithi had a brilliant idea for an illustration and began working on it immediately.
Around 2 pm, I was informed about a change.
Arundhati’s story about online meat-delivery firm [Licious](https://the-ken.com/story/can-binny-bansals-consultancy-save-licious-from-the-premium-trap/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) got scheduled for Monday instead. The company’s customer base is saturating, and growth has stalled. Binny Bansal’s startup consultancy, xto10x, has been enlisted to help them out of this rut, but Licious continues to grapple with revenue challenges and a disgruntled leadership.
“I’m on it,” said Adhithi while the rest of us enjoyed our weekend.
On Monday, Gaurav had reached out to Steve. His story was about the hype around the newest business to emerge out of conglomerate Reliance Industries—Jio Financial Service Limited. It’s on a [hiring](https://the-ken.com/story/freshly-minted-jio-financial-is-the-hottest-new-employer/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter) spree. Teams are being put together to meet the sky-high expectations around RIL’s big bet on financial services. Gaurav had a straightforward idea for illustration, but a glitch prevented Steve from using her iPad for drawing. She has to settle for recreating her illustrations on the computer.
Up next on Adhithi’s plate was Shaswata’s story about India’s battery [recyclers](https://the-ken.com/story/your-ev-battery-is-dead-some-are-happy-about-it/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter). They are anticipating more end-of-life batteries to hit the market soon, and the adoption of electric vehicles is increasing. This presents an exciting prospect for expansion as well as challenges in the industry dominated by the unorganised sector.
Adhithi thought she had two days to work on the graphics for this one, but a swift pipeline change later, she had half a day. The team sat together to figure out a quick and simple illustration. Steve had an idea we liked. Adhithi executed it.
We ended the week with Aayush’s story, which was also on an RIL business. Reliance Retail wanted to disrupt the way fast-moving consumer goods (FMCG) reach small retailers, but it hasn’t been able to. It has paused the operations of [Jiomart B2B](https://the-ken.com/story/jiomart-b2b-paused-reliances-fmcg-disruption-has-to-wait/?utm_source=recap_story&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=recap_newsletter), the vertical it launched in 2020 for that goal. Yet, Reliance is still in the game thanks to its recent acquisition of Metro Cash & Carry India and could see a resurgence. Steve had two days to capture this in a tricky flowchart and an effortless illustration.
The team did all this, plus graphics for our newsletters and the Southeast Asia edition. But that’s another story.
Most days, it feels like we are chefs in a restaurant kitchen. (Any fans of The Bear?) We get through it all with one simple rule: having each other’s backs.
Have a restful Sunday, and don’t forget to check tomorrow’s graphics. We’re already on it.
Best,
Aishwarya
[aishwarya@the-ken.com](mailto:aishwarya@the-ken.com)
What you just read is the personalised daily introduction to The Ken's story. Written by a different person each day. Often insightful, sometimes witty, and very rarely boring. Someone sent this to you? [Sign up for free](https://the-ken.com/?modal=register&utm_source=footer&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=morning_email_ind_recap). [Dont like these? You can unsubscribe](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/unsubscribe/?user_id=2349339&data=8nmdOQpr8N_IWlSfvSksF5IGjHbRn20Lvsdi6auHeTtoMDAwdTAwMOzIa9j5P6fYWOhOoixtH3VMEH-4iq7n7bfzLA3qMT7VgVIdlbXAhkl5RuOoG5sVfxd69csNwsLorC4fjNiQqwwBbClQq1A4OPNzCfQ_tyf6WTW4fWnk1VatXQfKq0l6prrXdJ8KYc4FlXfXIahBjhSDhnmuSAim-QsiDW8jtNf4VeGaGTlTadz7JVV0tDGkuPrjmk5kge5pR7iXD9LfsNIN0z4-aCrfqvC3DvMb3a5591gZctfAwCyD7EuIr4c2quHo11dWUZOt5cjZWfuFhiJDe5514_z8kUpQSXUBjwSItP63iy4rk3u-dJR-HSzy60dIDUrnRuvLgjnGlzp4hl1e6Po7280SjNRX8kD1XSHDRn6TuXDxJ8slarYYmG09UMiJyxM8iPLQCxdVeS-OIbso6Z9oGJnUvSquOj09MYagFsCgXL5ri0NKtH3wjwiIWJlO813PmOLkOtFbOxe3h0kdDJ4obXE9xj8MtRXJ7VRSvfO6yzU6bHfyCMQn-Byn5hIE3gSuq1G9AMk4Rz6mzIM=) Dont want to hear from us again? [ Unsubscribe from our emails here](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/?user_id=2349339&data=XfHl35Kf456k0uvyRT7G4nitQ9uOQcVbi6FTgK2dGN1oMDAwdTAwMGTxSNMb9Posz-sk_WH-CUbP_IKxlzQVtpWDXdT7gt55c6AoK31jqXQcOvzRdBAtwAV4FaieE5dVgm3JkL2Pr0M4cfIhlKdUeZwSsePCo0owoeqGo-gew07OhT1v3WPZVg3hPsEiSqc_T9mkSBgWisKi-UDlyUB7YB3hgtE-jaWSHtXkB708rohzgFhgYOxNHH9cwslAR-8g9iB6YN5OPBP7Fg5gVbmZVRzU9OAcbRD2Z-37Dg3xY_jNJkUAMm2Phul17JcaS80LBPVAJmITzc6A_eSNdmPRQhJghwOAfe0prUwl3BM-MLZb15dUd5bsgW0ULCBCHX4DMPiNjH-wxmZveDKK_3m2G7504H71YNHihtCtXf_4XC9GnyvX3B7KhWqNuOCK5X7a3X7Yo_loXYxt7UbI4MSlE36TnNrZTDFGodnKY5pxjqXBKg3sbWqFIEvyXRV-KUaSNEZUfida9MT7BFqvzjRKl_6L7l9NyX-TcQ5fXIQeV_po5LTF1uSUhg==).
Something wrong? Tell us at [support@the-ken.com](mailto:support@the-ken.com)