---
subject: "First Principles: When we are not chasing deadlines"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-02-01 05:43:36
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "STARRED", "The Ken", "YELLOW_STAR"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "STARRED", "Label_8244464457792971031", "YELLOW_STAR"]
---
|
|
First Principles
Sun, 01 Feb 26
A community-powered Sunday newsletter on mental models, self-reflection, learning, growth, photos, books, and more.
Dear Ishan, good morning and welcome back. It’s a new month already. Have you watched any great movies recently? Me, I watched One Battle After Another last week. After watching it, I felt the sense of exhilaration that I’d almost forgotten, but also a deep sense of disappointment at not having seen it on the big screen as Paul Thomas Anderson, the director, had so obviously wanted us to.
How do you make a movie so relevant, so powerful and yet so bereft of any one overarching narrative? To even say something as trite as “AI could have never made such a movie” would be an insult to the movie!
And then, on Saturday morning, I came across this piece in [The Atlantic](https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/2026/01/college-students-movies-attention-span/685812/) about how many film students were losing the ability to sit through films!
Kyle Stine, a film and media-studies professor at Johns Hopkins, usually begins his course with an icebreaker: What’s a movie you watched recently? In the past few years, some students have struggled to name any film. Kristen Warner, a performing- and media-arts professor at Cornell University, has noticed a similar trend. Some of her students arrive having seen only Disney movies. Erpelding, at UW Madison, said he tries to find a movie that everyone in his class has seen, to serve as a shared reference point they can talk about. Lately, that’s become impossible. Even students who are interested in going into filmmaking don’t necessarily love watching films. “The disconnect is that 10 years ago, people who wanted to go study film and media creation were cinephiles themselves,” Erpelding told me. “Nowadays, they’re people that consume the same thing everyone else consumes, which is social media.”
The Film Students Who Can No Longer Sit Through Films, [The Atlantic](https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/2026/01/college-students-movies-attention-span/685812/)
It’s a sad state of affairs. I’d like to believe that human attention spans have hit rock bottom, and that from here things can only get better. I mean, how much shorter can Tiktok videos get?
Perhaps my belief comes from the fact that Gen Zs and Gen Alphas are aware of this, which is why many of them are consciously taking up book reading (an attention span test if there ever was one!) After years of decline and stagnation, book sales are growing[ in many countries](https://www.publishersweekly.com/pw/by-topic/industry-news/financial-reporting/article/99417-print-book-sales-rose-slightly-in-2025.html), including [India](https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/india/return-of-reading-how-books-are-making-a-cool-comeback-among-the-young-and-social/articleshow/123479792.cms?from=mdr).
I’ve just started reading a book today that’s been on my backlog for a few years—Thinking in Bets by Annie Duke. Duke got into playing poker to kill time while she was on a break from her Phd in cognitive psychology.
My plan was to earn some money during this break from school, stay on the academic path, and continue playing poker as a hobby.
My temporary break turned into a twenty-year career as a professional poker player. When I retired from playing in 2012, I had won a World Series of Poker gold bracelet, the WSOP Tournament of Champions, and the NBC National Heads-Up Championship, and earned more than $4 million in poker tournaments.
Here’s why you may want to read the book, too, in Duke’s words:
Over time, those world-class poker players taught me to understand what a bet really is: a decision about an uncertain future. The implications of treating decisions as bets made it possible for me to find learning opportunities in uncertain environments. Treating decisions as bets, I discovered, helped me avoid common decision traps, learn from results in a more rational way, and keep emotions out of the process as much as possible.
As it turns out, today is a Book’s Special for First Principles. Tanim, our Books Editor, has compiled a bunch of recommendations for you. Keep reading!
Currently reading
[Thinking In Bets](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/35957157-thinking-in-bets) – Annie Duke
Currently listening
[Streets Of Minneapolis](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GDaPdpwA4Iw&list=RDGDaPdpwA4Iw&start_radio=1) – Bruce Springsteen
Currently watching
[Why aren’t actors ugly anymore?](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BzKXF0T75ps)
Here’s everything we have for you in First Principles this week:
1. What The Ken read in 2025 (Business edition)
2. Out of a Hat
[Pro tip: This email is a highly abbreviated version, since many email clients impose restrictions on the amount of material we can publish in a single email before intervention. In fact, it’s likely some email clients may even clip this truncated email.
The best way to experience this edition is to read it on our [website](https://the-ken.com/newsletter/first-principles/when-we-are-not-chasing-deadlines/) or [app](https://the-ken.com/newsletter/first-principles/when-we-are-not-chasing-deadlines/), where all sections are featured in full and unabridged form.
Also, if your default setting is to not show images within emails, please consider turning it off for this newsletter. Or else, you’ll miss many of the interesting images and photos we carry each Sunday.]
1. What The Ken read in 2025 (Business edition)
Hi Ishan, this is Tanim, and today’s books section is a very special edition. Last week, I shared my thoughts on the one business book I read. This week, I have compiled recommendations from the entire team at The Ken.
Get ready to add more books to your already-overflowing TBR list.
Valli, who says she loves reading about companies because there’s so much corporate drama in them, found [Hatching Twitter](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/18656827-hatching-twitter) by Nick Bilton to be her favourite from the six company-focused books she read.
“Twitter’s early story is corporate drama in a nutshell. The book Hatching Twitter, is an interesting case study in what happens when unstable leadership can’t keep up with a company’s growth. Noah Glass—often credited with conceiving the idea, and even the name “Twitter” and the iconic bird symbol—is pushed out early. To this day, he has effectively made no money from Twitter. Leadership then flipped twice in quick succession: Dorsey was replaced by Evan Williams in 2008, and Williams was later pushed aside for Dick Costolo in 2010. Finally, Jack Dorsey replaced Dick Costolo again in 2015. Twitter became known for unusually frequent CEO changes and internal “revolutions”, which is basically organisational instability turned into a pattern.
What we can learn is that structure is what protects a mission from turning into a game of musical chairs. When decision rights, equity expectations, and board governance aren’t made explicit early on, the company ends up spending its most valuable resource, founder attention, on internal legitimacy battles instead of focusing on the product. If roles had been defined early, everyone’s expectations would have been managed. That ambiguity is costly: when governance lags behind growth, politics fills the gap.”
This book, along with the one about Nvidia, really brought home to me how cutthroat people can be in business. I found it almost comical that the name “Nvidia” comes from the founders’ attempt to weave the word “envy” into the company name, an emotion they wanted their former employer to experience. If you are curious which book I am referring to, you can read about it [here](https://the-ken.com/newsletter/first-principles/hope-is-a-strategy/).
Seema, whose schedule is so full that she hasn’t seen a movie in ages, opts to maximise her time by watching documentaries. She recommends [Breakneck](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/223736214-breakneck): China’s Quest to Engineer the Future by Dan Wang
“By the time I came to this book, it had already been widely reviewed and praised. Even so, I still discovered many new things for myself. I could relate to what some investors have told me about why it was getting difficult to get regulatory approvals in the US on time. The book is a masterful contrasting exercise between the engineer-led policy making in China and the lawyer-led governance in the US. I think the lesson for India, which graduates many engineers on paper, is to make short-to-medium-term corrections in its educational institutions so that engineering is reclaimed by the hands and heads of its graduates.”
Of course, as the podcast producer for Zero Shot, Vidhatri’s recommendation is on the subject of AI—[Empire of AI](https://www.goodreads.com/en/book/show/222725518-empire-of-ai): Dreams and Nightmares in Sam Altman’s OpenAI
“I read this book at a time while trying to frame the constant conversation on AI around me. What are we to make of the money flowing in and the endless promises being sold to us about a supposed future of AGI? This book hit me with a strong—and much needed opposing—framework: the AI industry today is fundamentally extractive (of data, resources, people) and can be compared to the empires of old. Hao, a journalist who was among the first to profile OpenAI when it was a non-profit lab looking to “benefit all humanity”, builds this argument while still profiling the company and its founder Sam Altman. This book really helped me understand the AI supply chain, the links between AI research and industry, and the biggest company at its centre. Hao opened up my mind to the idea that there could be an alternative—maybe even more sustainable—way of building and deploying AI models .”
First Principles reader Ramya Kancharla also recommends the same. She says:
“If there’s only one book on AI you read now, let it be this. It delves into the culture at OpenAI as a pathway to explore AI safety (or lack thereof), and the enormous human and environmental costs of AI. It’s made me much more thoughtful of how and when I use AI, and that’s the greatest compliment I can give a book—when it makes me think and even change my behaviour.”
Sthaman’s [recommendation](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/467754.What_They_Don_t_Teach_You_at_Harvard_Business_School) is an essential, foundational read. And if you are considering a [corporate subscription](https://the-ken.com/corporate-teams/?utm_source=email&utm_medium=daily_newsletter&utm_campaign=newsletter_plug), he would be happy to walk you through it.
“One of the most memorable business books I read in 2025 was Mark McCormack’s What They Don’t Teach You at Harvard Business School. Mark, the founder of IMG, one of the world’s largest sports marketing agencies, packed this 1984 title with timeless wisdom. It covers everything from business etiquette to first-principles thinking and how to build and scale a successful venture. I kept noticing parallels in my own day-to-day work and themes you would find in modern business podcasts or books. McCormack’s writing is filled with anecdotes and jargon-free, making it a breezy read that’s easy to absorb. His reflections on human and organisational behaviour, for example, transcend time and technology, they are as applicable in the age of AI as they were in the era of letters or laptops.
I skimmed through the book again and was reminded of one insight: the power of listening. McCormack describes choosing to say less, deliberately holding back what he knew, and instead asking questions that invited others to share their constraints or fears. Apart from making people feel acknowledged, it often made deals and processes far more efficient.
It’s a book I can easily see myself revisiting as I move forward in my professional journey.”
Vishnu, our community manager who truly loves his work, recommends [The Wisdom of Crowds](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/68143.The_Wisdom_of_Crowds) by James Surowiecki.
“I kept seeing this book pop up in articles about community and group intelligence, so I figured I’d check it out.
As someone who enjoys exploring historical contexts and going down rabbit holes, I found the book genuinely engaging. Fair warning, though, it’s a dense read that really demands your attention. I advise revisiting it multiple times, given the depth of material. But if you’re someone who wants to understand the science of building communities with historical proof (and does not shy away from doing your follow-up research as well), give it a go!”
Mrunmayee, who insisted that she doesn’t read business books, like many of our writers, did recall one that has stayed with her.
“As someone who aggressively sticks to fiction, philosophy, or history on her reading list, an autobiography of a major old-school American business leader feels out of place in my bookshelf. And yet, Lee [Iacocca’s](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/486319.Iacocca) story has been one of my favourite reads ever since I picked it up.
Admittedly, I wanted to read it because this was the legendary Iacocca. The man at the helm of Ford Motors when the company launched my favourite car, the Mustang. The dude who redefined American muscle cars, making them younger, sleeker, and much more affordable, and then got pushed out of the company, only to reinvent both himself and Chrysler.
Through the book, I got to see how someone actually thought through decisions that later got praised as “visionary”. Reading about how he sold ideas that didn’t make sense on paper to rooms full of skeptics honestly sharpened my questioning and ideation as a business reporter. It made me better at spotting why companies and governments stick to strange policies, even when logic says they shouldn’t.”
Sushmita, one of our new colleagues, recommends a Substack newsletter for all designers out there.
“Last year, I came across Carly Ayre’s newsletter, [Good Graf](https://carly.substack.com/), while I was in pursuit of good design and UX reading. There’s a piece “Designers! Designers! Designers!,” really spoke to me because it described so well what the market is looking for right now. About what a good designer actually does, and how much of the job comes down to taste, translation, and restraint. Especially in the age of AI. It gave me an insightful look into the hiring process, and while I don’t think it made me a “better” designer in any obvious, portfolio-ready way, it definitely made me more attentive and precise about what I value. A favourite quote of mine from it is: “Execution is abundant. Strategic, hybrid execution is rare. The future belongs to the companies that can tell the difference, and to the designers who can prove they do, too.”
Seetharaman, who is based in Mumbai, will be visiting us in the Bengaluru office next week for an exciting new project. Big things are coming your way! These are his recommendations based on his many reads last year.
“Two books stood out for me, and neither was published last year.
1. Michael J Sandel’s [What Money Can’t Buy](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/13221379-what-money-can-t-buy): As always, Sandel forces readers to reconsider their assumptions and deeply held views. Among other things, he questions the morality of one’s ability/willingness to pay to replace the need to wait, whether it’s paying to jump a customer-service queue or to get faster access to a doctor.
2. Augustine Sedgewick’s [Coffeeland](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/49808906-coffeeland): A stellar, troubling account of coffee’s impact on the politics, agriculture, and labour rights of El Salvador, told through the story of an enterprising family of Brits.”
Karan, who we recently discovered is an unapologetic fan of Comic Sans, recommends The Laws of Simplicity. Hey! No judging here. That privilege is reserved for colleagues.
“I recently chanced upon [The Laws of Simplicity](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/225111.The_Laws_of_Simplicity), and what a gem it has been! It’s refreshingly short—staying true to its own philosophy—and while it’s framed for designers, I’ve found it invaluable as a PM. What I love is how timeless it feels; Maeda’s ten laws apply to nearly any user-facing product. The book is refreshingly pragmatic, offering snippets like: “Any design that incorporates lightness and thinness conveys the impression of being smaller, lesser, and humbler. Pity gives way to respect when much more value is delivered than originally expected…” it really does make you step back and muse.”
Indra, whose weekly nudge for us at The Ken involves presenting an analysis of different company projects every Friday, recommends the following two books respectively: [Inside The Nudge Unit](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/26171720-inside-the-nudge-unit) by David Halpern and [The Art of Uncertainty](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/213395504-the-art-of-uncertainty) by David Spiegelhalter. While not traditional business texts, these are foundational reads for anyone interested in behavioural sciences.
“This is a pretty old book; it was published in 2016, but I think it’s one of the few that actually talks about behavioural science and ‘nudges’ from a practical, real-world perspective. David Halpern was part of the British Government’s Behavioural Insights Team (or ‘Nudge Unit’), which was set up in 2010, with the help of Richard Thaler. This book is all about his first few years at the Unit, the frameworks they used to ideate for experiments, the experiments they ran on the British populace and their outcomes, and even the policy considerations that preceded their interventions. For anyone who has read (and liked) Thinking Fast and Slow, I think this book will be a great follow-up, because it focuses on practical, real-world nudges rather than those just tested for in experiments.”
“I read this book sometime last year, although it was released a couple of years ago. The author explores how uncertainty is quantified in mathematical terms, and the book mainly gave me a sense of how risk and uncertainty are quantified in real-world scenarios. What’s really cool is that the book is equally fun and useful for the average reader looking to better understand the statistical concept of risk, and as well as for more advanced readers who have some understanding of what it means, but want to see many real-world use-cases and implications of uncertainty. Sir David Spiegelhalter even narrates his own experiments in uncertainty. Which includes cool (and somewhat extreme) things like trying to understand the game of knucklebones by playing it hundreds of times himself, or stimulating how long monkeys with typewriters can write Shakespeare using a computer program that generates keystrokes. Overall, it’s a fun (and somewhat long) read that I would recommend.”
Vijay, who also recently joined us, has just discovered a passion for biking, recommends [Engulfed](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/225898456-engulfed) by James Montague.
“I picked up this book to better understand ‘sportswashing’, but I gained a deeper understanding into how sport—which, to me is the epitome of pure, unfiltered, and unscripted emotion—is not only a high-stakes business, but a tool that wields tremendous global influence. Such power attracts all kinds who desire to control it, regardless of the cost.
Ignore some of the biases therein, and what you have is a well-researched, fast-paced tutorial on your hands.”
PGK also has books to recommend, but he’s already shared them [here](https://the-ken.com/columns/zero-shot/what-we-explored-in-2025-plus-book-recommendations/) previously.
What are you reading? Share your recommendations with us [here](https://theken.typeform.com/FPBooks?typeform-source=the-ken.com).
2. Out of the hat
Hi everyone, and welcome back to another week of Silent Sundays. We’ve been curating a wonderful range of photographs shared by our community, and it’s always a pleasure to spend time with each submission. If you’d like to contribute to a future collection, you’re welcome to do so [using this link](https://theken.typeform.com/fpsilentsundays).
Today’s album brings together a spontaneous mix of images chosen simply for the sense of curiosity and delight they sparked. There’s no single thread this time, just moments that felt worth sharing.
With that, let’s begin.
From Shrutkirti Vashist, Kumarakom, Kerala, India:
| Kumarakom, India (Shrutkirti Vashist) |
From Pradeep Sagar, Phú Quốc, Vietnam:
| Phú Quốc, Vietnam (Pradeep Sagar) |
From Kirti Manian, Ithalar, Nilgiris:
| Ithalar, Nilgiris (Kirti Manian) |
From Prasenjit Ghosh, Hyderabad:
| Hyderabad, India (Prasenjit Ghosh) |
From Indrani, Akshaynagar, Bengaluru:
| Akshaynagar, Bengaluru (Indrani) |
That’s a wrap for this week. Before you go, if you know someone who might like this newsletter, forward us to them!
Please write to [fp@the-ken.com](mailto:fp@the-ken.com) if there’s anything you’d like to share with us. Or leave a comment on our on-site edition.
See you next Sunday!
Regards,
Rohin Dharmakumar