---
subject: "on scaffolding"
from: "visakanv <visakanv@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-05-10 18:30:57
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Visakan V"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3317537462887877902"]
---
I’ve had the mental image of scaffolding on my mind for a long time, and If you’re trying to build anything substantial, you’re going to have to use some kind of scaffolding.You need to have some sort of container, some sort of meta-structure that facilitates the building of the main structure. my feeling is that… i’ve always been quite bad at this. i tend to use as little scaffolding as i can manage, and often my projects fall apart because of improper or insubstantial scaffolding. Now, let me be precise– oftentimes, projects simply aren’t meant to be finished. Lots of creative projects are best thought of as ‘drafts’ (rather than ‘false starts’, which I consider to be a misuse of a sports metaphor, inappropriately ported over to the creative realm¹). The purpose of a draft is to function as a kind of scaffolding. It’s a sketch, an outline, a way for the creator to think through their project, to make mistakes cheaply. For example, if you’re sketching a bunch of drawings of hands in varying positions, it makes more sense to sketch the shape of each hand and then move on to the next sketch, than it does to go through the trouble of ‘finishing’ by meticulously shading each sketch. The goal is to get a better understanding of hands, and the shading takes time and effort. You draw 20 different ‘low-res’ hands and it improves the quality of the hand that you draw for the ‘real thing’ that you work on later. Or maybe you just enjoy the process of getting to know hands better. Da Vinci's sketches for Leda and the Swan Above are some of the setches that Da Vinci did while working on a a couple of compositions of Leda and the Swan. The paintings are lost, but there are Anyway, what I find interesting is to try and follow Da Vinci’s thinking as he made these sketches. What was he trying to accomplish? The first is comparatively small and crude– it looks to me like he was mainly figuring out the pose and the composition, and you get a sense of the whole. In contrast, in the third pic, he does the (disembodied) head several times. It looks to me like he probably did the low-res face (bottom left) first to get the face-and-hair combination roughly-correct, then tried drawing the hair from a couple of different angles (probably the less-detailed one first), and then the main study on that page is the one with the beautifully detailed expressive face, probably close to what he might’ve done in the final painting. to do good work, you have to do good project managementAfter spending some time looking at Da Vinci’s sketches, I find myself wanting to state the following more assertively than I otherwise would have: It seems obvious, maybe even tautological, that anybody capable of producing great work, has to be capable of doing this kind of project management effectively. Because we have a limited amount of time and energy, if we want to get good, we have to allocate those resources effectively. And to do that we have to know how not to waste our time polishing turds². I think it can be tempting as a novice to assume that everything a master produces must be refined in the high-res, high-production-value sense. I think that would be quite definitively wrong. A master has to be capable of producing quality low-res work, experimentally. And here I suppose I should clarify that I’m talking about artists in the risk-taking sense, the kind that Baudelaire described as barbaric and/or child-like. Good works are familiar, pleasing, refined, they meet our expectations. Great works are unsettling, disorienting, they confound our expectations. In this definition, it’s almost impossible for a great work to be considered ‘refined’ at the time of its creation, because its elements are alien, they have not yet had time to have been weighed and evaluated. I think the principles of great project management are probably a little less varied than the principles of great work, because the human being is constrained by mundane things like needing to eat and sleep. Some experimentation there can be interesting, and some artists go hard on that, but generally speaking it makes more sense to live a robust life. Flaubert had a quote that went, “Be regular and orderly in your life, so that you may be violent and original in your work.” I think intellectually this makes a lot of sense. I suspect I would be more violent and original in my work if I got more physical exercise and more sleep. I know all this intellectually, but emotionally I must confess I do sometimes fantasize about pulling a deranged all-nighter and producing something magical in a fugue state. Salvador Dali would allegedly do things like nap in a chair while holding an object that would wake him when he dropped it, so he could work with his dream-state. That’s something that’s always intrigued me, but I never quite got around to really experimenting properly with it. I’m not sure if I’ve said it on here before, but I sometimes feel like I have some kind of aversion to “being a precious diva”, and that that probably has kept me from experimenting more with my process. I suspect I could probably reframe it as “being a cheeky lil trickster” and, it gets so recursive, trick myself into having fun with it. We’ll see. If you’re having fun in your work, |