---
subject: "NEPA, Permitting and Energy #1"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-10-08 17:25:51
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Balsa’s most ambitious goal is a repeal-and-replace, foundational reform of NEPA. NEPA, the National Environmental Policy Act, has increasingly been a disaster, paralyzing America’s ability to build or do physical things of all kinds. This increasingly includes green energy projects like solar and wind, as well as the infrastructure necessary to connect them to the grid. The fundamental problem lies in the core design. A wise law would do a cost-benefit analysis, and ask: Is this project net helpful or harmful to the Earth, and does that consideration outweigh other economic and social benefits? NEPA instead asks: Did you file all the proper paperwork, taking into account an absurd and growing list of detailed considerations and procedures? Can someone sue you, claiming you missed something or handled some detail inexactly, holding up your project indefinitely? Is there any tiny thing that should act as a veto point? And the courts continuously make it easier to halt a project, and impose ever-expanding requirements on any attempt to do almost anything at all. No amount of benefit to the Earth, under NEPA makes up for even the slightest bit of potential technical harm. So we sit back, and the planet boils. Current reform efforts can be helpful on the margin. Granting various categorical exceptions, statutes of limitations and other restrictions on NEPA can in practice mitigate some of the damage. But as long as we have a lawsuit-based, technical-violation-veto-point method of determining what is allowed to proceed, the core problems are only going to get worse. Balsa’s plan, when we are ready to proceed to the cause area, is instead to figure out a path to a replacement framework that is based on cost-benefit analysis. When a new project or action is proposed, commission an analysis of the costs and benefits, allow proposals to compensate the losers or address the issues, assemble the stakeholders, and determine whether the proposed project is net beneficial and thus should proceed. Let those who are harmed sue for damages, but not injunctions - don’t leave the decision on whether to proceed up to a court. Is that a long shot? Oh, absolutely. In the meantime, the bulk of this post is a summary of various current efforts to reform NEPA and otherwise get things moving, so we can actually build and do the physical things we need to build and get done, most of which would be to the benefit of the climate. This edition includes me clearing out a backlog of older stuff that I’d never gotten to, and pulling out what is still on point. Alas, a lot of it still remains relevant, but apologies if some items I did not catch have become obsolete. In addition to these: From Noah Smith, Yay House Permitting Bill
That all indeed sounds like marginal improvements, that will help on the margin, but that will at best dent the problem. The core issue is the central design of NEPA, and without judicial reform or a full reimagining of the mechanisms, we’re out of luck. Yay All Permitting Reform
It’s great that we’re making progress on all those bills and calling for reform. That there are so many is a sign we’re going about this in a not ideal way, but it’s far better than not doing anything. The Manchin/Barrasso bipartisan permitting reform bill is by all accounts excellent, and centrally a pro-clean-energy bill.
Boo ‘Community Meetings’
What the majority of the people want, or what the key stakeholders want, does not determine outcomes. Various veto points and lawsuits do. Like NEPA they have no actual standards, and instead are procedural fetishes. Is it good that there are forms and ways for regular citizens to stand up and have their voices heard? Of course, but what we do with that in practice has become absurd. As Yglesias suggests, the solution is to have elections, which we use to choose officials. Boo Current Methods of ‘Historic Preservation’One issue with NEPA is that it requires constant checks for potential disruptions of cultural heritage and historic preservation. There is flat out no one to hire. Yes the market could in theory fix this by training more people but that process would take decades and require expectations of well-paid and steady work. Even then, it would be a huge expense and source of delays, which would almost always be of minimal value at best. Any common sense analysis would say that if you want to preserve things, this is the opposite of what you would do. Mostly, I’ll come out and say it, concerns like this are overblown and dumb. We shouldn’t worry about them unless we have reason for particular unusual concern. I can and will put a number on such issues and that number will not be so high. Perhaps we can use some form of insurance? Boo Pointless Paperwork
This is one of those trivially easy solutions. Three ways out. First, the way proposed:
Second method, in theory, is that this sounds like a job for… prediction markets, of course. You create a market for whether there will be a finding of impact at all if a robust assessment is made, if it sticks around at 1% or whatever then that’s that, no need to do an assessment. Or alternatively, does anyone want to post any sort of bond or otherwise signal that someone, somewhere, cares at all? As in, rather than always require these documents, only require these documents if someone actually brings a challenge - and make that person pay at least the costs of preparation, if they lose their challenge (or at least, if they lose their challenge and the court rules that the challenge was unreasonable). Even these simpler Environmental Impact Reports most projects have to fill out are rather nightmarish. Despite being most of the paperwork,
They also don’t stop the project, so what’s the point? That’s the core thesis: Any given paperwork should either have real value of information, telling you whether or not do something, or it shouldn’t be required.
It’s Getting Worse
One can separate the issue into the 4.2 years of time, versus the chance there will actually be a challenge upheld (sometimes even for good reasons). Certainly we can do this in a lot less than 4.2 (or 3.9) years? Looking forward, the key variable will be, of course, AI. For the plaintiffs looking to prevent anyone from ever doing anything, the AI lets them file mountains of extra paperwork fast and cheap. For the courts and those trying to do something, they can use it in return. Who ends up ahead? That depends on whether the plaintiffs are close to covering the space of potential actions and timings, I think? If plaintiffs are already doing most of what they are capable of doing, since they impose lots of asymmetric costs and time favors them, then they can only gain so much from AI. You can’t ‘play better than perfect’ as it were. Whereas the defenses and courts have limited resources and face asymmetric costs dealing with this. They are the ones producing thousands of pages of documentation, and who have to deal with every single complaint, and so on. So that suggests they are favored. A concern on that is that the plaintiffs often rely on the ‘pounce on the one mistake’ strategy. There was one public comment you didn’t respond to properly, let’s hold the project. Generative AI will make mistakes. But then so will people. If you are wise, you can do various error checks by AIs and also humans, and should be able to get a much reduced error rate while also gaining speed. So overall I think I’m optimistic, if everyone involved were to use AI properly. The worry is, will courts be able to keep up? Or will they be unable to properly use their own AIs, and thus become drowned in paperwork? Even if they do get there eventually, how unevenly distributed will that future be? How many years delay might be involved?
Consider the Alternative
Every part of this is of course absurd. I would focus this time on the need for ‘alternatives.’ This is the very definition of letting the perfect be the enemy of the good. Under no circumstances should anyone ever have to prove there are no superior alternatives, and until then do nothing. You should of course compare to ‘no project.’ What other alternatives should be considered? I would say, whichever ones someone is willing to pay for you to consider. The current rule of ‘all reasonable alternatives’ is a recipe for obvious nonsense. So, yeah. You apply for a project, and note the alternatives you intend to consider. Anyone can suggest an additional alternative and pay a fee, for it to be considered, within a fixed time window. Then you have to consider exactly those alternatives (or justify why you are excluding them), and perhaps reasonable combinations thereof, and that is it. Perhaps if your alternative is selected, you win a bounty, to reward good alternatives. That way, you don’t have anyone retroactively say ‘what about this other alternative’ or otherwise stall the project on that basis. Yay Nuclear PowerAs I hope we all know, nuclear power is safe reliable clean green energy. It often is expensive, but that is mostly because regulations impose absurd requirements and costs upon it, and the resulting lack of practical experience and moving down the learning curves. Nuclear waste is a trivial concern compared to the air pollution associated with traditional power plants, which kills people on the regular. We should be embracing nuclear power as much as possible, and most of those opposed to it essentially want humanity to perish, or have been fooled by those who want that or by the vibes around the term nuclear.
Can we have more nuclear power now? Sounds like perhaps we can. How do you get people to support nuclear power?
Why are we not doing so great?
Why do nuclear power plants cost such large and increasing amounts? It is easy to see why the best response to such a regime is modular design. If you can repeatedly create the exact same nuclear reactor design that is already approved and that you know works, then you can do that over and over again, and a lot of things get much cheaper, faster and easier. Anything customized or bespoke is prohibitively difficult. Thus, the modern attempts to do exactly this type of modular design. In response to Congress ordering the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to provide a feasible pathway for licensing new reactors in January 2019, by a House vote of 361-10,
Yay Solar and Wind PowerOffshore wind continues to have various cost problems, many of which are permitting problems.
This action is Obvious Nonsense. You can review the effect of future projects while constructing the current project. If you don’t like it, you can hold back future projects. At best, we are talking multi-year processes to deal with EIS and NEPA, despite the whole thing being done largely to benefit the environment and also on the ocean. There is also the issue where people sue to stop the projects to protect their view. How about we tax all coastal real estate, and use the proceeds to compensate the specific losers whose precious views get hurt?
If you don’t get approval, eventually you give up. If we don’t build massively more transmission lines, that our permitting rules make all but impossible to build,
Wind power cannot get any respect.
Noah Smith reminds us that Even simply approving the various energy projects waiting in line would make a huge difference, since
Yay Geothermal EnergyThis comes up a lot when I read about or look into such matters: So, excellent news: Yay Heat Pumps
Yay Carbon Taxes But Perhaps There are Exceptions
Europe is so short on energy it is burning coal and not being very green internally, so shifting production from elsewhere to the EU will make the climate worse. Protectionist policies impoverish the third world and prevent development, and countries need to develop first before they can in practice clean up their carbon emissions. And that these effects can overwhelm the positive incentive effects from the tax. Europe should prioritize getting rid of coal, at least on the margin.
The second argument I mostly do not buy. This is leveling the playing field, if you charge for carbon internally but not externally than you are exporting your carbon emissions elsewhere and favoring foreign competition. I don’t see how it is efficient, likely to accomplish your goals, or politically sustainable, to not extend the policy overseas. The first effect is a dramatic indictment, saying that the EU is so bad on climate that it is even worse on the margin than the world norm, and isn’t getting its own house in order. Alas, this seems right - any marginal energy use there is going to be from coal. Alas again, the implication is that the solution is to shift energy use out of the EU in the name of climate, and actively subsidize imports until their energy situation improves. Which is not a practical thing to hope will happen. The third argument is obviously correct. If Europe’s obsession with climate was about doing things that were good for the climate they would be focusing on reducing their coal consumption and not doing things like shutting down nuclear plants. The fact that they are not doing this shows that their talk about the climate is primarily about something other than improving future physical conditions. Which is a shame. I don’t generally buy the ‘you should be doing X first, therefore it’s bad to do Y’ arguments, where Y in no way prevents doing X. This feels like an exception, something so egregious, that so dominates the entire calculus, that it is valid. Yay Replacing Collapsed Bridges and HighwaysA great illustration of how silly our rules are is that
The response of ‘you want to review building a bridge where we already built a bridge?’ raises questions that existing NEPA reviews already raise all the time. No, we can’t actually do other things as fast and directly as ‘rebuild an existing bridge.’
Seriously. We can repair a collapsed bridge in two weeks, with no warning or preparation time. We don’t want to move that fast in general, that would involve extra costs, but we can totally do the things we need to do. Also, I love the idea of a bridge rebuilding competition. That’s exactly how you make America great, you compete with the other side to quickly create valuable public goods. How about a new bridge building competition next? Or subway construction?
Standard ProcedureA standard proposal for NEPA are time and page limits. Periodically those with experience warn such limits won’t work.
You could impose such limits usefully, if you did it correctly. But you have to do it in a way the courts will allow, and that ensures the time limits are meaningful and bind, and that everything still gets done, and so on. Or you can fix the damn law rather than trying to patch it. I do still think time limits on challenges or other hostile actors should do some work? (Yay?) Loopholes
Also There’s CEQA
What They Took From Us
Here is his summary thread:
I do not disagree with any of that. One thing to keep in mind is that to many, many of whom call themselves ‘environmentalists,’ it is a feature not a bug that NEPA interferes with such projects. If everyone agreed it was a bug, it would be solved by now. Instead, as with most such cases, the true costs are not only the direct costs, that’s relatively minor, but mainly the invisible graveyard of projects never started. Our grid will remain crippled if we do not address this. Enemies of the PeopleReminder, when I say ‘enemies of the people’ I mean that literally - people who oppose the people, and want the people to be worse off. It’s a preference. A busy transit rail line, that already exists? On the recent permitting reform bill, I’m willing to put bill opponents here.
Even that in many cases is a motte. One does not simply approve a wind farm, or even a solar farm. But lo, we have good news.
Thank you Ia. Every little bit helps. What this is of course not, in any way, is so over. Every time something like this happens (say, the latter on extinction risk from AI, which was a much bigger deal and sign) there will always be someone saying things like this, and many who expect Everything Will Change. It is always a safe bet to say no, everything will not change, opinion will shift only slowly, the fight is far from over. We certainly have an existence proof from Greta Thunberg that a young voice can make a big difference in the discourse. That does not mean it applies to anyone who speaks truth in The Guardian.
In other ‘we need a new word for what we currently refer to as environmentalist’
At least it’s not
Speculations on Future Costs
I do not know if this is true but it seems scarily plausible. Early on, the primary costs of renewable energy were physical goods where innovation was permitted, so we saw dramatic cost improvements. We will continue to see improvements there, but now the primary remaining costs could indeed increasingly be regulatory and legal and logistical, and things like endpoint labor, that we are not allowed to innovate our way around. Alternatively, while we had high technology and manufacturing costs the rent-seeking costs were contained. Now that there is a surplus, the rent seekers are here to take it. The unavoidable actual physical costs, after all, cannot go below $0. Personal EffortsCarbon and climate change are a magnitude game, if you want to make personal changes to help then A Potential IssueA consideration when pushing towards greater use of the electric grid is whether or not that grid is sufficiently reliable. If, as California is doing, you increasingly ban things not being fully electrified, We Must Fix the Core ProblemI will conclude with a reminder of what I opened with: In the end the core problem is that our entire approach is flawed. We will need to fix it.
He asks for a judicial shot clock. I think that’s a good start and doesn’t go far enough. You're currently a free subscriber to |