---
subject: "The Dumb Phone Edition"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-11-18 12:22:48
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Noah and I have been slammed this week, so we have been bad with writing. This is a re-run with an update: The dumb phone didn’t take. Though I am still obsessed with this idea. Maybe someday I can make it work. -CJN Colin here. I don’t like to admit it, but I’m glued to my phone for most of the day. The worst perpetrators for me are the messaging apps: I have Signal, Whatsapp, Telegram, and iMessage and they do a lot of inbound all day, not including work messaging. And then comes email—across work, personal, and side projects. That alone is enough to siphon a lot of attention before you layer on social apps, news apps, and podcasts all competing for a finite amount of attention. Pre Covid in NYC, any downtime was promptly eaten by one of the aforementioned. Cab rides turned into feverish catch-up sessions and literally small spaces like an elevator ride were time to indulge. It is very much an affliction that many of us are familiar with every day. But I’ve also realized that to solve difficult problems, be creative, and arrive at insights (necessary for both work and daily WITI!) that the brain needs some uncluttered space to just exist. So, naturally, I have been intrigued for a long time about the dumb phone concept. Why is this interesting? The simple idea of the dumbphone has spawned a mini-industry of sorts. Some of the old-school players are reissuing classics for this very reason. Nokia
But there is an inherent irony to buying tech to replace your tech, though they do spin a good yarn about it. I’m most intrigued by the It feels good in the hand, has a nicely designed interface, and allows for a hot spot to connect another device like your laptop if you’re out and about. For those that must have a messaging app, Signal runs on it, as well. It seems like the compromise of giving up just enough functionality while still retaining some. But in my attempts to flirt with the dumbphone concept, I do find myself needing a Google map for orientation from time to time or some of the daily conveniences afforded by our feature-rich phones. So I am still trying to find the sweet spot. (CJN) WITI Classifieds: We are experimenting with running some weekly classifieds in WITI. If you’re interested in running an ad, The finest micro-creators across all platforms (TikTok, YouTube, Reddit, more!) in one place. A world of music in your inbox, one song at a time. Nudge, get customer insights with ease. Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) —
|