---
subject: "Disney's Crucial ~$4B Acquisition"
from: "Trung Phan <trungphan@workweek.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-01-25 06:01:12
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Trung Phan"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_7971156048460647958"]
---
The Launch of BAMTech
The Ichiro-to-Disney streaming story goes back to 2000.
It’s the height of the DotCom Bubble (and my infatuation with Adidas tear-away athletic pants).
MLB Commissioner Bud Selig is trying to figure out how the internet will change the sport. According to a great long read from [The Verge](https://link.workweek.com/click/38336781.36318/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cudGhldmVyZ2UuY29tLzIwMTUvOC80LzkwOTA4OTcvbWxiLWJhbS1saXZlLXN0cmVhbWluZy1pbnRlcm5ldC10di1uaGwtaGJvLW5vdy1lc3BuP2hhc2hlZF91c2VyPTBlYmVmMTJjNDI5MTE4NDU2MmRhYzA5OTY1YmNlODA4/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B1f051fb1) from 2015, Selig takes on the opportunity by consolidating the digital media rights and offers to build websites for all 30 MLB teams.
To make the MLB internet project “fair” for every team and ensure a minimum level of online competency, Selig creates an independent arm of the league called MLB Baseball Advanced Media (BAM).
Selig funds the project by asking each of the 30 teams to commit $4m ($1m per year across 4 years) and creates a $120m pot of money.
Unfortunately, the first use of those funds was about as fruitful as buying Blackberry stock in 2008. The MLB hires a consulting firm to build a website for the league and it’s a complete disaster (but I’m the pitch decks was probably sick).
Licking its wounds, the MLB commits to building future digital technology in-house.
Enter Ichiro Suzuki, who is basically a combination of Elvis and Michael Jordan in Japan. Ichiro signs with the Seattle Mariners and becomes the first Japanese position player to ever play in the MLB. Amidst wild media frenzy, Ichiro plays his first game in April 2001.
Japanese fans from all over the globe are jonesing for live updates. Spying an opportunity, MLB BAM (aka BAMTech Media aka BAMTech) spins up a live audio streaming product. It’s a solid idea and they spend millions on the product, but the reception is meh. Due to poor marketing and choppy tech, less than 1,000 fans sign up.
With the website and audio streaming failures, BAMTech is close to striking out (pun intended, sorry). However, the streaming angle looks like it might have legs and Selig isn’t ready to quit. To provide a bit more runway, the MLB gives BAMTech the league's ticketing rights and it turns around and sells the rights to TicketMaster for $10m.
Then, BAMTech takes the $10m and commits to building a video streaming service that combines “the agility of a web startup and the reliability of a broadcast network”, per The Verge.
MLB streams its first game on [August 26th, 2002](https://link.workweek.com/click/38336781.36318/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cubWxiLmNvbS92aWRlby95YW5rZWVzLWRlZmVhdC1yYW5nZXJzLTEwLTMtYzI0MTk4MDExP2hhc2hlZF91c2VyPTBlYmVmMTJjNDI5MTE4NDU2MmRhYzA5OTY1YmNlODA4/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B6b3eca65) with the New York Yankees playing the Texas Rangers. This livestream is 3 years before the launch of YouTube, 4 years before Netflix’s streaming pivot and 8 years before KFC releases the Double Down sandwich, with bacon and cheese smothered between two deep-fried chicken fillets instead of bread.
One BAMTech exec described the stream like “watching a flip book”. However, fans love the janky live video stream a lot more than the janky live audio stream. Over 30,000 people watch at an excruciatingly slow speed of 280 kilobits per second.
BAMTech doubles down on the opportunity by selling a streaming package for the upcoming playoffs. Since all of the American broadcast rights were tied up domestically, the main market for this playoff streaming product was actually in Europe.
The tech performs well enough that BAMTech launches MLB.tv for the 2003 season and sells a full season package for $79.95. Over 100,000 fans sign up and BAMTech is now a real business. Amazingly for the team owners, BAMTech ends up only using $77m from that original $120m investment before paying out dividends.
With a cash cow in place, BAMTech keeps innovating and solves a bunch of problems for serving live audiences at scale. The same problem that other major tech players will have to figure out in the years to come:
-
Geofencing: Many MLB teams have regional blackouts for streaming games because they want fans to watch in person or on their owned TV networks. BAMTech figures out how to serve some regions and black other ones out.
-
Multi-device sync: Live sports has to be…live, which is why the stream has to minimize any lag across different devices. If someone watches part of the game on their laptop then goes to the bathroom to drop a deuce and wants to keep watching, BAMTech has to make sure the devices are sync-ed.
- Global infrastructure: To serve a global audience effectively, BAMTech built data centres and high-speed internet connections in densely-populated areas. It also established key relationships with infrastructure providers in every country that offered MLB.tv.
BAMTech faces some competition (NeuLion, Verizon) but has the advantage of stress-testing its product with thousands of baseball games and millions of users. By the early-2010s, BAMTech is the fastest and most cost-effective streaming provider in the world. As more fans move online, other sports leagues tap the company for its streaming infrastructure including the WWE (2014), FIFA World Cup (2014), NHL (2015) and PGA (2015).
Another key partnership is with HBO. The cable TV powerhouse had built its own streaming product called Go. But in 2014, HBO Go received a ton of bad press because it shat the bed for the season 4 finale of Game of Thrones and the premiere of True Detective. HBO’s platform couldn’t handle the demand of viewers wanting to watch fire-breathing dragons and a creepily moustached Matthew McConaughey telling us that “time is a flat circle”.
Not wanting to fumble the Season 5 premiere of Game of Thrones, HBO hired BAMTech to build a new streaming service called HBO Now. Originally, HBO execs had penciled in a cost of $900m over 3 years to overhaul its streaming service. BAMTech — with the Game of Thrones deadline breathing down its neck — delivered HBO Now for only $50m and in under 4 months. It was an impressive achievement.
With such a massive W, the MLB seriously started floating the idea of spinning off BAMTech. By 2015, the MLB’s streaming unit had 800 employees and sales of $900m. The majority of that revenue was for streaming infrastructure — including PlayStation’s online gaming product Vue — but BAMTech was still also running MLB websites, selling league tickets, building mobile apps and running the league’s in-game instant replay system.
A potential IPO would allow BAMTech to operate much more like a high-speed tech startup. It could offer talent equity and laser focus on its main business without worrying about MLB-specific concerns.
Turns out that a perfect home was waiting for BAMTech…and it wasn’t the public markets.
***
Disney Goes All In On Streaming
The Walt Disney Company isn’t the first thing that comes to mind when people think about technology.
In fact, some of its more well-known tech stories are gaffes. My personal favourite involves Steve Jobs and comes from the book [“Those Guys Have All the Fun: Inside the World of ESPN”](https://link.workweek.com/click/38336781.36318/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYW1hem9uLmNhL1Rob3NlLUd1eXMtSGF2ZS1BbGwtRnVuL2RwLzAzMTYwNDMwMDE_aGFzaGVkX3VzZXI9MGViZWYxMmM0MjkxMTg0NTYyZGFjMDk5NjViY2U4MDg/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Bd435f774). It’s about the ill-fated ESPN Phone:
Of ESPN’s misfires, there is probably no better example than the great Mobile Phone Runaround of 2006, a case of ESPN trying to branch out in a forest where it was a complete stranger—and so quickly that it promptly got lost.
It sounded good: a mobile phone that supplied not only the basics of a telephone but also, for the sports fan, nearly instant access to scores (five whole seconds before they’d appear on a TV screen!), breaking sports news, columnists, and other assorted jock poop. A specially designed phone seemed a handsome creation in black with red buttons. It had a retro aura, but if anything, viewers of ESPN are accustomed to high-tech glitz—bold graphics, futuristic displays.
But design was only a small factor in the phone’s failure—and it definitely did fail. When 240,000 customers are projected for a service, and only 10,000 show up, that’s not success. Disney also had a troubled mobile phone division, and in fiscal year 2006, the combined loss from the Disney and ESPN phones was $135 million.
The story goes that ESPN president George Bodenheimer attended the first Disney board meeting in Orlando, Florida, just after the company had bought Pixar, the innovative animation factory, and spotted Apple CEO Steve Jobs in a hallway. It seemed like a good time to introduce himself. “I am George Bodenheimer,” he said to Jobs. “I run ESPN.” Jobs just looked at him and said nothing other than “Your phone is the dumbest fucking idea I have ever heard,” then turned and walked away.
Imagine coming home from and work and telling your wife, “Hey, you won’t believe it, I had a chat with Steve Jobs today but…”
To be sure, ESPN — which Disney acquired in 1996 as part of its $19B deal for Capital Cities/ABC — had an impressive technology stack to serve live cable TV sports all over the world but it clearly had issues with early digital products (when I posted this story on X, the CTO of Disney [clapped back](https://link.workweek.com/click/38336781.36318/aHR0cHM6Ly94LmNvbS9hYXJvbi9zdGF0dXMvMTY3NDUxNTI3ODEzMzE4MjQ2ND9zPTQ2JnQ9UkU2RTNRX2NSN2NCTVVkUVNpTDdKQSZoYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Bc01f1142) by writing that “the groundbreaking work we did on Mobile ESPN, including building a native app on a feature phone before there were ‘apps’, helped us get to the leadership position we enjoy today in mobile” and highlighting that ESPN app was #1 in its category…touche).
Another way to look at Disney and tech is its middling track record of integrating new technologies from acquired companies.
There was the search engine InfoSeek in 1998 for $1.7B. Disney identified the right industry, but had no idea how to really run such a service. Then there was $564m for social-media game-maker Playdom in 2010 and $563m for online video network Maker Studios in 2014. None of these really hit. Especially compared to how Disney has been able to bring in its largest content acquisitions into the mix (Capital Cities/ABC/ESPN, Pixar, Marvel, LucasFilms). Obviously, this shouldn’t be a major surprise. Content is Disney’s raison d'être.
This is all a long way of saying that there was no guarantee that Disney would eventually bet the farm on streaming.
According to a [New York Times piece from 2017](https://link.workweek.com/click/38336781.36318/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cubnl0aW1lcy5jb20vMjAxNy8xMC8wOC9idXNpbmVzcy9tZWRpYS9iYW10ZWNoLWRpc25leS1zdHJlYW1pbmcuaHRtbD9oYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Bf72aa17a), Disney did start exploring the streaming market as early as 2006 (a year after YouTube and 4 years before KFC’s Double Down) and tried different experiments over the next decade:
[The] world’s largest entertainment company had to be careful: It could not embrace a new business model at the expense of its still highly profitable existing one — at least not until it saw a tipping point.
So Disney, along with other television companies, first tried something called TV Everywhere. Introduced in 2010, it allowed people to watch television shows on mobile devices as long as they “authenticated” themselves as current cable or satellite subscribers. But that cable bundle-saving effort proved cumbersome and never completely caught on.
[In 2014], Disney started to look at streaming more aggressively. Disney experimented with going it alone, quietly developing an app called DisneyLife. Introduced in November 2015 in Britain, DisneyLife offered old Disney movies and television series, children’s e-books, games and music. Subscriptions cost about $13 a month.
The lesson from that was without new movies, or at least exclusive content, interest was limited. Disney soon cut the subscription price in half. After two years, analysts estimate that DisneyLife has only about 437,000 subscribers. (It was never introduced outside Britain.)
Bob Iger — who became Disney CEO in 2005 — also considered buying Twitter in the mid-2010s as Disney’s online play. But he backed out at the last second due to concerns over policing hate speech on the platform (fair enough!).
Another complicating factor was that Disney was making ~$800m a year licensing its content. A streaming pivot would take away this lucrative (and very high margin) revenue stream, much of which came from Netflix. Further, Disney forecasted it would have to spend $150m for exclusive content to launch a streaming product.
But by 2016, everyone saw the writing on the wall. The cable TV model that floated ESPN and Disney’s various networks couldn’t possibly last (and it has really cracked in the past few years). So, Iger and Disney’s board — which included techies such as Twitter’s Jack Dorsey and Facebook’s Sheryl Sandberg — decided to do the streaming pivot just as BAMTech put itself up for sale.
The plan was the launch a streaming ESPN product (ESPN+) within a few years and a home for all Disney IP (Disney+) by the end of 2019.
To make it happen, Disney acquired a 33% stake of BAMTech for $1B with rights to a larger stake in future years and — spoiler alert — Disney exercised those rights:
- 2017: Disney acquires another 42% of BAMTech for $1.58B
- 2019: Disney+ launches in November.
-
2020: Bob Chapek takes over the CEO job from Iger as the pandemic hits.
-
2021: In March, Disney+ reaches 100m subscribers (about 50% of Netflix’s subscriber base in only 16 months). In August, Disney acquires 10% more of BAMTech from the NHL for $350m, which had invested in an earlier deal.
-
2022: In late November, Bob Iger returns as Disney CEO and Disney buys the remainder of BAMTech for $900m from the MLB.
BAMTech is now called Disney Streaming and helped its parent company grow to over 240m streaming subscribers across its main apps — Disney+ (159m), Hulu (51m), ESPN+ (25m) — but it has been a very rock ride.
***
BAMTech and the $100B+ Unlock
When Disney+ launched in [November 2019](https://link.workweek.com/click/38336781.36318/aHR0cHM6Ly92YXJpZXR5LmNvbS8yMDE5L2RpZ2l0YWwvbmV3cy9kaXNuZXktbmV0ZmxpeC1zaGFyZXMtZGlzbmV5LXBsdXMtcHJpY2luZy0xMjAzMTg3OTc5Lz9oYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Bf66541ff), Disney’s market cap hit an all-time high of ~$235B while Netflix fell slightly to ~$150B. Since then, Disney’s market cap has fallen by 15% and Netflix is up 277%.
The divergence has many people questioning Iger’s streaming pivot. Should Disney just have stayed an arms dealer and sold content to other streaming services? Sony recently reached an all-time high with such an arms dealer strategy (as well as major media investments in gaming and music).
If we look at the current make up of Disney’s company, the streaming to pivot was probably the right move in the long run. Without streaming, Disney would have a dying cable TV business and fewer options to direct attention to its lucrative theme park and cruise businesses. So much attention is shifting online — especially for the next generations — that digital hubs like Disney+, Hulu and ESPN+ are crucial tools to funnel people to Disney’s IRL experiences.
It was an expensive bet in terms of time, money and resources. The CEO drama between Chapek and Iger very much centered around finding a way to make the transition work. A bet that may finally be paying off. In fiscal Q3 of 2024, Disney’s streaming unit reported its first operating profit ($47m) followed by a larger gain in the in [fiscal Q4 2024 ($321m)](https://link.workweek.com/click/38336781.36318/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuY25iYy5jb20vMjAyNC8xMS8xNC9kaXNuZXktZGlzLWVhcm5pbmdzLXE0LTIwMjQuaHRtbD9oYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B5f935a44). This was after the unit lost $4B in 2022. While subscriber growth has slowed from the early days, Disney is squeezing more dollars from each user (these damn subscription price hikes) and is finding success with a lower-priced ad-tier.
Iger is supposed to find a new CEO successor for 2026 and is confident that Disney’s direct-to-consumer streaming strategy is the company’s future growth engine.
One quick-and-dirty way to look at the streaming unit’s importance is by considering how the market values Disney+ subscribers as compared to Netflix.
Again, this is not an apples-to-apple comparison. Netflix's top-tier pricing has been jacked up to $25 a month (ugh) while Disney+ top price is at $16. Netflix has ~90m subs in the lucrative US/Canada markets while Disney+ has ~50m in those regions. Also, about 1/4 of Disney+ subs are from India (Disney acquired Indian-focussed streaming service HotStar when it bought 21st Century Fox, and combined with Reliance Industries' JioCinema in an $8.5B in 2024 to make an Indian entertainment giant).
With those caveats, let’s run the napkin math. Netflix is worth $415B with 302m subscribers. Or $1,374 per sub. Disney+ has 159m subscribers and if each subscriber was worth as much as Netflix, that imputes a value of $213B. Disney’s current market cap is $203B, which means — on this admittedly crude measure — the market is assigning negative value to the combined assets of a (dying) cable business and (somewhat struggling) theme park business.
Throughout the 2010s, traditional media businesses always envied Netflix’s tech multiple (remember Netflix was in the OG FAANG stock acronym before Nvidia came around). This was definitely a driving motivation for Iger. He wanted that juicy tech P/E ratio. Now Disney doesn’t have a choice but to make it happen.
As noted at the top, Disney+ is well-placed to take second place in the streaming wars. Most households will pay for a few services and Disney’s job is to slot in behind Netflix. I can tell you as a parent that Disney and Pixar properties are kind of a must-have. Disney+ is definitely ahead of Max, Paramount+ and Peacock. Those legacy companies are desperately trying to find a workable model and shedding cable TV assets. Meanwhile, Amazon Prime and Apple TV Plus have infinite money under their corporate parent.
Disney had a fork-in-the-road decision and was able to execute quickly on the streaming path because of BAMTech. I used my [Bearly.AI](https://link.workweek.com/click/38336781.36318/aHR0cHM6Ly9iZWFybHkuYWkvP2hhc2hlZF91c2VyPTBlYmVmMTJjNDI5MTE4NDU2MmRhYzA5OTY1YmNlODA4/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B287e774b) research app to whip up a table on Disney’s largest acquisition and BAMTech is such an interesting unlock for the rest of the company.