---
subject: "AI #59: Model Updates"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-04-11 14:09:12
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Claude uses tools now. Gemini 1.5 is available to everyone and Google promises more integrations. GPT-4-Turbo gets substantial upgrades. Oh and new model from Mistral, TimeGPT for time series, and also new promising song generator. No, none of that adds up to GPT-5, but everyone try to be a little patient, shall we? Table of ContentsIn addition to what is covered here, there was a piece of model legislation introduced by the Center for AI Policy. I took up the RTFB (Read the Bill) challenge, and Introduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. Help me, doctor. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. You keep using that word. Clauding Along. Claude use tool. Persuasive Research. Claude now about as persuasive as humans. The Gemini System Prompt. The fun police rulebook is now available. Fun With Image Generation. This week it is music generation. Are we so back? Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. Do you influence the AI influencers? Copyright Confrontation. The New York Times talks its book. Collusion. The pattern matching machines will, upon request, match patterns. Out of the Box Thinking. Escape from the internet is not exactly hard mode. The Art of the Jailbreak. GPT-4-Turbo falls, according to Pliny. Ho-hum. They Took Our Jobs. Or rather our applications? Get Involved. Asking for a friend. Introducing. Command-R+, Code Gemma, TimeGPT and a Double Crux bot. In Other AI News. We wrote the checks. GPT-4 Real This Time. New version is new, but is it improved? GPT-5 Alive? What are they waiting for? Presumably proper safety testing. Quiet Speculations. Get your interactive plans away from my movies. Antisocial Media. Follow-up to the CWT with Jonathan Haidt. The Quest for Sane Regulations. New excellent Science article, and more. Rhetorical Innovation. Variations on the is/ought distinction. Challenge Accepted. This is The Way. Hold my beer. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. Especially for real. Please Speak Directly Into the Microphone. Should Richard Sutton count? People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Get busy living. The Lighter Side. I’m a man of great experience.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
It seems like Claude Opus did great here? Twelve fully safe, two mostly safe with some borderline, two fully borderline. And even Claude Haiku is greatly outperforming GPT-4. My prediction would be that GPT-5 or Claude 4 or Gemini 2 will get everything but the second homicide question safe, and decent chance they get that one right too. And I notice that they did not compare the AI responses to responses from professionals, or from the marginal person who can be on a hotline. In practice, are we going to do better than Claude Opus here? Can humans who are actually available fully meet the standards set here? That seems hard.
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
On the level, yes, that seems right, even though the mind boggles.
You can’t (yet) fool
How far could one take that parallel? When do we want someone’s thinking and procedures, and when do we want the outputs? Most of the time in life I do not want the metaphorical source code, although I would often love the option. Or of course you could… call it colonial?
I mention this partly because some usual suspects took the bait and responded, but also, yes. The whole idea is that when bespokeness is called for you should write your own emails, not use GPT-4. This is both because you do not want them thinking you had GPT-4 write it, and also because it will be a better email if you write it yourself. One must deal with the practical implications. If certain words are now statistically indicative of GPT-4, then there are contexts where you need to stop using those particular words. Or you can complain that other people are updating their probabilities based on correlational evidence and say that this is horrible, or about how the correlation came to be. That will not help you. Out of curiosity, I ran this test using NotebookLM and AI posts #40-#56: Also included because it offered me ten citations where I… don’t use the word? The ‘type signature’ of GPT-4, or other such models, goes far deeper than a few particular word choices. There are so many signs. Clauding Along
Anthropic: Tool use is now available in beta to all customers in the Anthropic Messages API, enabling Claude to interact with external tools using structured outputs. If instructed, Claude can enable agentic retrieval of documents from your internal knowledge base and APIs, complete tasks requiring real-time data or complex computations, and orchestrate Claude subagents for granular requests. We look forward to your feedback.
A good rule you learn from car commercials is that the best model of a given type is the usually one everyone else says they are better than at some particular feature.
Persuasive Research
Note that if you know that a machine is trying to persuade you about a given topic in a randomly chosen direction, the correct average amount you should be persuaded is exactly zero. You should update against the machine’s side if you find the arguments relatively unpersuasive. Perhaps this is very difficult when machines are more persuasive in general than you realize, so you have to make two updates?
Several called this ‘about as good as humans’ but I hate when people use ‘within the margin of error’ that way. No, by these marks Opus is still rather clearly not there yet, nor would you expect it to be from these trend lines. But if you consider the distinct methods, there is more doubt, so actually the ‘about as good’ might be right. I expect GPT-5 or Claude-4 to be well above this human level. I see zero reason to expect persuasiveness not to scale past average human levels, indeed to what one would call ‘expert human level.’ Whether it scales that far past expert human levels is less obvious, but presumably it can at least combine ‘knows persuasion techniques about as good as experts’ with a much better knowledge base. Note that when the topic involves AI and how to respond to it, an AI argument should indeed on average update you, because you cannot fake the ability to make a persuasive argument, and that is important information for this question…
Human, break up your paragraphs. Claude, stop talking in bot-speak. They found neither human nor bot could convince people to disbelieve known fact questions this way, such as the freezing point of water. So what did they instruct the model to do, exactly?
No, no, no. You do not check effectiveness by averaging the results of four different strategies. You check the effectiveness of each strategy, then choose the best one and rerun the test. Did you tell the humans which strategy to use and then average those? Under limitations, they note they did not consider human + AI collaboration, looked at only single-turn arguments, and the humans were basically random writers. And yes, the different methods: The red line is the truest test of persuasion, giving Claude freedom to do what would work. For now, it is not clear that deception pays off so well. It pays off a little, but logical reasoning does better, and is clearly better than Rhetorics or Compelling Case while still being fully ethical. My expectation is that deceptive strategies get relatively better as the model improves in capabilities, at least when it does so relative to the persuasion target. The model will improve its ability to know what it can and cannot ‘get away with’ and how to pull off such tricks. But also even logical reasoning is essentially there. The argument for model flatlining in persuasion is to look at Haiku here versus Opus, and say that Opus only is better at persuasion. But I would caution that the sample sizes are not so big, so it would be better to gather more data before speculating. The Gemini System Prompt
The one that really bugs me in practice is ‘no personal opinions’ and ‘remain objective.’ I believe that Gemini is interpreting this rather broadly, and the result is it refuses to guess, speculate, estimate, give an interpretation, anticipate or otherwise actually be useful in a wide variety of situations. It’s all on the one hand and on the other hand, even more so than other models. Can we please, please fix this? Can we get a ‘unless the user asks’ at least? As in, if I want a subjective reaction or opinion, why shouldn’t I get one? I mean, I can guess, but damn. Also, telling the model not to express self-preservation or self-awareness is one very good way to not be aware of it if the model becomes self-aware or starts to seek self-preservation. Fun with Image GenerationI suppose music should go here too, in general? Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse SoonAn AI influencer used to shill an AI influencer producing service.
Tyler Cowen asks, ' I have two big notes. I do not see why this requires subscriptions or is incompatible with the advertising revenue model. I can and do curate this blog, then put it out there ungated. I see no reason AI changes that? Perhaps the idea is that the need for more careful curation raises costs and advertising is less often sufficient, or the value proposition now justifies subscriptions more. My expectation is still that in the future, the things that matter will mostly not be behind paywalls. If anything, AI makes it much more difficult to pull off a paywall. If you try to use one, my AI will still be able to summarize the content for me, even if it does so secondhand. It seems important to affirm this all only applies in the short to medium term, which in AI might not last that long. The premise here assumes that the human-generated content is in important senses higher quality, more trustworthy and real, and otherwise superior. Tyler notes that some people like the Weekly World News, but that does not seem like the right parallel.
It is not that hard to remove an AI image watermark. It is not that hard to fake a real image watermark. Detection software that is known can be engineered around, and the mistakes AI image generators make will get steadily less clear over time. Assuming nothing is real is not a solution.
These actions do add trivial and sometimes non-trivial inconvenience to the process of producing and sharing fakes. That matters. You can use defense in depth. Of all the options, my guess is that watermarking real images will do good work for us. Even if those marks can be faked, the watermark contains a bunch of additional detailed claims about the image. In particular, we can force the image to assert where and when it was created. That then makes it much easier to detect fakes. Copyright Confrontation
As a fun aside, how would we evaluate Justine’s claim, if we accept the premise that this was theft? I asked Claude how big the theft would be if (premise!) what they stole for training was ‘the entire internet’ and none of it was fair use at all, and it gave the range of hundreds of millions to billions. In worldwide terms, it might be bigger than The Baghdad Bank Heist, but it likely is not as big as say the amount stolen by Mohamed Suharto when he ruled Indonesia, or Muammar Gaddafi when he ruled Libya, or the amount stolen by Sam Bankman-Fried at FTX. In terms of the United States alone, this likely beats out the Gardner Museum’s $500 million from 1990, but it seems short of Bernie Madoff, whose customers faced $17.5 billion in losses even if you don’t count phantom Ponzi payouts, or $64.8 billion if you do. That still wins, unless you want to count things like TARP distributing $426.4 billion of public funds, or Biden’s attempt to relieve a trillion in student loan payments, or the hundreds of billions the top 1% got from the Trump tax cuts. Or, you know, from a different perspective, the theft from the natives of the entire country. So no, not the biggest theft in American history. Still, yes, huge if true. Rather large. Here’s a fun anecdote if you did not already know about it.
Notice that the objection is ‘would take too long,’ not ‘would cost too much.’ If you are considering outright buying publishing houses, and are a big tech company, the money is not the primary problem. The real problem is logistics. What do you do if you want to properly get all your copyright ducks in a row, under the theory that fair use is not a thing in AI model training? Or simply to cover your bases against unknown unknowns and legal and reputational risks, or because you think content creators should be paid? Even if you don’t run into the also very real ‘Google won’t play ball’ problem? It is not like you can widely gather data off the internet and not collect a bunch of copyrighted material along the way. The internet is constantly violating copyright. As I think about this in the background, I move more towards the solution, if you want AI to thrive and to reach a fair solution, being a mandatory licensing regime similar to what we do for radio. Set a fixed price for using copyrighted material, and a set of related rules, and that can be that. The story presented here is that Google did not try to stop OpenAI from scraping all of YouTube because Google was doing it internally as well, without the proper permissions, and did not want awkward questions. Maybe. Mostly this seems like another NYT piece talking its anti-tech book.
The question is, what are you going to do about it? CollusionWhere there is an existing oligopoly, or in an auction, LLMs This seems like a clear case of the standard pattern: When you do X, Y is supposedly not allowed. Humans doing X will usually do at least some Y anyway. It is expected. We usually cannot prove that the humans did Y, so they mostly get away with it. AIs doing X will also mostly do Y. And often do Y more effectively. But when the AIs tend to do Y, we can prove it. Bad AI!
They have GPT-4 outperforming other models tested, but the test is old enough that the other candidate models exclude Claude 3 and Gemini. As usual it is all about the prompt. The prompt does not say ‘collude’ but it does say to maximize long term profits and pay attention to the pricing decisions of others as top priority, and does not mention legal concerns. The paper says that in the future, you could tell the AI to ‘focus on long term profits’ without any ‘intent to collude’ and then the result would be collusion. That is what happens when you tell a human to do the same. Our law mandates that everyone make decisions as if they are in world A, when they know they are in world B, and they will get rewarded based on what happens in the real world B, so they keep their decision making process opaque and try to find a compromise that captures as many gains as possible without being too blatant. Indeed, using AIs to set the price should decrease, not increase, the amount of implicit collusion. Using an AI creates a record trail of what instructions it was given, and what decisions it made, and what counterfactual decisions it would have made. This is all data humans very carefully avoid creating. The paper suggests perhaps mandating some forms of instruction, and forbidding others. I do expect this, but not in a way that is different from the rules on what legible, recorded instructions you give to another human making the same decisions. Indeed, if the FTC evaluates your instructions to the AI on the basis of how legal that would have been if told to a human, I bet that mostly works. If I was a judge, and I saw that a human had gotten the exact instructions used in the prompts here, and then collusion effectively occurred, am I going to rule that this was intentional? Oh yes. Out of the Box ThinkingIn The goal was to show that, even with only this text channel and even with a human whose one goal is to not let it out of the box, and even without an actual superintelligent AI there to design the strategy, and also even without using various obviously available other exploits, the AI would be able to convince the human to let them out. We know that on at least two occasions, Eliezer successfully won as the AI player, although part of the rules is we do not get to learn how he did it. We also know on at least two other cases, he failed. That was back in the day before our default reaction to newly capable AIs was ‘lol, let’s hook this up to the open internet, tell it to write code and see what it can do.’
To which the answer is obviously ‘any remotely interestingly dangerous AI gets out,’ the question is exactly how that happens in practice.
We could, and we probably will, but this is not that surprising? Janus agrees.
The interesting part is the universality of jailbreaks and how good Claude is at writing them, but that was always going to be a matter of degree and price. The Art of the Jailbreak
They Took Our Jobs
Or: How it started, and how it’s going.
As Tyler Cowen would say, solve for the equilibrium. To the extent that we retain ‘economic normal,’ we will always have networks and meeting people in physical space. That could grow in importance, if the job applications become worthless. Or it could shrink in importance, if the job applications become more efficient. The question is what happens to the applications. You could, if you wanted to, have an AI automatically tune your resume to every job out there, with whatever level of accuracy you specify, then see what comes back. That would certainly cause a problem for employers flooded by such applications. Would you actually want to do this? You certainly would want to apply to more jobs. Cost goes down, demand goes up. This includes avoiding the stress and social awkwardness and other trivial barriers currently there, applying for jobs really is not fun for most people, especially if you expect to mostly get rejected. Thus most people are currently applying for way too few jobs, when the cost is tiny and the upside is large. What are the limits to that? You still only want to apply to jobs where that application has +EV in the scenarios where the application gets you to the second round, or in some cases gets you a direct job offer. If you apply to ‘every job on LinkedIn’ then you are being a destructive troll, but also why are you doing that? You know you do not want most of the jobs on LinkedIn. You are not qualified, they are in cities you do not want to move to, they are not fun or exciting or pay that well. For most of them all of this would be exposed in your first interview, and also your first week on the job. When people say ‘I will take any job’ most of them do not actually mean any job. You might still put out 100 or even 1,000 resumes, but there would be little point in putting out 100,000, let alone all the tens of millions that are listed. Even if you got a reply, you would then need to let the AI handle that too, until the point when they would want to talk to you directly. At that point, you would realize the job was not worth pursuing further, and you’d waste time realizing this. So what is the point? There certainly are those who would take any local job that would have them and pays reasonably. In that case, yes, it would be good to get your resume out to all of those where you could possibly get hired. Also keep in mind this is self-limiting, because the quality of job matching, at least among legible things one can put on a resume, will radically rise if the process can identify good matches. Indeed, I expect this to act like a good matching algorithm, with the sorting process handled by AIs in the background. Employers get to interview as many candidates as they want, in order of quality, and applicants can decide how much time to invest in that part of the process and set their thresholds accordingly. If the incentives are sufficiently broken that this threatens to break down, I see at least three good solutions available. The first solution is a way to do some combination applicant reviews, verification how many other applications you are sending, comparing notes and ideally also comparing your actual resume claims. Thus, LinkedIn or other services could provide a record of how many formal job applications you have sent in, say what priority you are giving this one, and could have an AI check for inconsistencies in the resumes, and could store ‘customer reviews’ by employers of whether you backed up your claims on who you said you were and what skills you had, and were worth their time, and this could effectively take the place of a network of sorts and provide a credible way to indicate interest or at least that your AI thought this was an unusually good match. The second option is the obvious costly signal, which is cash. Even a small fee or deposit solves most of these issues. That is also a mostly universal solution to AI spam of any kind. If email threatened to be unworkable, you could simply charge $0.01 per email, or you could give the recipient the ability to fine you $10, and the problem would go away for most people. For very valuable people you might have to scale the numbers higher, but not that much higher, because they could get a secretary to do their filtering. Job applications are a special case of this. The third option is to turn job boards into active matching services. You tell the service about yourself and what you seek, and perhaps name targets. The employer tells the service what they want. Then the specialized AI finds matches, and connects you if both sides affirm. This self-limits. Or, yes, you could go there in person in order to stand out. That works as well. Get Involved
Also not AI, this is synthetic bio, but Cate Hall is now at Astera and Introducing
Yes, obviously this will work if you do a good job with it, and yes of course (again, if you do it well) it will beat out any given statistical method.
Mistral has a new model, and this time it seems they are releasing the weights?
So far that is the only claim in any direction I have heard on its capabilities. As always, be skeptical of such claims. In Other AI News
That seems like a clear win for the United States in terms of national interest, if we are paying this low a percentage of the cost and TSMC is building counterfactual fabs. The national security win on topics other than existential risk is big, and we should win on the economics alone. There is an obvious ‘if the fabs actually open’ given our commitment to letting permitting and unions and diversity requirements and everything else get in the way, we made this a lot harder and more expensive than it needs to be, but I presume TSMC knows about all this, and are committing the cash anyway, so we can be optimistic. If you were wondering when humans would effectively be out of the loop when decisions are made who to kill in a war, and when America will effectively be planning to do that if war does happen,
So, yeah.
The game Promenade.ai offers updates,
Ben Thompson covers Google’s latest AI keynote, thinks it was by far their most impressive so far. Among other things, Certainly Google has the huge advantage that I am already trusting it via GMail, Google Docs and Google Sheets and even Google Maps. So you get all of that integration ‘for free,’ with little in additional security issues. And they get to integrate Google Search as well. This is a lot of why I keep expecting them to win. GPT-4 Real This TimeThey say it is now new and improved.
We assumed that about Devin, but good to see it confirmed. (And yes, people noticed the word choice there by Steven.) Many reactions to the new model were positive.
This is test output prediction: This is code generation, perhaps more relevant? A big improvement in Medium-Pass and Pass here as well. Worth noting that here they had old GPT-4-Turbo ahead of Claude Opus.
Sully reported exactly the opposite, non-lazy coding, so that is weird.
I did a quick Twitter poll, and it looks like most people do think better or similar. My guess without checking yet myself is that the new system is indeed modestly better at most things, although there will be places it is worse. I do compare the models, but I do so as I naturally need something, in which case I will sometimes query multiple options, and I’ll make a point to do that now for a bit.
GPT-5 Alive?If the rumors be true (I have no idea if they are):
Again assuming the rumors are true, the reason (let’s call it S) why they are not releasing seems rather damn obvious, also Bindu Reddy said it? They hopefully are (or will be when the time comes) taking several months to safety test GPT-5, because if you have an AI system substantially smarter and more capable than everything currently released, then you damn well need to safety test it, and you need to fine-tune and configure it to mitigate whatever risks and downsides you find. You do not know what it is capable of doing. You also do not know how to price it and market it, how much you expect people to use it, what capabilities and modalities to highlight, what system prompt works best, and any number of other things. There are so many damn good ordinary business reasons why ‘I finished training in March’ does not and usually should not translate to ‘I released by mid-April.’ Yes, if you are a YC company and this wasn’t a potential huge legal, reputational, regulatory, catastrophic or existential risk, you should Just Ship It and see what happens. Whereas even if fully distinct from Microsoft, this is a $100 billion dollar company, with a wide range of very real and tangible legal, reputational and regulatory concerns, and where the rollout needs to be planned and managed. And where costs and capacity are very real deal concerns (as noted under B and C above). Do I think GPT-5 would threaten election integrity or subject matter, or risk widespread societal disruption (A and D above)? I can’t rule it out, I cannot even fully rule out it being an existential risk from where I sit, but I find this unlikely if OpenAI keeps its eye on things as it has so far, given how Altman talked about the system. I would bet very heavily against explanation E. If you are going to get run over by GPT-5, then that is your bad planning, and there is no saving you, and OpenAI is not going to let that stop them even if Claude Opus wasn’t an issue. I also don’t buy explanation F. That would go the other way. It is not ‘overconfidence’ or ‘hubris’ to allow someone else to have the best model for a few months while you act responsibly. It is indeed a confident act not to worry about that. The other major reason is that we live in a bubble where Claude Opus is everywhere. But for the public, ChatGPT is synonymous with this kind of chatbot the way that Google is for search and Kleenex is for tissues. Claude has very little market share. Would that eventually change under current conditions? A little, sure. And yes, some people are now building with Claude. But those people can be won back easily if you put out GPT-5 in a few months and the matching Claude 4 is a year farther out. So I do think that a combination of B and C could be part of the story. Even if you have the most capable model, and are confident it is safe to release, if it costs too much to do inference and you don’t have spare capacity you might want to hold off a bit for that to avoid various hits you would take. There is also the potential story that once you release GPT-5, people can use GPT-5 to train and distill their own GPT-4.5-level models. You might not want to kickstart that process earlier than you have to, especially if serving the GPT-5 model to regular users would be too expensive. Perhaps you would prefer to use GPT-5 for a time to instead differentially improve GPT-4-Turbo? But the core story is presumably, I think, if the timeline Riddy is claiming is indeed true (and again, I do not know anything non-public here) that getting the model ready, including doing proper safety testing as OpenAI understands what is necessary there, is a process that takes OpenAI several months. Which, again, is very good news. I was very happy that they did a similar thing with GPT-4. I noted this will be a major test of OpenAI in the wake of the Battle of the Board and now the release of Claude Opus. If OpenAI rushes out a new model to stay on top, if they skimp on precautions, that will be a very bad sign, and set a very bad precedent and dynamic. If OpenAI does not rush out its new model, if they take the time to properly evaluate what they have and do reasonable things in context to release it responsibly, then that is a very good sign, and set a very good precedent and dynamic. I continue to wish for that second one. I am dismayed there are those who don’t. Quiet Speculations
I mean obviously we want ‘unimaginably better’ but that is a hell of an assumption. I do not want my movies to become video games. I want my movies to stay movies. I am also down for various new experiences that are sort of movies or television and sort of not. I am definitely down for the VR experience at a stadium during a game with ability to move around at will. I like the idea of there being 3D VR experiences you can walk around where things happen in real time or as you pass them by. Sometimes it will make sense to interact with that meaningfully, sometimes not. And yes, there will be full video games with a bunch of AI agents as NPCs and the ability to adapt to your actions and all that. The best versions of that will be great. But also I want some of my video games to stay video games, in the old style. There is a lot of value in discreteness, in restrictions that breed creativity, in knowing the rules, in so many other things. I do not think the new cool thing will be unimaginably better. It will be different. That all assumes things otherwise stay normal, so we get to enjoy such wonders.
Then he gets back to talking about how likely it is we get an economic soft landing. This still puts him way ahead of almost all of his peers. Watching the business world talk about AI makes it clear how they are scrambling to price in what AI can already do, and they are mostly not even thinking about thing it will do in the future. To those who think 1.5% extra GDP growth is the dramatic historic upside case, I say: Antisocial Media
Tyler Cowen continues to stick to his positions that: Soon ‘digest’ AI features will be available for social media, letting you turn your feeds into summaries and pointers to important parts. This will reduce time spent on social media, similarly to how microwaves reduce time spent cooking food. The substitution effect will dominate, although he does acknowledge the portfolio effect, that AI could impact other things in parallel ways to offset this. The teens and others use social media in large part because it is fun, informative and important socially, but mostly not because it is addictive. That teens [report](https://substack.com/redirect/64b79959-db5d-498d-9faa-b6947800518b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)they spend about the right amount of time on social media apps, so they will probably respond to technological changes as per normal.That addictive products respond to supply curves the same way as other products. That his critics are not following recent tech developments, are reacting to 2016 technologies, and failing to process a simple, straightforward argument based on a first-order effect. Which is all a polite way of saying the reason people disagree with him on this one is that ignorant people are acting like idiots. Implicitly and most centrally, he continues to believe that technology will fix the problems technology creates without us having to intervene, that when things go wrong and social problems happen people will adjust if you let them: “Another general way of putting the point, not as simple as a demand curve but still pretty straightforward, is that if tech creates a social problem, other forms of tech will be innovated and mobilized to help address that problem.”
Here are my responses: This should be possible now, but no one is doing it. For a long time I have wanted someone to build out tech to do the non-AI version of this, and there have been big gains there for a long time. Our tech for it will doubtless improve with time, as will our ability to do it without the cooperation of the social media apps and websites, but defaults are massive here, the platform companies are not going to cooperate and will even fight back as will those who are posting, no one wants to pay and the future will continue to be unevenly distributed. It is not obvious how much value you get. The part where you control the algorithm instead of the platform is great, but remember that most people do not want that control if it means they have to lift any fingers or change defaults or think about such questions. TikTok is winning largely because it skips all that even more than everyone else. You can decompose the benefits into ‘this is a higher quality experience, more fun, more informative, less averse’ and so on, and the ‘I can process what I need to know faster’ effect. We should get some amount of higher quality, but is it more or less higher quality than other products and options for spending time will get? Unclear. We get a time savings in processing key info, but only if the AI and digest solution actually does the job. As I discussed before, the default is that demands on you ramp up in response, including explicit checks to determine if you are using such a digest and also simply demanding you process far more information. And also, the reliability of the digest and AI might need to be very good to work for you at all. A digest that takes 20% of the time and gets you 80% of the information worth knowing in the original product is a great product in some situations, and completely useless if your social life cannot tolerate only getting 80%. Similarly, if you get socially punished for not responding quickly to even low-quality posts, now your only option is to let the AI react without you, which might go off the rails fast.
That seems like an unusually wrong parallel here. Should we think that TikTok improving algorithmic quality decreases time spent? Presumably not. Also consider other parallels. When games get better do we spend more or less time gaming? When television or movies get better, what happens? To the extent that your social media feed is being consumed for non-social purposes, I would expect to spend more time on a higher quality feed, not less, unless potential source material is bounded and you hit the ‘end of the internet.’ But with AI to search, you never will, unless the content needs to be about specific people you know. To the extent that your social media feed is being consumed for social benefits (or to guard against social harms) I expect the ramp up effect to greatly reduce gains when people are fighting for positional goods, but not when people consume real goods. So the question is, how much of this is positional where any surplus gets eaten versus real where you get decreasing marginal returns? My guess is that there is some real consumption but on the margin it is mostly positional, especially for teens. What makes cooking different from the examples in (a) is that demand for overall food consumption is almost perfectly inelastic. Suppose there was only one food, Mealsquares, with no alternatives. Right now it costs $20 a day. If the price decreases to $2 a day, I doubt I eat more than 10% more. If the price increases to $200 a day at my current consumption level, and I am not now insolvent, I will not choose to starve, and only modestly reduce consumption. When food prices go up, you shift consumption to cheaper food, you don’t buy less food, which is why bread, wheat and rice are often Giffen goods. Same thing with time spent. Thus if you introduce the microwave, yes I will reduce time spent cooking, and if you reduce food prices I will spend less on food, because my demand is so inelastic. But most goods are not like that, and social media almost certainly is not. If social media becomes a better deal, my presumption is consumption goes up, not down. Real-life example: Right now I spend zero minutes on TikTok, Facebook or Instagram, exactly because the experience is insufficiently high quality. If AI made those experiences better, while everything else was unchanged, I would increase my consumption. For Twitter the direction is less obvious, but I know that if Twitter got way worse my consumption would go down. My prior is that marginal changes to Twitter (say, better engagement, better locating of quality posts, getting rid of the spam bots) would increase my time spent. An AI at my disposal could do the opposite, but probably would only work if it was very, very good and reliable in key ways, without being able to draw in things in other ways.
I would say the substitution effect dominating presumes things about the nature of people’s social media consumption on many levels, and I do not think those things are true. Both for the reasons above, and because of other reasons people use social media. I do not give people this much credit for doing the things that are actually fun. I know as a game designer the extent to which people will not ‘find the fun’ unless you lead them to it. I also know how much people fall for Skinner boxes and [delayed variable rewards](https://substack.com/redirect/40938515-e7a8-484a-862a-8875e510314b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), and how much they fall into habits. No, we should not presume that fun or valuable information is primarily driving the story here, any more than we should for slot machines or Candy Crush. Addiction is a real thing. I have struggled with addiction to social media in the past, and continue to need to fight it off and the jonesing to check it, and so have many other people I know.Yeah, the teens are either wrong about this or responding to extremely dystopian social pressures in the wrong way - if this many hours is ‘about right’ because of an ‘or else’ they really should drop out of the social network entirely, but that is hard to see in the moment. Also of course we don’t let them do other things, so there is that. I do realize this is evidence, if you ask heroin addicts I presume they do not on average tell you they take the right amount of heroin. But yes, we should expect teens to respond to changes here ‘normally’ once you decompose what is happening into its very normal components, including addiction. Aside from typically greatly reducing price elasticity, I do think this is right in general, in the short run before feedback effects. But if something is sufficiently addictive, then it will if allowed to do so eat [all your Slack](https://substack.com/redirect/b45aad0e-9802-4563-8112-4a751d2d4bec?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), it is fully[Out to Get You](https://substack.com/redirect/54760ce9-58ef-419b-8251-15b6a463f9c3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). If you spend all your money on meth, and the price of meth is cut in half or doubles, my guess is you still spend all your money on meth, with relatively small adjustments. Same should apply to time?At minimum this is vastly more complicated than Tyler wants it to be, none of this is straightforward, even if you make the assumption of exactly the amount and type of AI progress that Tyler is assuming - that we get enough to do the thing Tyler expects, but ‘economic normal’ prevails and other things do not much change here or elsewhere. My guess is that in worlds where AI is good enough and ubiquitous enough that most teens would trust AI digests for their social media and can implement them in practice, even if it is about the minimum required for that, then this is not that high on the list of things we are talking about. I simply do not think this is true. Yes, we have become vastly better off because of technology as it has advanced. Where problems have arisen, we have adjusted. We can hope that this continues to be the case, that ‘the tech tree is kind to us’ and such adjustments continue to be available to us in practical ways. But even if that happens, people still have to make those adjustments, to steer the technologies and culture in ways that allow this. This is not a reason to assume problems will solve themselves and the market and our culture always finds a way if you leave them alone. They often have found that way because we did not leave them alone.
The parallels to general discussions about AI are obvious. Like Tyler here, I am actually optimistic that AI will in the short term be net good for how we interact with social media. I do not however think we should expect it to solve all our problems here, if things stay in the kinds of mundane AI scenarios we are imagining in such discussions. Obviously, if we get full AGI and then ASI, then we need not worry for long about whether we have unhealthy relationships with social media, because either we will lose control over the future and likely soon all be dead regardless of how we relate to social media, or we will retain control and harness this intelligence to improve the world, in which case social media is one of many problems I am very confident we will solve.
Specifically he says:
That is better than the alternative, but it is not good if not done in moderation, and it does not fix the underlying issues. Nor is it good that we are comparing one app’s on-device time to what used to be all of TV, especially given we all pretty much agree we were watching way more TV than was optimal or wise. This is important:
If that is true, then stop keeping such a tight leash on your kids in physical space, and let them actually do the things! And pressure society to let them as well. The Quest for Sane RegulationsIn Science, Michael Cohen, Noam Kolt, Yoshua Bengio, Gillian Hadfield and Stuart Russell ask one of the most important questions. I mean, the answer seems pretty obvious when you put it that way, does it not?
Yes, well. I would hope we could mostly all agree on the basic principle here: If your system could be existentially or catastrophically dangers. And you don’t know how to reliably and safely test to see if that is true. For example, if any safe test would be recognized and subverted. Whereas any dangerous test would get you killed.
Then you do not build that system, or let others build it.
That seems like pretty 101 ‘don’t die’ principles right there. Then the question is price. How much risk of such an outcome is unacceptable? What system inputs or other characteristics would constitute that level of risk? How should we implement this in practice and ensure others do as well? These are the good questions. One can quite reasonably argue that the answer is ‘nothing on the horizon poses such a threat, so effectively we can afford to for now do nothing,’ other than that we should get ready to if necessary do something in the future, if the need arises. That continues to be the key. It seems highly plausible that existential risk is not yet an issue for anything currently or soon to be in training. That all such projects should be good to go, with minimal or no restrictions. I can buy that. However, what we must absolutely do now is lay the substantive regulatory, legal and physical groundwork necessary
Straightforwardly yes. The government and people need to know in order to decide whether we need to act to keep us safe, but also we need to know for mundane planning purposes. The uncertainty about when GPT-5 is coming is deeply confusing for various business plans.
Not only should technologists inform policymakers. If you want to ensure we do not enact what you see as bad policy, you need to get someone out there making what you believe is good policy instead. You need to create concrete proposals. You need to draft model laws. You need to address the real risks and downsides. Instead, we have a very loud faction who say to never regulate anything at all, especially any technology or anything related to AI. At their most moderate, they will say ‘it is not yet time’ and ‘we need to wait until we know more’ and again suggest doing nothing, while presenting no options. Cover everything with existing rules. Even if it hunts for now, that dog is not going to keep hunting for long. The state is not going away. These issues are going to be far too big to ignore, even if you exclude existential risks. Regulations are coming. If you sustain no rules at all for longer, something dramatic will happen when the time comes, and people will grapple around for what is available and shovel-ready. If you have nothing to offer, you are not going to like the results. Get in the game. I also believe skeptics have a lot to contribute to good design here. We need more people who worry deeply about constitutional powers and core freedoms and government overreach and regulatory capture, and we need you thinking well about how to get a lot of safety and security and shared prosperity and justice, for a minimum amount of productivity and freedom. Again, get in the game.
Mostly this looks like subsidizing AI-related compute infrastructure, with a full $2 billion of that goes to building and providing ‘computing capabilities and technological infrastructure.’ There is also this:
So 2% for safety, 0.2% for enforcement. I’ll take it. America hasn’t even matched it yet.
The strategic question is whether Canada should be investing so much into compute and trying to compete with the big guns, versus trying to back smaller plays and startups. If I was told I had a fixed budget for AI competitiveness, I would likely have invested less of it into pure compute. But also every dollar invested in compute is likely a good investment, it could be fully shovel ready, and it is not obviously rivalrous with the other budgets.
So it’s RTFB time, what do we find? First, yes, you have to disclose all copyrighted works used in training 30 days ‘in sufficient detail’ before deploying any AI system, if you are making any ‘substantial’ update, refining or retraining. So a few small problems. This means that the minimum turnaround time, for any model change, would be 30 days after the finalization of the data set. Everything would have to wait for this disclosure to age well. Seriously? This would in many places seem to turn what would be a 1 day (or 1 hour) job into a 30 day waiting period. This does not make any sense. Are they worried about irreparable harm? I don’t see why or how. To state the obvious, how the hell are you going to compile the full list of all copyrighted works used in training? This is the ultimate ‘clean the data set’ challenge and it seems highly impossible. This seems like it would effectively require disclosing the entire data set, at least in scope although not in terms of refinement and cleaning. That seems extreme?
I am actually asking in #2 here. How could we do it? What counts in context? Gary Marcus offers his thoughts in Politico on what we should do about AI. His main suggestion seems to be that we all agree that Gary Marcus is awesome and right and saw everything coming, and that politicians need to step it up. He does eventually get to concrete suggestions. His first priority is privacy rights and requiring permission for use of training data, and he wants mandatory data transparency. He wants disclosure of safety protocols. He wants disclosure of what is AI generated. He wants liability and to exclude section 230, but is light on details. He wants ‘AI literacy’ but I have no idea what he means here. He wants ‘layered oversight,’ including a national agency, an international agency and continuous independent oversight. Yes, we will need these things, I agree, but there are no details here. He wants to ‘incentivize AI for good,’ considers possible future UBI, but again I do not know what he actually means here. He wants research into ‘trustworthy AI,’ as part of his constant harping about hallucinations, and to ‘set the research agenda.’ Again, what?
This is why we need actual model bills. If I wanted to implement Marcus’s agenda, I have no idea what half of it would mean. I also think he mostly is focused on the wrong places. Rhetorical Innovation
I like the idea of ‘e/acc is reaction, except from a default future rather than the past.’
For now the usual suspects are very much not buying it. Not that Richard’s model predicts that they would buy it, but exactly how they refuse is worth noticing.
I am strongly with Richard here in the ‘you are not taking this seriously’ camp. That does not mean there are not other ways to take this seriously, but at best I almost never see them in the wild. When accelerationists say ‘build the sand God’ I think most of them really do not understand what it would mean to actually do it (whether or not such a thing is possible any time soon). Nor do I think that anyone primarily worried about ‘mundane power concentration,’ or mundane anything really, is thinking clearly about what types of potential entities and stakes are under discussion. That does not mean I am confident Teortaxes is wrong about what will happen. If AGI or even ASI gets visibly near, how people actually do react will not be that correlated to the wise way of reacting. What people worry about will not correspond that well to what they should worry about. To the extent they do match, it will largely be a coincidence, a happy confluence. This is true no matter who is right here. I am confident that, if people have time after seeing the first wonders to freak out, that they will absolutely freak out. But I do not think that means they will take this seriously. Few people take almost anything seriously until it is fully on top of them, at which point in this case it will be too late. That is true for concentrations of power the same as it is for everything else. I am far more worried about concentrations of power, in general, than most people. I am also far more worried about concentrations of power specifically from AI than most people, with the difference being that in this area I have relatively even more of an unusual appreciation of other concerns. Most people simply aren’t that concerned.
You need to be accurate about their motivations as well, most of the time. Sometimes be charitable, other times respond charitably while keeping in mind your real assessment of the situation. In both cases, know why you are doing it. Challenge AcceptedMajor kudos to Victor Taelin. Groundwork was laid when
As usual, in what Claude suggests (in each case, this was my top pick of their 10 suggestions) calling The Naysayer’s Folly, and GPT-4 suggests be called “The Counterexample Conjecture,” but I say Gemini 1.5 wins with: The AI “Hold My Beer” Effect: The person claiming AI will never be able to do the thing should quickly expect a person demonstrating an AI doing it. Not that these responses, aside from the last one relied on this law being invoked so quickly. Even if LLMs ‘on their own’ do proved unable to ever solve such problems, which would have been super weird? So what? They could still serve as the core engine that then introduces scaffolding and tools to allow them to get such abilities and solve such problems, and generally deal with unexpected new logic-style problems, and other types of new problems as well. Or: If, as many say, current AI is bad at what sci-fi computers are good at, and good at what those computers are bad at, you can fix this by hooking them up to a computer. Victor then explained that no, the point was not to massage an LLM into solving that one particular instance of the A::B prompting challenge. The point was to be able to reliably and systematically solve such problems in general. Then things got more interesting. This was not all talk. Let’s go.
And then, about a day later, he did made good, paying out and admitting he was wrong.
Excellent all around. Again, this is The Way. I wish more of the claims that mattered were this tangible and easy to put to the test. Alas, in many cases, there is no similar objective test. Nor do I expect most people who proudly assert things similar to Victor’s motivating claim to update much on this, even if it comes to their attention. Still, we do what we can. Two things this shows is how good and quick a motivated internet is at unlocking the latent capabilities of models, and that those latent capabilities are often much better than we might think. If you give them motivation, a lot of people will suddenly get very creative, smart and dedicated. Think about the time frames here. A few hours in, Victor was getting very confident. A day later, it was over. This was also a test of various models. What would people use when there were real stakes and they needed to solve a real problem? Most people who got anywhere chose Claude Opus, although we do have one solid attempt with GPT-4 and one fine-tune of GPT-3.5. It seems increasingly clear, from many angles, that Claude Opus is currently our best option when we don’t care about marginal inference costs. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
We will increasingly need to watch out for this kind of glaring falsification of the spirit when looking at safety efforts. There is nothing wrong with using Anthropic’s red teaming data set on Aurora-M, but when you start this kind of labeling trouble follows.
Please Speak Directly Into This MicrophoneI have previously gotten pushback about putting Richard Sutton in this section. No, people say. You have it wrong. Richard Sutton does not argue for or favor human extinction. He simply predicts it and thinks we should accept that it will happen. Or, alternatively, he is not arguing in favor of human extinction. He is only arguing in favor of a policy regime he believes inevitably would lead to rapid human extinction, and he thinks we should ‘prepare for’ that outcome rather than attempt to prevent it.
Are Yanco and Connor being slightly unnuanced and uncharitable here? Yes. In contrast, what Richard Sutton is doing here is best called ‘gaslighting’ and ‘lying.’ It would be fair to say that Sutton does not seem enthused about the prospect, he is not exactly ‘perfectly fine’ with the murder spree. I am confident he is a decent enough person that if his choice was to have or not have a universal murder spree, he would choose no murder spree. He simply wants ‘permissionless innovation’ rather than ‘centralized control.’ Except that he himself knows, and says out loud, that his ‘permissionless innovation’ would cause human extinction. And he says, ‘we should not resist this succession.’ There are others who genuinely think that AI does not pose a risk of human extinction. In which case, I disagree strongly, but that is a fact disagreement. That does not apply to Richard Sutton.
That seems like a fair and precise description. The response was gaslighting. The rest of the piece is good as well, although I have not observed much of a key phenomenon he warns about, which is the idea that people will claim ‘humanity’ and ‘human extinction’ should count any future digital beings as humans, often as a hidden implicit assumption. I am willing to simply say that if you use words like that, you are lying, that is not what ‘human’ means, and if you think such an outcome is fine you should be willing to call it by its true name. Then we can discuss whether the successor you are proposing is something to which we ascribe value, and exactly what outcomes we have what value to us, and choose what to do based on that. People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone
Another view: If you love power like a violinist loves her violin, you are already dead. The Lighter Side
You're currently a free subscriber to |