---
subject: "Open Thread 323"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-04-01 07:36:19
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
This is the weekly visible open thread. Post about anything you want, ask random questions, whatever. ACX has an unofficial 1: Congratulations to Daniel M, aka SmallSingapore, who finally checked his email after a month and realized he’d won
2: There were some technical difficulties with the forecasting score hashes last time. Here are some improved versions, total score only, sorry.
Go to 3: Several things I’ve been asked to recommend this Open Thread, including: [Newspeak House](https://substack.com/redirect/c4c0a396-7a9b-4ef6-a06b-ce9b1818dcd9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)is a center of the London rationalist community. It describes itself as “an independent residential college since 2015” teaching “a one year course on Introduction To Political Technology” which is “designed to support mid-career technologists to develop a holistic understanding of the civic landscape in the UK, in order to found groundbreaking new projects or seek strategic positions in key institutions”. Given the name this all sounds slightly sinister, but next year’s course is open and[you can sign up here](https://substack.com/redirect/11887c96-4192-4014-878d-d925758eed5b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).The [Tract](https://substack.com/redirect/8c13c1d9-421e-4e88-9624-e55afc1917d9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)team is in the Bay this month and looking to connect with “YIMBY angel investors who are interested in tech solutions to vetocracy” as well as YIMBY campaigners, urban planners, and zoning nerds. If that’s you, contact them at jamie[at]buildwithtract[dot]comThe Japanese AI safety community apparently exists and is holding a Technical AI Safety Conference in Tokyo in, uh, four days, so if you’re interested [sign up quickly](https://substack.com/redirect/8bc070ef-379f-4f58-a814-28744015858a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). Attendance is free, it looks like the talks are in English, and featured speakers include Dan Hendrycks and researchers from Anthropic and DeepMind.GiveWell [is looking for a new Head of Philanthropy](https://substack.com/redirect/decd306a-33de-4403-939a-1c07ad1edee0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), which I think means mostly fundraising. $200K+ salary, office/remote optional, international candidates welcome.
4: Several people have asked me to recommend their blog in the Substack Recommendations system. I have a blanket policy of always refusing, because otherwise I would worry about offending someone and stumble into recommending everybody. If your blog is good, I will hopefully come across it and recommend it without you asking me, sorry. You're currently a free subscriber to |