---
subject: "If climate studies is the new computer science, where are all our climate tech schools?"
from: "Green Margins by The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-05-11 09:47:24
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
First, let me welcome everyone who’s new here. I’m Seema, co-founder and Editor of The Ken , and writer of Green Margins —one of our weekly paid newsletters.
Subscribers who've been with us for a while know this, but let me contextualise for the new folks here—every now and then, when we believe we have an important edition, we share it with some of our free subscribers. Well, I have one such edition for you today. I think you, and anyone you’d like to share it with, will absolutely enjoy it. If you like this and would like to read more, you can always[subscribe to](https://the-ken.com/newsletters/?utm_source=free-sub&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=the-stack)
[The Stack](https://the-ken.com/newsletters/?utm_source=free-sub&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=the-stack)—our collection of premium newsletters that cover topics like fintech, edtech, personal finance, crypto and a lot more!
If you would like to stop receiving our free newsletters, you can unsubscribe right [here](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/unsubscribe/?user_id=2349339&data=AxlLLoNIlEwaNtR7hMdyKhXTOgq4Ab-iiX_M4CoOMVfZGmy6qVKpWngjRWSccrNyykSsSObiRlr56idNB8ajTttYzJ5abemppNzoszrO4DkHCzUnL8elt51HSfOVfU1eb6XYsFlLca-B3rkKgtL-iL5LdYoFOCCRZiHEwk9pIYA-QKvwmwhbA8_vTSAYYnWlLyYzNNXHykW8cHh89zAP8CVlD3XiBX5KAKp1rsmi4pRRb2gNgl17LJrDriqMh3AthsseGPZKGx6vt7D27GpNmVD-6vwBjnKsMcbN_pJedkBxkCjGWr0V-RyczvF1mlCccGQYK0fetvMWOyQvt5rLFCJ6mn9q55XJElfz-ROmT6rfVsLZ_ScKlZTY_7yGwaHrqcWg4OSipxRq3IbQXLp-PSme0WIXYK4HYsHmK65fFt_7dOxxsIetDQc7SvnJAT_-0hkL6uYtpRwNCY810-CToG5FdXM4Ev7aFy8_q1a0wGUjBrvrb36uzBtyQ2MNti_YGdFH2SUOJBKVHojQannkKl5r6KlzO1zAVh90aplnd2QrQR73qmcIB-0I0EoRO0Rj).
One of the items on my bucket list is to be a fly on the wall when the investment committee of a large venture capital (VC) fund convenes. I want to see how they make those outsized bets (or goof up on simple ones).
I may not be a welcome guest, at least not as long as I’m a journalist. But what the heck, a bucket list idea is a bucket list idea.
Anyway, I sometimes compensate for this by closely following what dyed-in-the-wool venture capitalists bet on in their personal capacity, or when they take to writing books.
Last week, John Doerr, one of the most successful venture capitalists in Silicon Valley, [gave away](https://www.nytimes.com/2022/05/04/climate/john-doerr-stanford-climate.html) a tenth of his personal wealth (an impressive US$1.1 billion) to Stanford to set up a new school for climate studies. It was apparent he was invoking one of the lesser known of the 12 laws that Eugene Kleiner, the late co-founder of the legendary fund Kleiner Perkins, left behind.
The law: There is a time when panic is the appropriate response.
In making the largest-ever contribution in the history of the American education system for a new school, is Doerr, the plucky investor who funded Slack, Amazon, and Google, showing us his panic?
More than his gift money, I believe the status he bestows on climate studies will shake things up. Doerr says the study of climate change and sustainability is the “new computer science”.
So how are we placed in India? We are, after all, the country that turned computer science training on its head by converting even the garden variety of engineering grads into CS professionals. How about climate studies?
Will employment come first, or courses?
Since we started off with Doerr, let’s stay with private money for now.
In 2009, the Divecha Centre for Climate Change became the first privately-funded centre at Bengaluru’s Indian Institute of Science (IISc). To my knowledge, at that point, it was also the first standalone climate studies centre in India. But today, 13 years later, the centre is nowhere near its intended potential.
After speaking with multiple people, it’s clear to me that the centre suffered from two things most new initiatives in Indian public institutions are plagued with: 1) half-hearted measures at populating the new centre with the right people at the right remuneration; 2) no freedom to use private money like private money, instead subjecting it to the same bureaucratic delays and constraints as taxpayers’ money.
At its core, I’d say IISc was not keen on this centre and didn’t allocate faculty positions for many years. Two years ago, after much struggle, it granted a joint faculty position; till date Divecha Centre does not have a regular faculty. People at IISc say “it was the goodwill of Arjun and Diana Divecha that they did not stop their financial contribution despite the centre remaining sub-optimal”.
My sense is that people in such institutions, and even in the power corridors of New Delhi, thought climate change was a future event; a problem created by the developed world, which the developed world would solve.
When I reached out to Jayaraman Srinivasan, the founding chairman of the Divecha Centre, he did not shy away from admitting failure. Although they started with the masters programme, graduating students could not find jobs in India, he says. Unsurprisingly, interest in this programme faded even though the students found jobs overseas. Srinivasan holds a BTech degree from IIT Madras and a PhD from Stanford.
Students come for job prospects, they don’t come because they like the subject, he says. “I don’t blame them, we are not a rich country. In that context [of job creation] we have not done well. IIT-B started later than IISc, but it has done much better.”
Srinivasan says he has not seen companies come to IISc looking for such professionals in a big way. But in IT, in the late ‘90s, TCS came and recruited the entire batch of Masters students, without any interview. “They said they just wanted to recruit smart people; it happened two-three times,” he recalls, “That kind of response from the industry has to happen in climate change for it to take off in a big way.”
It’s hard to believe the industry doesn’t have a requirement for such skills.
As we wrote earlier here—[Everyone wants a sustainability leader. No one knows where to find them](https://the-ken.com/story/everyone-wants-a-sustainability-leader/?r_edition=2)—already, medium and large businesses are scrambling to hire people who can address their sustainability or ESG goals. That’s only going to intensify in the near future.
Over the years, I have often heard how [the Y2K moment](https://www.cnbctv18.com/information-technology/backstory-how-y2k-triggered-a-boom-for-india-it-11636332.htm) of the early 2000s was the defining moment for the IT sector, and how the McKinsey-Nasscom [report](https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/business/india-business/nasscom-mckinsey-upbeat-on-software-exports/articleshow/12601539.cms) of the time, which scoped out market opportunities for Indian IT, set the ball rolling.
As it turns out, McKinsey has [laid out](https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/sustainability/our-insights/how-the-net-zero-transition-would-play-out-in-countries-and-regions) the market potential once again—this time for the green transition.
Don’t get me wrong. I don’t think climate change is the same or as straightforward as the Y2K challenge, or that McKinsey forecast is spot on. But the point is, once again, monumental challenges and opportunities have aligned. And it’s time to solve for the supply side crunch.
Srinivasan believes there won’t be a shortage of the willing. “Since I have interacted with students across the country and given hundreds of talks on this subject, I think if IITs start a BTech programme in climate change, there will be a huge demand from JEE candidates,” he says.
IT didn’t need government patronage to grow
Most Western investors see climate change as a large business opportunity now. The CEO of the world’s largest asset management company Blackrock, Larry Fink, [thinks the next 1,000 unicorns](https://www.cnbc.com/2021/10/25/blackrock-ceo-larry-fink-next-1000-unicorns-will-be-in-climate-tech.html) won’t be search engines or media companies, but emerge from businesses developing or using green technology.
Where then are the institutions training people to partake in this green gold rush?
Now is the best time to set up climate-focused schools, says Miniya Chattarji, CEO of sustainability incubator Sustain Labs, and Director, Anant Fellowship for Climate Action:
|
And after 10 years of running doctoral and masters programmes in climate change that have produced 20 PhDs, with 70 on-roll students, IIT-Bombay is finally taking a small plunge. From the forthcoming semester, it will offer a dual-degree course—Inter Disciplinary Dual Programme, IDDP—where any BTech student can pursue a masters in “climate change.”
Convenor and IIT-B professor, Subimal Ghosh says that he doesn’t expect the industry to hire hundreds of students at this point. “I think our students have a unique perspective, rather than get absorbed [in the industry] they should start up.”
Ghosh is right, but also far removed from the realities of startup funding and scaling up in India. Financial investors are still [putting their eggs](https://the-ken.com/story/why-climate-tech-funding-is-only-a-trickle-in-india/?searchTerm=Climate%20tech) in the electric vehicle/mobility basket, leaving it to strategic investors to sporadically fund climate adaptation or mitigation ideas. Ghosh also believes that departments like his need collaboration with industry, not donations. “They should seek us out, we shouldn’t be running after them.”
It seems Doerr, for his part, hopes his gift to Stanford will inspire other wealthy individuals to spend their fortunes combating climate change.
|
And since the IT boom in India didn’t happen because of the government, one could be forgiven for hoping that the sustainability industry would follow suit. I asked Pramath Sinha, a former McKinsey executive who’s been involved with founding a bunch of private institutions in India—ISB, Ashoka University, Harappa Education—how he sees large private funding for climate training.
“We are the cusp of change. Events like John Doerr’s [gifting] are far away, but we are aware of it here,” he says, as he dons yet another hat, this time of the founding provost of Anant National University in Ahmedabad.
Since there’s a great deal of emphasis on ‘placements’ at all the institutions he’s helped found, including at the liberal arts university Ashoka, I asked him what a new climate school would put first—placements or talent development?
Sinha thinks the two go hand in hand, and that it’s hard to predict which will happen faster—will people just start learning it, or will they do it because they want a job? He sees a lot of people just wanting to educate themselves in order to apply climate-related learning to what they are already doing. “You will see this evolve for both types of outcomes.”
The question of the day, though, is this:
Will wealthy people in India (or in the diaspora) fund climate-focused institutions? Because I’ve learnt that Indian Limited Partners in venture funds aren’t really happy with the modest returns that climate-related so-called “impact investments” yield.
Sinha says “enough people are making more than enough money” to fund institution-building. The question boils down to whether we can give them an interesting proposition that is both credible and something in which they believe in.
I don’t know about you, but I do look forward to seeing some new schools of climate studies in India.
That’s a wrap for today. What do you think? Will climate science schools begin springing up all over India? What will it take for that to happen? And if it did, would you sign up for a course?
Oh, and if you enjoyed reading this, don't forget to subscribe to The Stack. Paid subscribers get nine newsletters every week!
Take care.
Regards,
Seema Singh