---
subject: "Inciting Incident: Why Guinness is more than records, beer, and a social-media sensation"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-03-21 10:52:40
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
Inciting Incident
Fri, 21 Mar 25
Inciting Incident is our weekly newsletter about the most powerful tool of our age—stories. Stories told by businesses, leaders, governments..
Good Evening Ishan,
Before we dive into today’s edition of Inciting Incident, I have a quick announcement to make.
It shouldn’t be news to any of you that India’s stock markets seem to be descending rather hastily into prime bear market territory. But what if this isn’t some short jaunt? What if we’re heading into an extended stock market winter?
This is the premise of The Ken’s very first live event, which is being held in Bengaluru on 24 March, Monday. And we bring together two long-term and contrarian CEOs—Zerodha’s Nithin Kamath and Capitalmind’s Deepak Shenoy—to discuss the mental models, decision making frameworks, and potential outcomes for what is now a very real possibility: a long bear market that lasts 24 months or more.
You can check out all the details about the event and purchase a ticket here: [https://the-ken.com/event/beyond-the-first-order/](https://the-ken.com/event/beyond-the-first-order/)
Now for this week’s edition.
Imagine you enter a pub in England and order the country’s most popular traditional stout (dark beer). The barkeep will tilt the glass at a 45-degree angle, pour you a bit of Guinness, and then wait for the beer to settle. They will then pour again to create a domed white head. If they are following the recommended process, this step is supposed to take exactly 119.53 seconds.
Many have called this rather unreasonable exactitude a [marketing ploy](https://www.irishtimes.com/life-and-style/the-guinness-two-part-pour-is-just-a-marketing-ploy-1.3436716), but as the company claims, there is apparently [some science](https://www.forbes.com/sites/sujatakundu/2016/03/11/the-science-behind-pouring-the-perfect-pint-of-guinness/) behind it.
By pulling the tap forwards, the Guinness is being poured with some force. As it is forced out of the tap, and on contact with the glass, the bubbles begin to form. By using the maximum force of the tap, the gases in the liquid are agitated and form bubbles, while the 45 degree angle allows small bubbles to form, which give rise to a smoother and creamier head, rather than the larger, glassier bubbles that could form from a more turbulent landing.
Once the bottom of the harp has been reached by the incoming liquid, the bartender must then start to straighten the pint glass to upright by the time the liquid reaches the top of the harp. This takes longer than you think owing to the need to take the glass through the whole 45 degree angle to standing. This is when the real wait happens. The bartender places the still-cloudy not-quite-a-full-pint on the bar and waits for the bubbles to surge down the sides of the glass and up the centre to form the head. This settling step is reputed to take exactly 119.53 seconds. Not two minutes. Not 119 seconds. 119.53 seconds. During this time, any bubbles rise up, creating the two distinct layers which offer more than just aesthetics, which I will come to in a moment.
If you don’t like beer or don’t want to imagine yourself in a pub. I have another experience for you to consider.
Imagine you argue with a friend one day about how tall the tallest man in the world is. Or how young the youngest Nobel Prize winner is. Or how fast the fastest marathon runner is. Chances are, you will settle the argument by referring to the Guinness World Records. And if you follow social media trends, you might have come across this year’s ‘Split the G’ challenge, which has ended up being championed by celebrities such as English singer-songwriter Ed Sheeran and American actor Jason Momoa, and inspiring bars to promote it as a new drinking game.
Guinness has had a persistent, if fluctuating, presence in pop culture for a long time, and perhaps the last decade or so has been a bit of a dry patch.
But we are now seeing something of an upsurge.
Earlier this week, The Economist carried an [article](https://www.economist.com/culture/2025/03/16/why-everyone-is-harping-on-about-guinness) titled ‘Why everyone is harping on about Guinness’, asking why a 250-year-old brand was so popular again that Netflix has decided to make a drama about the history of the Irish brewery and sales are skyrocketing.
In Britain in the second half of 2024 sales of beer by volume declined by 1%, according to CGA, a research firm; sales of Guinness, meanwhile, shot up by 21%. Holiday socialising caused “unprecedented demand” in December, says Grainne Wafer of Diageo, Guinness’s parent company. An additional 4.5m pints were sold that month compared with the previous March. Facing shortages, some establishments rationed it.
The Economist attributes this growing popularity to Guinness having lit an unintentional spark with young customers.
But this is Inciting Incident, where we decode brand stories and narratives, and I was more interested in how Guinness has managed to strike this chord—the story it has told and the identity it has built.
It is easy to make the same mistake that Guinness’s parent company Diageo did—understimating the potential of an old, lasting brand that has created around itself an elaborate, ritualistic community experience. An underestimated asset in the post-pandemic world.
Guinness’s success has a lesson for many companies: beware underestimating steady performers in favour of newer products. Guinness was one of two companies that merged to form Diageo in 1997 and, while it has kept faith with the stout, spirits have been at the heart of its strategy. It is easy to miss the potential of brands that have been around a long time. This one is both traditional and peculiarly modern. Food and drink start-ups often labour to convey a sense of identity and provenance to consumers, but Guinness has both innately. While it spends heavily on marketing and has devised many ad campaigns, they all evoke the same truth. It is a distinctive product that has been brewed in the same style for centuries.
[…]
Emotion and identity are weightier than portfolio strategy and it pays to keep faith in brands with long histories and consistent values, even if one sometimes has to be patient. Ivan Menezes, the former Diageo chief executive who led the push into premium spirits, often wore a Guinness harp pin. His heart was telling him something.
The great Guinness shortage has lessons for Diageo, [Financial Times](https://www.ft.com/content/1cd9c09c-7dc5-486a-8aca-88f0d55fdc0d)
How did Guinness create this narrative?
First, there’s what Christopher Vogler, a screenwriter best known for working with Disney and his screenwriting guide—The Writer’s Journey: Mythic Structure For Writers—calls the wisdom of the body. Vogler claims that people’s bodies react to the stories they hear, and that the emotions they evoke result in physical bodily triggers. These are visceral experiences, used to good effect by storytellers for thousands of years—think stories that give you goosebumps, provoke involuntary gasps of breath, trigger flutters in the stomach.
Guinness, in recent times, has been expanding the range of ‘visceral experiences’ it can attach its product and identity to. The carefully articulated double-pour training for bartenders mentioned above is one reflection of this, but so is the ‘[Split the G challenge](https://www.nytimes.com/2024/12/03/dining/drinks/guinness.html?searchResultPosition=1)’ and two new launches—Guinness in a [dancing can](https://mobilemarketingmagazine.com/guinness-celebrates-perfect-pour-with-dancing-can-in-new-ad/) (which can be had at home instead of you getting it precisely poured in a pub) and [non-alcoholic](https://brauwelt.com/en/international-report/europe-russia/647591-sales-boom-for-guinness-0-0) Guinness.
Second, Guinness has long been fanning a culture of pub quizzes and debates with its world records business, which has turned out to be a great way to coalesce a fun, tight-knit community. This probably shouldn’t surprise us because, according to the company’s website, the only reason Guinness [launched](https://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/about-us/our-story) the Book of Records was because its leaders already had an organic, communal habit of good-natured pub arguments and debates.
The idea came about in the early 1950’s when Sir Hugh Beaver (1890—1967), Managing Director of the Guinness Brewery, attended a shooting party in County Wexford. There, he and his hosts argued about the fastest game bird* in Europe and failed to find an answer in any reference book. In 1954, recalling his shooting party argument, Sir Hugh had the idea for a Guinness promotion based on the idea of settling pub arguments and invited the twins Norris (1925—2004) and Ross McWhirter (1925—75) who were fact-finding researchers from Fleet Street to compile a book of facts and figures.
Guinness has never let go of this story of community, even as it changed into something else. The Guinness Book of World Records is now a branding agency, [reported](https://thehardcopy.co/the-guinness-book-of-world-records-is-now-a-branding-agency/) The Hard Copy last year, talking about how it has retained its core strengths—content marketing, the spirit of community, and a penchant for celebrating breaking records—and turned them towards helping other brands.
Here are some notable examples of records that GWR helped their clients break:
Apple: Largest number of iPhones used in a single photo.
Red Bull: World’s largest human flag, made up of 1,000 people
McDonald’s: Largest gathering of people dressed as Ronald McDonald.
Google: Most people simultaneously using Google Maps.
Ikea: World’s largest furniture assembly marathon.
Alibaba Group: World’s largest online shopping event.
Panasonic: Longest-lasting battery
The final piece of Guinness’s brand story, though, is probably the most consistent card it has played throughout its history—its championing of a ‘can-do spirit’ that never settles. You can see it in how Guinness talks about its founder Arthur Guinness (“a philanthropist, a pragmatist, an innovator, a family man, and a fighter”). You can see it in how it has expanded its businesses globally. Its success in Africa, which became its largest market in 2004, has much to do with how effectively it has valorised aspiration, strength, fearlessness as indispensable heroic virtues.
All this, though, shouldn’t blind us from the fact that the brand has also attracted criticism, with some accusing Guinness of exploiting men and masculinity, and associating heroic identity with the consumption of beer.
…conspicuous consumption becomes a way for men to showcase their worth, a substitute for the provider role that is out of reach for so many men working precariously in Africa’s informal economies. Guinness’s recent campaigns celebrate the African everyman, the men at the bottom billion. And in doing so, it sells them a beer. It is a powerful example of how men’s search for validation can actually enrich corporations.
Africa is the world’s largest market for Guinness beer – how its ad campaigns exploit men, [The Conversation](https://theconversation.com/africa-is-the-worlds-largest-market-for-guinness-beer-how-its-ad-campaigns-exploit-men-239120)
Have a wonderful weekend.
As always, please let me know what you think about this newsletter by writing to me at inciting-incident@the-ken.com. I’ll be back in your inbox at 4 pm India time next Friday with more stories decoding the world of storytelling. Finally, enrollment is open for The Ken’s workshops in Building and Differentiating with Narratives, please enrol [here](https://the-ken.com/learning/narrative-thinking-for-team-leaders-and-business-heads/).
Yours,
Ruhi