---
subject: "Contra DeBoer On Temporal Copernicanism"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-09-10 05:07:04
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "IMPORTANT", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Freddie deBoer
(I think there might be a math error here - 100 years out of 300,000 is 0.033%, not 0.33% - but this isn’t my main objection.) He then condemns a wide range of people, including me, for failing to understand this:
I deny misunderstanding this. Freddie is wrong. Since we don’t know when a future apocalypse might happen, we can sanity-check ourselves by looking at past apocalyptic near-misses. The closest that humanity has come to annihilation in the past 300,000 years was probably the Maybe you’re more worried about environmental devastation than nuclear war? The biggest climate shock of the past 300,000 years is . . . also during Freddie’s lifetime². Man, these three-in-a-thousand coincidences keep adding up! “Temporal Copernicanism”, as described, fails basic sanity checks. But we shouldn’t have even needed sanity checks as specific as these: common sense already tells us that new apocalyptic weapons and environmental disasters were more likely to arise during the 20th century than, say, the century between 184,500 BC and 184,400 BC. What’s Freddie doing wrong, and how can we do better? The following argument is loosely based First, those uniformly distributed across calendar time. For example, asteroid strikes are like this. Here Freddie is completely right: if there are 300,000 years of human history, and you live 100 years, there’s an 0.03% chance that the biggest asteroid in human history strikes during your lifetime. Because of this, most people who think about existential risk don’t take asteroid strikes too seriously as a potential cause of near-term apocalypses. Second, those uniformly distributed across humans. This is what you might use to solve Third, those uniformly distributed across techno-economic advances. You’d use this to answer questions like “how likely is it that the most important technological advance in history thus far happens during my lifetime?” This seems like the right way to predict things like nuclear weapons, global warming, or the singularity. But it’s harder to measure than the previous two. You could try using GDP growth. At the beginning of Freddie’s life, world GDP (measured in real dollars) was about $40 trillion per year. Now it’s about $120 trillion. So on this metric, about 66% of absolute techno-economic progress has happened during Freddie’s lifetime. But we might be more interested in relative techno-economic progress. That is, the Agricultural Revolution might have increased yields from 10 bushels to 100 bushels of corn. And some new tractor design invented yesterday might increase it from 10,000 bushels to 10,100 bushels. But that doesn’t mean the new tractor design was more important than the Agricultural Revolution. Here I think the right measure is log GDP growth; by this metric, about 20% of techno-economic progress has happened during Freddie’s lifetime. Freddie sort of starts thinking in this direction⁵, but shuts it down on the grounds that some people think technological growth rates have slowed down since the mid-20th century. Usually the metric that gets brought out to support this is changes in total factor productivity, which do show the mid-20th century as a more dynamic period than today. So fine, let’s do the same calculation with total productivity. My impression from eyeballing So what’s our prior that the most exciting single technological advance in history thus far will happen during Freddie’s lifetime? I think a conservative number would be 15%⁶. How do we move from “most exciting advance in history” to questions about the singularity or the apocalypse? Robin Hanson cashes out “the singularity” as an economic phase change of equal magnitude to the Agricultural or Industrial Revolutions. If we stick to that definition, we can do a little better at predicting it: it’s a change of a size such that it’s happened twice before. Using our previous number, we estimate ~30% chance that such a change happens in our lifetime. (sanity check: the last such earth-shattering change was the Industrial Revolution, about 3 - 4 lifetimes ago.) What about the apocalypse? This one is tougher. Freddie tries to do an argument from absurdity: suppose the apocalypse happened tomorrow. Wouldn’t it be crazy that, you, of all the humans who have ever existed, were correct when you thought the apocalypse was nigh? No, it’s not crazy at all. If the apocalypse happens tomorrow, then 7% of humans throughout history would have been right to predict an apocalypse in their lifetime. That’s not a such a low percent - your probability of being born in the final generation is about the same as (eg) your probability of being born in North America. Here’s a question I don’t know how to answer - the number above (7%) is about how surprised you should be if the apocalypse happens in your lifetime. But I don’t think it’s the overall chance that the apocalypse happens in your lifetime, because the apocalypse could be millions of years away, after there had been trillions of humans, and then retroactively it would seem much less likely that the apocalypse happened during the 21st century. So: is it possible to calculate this chance? I think there ought to be a way to leverage the Speaking of the Carter Doomsday Argument… …Freddie is re-inventing (local Substacker The world’s leading expert on anthropic reasoning is probably Oxford philosophy professor Nick Bostrom, who I think if you use anthropic reasoning correctly, you end up with a prior probability of something like 30% that the singularity (defined as a technological revolution as momentous as agriculture or industry) happens⁷ during your lifetime, and a smaller percent that I’m not sure about (maybe 7%?) that the apocalypse happens during your lifetime. None of these probabilities are lower than the probability that you’re born in North America, so people should stop acting like they’re so small as to be absurd or impossible. But also, (except maybe the part about how 1 The Toba supervolcano is 2 Something called “ 3 If he got this far halfway down, why did he even present the obviously-wrong 0.03% number as his headline result? Was he hoping we wouldn’t read the rest of his post? 4 This is slightly wrong for the exact framing of the question; your life is a span rather than a point, so probably by the time you die, about 10% of humans will have been alive during your lifespan. The exact way you think about this depends on how old you are, and I’ll stick with the 7% number for the rest of the essay. 5 Again, I don’t understand why he bothered giving the earlier obviously-wrong-for-this-problem numbers, vaguely half-alluded to the existence of this one in order to complain that someone could miscalculate it, and then put no effort into calculating it correctly or at least admitting that he couldn’t calculate the number that mattered. 6 Some of these numbers depend on how you’re thinking of “lifespan” vs. “lifespan so far” and how much of your actually-existing foreknowledge about the part of your life you’ve already lived you’re using. I’m just going to handwave all of that away since it depends on how you’re framing the question and doesn’t change results by more than a factor of two or three. 7 Realistically the Agricultural and Industrial Revolutions were long processes instead of point events. I think the singularity will be shorter (just as the Industrial Revolution was shorter than the Agricultural), but if this bothers you, imagine we’re talking about the start (or peak) of each. You're currently a free subscriber to |