---
subject: "Jeff Asher on manipulating crime data"
from: "Marginal REVOLUTION <donotreply@wordpress.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-08-17 04:28:04
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tyler Cowen", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2466199532210586699", "UNREAD"]
---
Jeff Asher: Within a city, within a district, there are times, either by mistake or by intention, that an agency will manipulate a certain type of crime. There are times where things will get underreported. There will be mistakes. There are times where things will get over reported and there will be mistakes. But because there's 18,000 individual agencies reporting data, usually when the data is wrong, it's obviously wrong.
It's like Chicago reporting, you know, six murders in a month when the city averages over 20, and in some years more than that. Way more than that. It's when you've seen these sharp drops in crime all of a sudden when a data reporting system changed. But to manipulate national crime data would be virtually impossible. I think that’s the value of being able to go and get it from each individual city. You can draw your conclusions and audit agencies that look wrong and still come to the correct conclusion. And I'll note the FBI has seven major categories of crime that they collect. And there are ten different population groups. Every one of those population groups in every category of crime reported a decline in 2024, per the FBI. So it's not a big blue city thing. It's a small city thing. It's a suburb thing. It's a rural county thing. It's a big city thing. It's everywhere...
But of the 30 cities that reported the most murders to the FBI in 2023, murders are down in 26 of them. We're seeing a 20% drop in murder, a 10% drop in violent crime, a 13% drop in property crime. Whereas in 2024 murder fell a lot and auto theft fell a lot, now it's pretty much that everything is falling a considerable amount.
Here is [his full dialogue with Paul Krugman](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=405ffa0830d5c373f6ab58ba3d99ea6b2f175f759d53c90354e3ee47e7ce1cc8&blog_id=42693868&post_id=91309&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=f2b9140da17ae1eddc2621e940b93365&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly9wYXVsa3J1Z21hbi5zdWJzdGFjay5jb20vcC90YWxraW5nLXdpdGgtamVmZi1hc2hlcj91dG1fc291cmNlPXBvc3QtZW1haWwtdGl0bGUmcHVibGljYXRpb25faWQ9Mjc3NTE3JnBvc3RfaWQ9MTcxMDYzMjMwJnV0bV9jYW1wYWlnbj1lbWFpbC1wb3N0LXRpdGxlJmlzRnJlZW1haWw9ZmFsc2Umcj0zbzkmdHJpZWRSZWRpcmVjdD10cnVlJnV0bV9tZWRpdW09ZW1haWw&email_id=3d768bb543fa45f88104ec1e4de47f09). And here is [Jeff's YouTube channel](http://marginalrevolution.com?action=user_content_redirect&uuid=dd735b81d47bb4fa7e5dd906c5dad62fe62faee63469692f0764db0004d632c7&blog_id=42693868&post_id=91309&user_id=262258391&subs_id=225460721&signature=8182530c99440a00b5b0047187cdf8d6&email_name=new-post&user_email=ishan.mail@gmail.com&encoded_url=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cueW91dHViZS5jb20vQEFnZ3JlZ2F0ZWRfUlRDSQ=&email_id=3d768bb543fa45f88104ec1e4de47f09) on the same topics. Yes, I know public disorderliness is up in some regards. But do not use that as an excuse to mood affiliation with an extremely negatively view of the trends!