---
subject: "The Network School Fellowship"
from: "Balaji <balajis@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-04-18 16:35:39
labels: ["Balaji", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_3304713803370614215", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Global meritocracy is finally here. We’re launching a new fellowship for founders and creators, open to anyone from any country. You can If that already sounds amazing, go to (1) Who should applyYou should apply if you’re a global tech founder, AI-first creator, or community builder. Our ideal founder recognizes that the Internet is rising, that Asia is rising, and that technology has Our AI-first creator category is newer and deserves a bit more explanation. In short, we believe 20th century media is over. And we think every niche filled by the formerly mainstream media — Hollywood, newspapers, magazines, broadcast television, and the like — is up for grabs as never before, with production shifting from traditional venues to the global Internet. So, we’re looking for filmmakers, artists, and storytellers who want to make tasteful³ use of AI to Our community builder category is likewise new and also merits explanation. Briefly, we think the third kind of “thing” after tech companies and cryptocurrencies will be startup societies. That means intentional communities, pop-up cities, and network states, where digital tribes assemble offline in person. I’ve written about this at length in About youOK, so that’s the type of person we’re looking for professionally — a founder or creator. But what are you like personally? You’re [Internet First](https://substack.com/redirect/0689bfb2-7845-4da8-9a3a-ee8707f90c0c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), in that you broadly believe in the open web, decentralization, cryptocurrency, and encryption.You’re classically liberal, centrist, or otherwise politically pragmatic⁷ — rather than ultranationalist or socialist. You’d be in tech even if markets crashed for a decade, so long as you had time to study, learn, and explore. You’re excited to relocate to our [solarpunk campus](https://substack.com/redirect/dc252313-9186-4bf4-89a0-23df5b2baae0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)near Singapore for a year to level up among others of like mind.And you’re likely what we call [dark talent](https://substack.com/redirect/aea81b61-f919-4fea-9ca7-6125525b299c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)— undiscovered greatness from the middle of nowhere⁸, whether that’s India or Indiana, Eastern Europe or the Middle East — who just needs a shot to prove yourself. And this is your shot.
So: you should apply⁹ for the Network School Fellowship if you’re looking for a sunny, green, and calm environment to build your dream amidst a community of builders. We’ve created a peaceful place with minimal distraction where funding, coffee, food, gym, office space, laundry, cleaning, and all the rest is provided so you can focus on work. Now, let’s focus on the application. (2) How to applyBecause we’re open to the whole world, we expect many to apply. So, we have a simple multi-stage process for obtaining a Network School Fellowship. Form. First, fill out the form at [ns.com/apply](https://substack.com/redirect/f2684e66-670a-4d80-b8db-081a95ef5f2d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). We’ll review to see if you have either potential (as demonstrated by test scores and academic accomplishment) or results (as demonstrated by tech portfolio or startup traction). We’ll also administer a short screening test and ask for references.Zoom. For those we deem competitive in the first round, we’ll do a structured video interview where we get to know you and ask a number of interactive questions. We seek people with high integrity and high agency, a combination that’s hard to assess through forms alone. Room. Finally, we ask candidates who make it to the third round to fly out¹⁰ to our Network School campus near Singapore¹¹ for a in-person, proctored, pencil and paper objective examination similar to the IIT JEE, the GaoKao, or the SAT. This offline component allows us to AI-proof the online talent search, thereby confirming your skills. During your trip you’ll also meet other Network Schoolers, see the facilities, and determine if you’re ready to build. Boom. Then, if you’re accepted, you’ll relocate to Network School for one year to build. We’ll either fund your existing company or set up a new one. Existing companies will be backed in their current jurisdictions, while new companies will be incorporated by default in Singapore.¹²
So that’s the idea: a global startup draft, like the NBA draft, where we source talent from around the world and colocate it in person. We’re starting with 100 global founders in our first batch, and plan to scale up over time if things go well. But why are we doing this? (3) Why we’re doing thisWe believe the old path for finding global tech talent — which went through Stanford¹³, Silicon Valley, San Francisco, California, and ultimately America — is ending. So we’re going to need a new path, based on pure global meritocracy. And we think the Network School Fellowship could be a starting point for this new path. To motivate this, let’s talk about (a) what the path for tech talent used to look like, (b) why it’s now broken, and (c) how we plan to replace it. The old path for tech talentLet’s break this up into the American and global paths. The American path once started with a smart young kid in the middle of (say) Indiana like Scott McNealy. He’d take the SAT, get a great score, attend a top engineering school at a reasonable price, come to Stanford for his graduate degree, found a Silicon Valley tech company, scale it up, and eventually go public. The global path once started with a smart young kid in the middle of (say) India like Vinod Khosla. He’d take the IIT-JEE, get a great score, attend a top engineering school at a reasonable price, come to Stanford for his graduate degree, found a Silicon Valley tech company, scale it up, go public, and eventually become a US citizen.¹⁴ Now, if you know anything about those two men, you’d know that they cofounded a little multibillion dollar company called Sun Microsystems. That is: they came from very different places, but thanks to the magic of global meritocracy, thanks to international capitalism, they could build something great together that pushed tech forward and benefited the world. The old path for tech talent is brokenYet their story is much less possible in today’s US. I won’t rehash every headline, but today’s Scott McNealy might well be blocked from matriculating by DEI, and today’s Vinod Khosla might well be blocked from immigrating on an H-1B. And that’s really just the start of it. Every single piece of the old path for tech talent is now either fully broken or under assault. To review: Stanford. With [anti-merit admissions](https://substack.com/redirect/40ff3d1c-0306-4a38-b460-9b1b6cdd870b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o),[unaffordable tuition](https://substack.com/redirect/d9ab5cf1-3675-4e6f-9e2e-36d834baa753?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o),[student visa denials](https://substack.com/redirect/87709544-6784-47e7-b800-f192f5d09133?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o),[grade inflation](https://substack.com/redirect/391281b1-31a4-46e4-b273-8b555dfe8e5b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o),[ideological zealotry](https://substack.com/redirect/c79d721b-ccda-45a3-89fe-1e5e1467bcb3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o),[AI fakery](https://substack.com/redirect/55b40633-c220-44cd-8b17-d4c5c1d92f60?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o),[lack of reproducibility](https://substack.com/redirect/297b4daf-8fd2-45b5-8de1-a49da1615487?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), and[budget cuts](https://substack.com/redirect/7ee59574-d1b6-4aa6-940f-c56c5f50e2b3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), US academia (including Stanford, Berkeley, MIT, etc) is in[steep decline](https://substack.com/redirect/2956ed00-aa54-4b7f-984a-afbed86bb95a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).Silicon Valley. Still great people here, but the proverbial [garage startup](https://substack.com/redirect/c26a8302-b2b0-415a-86c0-016b965a76be?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)may need[$250k](https://substack.com/redirect/1a4f3d98-e54e-4567-b513-3d05a4db1dc0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)just for compliance. High cost, high regulation, and high ideological conformity now means fewer crazy ideas — and much more consensus (and hence fundable, but perhaps not exceptional) work.San Francisco. Even more extraordinary cost, [rampant crime](https://substack.com/redirect/8865c7ff-2d1e-4b10-91b8-61b002ea6adf?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o),[out-of-control filth](https://substack.com/redirect/e22566e4-3f25-4be2-8904-7a2e1e3c5aa9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o),[anti-tech laws](https://substack.com/redirect/f60585ab-64b9-42d7-9cc6-427254ee9861?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), and ideological anti-tech sentiment that’s escalated all the way to[ritual destruction](https://substack.com/redirect/f4cefeb1-ff0c-4c8b-94fd-81c3ffab2da7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)of[self-driving cars](https://substack.com/redirect/49e2407d-0988-4c71-963c-76ebc054455a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)and[violent attacks on founders](https://substack.com/redirect/f08803b3-ab42-41e6-97a3-c281173a051c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).¹⁵California. A [bankrupt state](https://substack.com/redirect/19e2927f-b68a-40d6-bbf8-0753451961d7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)that can’t[control fires](https://substack.com/redirect/4821c7ae-57bf-4ec8-b69f-59d412a9893a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o),[stop theft](https://substack.com/redirect/d0c82a63-3dea-4f75-8a1b-2f9143a1637c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), or[build public infrastructure](https://substack.com/redirect/0be35b7d-7ed5-4e69-9259-d63dd14d1e77?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)— but that will still[raise taxes](https://substack.com/redirect/19e2927f-b68a-40d6-bbf8-0753451961d7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)and impose[anti-tech](https://substack.com/redirect/32ff83e3-f1bc-4e58-84e2-1c9b9d1c9c1a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[regulations](https://substack.com/redirect/58b2666d-1795-4600-aa72-00cdd541b0df?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).¹⁶America. Now institutionally hostile to [skilled immigration](https://substack.com/redirect/ef0aca55-476e-4c80-85b9-2746ecfcd5fd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o),[foreign investors](https://substack.com/redirect/40261362-d749-45e5-8f01-90bc452a8faf?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o),[student visas](https://substack.com/redirect/46e75f8e-36df-4b82-904c-ebd27a87c42b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o),[exports, imports, free trade](https://substack.com/redirect/7b79e2e5-0923-41e8-a52f-c7f646c26806?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), and[foreigners](https://substack.com/redirect/036b4cb6-9b98-40c0-bbfb-186dab3eeb6c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)in general, with unpredictable[corporate law](https://substack.com/redirect/784215f0-bd02-4465-aabc-0be290f46469?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).
In short: the combination of surging Fortunately, we still have the Internet. The new path for tech talentRemember, there’s no silicon being mined out of the hills of Silicon Valley. There’s no natural resource keeping tech there. So in theory, given that you just need a laptop to build things on the Internet, we should be able to materialize the global tech community anywhere. But in practice, someone needs to actually do that. And And thus the Network School Fellowship. In a sense, our fellowship just does the “obvious” thing. It starts with the observation that tech has We put the first node of the Network School in the new In other words: we have capital here to fund tech companies, visas for tech talent, and the will to build. And with that will, we’ve already built our initial And all we need is you. So, apply for the Network School Fellowship at 1 For example, you should be aware of not just Tesla but BYD, not just SpaceX but ISRO, not just ChatGPT but Mistral, not just Anduril drones but also Bayraktars. That is: you should know about the best of Silicon Valley, but also the best of the world. 2 We have a list of areas we’re interested in at 3 What is tasteful use of AI? It’s not slop. It’s not text in ChatGPT voice, or humans with twelve fingers. It’s using AI to create something cool. 4 In general, we think the workflow of an AI-first creator is highly technical and similar to a programmer, so in a sense you can think of this as a subclass of tech founder. 5 As one example: a traditional creator often builds an audience on the basis of their looks or charisma, which is fine. But an AI creator is more like a screenwriter, who can cast any actor or actress in any role at any time. This makes them far more flexible, and capable of generating many different kinds of content. 6 For example, AI is already extremely useful for cleaning up raw audio transcripts, generating timestamps, and tasks of this nature. It usually requires polish, but it saves time. 7 As a first cut: if you like Lee Kuan Yew and Singapore, and believe in results over ideology, then we will probably get along. 8 Of course, if you come from “somewhere”, like New York or Tokyo or London or the like, feel free to apply. Dark talent is about your current position, not so much your current location. 9 Just as important is who should not apply. You should not apply for the fellowship if you’re seeking something purely recreational. Of course, we do have fun, but our events calendar is more like a research university, fitness bootcamp, or tech conference than a tropical resort. That is: the typical event is organized around learning technology, burning calories, and/or earning revenue — around self-improvement of some kind. So, if your idea of fun is working with robot dogs, running a 5K, hearing guest lectures from founders like Vitalik and Bryan Johnson, and meeting people of like mind — you’ll definitely have fun. And Singapore is right next door, so you can hit a global city whenever you want. But the focus is not Bali, but technology. Meaning: not eat/pray/love, but 10 We may reimburse travel for applicants with true financial need. Just indicate this when you apply. 11 You can fly in via Singapore’s Changi Airport (SIN) or one of Malaysia’s airports like KUL or JHB. 12 Unless there’s regulatory justification for another locale. 13 I don’t mean literally Stanford alone. I mean Stanford in the sense of American STEM-focused universities like Stanford, MIT, Harvard, and the like that graduate tech talent. Though of course Stanford by itself was a large part of that. 14 For decades, many talented immigrants essentially applied to college, company, and country as one package at age 21. For the US, they applied to do their graduate degree on an F-1 or J-1 visa, they then worked at a company on an H-1B or O-1 visa, and then they got membership in the country via permanent residency and ultimately citizenship. 15 Some people I like say SF crime is 16 Some of these measures, like the |