---
subject: "Why Is Moscow So Weird?"
from: "Tomas Pueyo from Uncharted Territories <unchartedterritories@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-08-14 14:51:30
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Tomas Pueyo", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_28238133486362596", "UNREAD"]
---
Moscow is the biggest city in Europe. How come? It’s one of the northernmost capitals in the world, yet away from the warming influence of the sea. Why? Most European capitals are on a major river, but Moscow is on a tributary of a tributary of a river that ends in a lake.¹ And while most other big cities are on river confluences, Moscow isn’t. Why such a poor location? At over 17,000,000 km2 in surface area, Russia is by far the largest country on Earth.² Of all the possible places it could have a capital, why did it end up being in Moscow? A city so far to the west of the country, on a tiny river, far from the sea or any trade hub? You might retort: It’s so far west because it conquered everything to its east. But that doesn’t really answer the question. Why was it able to conquer all that territory to its east? No other country has done anything even remotely similar. Why could Russia? And how is it possible that it would reach the Pacific Ocean before it reached the Baltic or the Black Seas?! And why is Russia’s capital not on the How did Moscow evolve from a swampy³ village in the 1100s to the biggest European city with over 20M people?⁴ An AI rendering of a Medieval swampy town on a river turning into Moscow. The answer to all these questions is pretty crazy. It involves horse archers, human harvesting, and tiny animals, and it tells us a lot about Russia’s past and its future. Not Too ColdRussia’s capital is very far north. It’s the 3rd coldest capital on Earth,⁵ and by far the biggest, at 8x the size of the next one.⁶ It’s so far north it barely has farmland! Why would you put the capital of the biggest country on Earth on the edge of some of the most fertile farmland on Earth? Capitals need a stable source of food. That usually means farms, or at least a port to import food.⁷ Moscow is not on a sea port or a major river (we’ll see why later), so it needed farmland to support it. This limits how far north Moscow could be, and it’s pretty much as far north as it can get away with. Moscow sits in woodlands, and the taiga forest begins north of it. None of this is very conducive to farming. So weird… It’s as if Moscow was trying to escape from fertile southern lands… That’s exactly what happened. Escaping from the SouthernersYou can see in the maps above that Moscow is north of today’s cropland area, and south of that are grasslands. Why grasslands? Because there’s just not enough rainfall to sustain a forest or crops. And who lives in grasslands? Nomadic LifestyleSteppe societies are perfectly suited to live in grasslands in a way that no other society is: Grasslands can’t sustain agriculture without irrigation. In other words, the ground can’t produce enough calories for humans to survive. But nomads can roam! So they can consume the calories produced across a larger area of grasslands. This way, they can feed horses, goats, and sheep. They then feed themselves from these animals’ dairy and meat. To give you orders of magnitude, a sheep can feed 100 people for one day, so just 30 sheep are enough meat for a company for a month.⁸ These animals also gave them wool, leather, furs, and bones for their clothing, weapons, armor, and yurts. They are extremely mobile. If needed, [they could travel](https://substack.com/redirect/b04e776f-c2f5-4e37-9226-5652cd8813c4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)up to 100 km per day. Riders had several horses (usually 5-6 mares) and would mount each one in turn to avoid tiring them too much.This meant they could quickly scout large areas, find weak points, and gather numerous riders there to overwhelm the enemy. The enemy couldn’t easily retaliate because the nomads would simply withdraw faster than they could chase them.
This is how the Mongols were able to build the biggest empire the world has ever seen in just 70 years. And how did they treat farmers on these lands? Not very nicely. Steppe Hordes Are Not Nice
200k people is about 3% of the Russian population at the time! With a threat like this, you’d want to attack the enemy to stop their raids… but you can’t. With these types of raids, no farming village could survive. The kingdom of Kievan Rus (the oldest Russian kingdom was based in Kiev¹⁰) disappeared because, although it was rich from farming its lands and trading with Byzantium, it was constantly attacked by steppe hordes until the Mongols steamrolled Kiev. Ukraine
So it’s not like some king decided to go to Moscow because it was a perfect spot to create a capital. Rather, the alternatives to its north were too cold, and the thriving alternatives to the south were eliminated by steppe hordes. The band Moscow finds itself in was ideal, because the steppe stops about 200 km south of it, so nomads didn’t have grasslands to feed their animals as they approached. Forests also slow them down, make archery less effective, and provide plenty of wood for protective structures like walls. This is at the edge of what steppe hordes could reach: Grasses grow with sunlight, so in winter, they don’t grow as much. Nomads had to spend their winters in southern pasturelands close to the Black and Caspian seas. Travel too close to the winter could be impossible, because the rains create the Nomads had to raid the north mainly in the summer, and it took about a month to reach the area of Moscow and a month to return, leaving them little time to raid; it was about as far north as they could reach. Moscow didn’t need to defend itself for months on end, it just had to hold off the enemy a few months per year. Nomads could still reach it, though. Also, the band of southern woodlands stretches for thousands of km east to west. What did Moscow have that was special in that band? River WallsAcross the Eurasian Plain, most rivers flow north-south. It’s inconvenient when your enemies can also flow north-south on horseback because rivers can stop horseback riders, but not if they run parallel to their path! You need an east-west border formed by rivers. You need… To its north, the Volga bends westward, forming a strong barrier with its tributaries: The Kama and its tributaries reach the Ural Mountains to the east, and the Oka and its tributaries the Ugra and Moskva reach far westward. And where is Moscow? Moscow’s historic center is on the north bank of the Moskva! That way, the river protected it from the threat of southern hordes. Moscow built several concentric walls as it expanded outwards, which you can easily see on satellite maps: Like in many other cities, these are now highway rings or boulevards. Of course, and like in many But this was just the last line of defense. Moscow also had to defend all the surrounding countryside that provided food, wood, and revenue. And this position along the Mokva is ideal because there’s another natural line of defense to its south: the Bereg Line (Riverbank line) along the Ugra and Oka rivers, which cut the invasion axis from West to East. So Moscow constructed a series of fortification lines similar to the Great Wall of China and the Roman Limes from the mid-16th century. Its strategy was simple: Garrison the Ugra-Oka line so as to block all possible fording locations, repel any river crossing attempts, and wait for the campaign season to draw to a close. The first time Moscow achieved this was in Moscow’s Ivan III was able to garrison every possible ford on the rivers, and stopped the southern nomads. As winter approached and the rivers started freezing, he retired his forces towards Moscow, to ambush the nomads in the forests. This additional buffer was too much, and the nomads turned around in November. This is a perfect illustration of Moscow’s ideal position: In the wooden range, south enough to get some farming but north enough to delay the steppe nomads, and behind the natural barrier of the Volga – Oka – Ugra –Moskva rivers. But this is not enough: Moscovites got lucky that year, but nomads could try this every year. They only needed to get lucky once in order to sack Moscow, so in the 1500s, they tried to raid Moscow Moscow needed a deeper defense. So it built it. If you’re keeping count, that’s three lines of defense at this point.
Wherever it could use existing rivers, it did. Elsewhere, it built wooden palisades thanks to the available forest around. Since this area had no farmers due to previous raids, Moscow needed to send soldiers there and feed them for months. That was too expensive, so it granted lands north of it to the soldiers that would defend it. Interestingly, this was the origin of Russia’s serfdom, as described in You can see this on the map of Russia’s expansion: Northern ExpansionFirst, from 1300 onwards, the Duchy of Muscovy expanded northwards. Why? Sure, it was so cold that nobody else could challenge Moscow in conquering that area. But the fact that it’s too cheap to conquer doesn’t make it worthwhile. Aside from low cost, Russia needed a benefit. What do you think that was? What kind of wealth can you get from a landscape like this? You get this: The fur trade was mostly of small squirrel-like animals called It was controlled by Novgorod, which was connected via rivers to the Baltic. Unfortunately for Novgorod, it’s close to Moscow, and on the path to the river trade routes between the Baltic and the Black Sea. Moscow had farmland to grow its population, whereas Novgorod didn’t. The result was that Moscow conquered Novgorod in the Note that, although Moscow could trade with the Baltic, it avoided actually controlling any land on the Baltic Sea itself, because there it was exposed to powerful kingdoms like Denmark, Poland-Lithuania, or Sweden. Instead, Moscow went eastwards. Eastern Expansion: More FursWe’re now well on our way to explain why Moscow reached the Pacific Ocean before the Baltic or Black Seas: more of the same. Once all the northern hinterland was secured, Moscow had the farming from its region and the income from the northern trade. It was now ready to fund its line of defense to stop the attacks from steppe hordes. But in the 1500s and 1600s, it was not able yet to control the steppes. It would take centuries for Russia to achieve this. Moscow was also not in a position to challenge much more powerful European countries to its west, including all the Hanseatic League cities. So Russia expanded in the easiest direction left: eastwards. There, it didn’t need to create any new economic model. It has just to expand the one it knew from the north: fur trade. It took less than one century to conquer everything from the Urals to the Pacific. Why? We saw it in It’s too cold, too far away from the warming influence of the Gulf Stream It has taiga forests to the north (and tundra beyond that) and steppe to the south, with only a small stripe that could be used for agriculture. It’s too far from trade routes, because it has no rivers that flow into trade seas. In Siberia, they all flow into the Arctic Ocean.
No trade means no wealth. No wealth means it was very hard to finance the infrastructure needed to drain the ground and irrigate the fields.
So the region was barely farmed, sparsely populated, and the locals were also predominantly nomads, but much less powerful than those farther south. Given this poverty, it was easier for Russians to conquer these peoples than the southern hordes. Add to that the fact that Russians brought diseases with them (like Spaniards to Americans), which killed up to So this is why Moscow couldn’t be located farther east: It controls the Volga River Basin, which is the easternmost river that flows southwards in Eurasia. East of it, there are the Urals, a huge barrier that made everything east of it poor, as it was disconnected from European markets. Past the Urals, it was too inhospitable for a large population center to appear.
Why isn’t Moscow farther west, though? Western CompetitionGiven everything I’ve told you, it’s obvious that Russia had to be a land-based kingdom. It had to expand across the northern forests, across Siberia, and more importantly, fight the southern hordes. This means all investments went to a land army, so it could afford no strong navy. Hence, Russia had to stay away from the Baltic and Black Seas for the longest times. It’s telling that, historically, the most Russian city on the Baltic was Novgorod, connected to Baltic trade, yet not exposed enough on the Baltic to get conquered by Baltic powers. There are also many rivers that flow into these seas, facilitating trade and the kingdoms that emerged from there. Two examples that illustrate the challenges of powers west of Moscow are the Kievan Rus we discussed before, and Poland-Lithuania, a huge kingdom that marched to Moscow several times. Technically, Moscow can reach all the way to Germany, where the Northern European Plain shrinks so much that it would be hard for Russia to stretch any further. That means the region between the Oder River and the Volga River was going to be highly contested. At its farthest expanse, the USSR did reach into Germany, but that was untenable given all the advanced societies that emerged in Eastern Europe thanks to its rivers and seas. So Why Is Moscow Where It Is?To its north, it’s too cold for farming, so no big city could emerge to prevail in the region. To its south, nomads “harvested” farmers for centuries, emptying the country. Moscow is in a narrow band between north and south where it’s ideal: South enough that it can farm, north enough that it has woods to protect it and provide wood. Given the logistics of the hordes, driven by the southern pastures, seasons, and the Rasputitsa, Moscow was just out of reach from steppe hordes, provided that it could defend itself. For that defense, it also needed rivers, and the only seriously big east-west river in the area is the Volga and its tributaries. Moscow has a double defense there, thanks to the Oka – Ugra and the Moskva. The Volga reaches into the Urals, protecting from southern hordes there too. The Volga also reaches very close to the Baltic, so Moscow could expand northwards easily and take control of the Baltic fur trade. The city that would control the Volga’s water basin would also control Siberia and its furs, because it’s an empty desert that happens to reach all the way to the Pacific. To the west, you have too much competition from populations that grew around very viable river basins.
Now we can answer the rest of the questions from the intro: Why aren’t the Baltic cities of St Petersburg or Novgorod the capitals of Russia? Novgorod was richer earlier on thanks to Baltic trade, and St Petersburg is recent but was for some time the capital of Russia. But although rich, both are too exposed to Baltic powers, and are too far north to develop a big local population from farming. Why isn’t Novosibirsk the capital, much more centrally located? Or any Siberian city, for that matter? Because historically these were very isolated, exposed to hordes, poor, and backwards. Why isn’t it Kiev? Because it was in the steppes, so too threatened by the hordes. Why isn’t the capital somewhere else on the Volga river basin? Why on a secondary tributary? Because most of the Volga river Basin is either too far south and exposed to hordes, too far north and too cold, or too far east to interact with European trade and wealth. Why did it reach the Pacific before the Baltic or the Black Sea? Because Russia had to be a land army, and there was little competition all the way to the Pacific (but a lucrative fur trade), whereas Baltic and Black Seas had massive competition from seaborn kingdoms and empires.
As you can see, the history of Moscow is the history of Russia. Once it became the capital of a transcontinental empire, people from all over the empire moved to the capital to be closer to its power and wealth. What does all this tell us about the future of Russia? Moscow is very much embedded in the North European Plain and its system of trade and communications. It pulls it in that direction. Alternative sources of power will always exist closer to Europe, as long as trade flows. Its granaries are south and west of it though. They are likely to continue having the highest population densities in the country. Until some sort of trade-based peace is brokered across the Northern European Plain, Moscow’s thousand years of conflicts in the region will make it insecure and fuel conflict. Siberia is still foreign land. It’s too big, and Moscow is too remote.
But this leaves many questions: Beijing is much closer to Siberia than Moscow. Will China challenge Russia’s presence in Siberia? When? Why does Mongolia exist, if nomads have been suppressed by Russia and China after centuries of invasions? How did trade work in Russia, with so much cold and so few roads for so long? How could Russia beat nomads so fast in its expansion eastwards in Siberia, whereas it was having trouble near the Black Sea? Moscow had another big asset: It gained an Orthodox Church seat a full 150 before it could face the nomads or conquer Novgorod. How come?
These are some of the things we’re going to explore in next week’s premium article. 1 The 2 Canada, the second largest, is a full 40% smaller! 3 The name of Moscow itself 4 5 After Kazakhstan’s Astana and Mongolia’s Ulaanbaatar 6 Stockholm’s metro area has 2.5M people. 7 Although it’s a risky proposition to rely on imports for the capital, most northern capitals have direct access to the ocean: Finland’s Helsinki, Sweden’s Stockholm, Norway’s Oslo, Iceland’s Reykjavik, Ireland’s Dublin, UK’s London, Scotland’s Edinburgh, Wales’ Cardiff, Estonia’s Tallinn, Latvia’s Riga, Denmark’s Copenhagen… Canada’s Ottawa, which is farther south than Paris, is on the massive St Lawrence River Valley, and has direct access to the ocean. And yet it’s minuscule compared to Moscow. The only exception I can see is Lithuania’s Vilnius, but the country is much smaller than Russia, and Vilnius is farther south than Moscow. 8 Steppe warriors were subdivided into units of 10, 100, 1,000, and 10,000 — in Mongolian, these units were called arban, jaghun, minquan, and tümen (pl. tümet). 9 The paper has a bunch of references to support each statement. 10 A city created by 11 Kievan Rus is a term from later Russia. 12 From Andrea Matranga’s But if there's no farmers anywhere, you just can't march there for any length of time. An ox team will eat the whole cartload of oats in just 15 days, so in practice any place more than 150km or so from farmers might as well be on the moon (except for water transport!). 13 They said “in the 1560s”, but I think they meant until then? Wikipedia suggests that’s the case. You're currently a free subscriber to |