---
subject: "Apple touchscreen MacBooks 💻, Microsoft unlimited vacation 👨‍💻, tips for faster web browsing 🌐"
from: "\"TLDR 🤖\" <dan@tldrnewsletter.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-01-12 11:38:59
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "TLDR", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_795315172960844453", "UNREAD"]
---
[Microsoft employees are getting unlimited time off (2 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.theverge.com%2F2023%2F1%2F11%2F23550470%2Fmicrosoft-employees-unlimited-time-off-2023%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000185a5c6ac74-b9e1927d-aa68-4279-8c11-c876df00c38b-000000/bM1P-RkXQq_QVav6ibjEMA1U14RpxgQAckAUshgX3Ac=283)
Microsoft's salaried US employees will be able to take unlimited time off starting on January 16. New employees will not need to wait to accrue vacation time. Employees will receive 10 corporate holidays, leaves of absence, sick and mental health time off, and time away for jury duty or bereavement alongside this new unlimited time off. Employees with an unused vacation balance will receive a one-time payout in April.
|
Science & Futuristic Technology
|
[CNET Is Quietly Publishing Entire Articles Generated By AI (2 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ffuturism.com%2Fthe-byte%2Fcnet-publishing-articles-by-ai%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000185a5c6ac74-b9e1927d-aa68-4279-8c11-c876df00c38b-000000/DXzOOO1W7YNEgbf53Zj51glfkY6ubMXNjS_MoesLGDU=283)
CNET has been using AI to generate its financial explainer articles. Articles published under 'CNET Money Staff' are generated using automation technology and then edited and fact-checked by an editor. CNET has so far put out around 73 AI-generated articles. Despite Google claiming to penalize AI-generated content, some of the articles have received large amounts of traffic. It appears that the company is trying to keep the experiment as lowkey as possible.
|
[Blood pressure reduced by engineered fiber supplements (2 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fnewatlas.com%2Fhealth-wellbeing%2Fblood-pressure-gut-microbiome-scfa-fiber-prebiotic%2F%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000185a5c6ac74-b9e1927d-aa68-4279-8c11-c876df00c38b-000000/c1TCO_N59NO9bABqOvUKbDNGAj53tPuL_TuEwMUe0as=283)
An engineered form of fermentable fiber can lower blood pressure in patients with hypertension. Experiments showed that hypertensive patients' blood pressure decreased within just three weeks of receiving the supplement. Doctors have long suggested dietary changes for treating hypertension. The fiber supplement helps re-establish gut microbial communities that produce molecules that lead to improvements in blood pressure.
|
Programming, Design & Data Science
|
[Dependencies (GitHub Repo)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fpointfreeco%2Fswift-dependencies%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000185a5c6ac74-b9e1927d-aa68-4279-8c11-c876df00c38b-000000/jhkPwvdKLf0KXzvI1DENy6OG_E5LVkBFIdDCjeX2_bY=283)
Dependencies is a dependency management library. Uncontrolled dependencies can cause many problems in the development cycle. The library controls dependencies and it can propagate dependencies throughout an application, override dependencies for just one portion of an application, and guarantee that all dependencies are overridden. The library was designed over the course of a video series, which is linked to in the repository.
|
[What Happens When A CPU Starts (6 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Flateblt.tripod.com%2Fbit68.txt%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000185a5c6ac74-b9e1927d-aa68-4279-8c11-c876df00c38b-000000/deev7jBLSRegFWZJtJtQlwQzhJ60KdtL-E4RpdWbd2c=283)
This article provides an in-depth explanation of what happens when a CPU chip starts. It covers the role of the CPU, memory, how the CPU gets its instructions, the BIOS, and more. The article provides specific examples of how some chips work.
|
[Why Matter mattered at CES (15 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.theverge.com%2F23547154%2Fmatter-smart-home-new-devices-ces-2023%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000185a5c6ac74-b9e1927d-aa68-4279-8c11-c876df00c38b-000000/TyqXkEo74iPkgno1pj_M_miNiSjt_PMgayeKwA-_rNs=283)
Matter featured in several keynotes and displayed prominently in smart home device makers' booths at CES 2023. Matter is an open-source interoperability standard that allows smart home devices from any manufacturer to talk to other devices. Dozens of companies and manufacturers announced specific plans either to update entire product lines or for new products, sometimes with dates and prices. This article contains a list of major Matter announcements from CES 2023.
|
[Performance tips for browsing the web (2 minute read)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fmikefsn.github.io%2F2023%2F01%2F11%2Fperformance-tips-for-browsing-the-web.html%3Futm_source=tldrnewsletter/1/01000185a5c6ac74-b9e1927d-aa68-4279-8c11-c876df00c38b-000000/b84ISUI69Ff9fGQSFXPcFkYurCA7kmMbAooatw17x3w=283)
This page contains a list of several tools that can make browsing the web a better experience. uBlock Origin can block ads and also block cookie prompts. Auto Tab Discard automatically discards tabs opened in the background. Redirector redirects requests from Reddit, YouTube, and Twitter to lightweight alternatives. Lightning Reopen runs Chrome as a background process on Windows to make the browser launch instantly. The animation when opening Chrome windows on macOS can be disabled with a command.
|
[Salad Technologies - Senior Golang Engineer (Remote)](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftldr.tech%2Fjobs%2Fsr.-software-engineer---go-developer%2F124/1/01000185a5c6ac74-b9e1927d-aa68-4279-8c11-c876df00c38b-000000/meDFxtq_etxUID7fksz5CaBfImFQxnCtRM3jt4W2R5I=283)
Salad is looking for a senior golang engineer for our Platform team to design and develop a container runtime environment and high-performance networking solution written in Go that will be used to power geo-distributed applications running at-scale across thousands of machines.
|
Over a dozen more jobs like these are posted every day on our [job board](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftldr.tech%2Fjobs/2/01000185a5c6ac74-b9e1927d-aa68-4279-8c11-c876df00c38b-000000/9YHD5qdypSFJQ1C4nwujJdDDdl7aiTc5xUHXYr0N_W8=283). If your company would like to hire through our free job board, please [sign up here](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftldr.tech%2Femployer%2Fsign-up/1/01000185a5c6ac74-b9e1927d-aa68-4279-8c11-c876df00c38b-000000/c_RDk34vVE5c95gQlti2_WyepS0eSXzE60padxXSF-8=283).
|
If your company would like to sponsor TLDR, please take a look at [our sponsor page here.](https://tracking.tldrnewsletter.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Ftldr.tech%2Ftech%2Fadvertise%3Futm_source=tldr/2/01000185a5c6ac74-b9e1927d-aa68-4279-8c11-c876df00c38b-000000/6FogDO_Vm4AilBQ1ajqx7DZuZJCA3-3jJJdtZRmaA6s=283)
If you have any comments or feedback, just respond to this email!
Thanks for reading,
Dan
|
|
|
|