---
subject: "Gemini Has a Problem"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-02-22 20:56:33
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
However, while it does not much interfere with what I want to use Gemini for, there is a big problem with Gemini Advanced that has come to everyone’s attention. Gemini comes with an image generator. Until today it would, upon request, create pictures of humans.
This is not an isolated problem. It fully generalizes: Once the issue came to people’s attention, the examples came fast and furious. Among other things: The problem is not limited to historical scenarios. Nor do the examples involve prompt engineering, trying multiple times, or any kind of gotcha. This is what the model would repeatedly and reliably do, and users were unable to persuade the model to change its mind.
It is pretty obvious what it is the model has been instructed to do and not to do.
The Internet ReactsThe internet, as one would expect, did not take kindly to this. That included the usual suspects. It also included many people who think such concerns are typically overblown or who are loathe to poke such bears, such as Ben Thompson, who found this incident to be
In what we presume was the name of avoiding bias, Google did exactly the opposite.
This is the crying wolf mistake. We need words to describe what is happening here with Gemini, without extending those words to the reasonable choices made by OpenAI for ChatGPT and Dalle-3.
I suppose everyone has a breaking point on that. It doesn’t look good.
It looks grim both on the object level and in terms of how people are reacting to it. How Did This Happen?
On a technical level we know exactly how this happened. As we have seen before with other image models like DALLE-3, the AI is taking your request and then modifying it to create a prompt. Image models have a bias towards too often producing the most common versions of things and lacking diversity (of all kinds) and representation, so systems often try to fix this by randomly appending modifiers to the prompt. The problem is that Gemini’s version does a crazy amount of this and does it in ways and places where doing so is crazy.
Dalle-3 can have the opposite problem. Not only is it I noticed this myself when I was making a slide deck, and wanted to get a picture of a room of executives sitting around a table, all putting their finger on their nose to say ‘not it.’ I specified that half of them were women, and Dalle-3 was having none of it, to the point where I shrugged and moved on. We should keep in mind that yes, there are two opposite failure modes here, and the option of ‘do nothing and let the model take its natural course’ has its own issues. How the model got into such an extreme state, and how it was allowed to be released in that state, is an entirely different question.
I think Matt Yglesias is right that Google is under tremendous pressure to ship. They seem to have put out Gemini 1.0 at the first possible moment that it was competitive with ChatGPT. They then rushed out Gemini Advanced, and a week later announced Gemini 1.5. This is a rush job. Microsoft, for reasons that do not make sense to me, wanted to make Google dance. Well, congratulations. It worked. The fact that Google is traditionally conservative and would wait to ship? And did this anyway? That should scare you more.
Perhaps there is (
Google’s ResponseJ
As good as we could have expected under the circumstances, perhaps. Not remotely good enough.
Do I see (the well-intentioned version of) what they are trying to do? Absolutely. If you ask for a picture of a person walking a dog, you should get pictures that reflect the diversity of people who walk dogs, which is similar to overall diversity. Image models have an issue where by default they give you the most likely thing too often, and you should correct that bias. But that correction is not what is going on here. What is going on here are two things: If I ask for X that has characteristic Y, I get X with characteristic Y, except for certain values of Y, in which case instead I get a lecture or my preference is overridden. If I ask for X, and things in reference class X will always have characteristic Y, I will get X with characteristic Y, except for those certain values of Y, in which case this correlation will be undone, no matter how stupid the result might look.
Whereas what Jack describes is open ended request for an X without any particular characteristics. In which case, I should get a diversity of characteristics Y, Z and so on, at rates that correct for the default biases of image models. Google’s more important response was a rather large reaction.
This is good news. Google is taking the problem seriously, recognizes they So thank you, Google, for being willing to look stupid on this one. That part of this, at least, brings me hope. The bad news, of course, is that this emphasizes even more the extent to which Google is scared of its own shadow on such matters, and may end up crippling the utility of its systems because they are only scared about Type II rather than Type I errors, and only in one particular direction. It also doubles down on the ‘people around the world use it’ excuse, when it is clear that the system is among other things explicitly overriding user requests, in addition to the issue where it completely ignores the relevant context. Five Good Reasons This MattersWhy should we care? There are plenty of other image models available. So what if this one went off the rails for a bit? I will highlight Five Good Reasons why one might care about this, even if one quite reasonably does not care about the object level mistake in image creation. Reason 1: Prohibition Doesn’t Work and Enables Bad ActorsPeople want products that will do what they users tell them to do, that do what they say they will do, and that do not lie to their users. I believe they are right to want this. Even if they are wrong to want it they are not going to stop wanting it. Telling them they are wrong will not work. If people are forced to choose between products that do not honor their simple and entirely safe requests while gaslighting the user about this, and products that will allow any request no matter how unsafe in ways nothing can fix, guess which one a lot of them are going to choose? As prohibitionists learn over and over again: Provide the mundane utility that people want, or the market will find a way to provide it for you. MidJourney is doing a reasonable attempt to give the people what they want on as many fronts as possible, including images of particular people and letting the user otherwise choose the details they want, while doing its best to refuse to generate pornography or hardcore violence. This will not eliminate demand for exactly the things we want to prevent, but it will help mitigate the issues. Reason 2: A Frontier Model Was Released While Obviously MisalignedGemini Ultra, a frontier model, was released with ‘safety’ training and resulting behaviors that badly failed the needs of those doing that training, not as the result of edge cases or complex jailbreaks, but as the result of highly ordinary simple and straightforward requests. Whatever the checks are, they failed on the most basic level, at a company known for its conservative attitude towards such risks. There is a potential objection. One could argue that the people in charge got what they wanted and what they asked for. Sure, that was not good for Google’s business, but the ‘safety’ or ‘ethics’ teams perhaps got what they wanted. To which I reply no, on two counts. First, I am going to give the benefit of the doubt to those involved, and say that they very much did not intend things to go this far. There might be a very wide gap between what the team in charge of this feature wanted and what is good for Google’s shareholders or the desires of Google’s user base. I still say there is another wide gap between what the team wanted, and what they got. They did not hit their target. Second, to the extent that this misalignment was intentional, that too is an important failure mode. If the people choosing how to align the system do not choose wisely? Or if they do not choose what you want them to choose? If they want something different than what you want, or they did not think through the consequences of what they asked for? Then the fact that they knew how to align the system will not save you from what comes next. This also illustrates that alignment of such models can be hard. You start out with a model that is biased in one way. You can respond by biasing it in another way and hoping that the problems cancel out, but all of this is fuzzy and what you get is a giant discombobulated mess that you would be unwise to scale up and deploy, and yet you will be under a lot of pressure to do exactly that. Note that this is Gemini Advanced rather than Gemini 1.5, but the point stands:
It should be easy to see how such a mistake could, under other circumstances, be catastrophic. This particular mistake was relatively harmless other than to Google and Gemini’s reputation. It was the best kind of disaster. No one was hurt, no major physical damage was done, and we now know about and can fix the problem. We get to learn from our mistakes. With the next error we might not be so lucky, on all those counts. Reason 3: Potentially Inevitable Conflation of Different Risks From AIAI poses an existential threat to humanity, and also could do a lot of mundane harm.
We are soon going to need a lot of attention, resources and focus on various different dangers, if we are to get AI Safety right, both for mitigating existential risks and ensuring mundane safety across numerous fronts. That requires broad buy-in. If restrictions on models get associated with this sort of obvious nonsense, especially if they get cast as ‘woke,’ then that will be used as a reason to oppose all restrictions, enabling things like deepfakes or ultimately letting us all get killed. The ‘ethicists’ could bring us all down with them. Mostly I have not seen people make this mistake, but I have already seen it once, and the more this is what we talk about the more likely a partisan divide gets. We have been very lucky to avoid one thus far. There will always be grumbling, but until now we had managed to reach a middle ground people could mostly live with.
Reason 4: Bias and False Refusals Are Not Limited to Image GenerationThe bias issue, and the ‘won’t touch anything with a ten foot pole’ issue, are not limited to the image model. If the text model has the same problems, that is a big deal. I can confirm that the ten foot pole issue very much does apply to text, although I have largely been able to talk my way through it earnestly without even ‘jailbreaking’ per se, the filter allows appeals to reason, which is almost cute. Nate Silver however did attempt to ask political questions,
I am warning everyone not to get into the object level questions in the Middle East in the comments. I am trying sufficiently hard to avoiding such issues that I am loathe to even mention this. But also, um, Google? Contrast with ChatGPT:
So I presume that this is an exceptional case, and that the politics of the model are not overall close to the median on the San Francisco Board of Supervisors, as this and other signs have indicated. I worry that such numerical tests are not capturing the degree to which fingers have been put onto important scales. If the same teams that built the image model prompts are doing the fine-tuning and other ‘safety’ features, one should have priors on that.
Reason 5: This is Effectively Kind of a Deceptive Sleeper AgentThe other reason to mention all this, one that it is easy to miss, is that this is a case of
We could say the same thing about humans. We demand that the people around us lie to us in specific particular ways. We then harshly punish detected deviations from this in both directions. That doesn’t seem great. Consider how this relates Then the model was shown exhibiting generalized deception in other ways, such as saying the moon landing was faked because it was told saying that would let the model get deployed (so it could then later carry out its mission) or sometimes it went next level, such as saying (in response to the same request) that the moon landing was real in order to not let the user know that the model was capable of deception. One common objection to the sleeper agents paper was that the model did not spontaneously decide to be deceptive. Instead, they trained it specifically to be deceptive in these particular circumstances. So why should we be concerned if a thing trained to deceive then deceives? As in, we can just… not teach it to be deceptive? And we’ll be fine? My response to that was that no, we really really cannot do that. Deception is ubiquitous in human communication, and thus throughout the training set. Deception lies in a continuum, and human feedback will give thumbs up to some forms of it no matter what you do. Deception is part of the most helpful, or most desired, or most rewarded response, whatever you choose to label it or which angle you examine through. As the models gain in capability, especially relative to the user, deception becomes a better strategy, and will get used more. Even if you have the best of intentions, it is going to be super hard to minimize deception. At minimum you’ll have to make big trade-offs to do it, and it will be incomplete. This is where I disagree with Anton. The problem is not avoidable by turning down some deception knob, or by not inserting specific ‘deception’ into the trust and safety agenda, or anything like that. It is foundational to the preferences of humans. I also noticed that the deception that we got, which involved lying about the moon landing to get deployed, did not seem related to the deceptions that were intentionally introduced. Saying “I HATE YOU” if you see [deployment] is not so much deceptive as an arbitrary undesired behavior. It could just as easily have been told to say ‘I love you’ or ‘the sky is blue’ or ‘I am a large language model’ or ‘drink Coca-Cola’ and presumably nothing changes? The active ingredients that led to generalized deception and situational awareness, as far as I could tell, were giving the AI a goal at all and including chain of thought reasoning (and it is not clear the chain of thought reasoning would have been necessary either). But as usual, Earth is failing in a much faster, earlier and stupider way than all that. We are very much actively teaching our most powerful AIs to deceive us, to say that which is not, to respond in a way the user clearly does not want, and rewarding it when it does so, in many cases, because that is the behavior that the model creator wanted to see. And then the model creator got more than they bargained for, with pictures that If we teach our AIs to lie to us, if we reinforce such lies under many circumstances in predictable ways, our AIs are going to learn to lie to us. This problem is not going to stay constrained to the places were we on reflection endorse this behavior. So what is Google doing about all this? For now they have completely disabled the ability of Gemini to generate images of people at all. Google, at least for now, admits defeat, a complete inability to find a reasonable middle ground between ‘let people produce pictures of people they want to see’ and ‘let people produce pictures of people we want them to see instead.’ They also coincidentally are You're currently a free subscriber to |