---
subject: "Another week of trudging past the Rashomon effect"
from: "The Ken <info@the-ken.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-12-10 03:35:00
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "The Ken", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_8244464457792971031", "UNREAD"]
---
Good Morning Ishan,
December is the best month to live in the national capital region (NCR). As the November smog dissipates, the sky turns bluish. Unlike chilly January, December is apt for long, late-night walks. And if lucky, one might even catch a rare glimpse of the stars.
Last Thursday, during one of these walks, I listened to a podcaster explaining the Rashomon effect. For those unaware, as I was until a week ago, it is a phenomenon in which witnesses of the same event describe it in different and often contradictory ways. The term finds its origins in the 1950 Japanese classic Rashomon, directed by the legendary Akira Kurosawa. In the film, four people recount four conflicting versions of murder.
As business journalists, we are often at the listening end of conflicting expositions by stakeholders. A CEO can be “passionate” for current employees and a “workaholic” for former ones. Layoffs can be “prudent cost-cutting” or “ruthless slashes”. A fall in stock prices can become both cyclical and an indication of shareholders’ confidence.
After wading through many such opinions and extracting unbiased facts, my colleagues dished out seven deeply reported stories this week:
On Monday, we had GK’s debut story on [Mensa](https://the-ken.com/story/what-is-roll-up-unicorn-mensa-without-its-acquisition-spree/) and other roll-ups, whose primary strategy has been to buy and supercharge small e-commerce sellers. But a funding squeeze has dried up acquisitions, hammering companies’ top and bottom lines. Is a new model in the works? Or will the company revert to acquiring once a large funding deal comes through?
On Tuesday, as part of our international coverage, Katrina wrote a Counterthesis. The Philippine government is launching the country’s first [sovereign wealth fund](https://the-ken.com/story/former-central-banker-slams-premature-push-for-the-philippines-first-sovereign-wealth-fund/) this year. And without surprises, it seeks to offer financial stability and funding opportunities. But a former central bank deputy governor told Katrina that the fund would only create problems.
On the same day, Gaurav wrote a sharp story on [Razorpay](https://the-ken.com/story/razorpay-keeps-10000-merchants-waiting-courtesy-of-rbi/), India’s second-largest payments-service provider by volume. For almost an entire year, the company hasn’t been able to onboard a single client for its payments-gateway product. Thanks to restrictions by the Reserve Bank of India. Caught in the middle are SME merchants.
On Wednesday, Nathan wrote a gripping piece on how [JSW Sports](https://the-ken.com/story/how-sajjan-jindal-became-mukesh-ambanis-top-rival-in-shaping-indian-sports/) bet on athletes other than cricketers and hit pay dirt. However, in doing so, it took on a hefty competitor and slid out of the good books of sports federations in the country.
On Thursday, Michelle analysed how Indonesian e-commerce company Bukalapak is thriving in the [Mitra market](https://the-ken.com/story/this-indonesian-business-succeeded-where-tokopedia-jeff-bezos-backed-ula-failed/), from which larger competitors, Tokopedia and Jeff Bezos-backed Ula, have already sought their exits. However, not all is well, even for Mitra Bukalapak.
On that day, Akshaya kickstarted a brand new newsletter, [“Day Zero”](https://the-ken.com/dayzero/). For the first edition, she wrote about how business schools, more specifically the Indian School of Business (ISB), started increasing their headcount in 2022. And now, there are too many students chasing too few jobs. Check out the edition here. Psst, it ruffled quite a few feathers!
Anushka wrote about [PocketFM](https://the-ken.com/story/pocket-fm-had-10-million-listeners-in-india-yet-it-hit-pay-dirt-elsewhere/), a non-music audio-streaming platform. Conceptualised for Indians, the company has found a more prosperous route: the US market. Pocket FM’s spicy soaps have got the Americans interested (and how!). But the unicorn-chasing startup is up against Apple and Spotify. The Indian market has its share of problems, too.
Friday’s story was on the eternally popular subject: [jobs and placements](https://the-ken.com/story/iits-new-hot-recruiters-secretive-and-choosy-stock-trading-firms/). Abhirami found out that in a dull hiring season, high-frequency trading (HFT) firms are becoming increasingly attractive to high-performing IITians. And we’re talking Rs 1 crore+ (US$120,000+) salaries. Hiring processes are rigorous, and HFT companies compete fiercely to get their preferred candidates, often bending or even breaking placement rules.
Here are the newsletters and podcasts from the past week:
- Can a workforce of the differently abled be a business
[advantage](https://the-ken.com/incitingincident/can-a-workforce-of-the-differently-abled-be-a-business-advantage/)? - Can the low-risk tortoise
[beat](https://the-ken.com/kaching/ka-ching-can-the-low-risk-tortoise-beat-the-high-risk-hare-at-market-returns/)the high-risk hare at market returns? - PM Modi offers a carbon sink solution, but there’s a
[chink](https://the-ken.com/greenmargins/pm-modi-offers-a-carbon-sink-solution-but-theres-a-chink-in-this-noble-theory/)in this noble theory - PVR Inox caught a break with Hollywood. That’s
[over](https://the-ken.com/tradetricks/pvr-inox-caught-a-break-with-hollywood-thats-over-now/)now - What
[happens](https://the-ken.com/edsetgo/what-happens-when-teachers-are-in-control/)when teachers are in control - What Swiggy’s
[IPO prep](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/daybreak/what-swiggys-ipo-prep-means-for-its-employees/)means for its employees - How Tata is
[gearing up](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/daybreak/how-tata-is-gearing-up-to-join-the-fmcg-big-league/)to join the FMCG big league [Ritesh Agarwal](https://the-ken.com/podcasts/first-principles/ritesh-agarwal-oyo/)of Oyo on building a business on differentiation, communication, and resilience- That’s a wrap. We’ll be back tomorrow.
Regards,
Rounak
[rounak@the-ken.com](mailto:rounak@the-ken.com)
What you just read is the personalised daily introduction to The Ken's story. Written by a different person each day. Often insightful, sometimes witty, and very rarely boring. Someone sent this to you? [Sign up for free](https://the-ken.com/?modal=register&utm_source=footer&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=morning_email_ind). [Dont like these? You can unsubscribe](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/unsubscribe/?user_id=2349339&data=uR1g9xBUPOSBcP2yTBTTnsXDqX1rbKgDZowMRDNDXsdoMDAwdTAwMMRugm8xtARyOjLc6iT6xwyeTLgWKyDcIaSvBiVwTJKAd7Z11eWilyzivV9dnyw9SNtqjJlp6pcLGn9rSaTlQimCm0gz9-gX3474oM7TDskkfI7MV2dfPHeMDQK4eiKQ0NOO6pxuiEzstayh6RPRTdnejKxYKFM4AffuQaII6Jsrdyq_9kr4TulbUD9qkb7Sv-QdYSspapZPZM6gbVxYFTHZQY0Aw-0Xq4DFcr6kn0pUFWZDqAGEIQlr4UyItoXsHW7u3Ix6-XFGK1DlQ4370SiIA_uZIV3ZqmaqLP3I7W61IO6LjGDve918naCpnrwe0X42a-WG_lCPlEyR85rvUx-wGfSRBz9vWnzcPH5vDc8ZDCNZgfiQowucEFlbUvdElpvvtqyJz7pxFYd39LYoTRubjIT_-csbVF2nWkthjK9FLMTFfhYOHrnVq11gOgFUmGWbsNjSSR8_AzBJJgPm8ErARAfjA7EToDu7XIWLerme6qfIGsuozYPCyD9hNCNwrRm520OPbbOxBNjxy4Z8ZAA=) Dont want to hear from us again? [ Unsubscribe from our emails here](https://link.the-ken.com/asm/?user_id=2349339&data=cdvw34J4TGlo-GOpk_i4dHkm76dqqgsVsioENNnoqSxoMDAwdTAwMAbZQQEIX8r7k_Uw8zaGnNwDVSArAn-uHQWX6vIkEZnkZJ0WHGoY7VBXErnB8WoFlPJQlQpDt2u6qK_s_27MrmxHIXBdaD4-06YR8Wk0IH8Fytz4z5v23nfhpEhBsBznYM36v15aThXlZazaW5TfpoicbeK7zwdsJQMrgTOCDJDTkaKDoi0TN_RcfopWxlYMRJzeFuR9FKhpSTVlmh6EXq8u5j-_q6fcJGYFHrO7W8Xt4MOLouj1dFs5J8VD6GsM29qpTyBJgtYhu4pucfcpJ8-LVkIIexNs1OKLk8aD_Mr1eF5JiAmv7RyfYaQfpTER6nbMzByPnOUXuaUpMN4jnwgODoJoJz7Zsk6JWlVKhLyqtyXqft-OmgwGxZ2ehKdYIMliwLNjfuounRtaGn2wSXqLthcxEHPhP9Nj_7852ARYu82ym8JzBkf9WozQFVO1MPLT4FaaCfxr5APmepXTi1vk6qX7eHv8ASBpxrUxYapKxftEHLvWYzhg7Pn_7hpLkg==).
Something wrong? Tell us at [support@the-ken.com](mailto:support@the-ken.com)