---
subject: "Text and Telos"
from: "\"Byrne @ The Diff\" <the-diff@ghost.io>"
to: ""
date: 2025-03-10 14:06:05
labels: ["Byrne", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_9080921820904578148", "CATEGORY_UPDATES", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
|
|
In this issue: - Text and Telos—Strictly speaking, LLMs don't have a model of physical reality, just a bunch of heuristics for predicting a sequence of tokens. But in practice, their training data is an ongoing effort to create a comprehensive model of reality, with a focus on the parts people care about the most.
- Scaling—Not everyone is spending aggressively on AI capex. But there are enough participants for the race to still be on.
- Retail Investors—The promise and peril of selling retail investors a risk premium slurry.
- Comparative Advantage—The weak connection between aid and economic growth.
- Transaction Costs and Corporate Structure—If your logo's on their business card, there's a sense in which it pays to be on the hook when they get sued.
- DeepSeek Governance—If a business risks what regulators view as an open-ended liability, the safest place for it to exist is within a structure where there are valuable assets to seize.
Text and TelosIf you'd told someone twenty years ago that, by looking at statistical patterns in how people use words, you could build a tool that could accurately correct typos, they would have been impressed. It's always hard to know in the present how an informed person without our present knowledge might have reacted to new insights, but in this case we know what they'd say, which is roughly " Then again, some abstractions are It's cheating to compare prose to math, because unless you have very specific theological or philosophical views there's no reason to think that physical reality has some kind of direct correspondence with text. On the other hand, a literate culture is a continuing effort to codify as much of the world as possible in text form, at every possible level, from religious texts and novels that try to codify enduring truths to internal corporate wikis that explain the process for expensing in-flight WiFi. From the perspective of an LLM, all of this was very helpful, in the same way that to a human being it's incredibly convenient that cows convert basically useless grass into food, beverages, and raw materials for clothes and other implements. Someone's gone to the trouble of processing annoying inputs into useful ones—great! This is the result of multiple historical accidents. Text gets privileged when communications are slow enough, and sufficiently low-bandwidth, that it's inconvenient to transmit other media, or to send people directly to make decisions. The privately-held but state-influenced trading companies of the early modern period, like the various East India Companies, had to be somewhat decentralized given that a letter from Chennai to London would receive an answer in about a year, if everything went exactly to plan. So questions like "the pepper harvest isn't great this year, what do you suggest we do?" were completely pointless. What did make sense was codifying expectations and practices in both directions—what each endpoint wanted was for the other one to be able to make reasonable decisions without real-time information. The information did get transmitted eventually, but it would make more sense to package together a few different things in the same single communication: here's what happened, here's what I did about it, here's why I did it, and here are the results so far and what I expect to happen next. In other words, limits on bandwidth encouraged people to report facts and then explicitly walk through the process by which those led to decisions. What happens when bandwidth and latency improve? There's a lot more room for real-time decisions, so it isn't necessary to outline everything in long memoranda. But the memo is still a default form of communication. Even if what's happening in practice is that someone in the Chennai office is Slacking someone at the London HQ, or someone at a London satellite office is hopping on a call with their boss in Chennai, whatever decision gets made will probably be memorialized in some document that, in form if not content and language, wouldn't have been out of place in the cargo hold of a merchant frigate. Digitization actually re-ran this same text-heavy, context-heavy communications history. In the early days, text was the only thing it was feasible to transmit, which had a two-sided feedback loop (cheaper bandwidth subsidized digital cameras and digital video, and they provided the demand that justified even more bandwidth). Companies that went online early developed an email-heavy communications culture, and that culture persists even though you could, in principle, manage your business by distributing voice messages, short-form video, etc. Once the default mode of communication is established, it becomes a default way of thinking, too, and becomes the place where you get lots of source material. You can try to reproduce the thought process that led to memos and emails, but if you don't have a record of other ways decisions were made, you don't have a good way to build on them. All of this was just one of those historical contingencies until LLMs followed the typical historical pattern in which None of these textual models are perfect, but to the extent that they approach perfection, it's in proportion to 1) how important the topic and hand is, and 2) how much progress you can make on that topic by putting one word after another. And the world has gotten more written-word-influenced over time (with periodic backsliding whenever a non-written medium like radio or TV shows up). It's still the case that if you want to have influence fifty years from now, you're better-off writing an essay or a book than making a video or recording a podcast, and that if you do try to influence the world through writing, you're building on a far bigger and better tradition than in other media. This will be extended further, in an odd way: humanoid robots have been a sci-fi dream for a long time, probably because it's so easy to slot them into human roles in fiction (that's especially true in a visual medium; a humanoid robot is a costume rather than a prop). That also means that they're suitable by default for humanoid tasks, and that in a human-centric environment, their sensors will approximate most human senses, in human-relevant ways—they'll be "looking" at things that are eye level, "listening" in the same frequencies people do and focusing on the same sound patterns people care about. At least most of them. Artificial eyes and ears can beat the real thing, but an artificial general-purpose nose seems very distant. If anyone's making interesting progress on this, I'd love to hear about it. [↩︎](https://www.thediff.co/r/9fed138b?m=f90780fc-498d-4ffe-a546-8a3e61574e99)
You're on the free list for The Diff! Last week, paying subscribers read about Diff JobsCompanies in the Diff network are actively looking for talent. See a sampling of current open roles below: - An OpenAI-backed startup that’s applying advanced reasoning techniques to reinvent investment analysis from first principles and build the IDE for financial research is looking for a backend-focused software engineer with experience building scalable back-end systems. (NYC)
- An AI startup building tools to help automate compliance for companies in highly regulated industries is looking for an AI research engineer with 4+ years of software engineering experience and a knack for translating cutting edge AI research into production level systems using experimentation. (NYC)
- Well-funded, fast-moving team is looking for a strong-willed full-stack engineer to build the best video editor for marketers. Tackle advanced media pipelines, LLM applications, and more. TypeScript/React expertise required. (Austin, Remote)
- A Google Ventures-backed startup founded by SpaceX engineers that’s building data infrastructure and tooling for hardware companies is looking for full-stack and front-end focused software engineers with 3+ years experience, ideally with data intensive products. (LA, Hybrid)
- A company building the new pension of the 21st century and enabling universal basic capital is looking for a mobile-focused engineer who has experience building wonderful iOS experiences. (NYC)
Even if you don't see an exact match for your skills and interests right now, we're happy to talk early so we can let you know if a good opportunity comes up. If you’re at a company that's looking for talent, we should talk! Diff Jobs works with companies across fintech, hard tech, consumer software, enterprise software, and other areas—any company where finding unusually effective people is a top priority. ElsewhereScalingxAI plans to - The biggest spenders are overestimating demand for future models, or
- The smaller spenders are either conceding that they'll make more on distribution than on model ownership, or just haven't figured out some of the ROI-maximizing tricks other parts of the industry have.
Retail InvestorsBridgewater's all-weather strategy - Correlations are a moving target, and the more investors there are who own an all-weather mix specifically to harvest uncorrelated return streams the more correlated those return streams will be, and
- A product like this is hard to market, because it's never the perfect choice for an investor with any specific macroeconomic viewpoint or worry. Every subset of the portfolio has a cleaner sales pitch under the right circumstance, but the mix of all of them only appeals to someone who is radically uncertain about the future, but also interested in somehow turning that uncertainty into a financial bet. This ETF partly solves that problem with the Bridgewater branding, and there's no shame in monetizing a book with management fees.
Comparative AdvantageThe Economist has a Transaction Costs and Corporate StructureCompanies exist at the efficient frontier between the coordination benefits of top-down control and the information benefits of market competition. One of the best illustrations of this is the tradeoffs that show up when a company tries to internally reorganize. That's DeepSeek GovernanceThere's a related version of this happening in China's AI sector: |
||||||||||
|
|
|
||||||||||
|