---
subject: "Links For May 2023"
from: "Astral Codex Ten <astralcodexten@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-06-01 04:19:17
labels: ["Astral Codex", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["Label_6409723252142624155", "CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
[Remember, I haven’t independently verified each link. On average, commenters will end up spotting evidence that around two or three of the links in each links post are wrong or misleading. I correct these as I see them, and will highlight important corrections later, but I can’t guarantee I will have caught them all by the time you read this.] 1: The 2: All the ancients, from Darius the Great to Augustus Caesar, agreed that 3: Remember when the global community banned whaling, but some countries (eg Japan) continued doing it under the facade of “research”? With octopus factory farms under increasing scrutiny, UNAM university in Mexico 4: Genuinely new (to me) optical illusion: 5: 6: 7: Matt Lakeman:
8: Related to my previous subscribers-only post on the psychology of fantasy: Balioc’s 9: 10: 11: Matt Bruenig
Bruenig’s argument is mostly a lot of annoying “well maybe it’s just your cultural bias that makes you care about this”, but in the middle of this it mentions some genuinely strong points, especially that the research doesn’t measure “sequence”, but rather “current status”. So if you graduated, got a job, got married, and had children, but then lost your job, your would be counted as “not following the sequence” (same if you get divorced). Also, disabled and old people and their caretakers are excluded from the analysis, which in one sense is fair (your conclusion can be “abled young adults can avoid poverty through this method”) but in another sense risks reducing all of this to the more trivial-seeming statement “if you’re young, healthy, abled, married, don’t have to support anyone else, and have a full-time job, you’re probably not poor”. But the authors (channeled by Caplan) disagree:
The main thing I would want to look at here is how much of this is causal vs. just class selection: upper-class people are more likely to marry, less likely to divorce, and more likely to wait before having children. Has anyone followed some pre-selected group of equal class people (eg the population of some low-income school district) and seen how their own success varies with sequence compliance? 12: I’ve previously linked claims that vat-grown meat, freed from the tyranny of having to grow inside animals, will include 13: The people who believed there was lots of gender bias in STEM academia, and the people who believed there wasn’t finally did
For ten years many prestigious news sources told us again and again that discrimination against women in STEM was a massive problem. People who questioned its extent were accused of misogyny and sometimes fired, I personally got harassed for pointing out reasons the standard arguments didn’t seem to hold true. Millions of dollars were spent investigating the problem, and the consensus was this was a travesty because it should have gotten even more resources. And now I expect this pretty strong evidence that women were actually advantaged in hiring and had parity in most other things (the salary is probably just the usual negotiation issue) to produce no publicity, no apologies, and no soul-searching from the people leading the current round of anti-academia and anti-STEM inquisitions. Sorry, yes I am bitter, it just bothers me how much the people claiming that it’s urgently important that nobody is ever allowed to suggest they are wrong have a consistent track record of being totally and inexcusably wrong. 14: In 15: More 16: More AI links from this month: Can’t even list all the new people who have come out as AI x-risk believers, but you can just read the [CAIS statement](https://substack.com/redirect/902778ea-aeec-4e6c-959d-9ecfb7dc9d96?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o). The top signatures are Geoff Hinton, Yoshua Bengio, Demis Hassabis, Sam Altman, and Dario Amodei; aside from the usual suspects, they also have Bruce Schneier (computer security expert) , Dawn Song (computer scientist and security expert), Andy Clark (professor of cognitive philosophy, wrote Surfing Uncertainty), Eliezer Yudkowsky (he didn't sign the last one because he disagreed with specifics, but he's here), and a former US Assistant Secretary of Defense for Nuclear, Chemical, and Biological Defense.[Connor Leahy on CNN](https://substack.com/redirect/b132c367-d27c-407f-ae8a-c112123ab3a5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)(nothing new in the interview, I just think it’s funny that it happened)[Google worries about open-source AI](https://substack.com/redirect/25a6f5b2-4368-4e93-abe4-b3fe8b6a190a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)(but see also Jeff Ladish’s discussion[here](https://substack.com/redirect/7254a230-f329-49fc-b138-f58528c00b8d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o))Copy editors [say AI has already changed their job beyond recognition](https://substack.com/redirect/516e14c1-d0d6-4193-b550-429273ca03ca?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[$5000 prize for solving math problems about matrices relevant to AI alignment](https://substack.com/redirect/22d4f4a6-7a3a-4363-a25a-6023cb876d05?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Jacob Buckman on how we [“aren’t close”](https://substack.com/redirect/6369d2ff-5464-4ead-8c67-a43166af2efc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)to creating self-improving AI (yes, but we “weren’t close” to creating GPT-4 five years ago!), and Steven Byrnes on[how to reason about AI danger if this is true](https://substack.com/redirect/95e43802-887d-4bd5-af13-71a940b30599?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).Even without a “foom” event, [“slow” takeoff can be very fast!](https://substack.com/redirect/fd6abe37-0989-4540-83c0-c129846aba55?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)If you want even more AI news, [Zvi’s weekly newsletters](https://substack.com/redirect/69f9f9eb-2649-49b5-86e4-04404273bab0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)(you might remember his old COVID newsletters) are very good. I like[this one in particular](https://substack.com/redirect/afafa1f1-eb2d-4fbe-810d-4cd9b0bf020c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)because the URL collapses the title to “AI - 8 people can do reasonable things”, which is a good accidental summary of where we are right now.
17: Sniffnoy: 18: People disagreeing with me: 19: Also, 20: Mental Floss: This started some disputes among my friends over what names it is ethical and reasonable to give children, so 21: Last month I reviewed Simon Whitney’s book on IRBs, From Oversight To Overkill. In the book’s honor, Roots of Progress discusses 22: Related article by Willy Chertman on how 23: Recent much-talked-about Harvard poll ( It’s fascinating that even after a year of very bad publicity, Musk remains most respected (although maybe this is just because he’s on a list of “political figures” without being a politician, and people hate politicians?). But it’s equally interesting that Trump and DeSantis both do better than any liberal. Did this poll just oversample conservatives? I don’t think so - its relative ratings 24: Related? ( 25: Australia has a 26: 27: One of the more obscure sequlae of 9/11 was the effort by Orthodox Jewish rabbis to find technicalities in Jewish law allowing the widows of victims to remarry, even though in some cases it was impossible to find their bodies to confirm death. 28: 29: When a kid gets good grades (or standardized test scores), is that more likely because they’re genuinely intelligent, or just because their parents are rich? 30: 31: Claims about Canadian population ( 32: For decades, big container ships spewed SO2 along their usual routes between the ports of Europe, North America, and Asia. In 2020, a new regulation came into effect mandating cleaner fuels, and the SO2 emissions stopped. SO2 blocks sunlight, so the band of northern ocean where these ships travel has been getting more sunlight recently, 33: AI company Anthropic 34: And related: I would instead put this in the context of the centuries-long advance of Protestantism. Martin Luther said that instead of asking priests what they thought a holy book said, you should study it yourself. But this still left a potential weak point - institutions can convince you to interpret the book in the way they prefer. Now we’ve finally brought the Lutherian project to its ultimate conclusion, where you can cut out the personal interpretation and just ask the sacred text directly. Of course no one likes how it answers! You're currently a free subscriber to |