---
subject: "Why Skyscrapers Became Glass Boxes"
from: "Construction Physics <constructionphysics@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-01-13 13:02:41
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Construction Physics", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8588207018748827248", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
The most common style for skyscrapers in the US (and probably the world) is the glass box — a structural skeleton of steel or concrete, with a skin of non-load bearing But skyscrapers weren’t always built in this style. If you go back to the early 20th century, you see skyscrapers clad with brick and stone, and much more pattern, detailing, and ornamentation. Buildings like the Why did this transition happen? A common theory is that it was essentially a plot by modernist architects, who had a particular theory of what made a building “good” — “honest” buildings without excessive decoration or ornament — and who successfully foisted that style on an unwilling public, who preferred the old style. This is more or less the thesis of Tom Wolfe’s From Bauhaus to Our House, a 34,000 word polemic decrying the rise of modern architecture:
Scott Alexander echoes this theory in
Changing architectural trends were undoubtedly a factor in the rise of the glass box aesthetic, but this explanation misses a huge part of why this transition happened. Notably, this theory completely omits the role of the real estate developer, who has a greater influence than anyone else in how a building comes together. Skyscrapers are designed by architects, but it’s the developer who conceives of the project, arranges the funding, hires the design team, and ultimately decides what the building will be. To me, the question isn’t “Why did architects embrace modernism? It’s “Why did real estate developers embrace modernism?” Ultimately, it was economics (or at least perceived economics) that drove developers to embrace this style. Glass curtain wall buildings were cheaper to erect than their masonry predecessors, and they allowed developers to squeeze more rentable space from the same building footprint. Ornate, detailed exteriors were increasingly seen as something tenants didn’t particularly care about, making it harder to justify spending money on them. And once this style had taken hold, rational risk aversion encouraged developers and builders to keep using it. The role of the real estate developerIn the US, most skyscrapers are built as speculative buildings: they’re built to be rented or sold to someone else. Even large corporate headquarters tend to rent out much of their space to other companies: when Sears built the The basis of a speculative building project is the pro forma: a financial model of the building and its profitability, based on its various projected costs (land, construction costs, financing and so on) compared to the revenues earned from rents. When considering a new building project, the developer will play around with this model — how many apartment units to construct and of what type, whether they should be market rate or luxury, whether any adjacent parcels are needed or not, whether the project should include office space or retail, how much parking is required and where on the site it can fit — until he gets something that seems to work. The pro forma creates a box that the developer has to work within, and ultimately dictates what sort of building can be built. If costs are too high, or revenues are too low, or the
Of course, for better or for worse, the developer can’t simply build anything that he wants. The developer’s pro forma-shaped-box is constrained by local building rules and regulations: zoning rules that dictate allowable building heights and These constraints can have very large impacts on the size and shape of buildings: the distinctive layer-cake style of early 20th century New York skyscrapers, for instance, was due to zoning rules that required setbacks to prevent buildings from occupying the entirety of their sites. In other cases, securing local approval is so difficult that it ultimately dictates the exterior form of the building, as noted by one Chicago developer in How Real Estate Developers Think:
It’s the developers job to navigate this mass of constraints, and to come up with a plan for a building that will be compelling to renters, acceptable to local residents and building authorities, and earn an acceptable return. The developer is highly incentivized to get this correct: real estate is a competitive market, and a new building project must compete with many other buildings on the market. Developers will thus typically pay very close attention to the local real estate market: growth rates, population demographics, what sort of projects are successful and what aren’t, what features are compelling to tenants, and so on. In some cases developers will go so far as to bring their sales staff to early stage design meetings, and have them weigh in on the design of the building itself, to ensure they’re building something that buyers want and staff can sell. Developers and architectsTo design the building, the developer hires an architect, who will lead the design effort and manage the design team (which includes specialties like structural engineers, mechanical engineers, and so on). The architect is the developer’s agent, and is Which is not to say that the architect simply does exactly what the developer wants. An architect is hired for their professional expertise on building design, including a building’s aesthetics. A good design that not only meets the developer’s programmatic requirements (number of units, amount of rentable space) but is aesthetically pleasing is one of the services the architect is providing. If an architect advocates for some particular design choice — a finish material, a building shape, a decorative feature — the developer will take that seriously. They hired the architect in part for their aesthetic taste, after all. But this sort of advocacy works only to a point. An architect typically can’t just go in whatever aesthetic direction they want, with the developer forced to follow along. For one, they can’t stray outside the box built by the developer’s pro forma and by what will be approved by the local authorities. This limits what sort of options an architect has to choose from: they can’t simply pick a facade material that’s twice as expensive, or a building shape that doesn’t have sufficient square footage, just because they like the look of it. For another, architecture is a very competitive field (there are around One such firm was
Emery Roth and Sons’ success was not because of their aesthetics – their designs were highly criticized by architecture critics. (Frank Lloyd Wright allegedly refused to drive down the streets that were dominated by Rothscrapers.) It was due to the simple fact that they had a reputation for delivering low-cost buildings with very large amounts of rentable space. In his
Meredith Clausen similarly describes the Roth’s in
These sorts of developer friendly architects abound. In Chicago, architect slash developer
With the design of the Empire State Building itself, Lamb would state that “whatever ‘style’ it may be is the result of a logical and simple answer to the problems set by the economic and technical demands of this unprecedented program.” Developers, especially those successful enough to be able to finance skyscraper construction, are also savvy enough to understand the architecture market: what firms are best at what sort of work, which architects are easy to work with and which aren’t, and what they’re getting when they sign on with one. If a high-profile architect is hired, it’s because the developer thinks that their style, or the cachet of their name, will bring value to the project. But even famous and opinionated architects aren’t necessarily given carte blanche to design buildings however they like. An example of this is But impeccable architectural credentials and strong aesthetic preferences didn’t mean that SOM was in the driver’s seat. The developer, Bruce Eichner, required constant redesigns to get the building where it needed to be finance-wise. Major architectural features were constantly removed or reworked: for instance, SOM wanted to have three-foot-deep recesses in the building as a major architectural feature, which would be supported by an expensive This sort of client feedback is common with high-profile architects. Minoru Yamasaki was the architect who designed the World Trade Center, but his feet were held to the fire the entire time by his client, the Port Authority. From
Similarly, famous modern architect
More generally, developers may or may not have strong aesthetic preferences (some care deeply, some not at all), but either way they tend to exercise a firm hand in the design process, putting money where it's useful and cutting it out where its not, and will often be very opinionated about what will work for a given project, based on the market and what tenants are believed to want. Why developers chose glass curtain wallsSo why did developers embrace the glass box aesthetic? Unsurprisingly, it comes down to economics. Prior to World War II, most skyscrapers had walls of stone or masonry. This was partly a holdover from the days when buildings were built with load-bearing exterior walls. The As codes were changing, other technological developments were making thin exterior walls made of metal and glass practical. Air conditioning was
Glass, too, was getting cheaper. In the 1950s, British glass manufacturer Pilkington invented the These developments made it possible to replace thick, heavy walls of stone and brick with thin, light curtain walls made of glass and aluminum. And while this style of construction was indeed championed by modernist architects, it also had decisive advantages from a real estate developer’s perspective. The most obvious was cost. A glass and metal curtain wall wasn’t necessarily all that much cheaper than one made of brick in terms of the materials themselves, but it was much thinner and lighter. Its thinness meant that for two equally sized floor plates, the curtain wall framed one would have more rentable square feet than the stone or brick one. This more than made up for the fact that the thin curtain walls had worse insulation and were more expensive to heat and cool than masonry walls. Similarly, the fact that a glass and metal curtain wall was so light meant that less structural framing was required to support it. Beams and columns could be made thinner, foundation sizes reduced. Not only did this reduce the cost of the building itself, but it reduced the cost of constructing it: all else being equal, a lighter structure is easier and cheaper to erect. Curtain wall could also be produced as large, prefabricated panels, allowing for very rapid installation on-site and eliminating expensive craft trades like masons.² With curtain wall, a building no longer needed scaffolding around the edge of the building for masons to work on: the curtain wall panels could simply be swung into place. From
The cost advantages of curtain wall still exist today: if you use There were also functional advantages of curtain wall that made it attractive to tenants. Large expanses of glass let in lots of natural light and maximized the amount of floor space that had nice views, two things that tenants valued highly (and were willing to pay for). Continuous expanses of glass also made it very easy to rearrange interior office partitions, as Richard Roth noted in an
Developers and ornamentationBut the popularity of curtain wall is only half of what needs to be explained. A preference for glass and metal cladding, wouldn’t, on its own, eliminate ornament and decoration on buildings. Ornamentation and glass curtain wall aren’t mutually exclusive. The elimination of ornament also comes down to economics. As we noted earlier, developers place a great deal of weight on what tenants want, and what they’re willing to pay for. And the reality is that while tenants care a great deal about what the inside of the building is like, they pay much less attention to the exterior of the building. Some developers, such as James Loewenberg, state this explicitly. From How Real Estate Developers Think:
Other developers aren’t quite so explicit that they don’t care about exteriors, but nevertheless echo these sentiments. In his book
Perez cares a great deal about the design of his projects, but his focus is on things where people spend their time: in their units, in the amenities, in the lobby, and so on. The interior designers he uses merit multiple mentions in his book. And while he also mentions a few high-end architects he’s worked with (Arquitectonica, Robert Stern), his buildings nevertheless tend to end up as basic boxes. From How Real Estate Developers Think:
If exterior details and ornamentation are not something a tenant is willing to pay for, they’re not something a developer is inclined to spend money on. And simpler, less ornamented buildings are cheaper to build. Ornaments and details cost money. Articulation and interesting facade shapes increase the amount of (expensive) exterior cladding without a corresponding increase in rentable square footage, and add joints and connections that become potential points of failure. When a developer does add ornament, it’s often in relatively limited ways in an attempt to get the most bang for their buck, ways that don’t change the size or shape of the building: making the windows a slightly different color, adding luxurious touches to one small, highly visible corner of the building, and so on. One developer described this process to me as “applying doilies.” An example of this is Aqua Tower in Chicago, designed and built by James Loewenberg. Aqua won awards for its design, which features an undulating shape due to its curved, differently-sized balconies that extend beyond the edge of the building. Loewenberg notes that this design was incredibly simple and inexpensive to create:
The financialization of architectureOf course, this desire to eliminate ornament which doesn’t contribute to the bottom line didn’t emerge suddenly following World War II: it had been a trend for decades prior to that. In his history of the Empire State Building, John Tauranac notes that in the early 20th century, real estate investors were becoming less and less inclined to fund “spurious” ornamentation that wouldn’t yield greater profits. This paragraph sounds like it’s describing modernist glass skyscrapers of the 1950s, but it's actually about Art Deco skyscrapers of the 1920s:
This trend towards “financialization,” of viewing a building increasingly in economic terms and only adding features that could be financially justified, continued over the course of the 20th century. Following World War II, developers embraced modernism because it provided an excuse to construct buildings less expensively, notes Steven Ruttenbaum:
In Skyscraper Dreams, Tom Schachtman likewise notes the bland designs of Emery Roth and Sons were in large part due to client feedback:
Similarly, in his
Even non-profits aren’t immune from this sort of pressure:
This tendency to omit decoration that buyers don’t seem to value isn’t limited to modernist, International Style skyscrapers. Consider, for instance, this single family home, which is fairly representative of new home construction in the US. This home obviously isn’t anything resembling “modern” architecture, and the front of the house has a great deal of ornamentation. Stone cladding, decorative shutters, faux lintels over the windows, and so on. On the sides, however, there’s virtually nothing: no stone cladding, no decoration on the windows, almost no ornament whatsoever. (In many houses, even the decorative Part of this is a problem of legibility. For some building features, like granite countertops, stainless steel appliances, or washer/dryer hookups, developers can quantify how much they’ll contribute to additional rents, and how much it's worth spending on them. But for exterior ornamentation, or simply an attractive exterior design, it’s much more difficult to quantify the benefits of it. If it can’t be included as an element in a financial model of the building, it's hard for a developer to justify spending money on it. More generally, there seems to be a certain amount of market inefficiency in the construction of new buildings, for reasons I don’t quite understand. Some developers have told me that the value of good design is the sort of thing that accrues over the long term. A developer putting up a building and then holding on to it might be able to see that value (though convincing outside investors is another story), but for a merchant builder that’s going to turn around and sell it, it won’t be reflected in the price they’ll be able to get for it. Developers and risk aversionFor these reasons, the unadorned glass box aesthetic became popular. And once a construction system becomes popular, numerous forces conspire to keep it in place. For one, a huge number of decisions in real estate are based on “comparables”: comparing your building to a similar building targeting a similar part of the market. This ultimately pushes new buildings to be similar to what’s already being built. Investors are risk-averse, and don’t want to fund a project that’s too different from what already exists and what the market expects. Developers don’t want to make risky design decisions, because bold choices are perceived to be polarizing, and are more likely to drive away tenants than they are to attract them. And for a developer, the downside of a project going poorly is much greater than a project doing exceptionally well, which incentivizes going with the tried and true. The more common a style becomes, the riskier it is for a developer or investor to deviate from it. A similar logic drives architectural and engineering decisions. Architects and engineers want to use systems they’re familiar with and have used before: they already have the details and calculations for them (saving them time and effort), and the systems have been vetted and demonstrated to work. An architect who specifies a glass curtain wall that he’s used many times before can be confident that the system will perform as expected, that the waterproofing will work as designed, and so on. If instead he specifies a novel system, he’s both making more work for himself and taking a major risk in doing so. On the construction side, contractors similarly prefer to use the tried and true rather than something novel with Is the glass box a market failure?So ultimately, the glass box aesthetic became popular not only because modernist architects liked it, but because it made buildings cheaper to build, and because developers gradually realized that ornate, highly-detailed exteriors weren’t particularly compelling to renters or to their investors. And once that aesthetic was in place, risk aversion and cost considerations kept it in place. Of course, none of this means that it’s impossible to build anything other than a plain glass skyscraper. Many developers care deeply about good exterior design, believe more classical design adds value and makes their project more competitive, and get funding to build those sorts of projects. Architects like One could argue that there’s a sort of market failure at work here: because architecture is ultimately funded by the people who occupy a building but viewed by people outside of it, there are externalities (in the form of benefits of attractive exteriors) that aren’t being appropriately priced in. An “efficient” market for architecture, which used some sort of mechanism to properly weigh the preferences of everyone who has to look at the building, might be expected to produce more beautiful buildings (for whatever your definition of beautiful is). Unfortunately for proponents of this theory, we already have such a mechanism: as discussed above, building design is heavily influenced by design review boards, planning commissions, and other forms of community input. Our current system bends over backwards to consider local preferences and give weight to these sorts of externalities. This doesn’t seem to have had much of an impact on how “beautiful” buildings are, or the dominance of the glass box aesthetic: all it does is make them harder to build. 1 The Pennzoil cladding is in fact aluminum, but Johnson and Burgee used a color that didn’t resemble aluminum at all. When presented to Liedtke, he simply said “That’s not aluminum, aluminum doesn’t look like that” and let them proceed with it. 2 A cousin of curtain wall is Construction Physics articles will always remain free, but if you find this work valuable, I encourage you to Construction Physics is produced in partnership with the Institute for Progress, a Washington, DC-based think tank. You can learn more about their work by visiting their You can also contact me on |