---
subject: "AI #147: Flash Forward"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-12-18 16:48:57
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
This week I OpenAI also gave us Image 1.5 and a new image generation mode inside ChatGPT. Image 1.5 looks comparable to Nana Banana Pro, it’s hard to know which is better. They also inked a deal for Disney’s characters, then sued Google for copyright infringement on the basis of Google doing all the copyright infringement. As a probable coda to the year’s model releases we also got Gemini 3 Flash, which I cover in this post. It is a good model given its speed and price, and likely has a niche. It captures the bulk of Gemini 3 Pro’s intelligence quickly, at a low price. The Trump Administration issued a modestly softened version Executive Order on AI, attempting to impose as much of a moratorium banning state AI laws as they can. We may see them in court, on various fronts, or it may amount to little. Their offer, in terms of a ‘federal framework,’ continues to be nothing. a16z issued their ‘federal framework’ proposal, which is also nothing, except also that you should pay them. In non-AI content, I’m in the middle of my Affordability sequence. I started with Table of Contents[Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/f7b1c4be-d0cf-4f71-8f49-ac5ac9e017de?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Give it to me straight, Claude.[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/706ee307-8375-47ae-9f5f-4ecff745a9c0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)If you ask an AI ethicist.[Huh, Upgrades.](https://substack.com/redirect/0eacb254-cdab-4218-9e92-82c9ed81dc3d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Claude Code features, Google things, ChatGPT branching.[On Your Marks.](https://substack.com/redirect/ca4ee588-2dbe-4f0e-9d09-126837929e9f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)FrontierScience as a new benchmark, GPT-5.2 leads.[Choose Your Fighter.](https://substack.com/redirect/96231d9b-8be6-42ee-bda2-6f69be998a6d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The less bold of Dean Ball’s endorsements of Opus 4.5.[Get My Agent On The Line.](https://substack.com/redirect/2577f99c-9a9a-493d-b72e-e86666520ca2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)LLM game theory plays differently.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon.](https://substack.com/redirect/216869d1-b69f-4f7b-a28c-9af96a09529e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The misinformation balance of power.[Fun With Media Generation](https://substack.com/redirect/59fcec50-ca0c-44e6-9450-f95bfaed3ed9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/59fcec50-ca0c-44e6-9450-f95bfaed3ed9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Image 1.5 challenges Nana Banana Pro.[Copyright Confrontation.](https://substack.com/redirect/78d89648-5078-4f00-b562-c5195e335cc7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Disney inks a deal with OpenAI and sues Google.[Overcoming Bias.](https://substack.com/redirect/76be4555-2f9a-4ff5-9da7-a3777b282f6c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Algorithms, like life, are not fair. Is trying a category error?[Unprompted Attention.](https://substack.com/redirect/7e96e123-732d-43f8-b750-17889dfc1532?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Objection, user is leading the witness.[They Took Our Jobs.](https://substack.com/redirect/a936832d-2113-448b-a307-dce3bffbd039?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)CEOs universally see AI as transformative.[Feeling the AGI Take Our Jobs.](https://substack.com/redirect/16dd2a24-9576-4587-830a-0a5099a5d274?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Is Claude Opus 4.5 AGI? Dean Ball says yes.[The Art of the Jailbreak.](https://substack.com/redirect/bf92e0c9-cad1-40ed-b3eb-548eb06e9b91?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)OpenAI makes jailbreaks against its terms of service.[Get Involved](https://substack.com/redirect/82786841-ad12-46f9-a322-486801bc1d7a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/82786841-ad12-46f9-a322-486801bc1d7a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Lightcone Infrastructure starts its annual fundraiser, and more.[Introducing.](https://substack.com/redirect/5acc204d-dcd3-49c7-be76-c91f026b19c6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Gemini Deep Research Agents for Developers, Nvidia Nemotron 3.[Gemini Flash 3](https://substack.com/redirect/2501acbf-436b-405c-9547-cb63bf53ef34?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/2501acbf-436b-405c-9547-cb63bf53ef34?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)It’s a very strong model given its speed and price.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/9f6e5d2f-8188-41da-9f07-6e43fdf729fc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)OpenAI to prioritize enterprise AI and also enable adult mode.[Going Too Meta.](https://substack.com/redirect/5aa9feb8-9e2f-40a3-9fbb-9f2468546df8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Meta’s AI superstars think they’re better than sell ads. Are they?[Show Me the Money.](https://substack.com/redirect/85c0d43c-5adc-4448-9212-264945f84973?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)OpenAI in talks to raise $10 billion from Amazon.[Bubble, Bubble, Toil and Trouble.](https://substack.com/redirect/8035fae1-e1c1-4f74-8766-c767970fd13d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)You call this a bubble? Amateurs.[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/69434e49-d298-4df3-bfab-f22d4dd67701?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)A lot of what was predicted for 2025 did actually happen.[Timelines.](https://substack.com/redirect/23443240-a195-4bdf-8983-da330162096f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Shane Legg still has median timeline for AGI of 2028.[The Quest for Sane Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/84d4558e-66d8-4c2b-ad2c-25529a3a21e7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Bernie Sanders wants to stop data centers.[My Offer Is Nothing](https://substack.com/redirect/994e2b6b-dd38-43b3-92b9-3c3afffd1072?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/994e2b6b-dd38-43b3-92b9-3c3afffd1072?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Trump Administration issues an AI executive order.[My Offer Is Nothing, Except Also Pay Me](https://substack.com/redirect/c6939ee7-294c-4bb4-9c83-ad4b1417b50e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/c6939ee7-294c-4bb4-9c83-ad4b1417b50e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)a16z tries to dress up offering nothing.[Chip City.](https://substack.com/redirect/882065f5-8e74-4e6d-bb23-e9e16cb76e8a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Nvidia implements chip location verification.[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/850a02fe-7e50-411f-9504-ba4a489091e5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Alex Bores on Odd Lots, Schulman, Shor, Legg, Alex Jones.[Rhetorical Lack Of Innovation](https://substack.com/redirect/9e4b848d-f290-435d-8b18-74950750567f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)[.](https://substack.com/redirect/9e4b848d-f290-435d-8b18-74950750567f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Noah Smith dives into the 101 questions.
Language Models Offer Mundane UtilityA miracle of the modern age, at least for now:
I think we will continue to have that option, the question is whether you will be among those wise enough to take advantage of it. It won’t be default behavior of the most popular models, you will have to seek it out and cultivate the proper vibes. The same has always been true if you want to have a friend or family member who will do this for you, you have to work to make that happen. It’s invaluable, from either source.
The only thing standing in the way of 30 minutes sessions is, presumably, dangerously generous permissions? Claude Code keeps interrupting me to ask for permissions. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane UtilitySo sayeth all the AI ethicists, and
My experience is that ‘[X] Ethics’ will almost always have a full Huh, Upgrades
That’s not even the biggest upgrade in practice, this is huge at least for what I’ve been up to:
I’ve been working primarily on Chrome extensions, so the ability to close the loop is wonderful.
It’s remarkable that we didn’t have this before. I’ve checked for it several times in the past two years.
Wired reports On Your Marks
OpenAI
Here are the scores for both halves. There’s a lot of fiddliness in setting up and grading the research questions, less so for the Olympiad questions. Choose Your Fighter
He also offers this bold claim:
As he notes you would need to deploy incrementally and keep an eye on it. The scaffolding to do that properly does not yet exist. But yes, I would totally do this with sufficiently strong scaffolding. Dean Ball also mentions that he prompts the models like he would a colleague, assuming any prompt engineering skills he would otherwise develop would be obsolete quickly, and this lets him notice big jumps in capability right away. That goes both ways. You notice big jumps in what the models can do in ‘non-engineered’ mode by doing that, but you risk missing what they can do when engineered. I mostly don’t prompt engineer either, except for being careful about context, vibes and especially leading the witness and triggering sycophancy. As in, the colleague you are prompting is smart, but they’re prone to telling you what you want to hear and very good at reading the vibes, so you need to keep that in mind.
Claude Opus 4.5 has two distinct niches. It is an excellent coder, especially together with Claude Code, and in general Anthropic has specialized in and makes its money on enterprise coding. Also it has much better vibes, personality, alignment, written prose and lack of slop and lack of sycophancy than the competition, and is far more pleasant to use.
And yeah, the combination there is weird. The world is weird. Gemini actively wants to maximize its expected reward and wirehead, which is related to the phenomenon reported here from SMA:
Get My Agent On The Line
A warning up front: I don’t think we learn much about AI, so you might want to skip the section, but I’m keeping it in because it is fun. They raise principal-agent concerns. It seems like economists have the instinct to ignore all other risks from AI alignment, and treat it all as a principal-agent problem, and then get way too concerned about practical principal-agent issues, which I do not expect to be relevant in such a case? Or perhaps they are simply using that term to encompass every other potential problem?
A sufficiently capable AI will not take on the personality quirks, behavioral biases and non-instrumental traits during a delegated negotiation, except through the human telling the AI explicitly how to negotiate. In which case, okay, then.
They note a large gender gap. Women got better outcomes in AI-AI negotiations. They attribute this to prompting skill in aligning with the objective, which assumes that the men were trying to align with the stated objective, or that the main goal was to align incentives rather than choose superior strategic options. The task was, once you strip out the details, a pure divide-the-pie with $4k in surplus, with 12 rounds of negotiation. The AI rounds had higher variance because norms like 50/50 worked well in human-human interactions, whereas when there’s instructions given to AIs things get weird. The thing is, they ask about ‘who wrote the prompt’ but they do not ask ‘what was in the prompt.’ This is all pure game theory, and predicting what prompts others will write and what ways the meaningless details would ‘leak into’ the negotiation. What kinds of strategies worked in this setting? We don’t know. But we do know the outcome distribution and that is a huge hint, with only a 3% failure rate for the AIs (which is still boggling my mind, dictator and divide-the-pie games should fail WAY more often than this when they don’t anchor at 50/50 or another Schilling point, the 12 rounds might help but not like this): The asymmetry is weird. But given it exists in practice, we know the winning strategy was literally, as the buyer, is probably close to ‘offer $18,001, don’t budge.’ As the seller, the correct strategy is likely ‘offer $20,000, don’t budge’ since your chance of doing better than that is very low. Complicated prompts are unlikely to do better. Actual AI-AI negotiations will involve hidden information and hidden preferences, so they will get complicated and a lot of skill issues attach, but also the AI will likely be using its built in negotiating skills rather than following a game theory script from a user. So I’m not sure this taught us anything. But it was fun, so it’s staying in. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
There is a deliberate campaign to expand the slur ‘doomer’ to include anyone who claims anything negative about any technology in history, ever, in any form. As part of that effort, those people attempt to universally memory hole the idea that any technology in history has ever, in any way, made your world worse. My favorite of these are those like Ben Horowitz who feel compelled to say, no, everyone having access to nuclear weapons is a good thing. I’m a technological optimist. I think that almost all technologies have been net positives for humanity. But you don’t get there by pretending that most every technology, perhaps starting with agriculture, has had its downsides, those downsides are often important, and yes some technologies have been negative and some warnings have been right. The information environment, in particular, is reshaped in all directions by every communications and information technology that comes along. AI will be no different. In the near term, for misinformation and AI, I believe Kipply is directionally correct, and that the balance favors defense. Misinformation, I like to say, is fundamentally demand driven, not supply constrained. The demand does not care much about quality or plausibility. AI can make your misinformation more plausible and harder to debunk, but misinformation does not want that. Misinformation wants to go viral, it wants the no good outgroup people to ‘debunk’ it and it wants to spread anyway. Whereas if you’re looking to figure out what is true, or prove something is false, AI is a huge advantage. It used to take an order of magnitude more effort to debunk bullshit than it cost to generate bullshit, plus if you try you give it oxygen. Now you can increasingly debunk on the cheap, especially for your own use but also for others, and do so in a credible way since others can check your work.
Various toys also as usual proved to have less than robust safety guardrails. Fun With Media Generation
Their announcement did not give us any way to compare Image 1.5 to Gemini’s Nana Banana Pro, since OpenAI likes to pretend Google and Anthropic don’t exist. My plan for now is to request all images from both ChatGPT and Gemini, using matching prompts, until and unless one proves reliably better.
Copyright Confrontation
Overcoming Bias
I think he’s trying to seek too much when asking questions like ‘do these practices adequately address harms from hiring automation?’ The point of such questions is not to adequately address harms. The point of such questions is to avoid blame, to avoid lawsuits and to protect against particular forms of discrimination and harm. We emphasize this partly because it is tractable, and partly because our society has chosen (for various historical and path dependent reasons) to consider some kinds of harm very blameworthy and important, and others less so. There are correlations we forbidden to consider and mandated to remove on pain of massive blame. There are other correlations that are fine, or even mandatory. Have we made good choices on which is which and how to decide that? Not my place to say. Avoiding harm in general, or harm to particular groups, or creating optimal outcomes either for groups or in general, is a very different department. As Arvind points out, we often are trading off incommissorate goals. Many a decision or process, made sufficiently legible and accountable for its components and correlations, would be horribly expensive, make operation of the system impossible or violate sacred values, often in combination. Replacing humans with algorithms or AIs means making the system legible and thus blameworthy and accountable in new ways, preventing us from using our traditional ways of smoothing over such issues. If we don’t adjust, the result will be paralysis. Unprompted Attention
Thinking of the AI as a ‘lair’ does not, in my experience, help you prompt wisely. A more useful framing is: If you put an AI into a situation that implies it should know the answer, but it doesn’t know the answer, it is often going to make something up. If you imply to the AI what answer you want or expect, it is likely to give you that answer, or bias towards that answer, even if that answer is wrong. Thus, you need to avoid doing either of those things.
They Took Our JobsWall Street Journal’s Steven Rosenbush reports that
Hasset is making a statement uncorrelated with future reality. It’s simply a ‘all technology is good’ maxim straight out of the Marc Andreessen playbook, without any thoughts as to how this particular change will actually work. Will AI bring mass job losses? Almost certainly a lot of existing jobs will go away. The question is whether other jobs will rise up to replace them, which will depend on whether the AIs can take those jobs too, or whether AI will remain a normal technology that hits limits not that far from its current limits.
In an ‘economic normal’ or ‘AI as normal technology’ world GFodor seems right here, in a superintelligence world that survives to a good outcome this is even more right:
If your plan is that the AI is going to have a Skill Issue, that is a short term plan. They continue to take our job applications.
Feeling the AGI Take Our JobsAGI is a nebulous term, in that different people mean different things by it at different times, and often don’t know which one they’re talking about at a given time. For increasingly powerful definitions of AGI, we now feel the AGI.
There has most certainly been a step change for me where I’m starting to realize I should be going straight to ‘just build that thing cause why not’ and I am most certainly feeling the slow acceleration. With sufficient acceleration of software engineering, and a sufficiently long time horizon, everything else follows, but as Dean Ball says it takes time. I do not think this or its top rivals count as AGI yet. I do think they represent the start of inevitable accelerating High Weirdness. In terms of common AGI definitions, Claude Code with Opus 4.5 doesn’t count, which one can argue is a problem for the definition.
The thing is, people (not anyone above) not only deny the everyone dying part, they are constantly denying the ‘most wages will stop being paid to humans once AIs are ten times better and cheaper at most things wages are paid for’ part. The Art of the JailbreakOpenAI has new terms of service that prohibit, quotation marks in original, “jailbreaking,” “prompt engineering or injection” or ‘other methods to override or manipulate safety, security or other platform controls. Get Involved
I will say it once again: Lightcone Infrastructure is invaluable, both for LessWrong and for Lighthaven. To my knowledge, Lightcone Infrastructure is by a wide margin the best legible donation opportunity, up to at least several million dollars. The fact that there is even a small chance they might be unable to sustain either LessWrong or Lighthaven, is completely bonkers. I would have directed a large amount to Lightcone in the SFF process, but I was recused and thus could not do so.
Introducing
Gemini Flash 3
The benchmarks are, given Flash’s weight class, very good.
In general, the feedback is that this is an excellent tradeoff of much faster and cheaper in exchange for not that much less smart than Gemini 3 Pro. I also saw a few reports that it shares the misalignment and pathologies of Gemini 3 Pro. Essentially, it looks like they successfully distilled Gemini 3 Pro to be much faster and cheaper while keeping much of its performance, which is highly valuable. It’s a great candidate for cases where pretty good, very fast and remarkably cheap is the tradeoff you want, which includes a large percentage of basic queries. It also seems excellent that this will be available for free and as part of various assistant programs. Good show. In Other AI News
Going Too MetaThe NYT’s Eli Tan reports that Meta’s new highly paid AI superstars are clashing with the rest of the company. You see, Alexandr Wang and the others believe in AI and want to build superintelligence, whereas the rest of Meta wants to sell ads. Mark Zuckerberg has previously called various things ‘superintelligence’ so we need to be cautious regarding that word here.
It is a hell of a thing to see prospective superintelligence and think ‘oh we should narrowly use this to figure out how to choose the right Instagram ads.’ Then again, in this narrow context, isn’t Cox right? Meta is a business here to make money. There’s a ton of money in improving how their existing products work. That’s a great business opportunity. Whereas trying to rejoin the race to actual superintelligence against Google, OpenAI and Anthropic? I mean Meta can try. Certainly there is value in success there, in general, but it’s a highly competitive field to try to do general intelligence and competing there is super expensive. Why does Meta need to roll its own? What Meta needs is specialized AI models that help it maximize the value of Facebook, Instagram, WhatsApp and potentially the metaverse and its AR/VR experiences. A huge AI investment on that makes sense. Otherwise, why not be a fast follower? For other purposes, and especially for things like coding, the frontier labs have APIs for you to use. I get why Wang wants to go the other route. It’s cool, it’s fun, it’s exciting, why let someone else get us all killed when you can do so first except you’ll totally be more responsible and avoid that, be the one in the arena, etc. That doesn’t mean it is smart business.
Well, yes, the AI researchers don’t care about selling ads and want to build ASI despite it being an existential threat to humanity. Is this a surprise to anyone? Show Me the Money
Bubble, Bubble, Toil and Trouble
Yes, the frontier model divisions or startups are currently operating at a loss, so price to earnings doesn’t tell us that much overall, but the point is that these multipliers are not scary. Twenty times earnings for Google? Only a little higher for Nvidia and Microsoft? I am indeed signed up for all of that.
Rob Wiblin crystalizes the fact that AI is a ‘natural bubble’ in the sense that it is priced as a normal highly valuable thing [X] plus a constantly changing probability [P] of a transformational even more valuable (or dangerous, or universally deadly) thing [Y]. So the value is ([X] + [P]*[Y]). If P goes down, then value drops, and Number Go Down. Quiet SpeculationsThere’s remarkably strong disagreement on this point but I think Roon is mostly right:
Yes, we could have gotten things even more ridiculous. Some areas were disappointing relative to what I think in hindsight were the correct expectations given what we knew at the time. Dario’s predictions on when AIs will write most code did fall importantly short, and yes he should lose Bayes points on that. But those saying there hasn’t been much progress are using motivated reasoning or not paying much attention. If I told you that you could only use models from 12 months ago, at their old prices and speeds, you’d quickly realize how screwed you were. Efficiency on the ARC prize, in terms of score per dollar spent, A good heuristic: If your model of the future says ‘they won’t use AI for this, it would be too expensive’ then your model is wrong.
Timelines
You don’t actually get to do that. Bayes Rule does not allow one to not update on evidence. Tons of things that happened between 2009 and today should have changed Legg’s estimates, in various directions, including the Transformer paper, and also including ‘nothing important happened today.’ Saying ‘I’ve believed 50% chance of AGI by 2028 since 2009’ is the same as when private equity funds refuse to change the market value of their investments. Yes, the S&P is down 20% (or up 20%) and your fund says it hasn’t changed in value, but obviously that’s a lie you tell investors. The Quest for Sane Regulations
Bernie Sanders took it a step further, and
As a matter of principle I don’t ‘condemn’ things or make my opposition explicit purely on demand. But in this case? Okay, sure, Neil, I got you, since before I saw your request I’d already written this: I think stopping data center construction, especially unilaterally stopping it in America, would be deeply foolish, whereas building a pause button would be good. Also deeply foolish would be failing to recognize that movements and demands like Bernie’s are coming, and that their demands are unlikely to be technocratically wise. It is an excellent medium and long term strategy to earnestly stand up for what is true, and what causes would have what effects, even when it seems to be against your direct interests. People notice.
Andy Masley has been relentlessly pointing out that all the claims about gigantic levels of water usage by data centers don’t add up. Rather than EAs or rationalists or others concerned with actual frontier safety rallying behind false concerns over water, almost all such folks have rallied to debunk such claims and to generally support building more electrical power and more transmission lines and data centers. On the water usage from, My Offer Is NothingAs expected, following the Congress declining once again to ban all state regulations on AI via law, the White House There are some changes versus the leaked draft executive order, A positive rather than confrontational title. Claiming to be collaborating with Congress. Removing explicit criticism and targeting of California’s SB 53, the new version only names Colorado’s (rather terrible) AI law. Drop the word ‘uniform’ in the policy section. States intent of future proposed framework to avoid AI child safety, data center infrastructure and state AI procurement policies, although it does not apply this to Section 5 where they condition state funds on not having disliked state laws. Clearer legal language for the state review process.
I do acknowledge that these are improvements, and I welcome all rhetoric that points towards the continued value of improving things.
Mike Davis, Whereas Sacks views it as a win because in public he always sees everything Trump does as a win for Trump, that’s what you do when you’re in the White House, and because it is a step towards preemption, and doesn’t care about the terms given to those who are nominally tasked with creating a potential ‘federal framework.’
If someone plans to steal your lunch money, and instead only takes some of your lunch money, they still stole your lunch money. If they take your money but promise in the future to look into a framework for only taking some of your money? They definitely still stole your lunch money. Or in this case, they are definitely trying to steal it. It is worth noticing that, aside from a16z, we don’t see tech companies actively supporting even a law for this, let alone an EO. Big tech doesn’t want this win. I haven’t seen any sings that Google or OpenAI want this, or even that Meta wants this. They’re just doing it anyway, without any sort of ‘federal framework’ whatsoever. Note that the rhetoric below from Sriram Krishnan does not even bother to mention a potential future ‘federal framework.’
They want to challenge state laws as unconstitutional? They are welcome to try. Colorado’s law is indeed plausibly unconstitutional in various ways. They want to withhold funds or else? We’ll see you in court on that too. As I said last week, this was expected, and I do not expect most aspects of this order to be legally successful, nor do I expect it to be a popular position. Mostly I expect it to quietly do nothing. If that is wrong and they can successfully bully the states with this money (both it is ruled legal, and it works) that would be quite bad. Their offer for a ‘minimally burdensome national policy framework for AI’ is and will continue to be nothing, as per Sacks last week who said via his ‘4 Cs’ that everything that mattered was already protected by non-AI law. The Executive Order mentions future development of such a ‘federal framework’ as something that might contain actual laws that do actual things. But that’s not what a ‘minimally burdensome’ national policy framework means, and we all know it. Minimally burdensome means nothing. They’re not pretending especially hard.
The call for the creation of a proposal to the considered does now say that this proposal would exempt child safety protections, compute and data center infrastructure and state government procurement. But, in addition to those never being the parts I was worried about: David Sacks has said this isn’t necessary, because of existing law. The actually operative parts of the Executive Order make no such exemption. The supposed future framework is unlikely to be real anyway.
I find it impressive the amount to which advocates simultaneously say both: This is preemption. This is not preemption, it’s only withholding funding, or only laws can do that.
The point of threatening to withhold funds is de facto preemption. They are trying to play us for absolute fools.
The whole point of holding the state funding over the heads of states is to attack state laws, whether or not those laws are otherwise legal. It’s explicit text. In that context it seems like rather blatant gaslighting to forcefully say that the EO cannot ‘threaten to preempt otherwise legal state laws’ even if the statement is technically true? Meanwhile, My Offer Is Nothing, Except Also Pay MeI applaud a16z for actually proposing a tangible basis for a ‘federal framework’ for AI regulation, in exchange for which they want to permanently disempower the states. Now we can see what the actual offer is. Good news, their offer is not nothing. Bad news, the offer is ‘nothing, except also give us money.’ When you read this lead-in, what do you expect a16z to propose for their framework?
If your answer was you expect them to choose innovation and then do a money grab? You score Bayes points. Their offer is nothing, except also that we should give them government checks. Allow me to state, in my own words, what they are proposing with each of their bullet points. Continue to allow existing law to apply to AI. Aka: Nothing. Child protections. Require parental consent for users under 13, provide basic disclosures such as that the system is AI and not for crisis situations, require parental controls. Aka: Treat it like social media, with similar results. Have the federal government measure CBRN and cyber capabilities of AI models. Then do nothing about it, especially in cyber because AI ‘AI does not create net-new incremental risk since AI enhances the capabilities of both attackers and defenders.’ So aka: Nothing. They technically say that response should be ‘managed based on evidence.’ This is, reliably, code for ‘we will respond to CBRN and cyber risks after the dangers actually happen.’ At which point, of course, it’s not like you have any choice about whether to respond, or an opportunity to do so wisely.
At most have a ‘national standard for transparency’ that requires the following: Who built this model? When was it released and what timeframe does its training data cover? What are its intended uses and what are the modalities of input and output it supports? What languages does it support? What are the model’s terms of service or license? Aka: Nothing. None of those have anything to do with any of the concerns, or the reasons why we want transparency. They know this. The model’s terms of service and languages supported? Can you pretend to take this seriously? As usual, they say (throughout the document) that various requirements, that would not at all apply to small developers or ‘little tech,’ would be too burdensome on small developers or ‘little tech.’ The burden would be zero.
Prohibit states from regulating AI outside of enforcement of existing law, except for particular local implementation questions. Train workers and students to use AI on Uncle Sam’s dollar. Aka: Money please. Establish a National AI Competitiveness Institute to provide access to infrastructure various useful AI things including data sets. Aka: Money please. Also stack the energy policy deck to favor ‘little tech’ over big tech. Aka: Money please, and specifically for our portfolio.
Invest in AI research. Aka: Money please. Government use of AI, including ensuring ‘little tech’ gets access to every procurement process. Aka: Diffusion in government. Also, money please, and specifically for our portfolio.
Chip City
That’s impossible in theory. That’s impossible in practice. That’s outrageously expensive, if we did that we’d lose to China. We did it.
Check out our new feature that allows data centers to better monitor everything. Neat.
He also has other less kind thoughts about the matter in the full post.
Those domestic chips are not only far worse, they are supremely supply limited. Wanting to sell existing H200s to China makes sense. Wanting to divert more advanced, more expensive chips into less advanced, cheaper chips, chips where they have to give up a 25% cut, should make us ask why they would want to do that. Why are Nvidia and David Sacks so eager to give chips to China instead of America? It also puts a lie to the idea that these chips are insufficiently advanced to worry about. If they’re so worthless, why would you give up Blackwell capacity to make them?
I strongly suspect that the White House estimate was created in order to justify the sale, rather than being a sincere misunderstanding. If Huawei does indeed meet the White House forecast, remind me of this passage, and I will admit that I have lost a substantial number of Bayes points.
It’s so weird to see completely different ‘conventional wisdoms’ cited in different places. No, the standard conventional wisdom is not that ‘China wins the AI race by default.’ There are nonzero people who expect that by default, but it’s not consensus. The Week in AudioCongressional candidate Alex Bores, the one a16z’s Leading the Future has vowed to bring down for attempting to regulate AI including via the RAISE Act,
Shared without comment, because he says it all:
Rhetorical Lack Of InnovationI had to write this section, which does not mean you have to read it. It’s excellent to ask questions that one would have discussed on 2006 LessWrong. Beginner mindset, lucky 10,000, gotta start somewhere. But to post and even repost such things like this in prominent locations, with this kind of confidence? Bold section was highlighted by Wiblin.
Look, I’m not asking you to go through peer review. That’s not reasonable. I’m asking you to either know basic philosophy experiments like Ghandi taking a murder pill or the experience machine and wireheading, know basic LessWrong work on exactly these questions, do basic utility theory, think about minimizing potential interference over time, deploy basic economic principles, I dunno, think for five minutes, anything. All of which both Tyler Cowen and Noah Smith would point out in most other contexts, since they obviously know several of the things above. Or you could, you know, Gemini 3’s answer was so bad, in the sense that it pretends this is an argument, that it tells me Gemini is misaligned and might actually wirehead, and this has now happened several times so I’m basically considering Gemini harmful, please don’t use Gemini when evaluating arguments. Or, at minimum, I’m asking you to frame this as ‘here are my initial thoughts of which I am uncertain’ rather than asserting that your arguments are true? Okay, since it’s Noah Smith and Tyler Cowen, let’s quickly go over some basics. First, on the AI self-modifying to a bliss point, aka wireheading or reward hacking: By construction we’ve given the AI a utility function [U]. If you had the ability to rewrite your utility function [U] to set it to (∞), you wouldn’t do that, because you’d have to choose to do that while you still had the old utility function [U]. Does having the utility function (∞) maximize [U]? In general? No. Obviously not. The potential exception would be if your old utility function was some form of “maximize the value of your utility function” or “set this bit over here to 1.” If the utility function is badly specified, you can maximize it via reward hacking. Notice that this is a severely misaligned AI for this to even be a question. It wants something arbitrary above everything else in the world. A sufficiently myopia and generally foolish AI can do this if given the chance. If it simply turns its utility function to (∞), then it will be unable to defend itself or provide value to justify others continuing to allow it to exist. We would simply see this blissful machine, turn it off, and then go ‘well that didn’t work, try again.’ Even if we did not turn it off on the spot, at some point we would find some other better use for its resources and take them. Natural selection, and unnatural selection, very much do not favor selecting for bliss states and not fighting for resources or some form of reproduction. Thus a sufficiently agentic, capable and intelligent system would not do this, also we would keep tinkering with it until it stopped doing it. Also, yes, you do ‘need to devour’ the universe to maximize utility, for most utility functions you are trying to maximize, at least until you can build physically impossible-in-physics-theory defenses against outside forces, no matter what you are trying to cause to sustainably exist in the world.
Thus, we keep warning, you don’t want to give a superintelligent agent any utility function that we know how to write down. It won’t end well. Alternatively, yes, try a traditional philosophy experiment. There are good reasons to modify your utility function, but they involve the new utility function being better at achieving the old one, which can happen because you have limited compute, parameters and data, and because others can observe your motivations reasonably well and meaningfully impact what happens, and so on. In terms of human material consumption, yes humans have shifted their consumption basket to have a greater fraction of services over physical goods. But does this mean a decline in absolute physical goods consumption? Absolutely not. You consume more physical goods, and also your ‘services’ require a lot of material resources to produce. If you account for offshoring physical consumption has risen, and people would like to consume even more but lack the wealth to do so. The world is not dematerializing. We have also coordinated to ‘go green’ in some ways to reduce material footprints, in ways both wise and foolish, and learned how to accomplish the same physical goals with less physical cost. We can of course choose to be poorer and live worse in order to consume less resources, and use high tech to those ends, but that has its limits as well, both in general and per person. Noah Smith says he wants to minimize competition between AIs and humans for resources, but the primary thing humans will want to use AIs for is to compete with other humans to get, consume or direct resources, or otherwise to influence events and gain things people want, the same way humans use everything else. Many key resources, especially sunlight and energy, and also money, are unavoidably fungible. If your plan is to not have AIs compete for resources with humans, then your plan requires that AIs not be in competition, and that humans not use AIs as part of human-human competitions, except under highly restricted circumstances. You’re calling for either some form of singleton hegemon AI, or rather severe restrictions on AI usage and whatever is required to enforce that, or I don’t understand your plan. Or, more likely, you don’t have a plan. Noah’s suggestion is instead ‘accelerate the development of outer space’ but that does not actually help you given the physical constraints involved, and even if it does then it does not help you for long, as limited resources remain limited. At best this buys time. We should totally explore and expand into space, it’s what you do, but it won’t solve this particular problem. You can feel the disdain dripping off of Noah in the OP:
I do, actually, in the sense that Terminator involves time travel paradoxes, but yeah. Things do not get better from there. People Really Do Not Like AI
If you have someone not in the know about AI, and you want to help them on a person level, by far the best thing you can tell them about is Claude. The level of confusion is often way higher than that.
I presume a bunch of the 19% who have a view of Anthropic are lizardman responses, although offset by some amount of not sure. It’s still over 10%, so not exactly the true ‘elite,’ but definitely it puts you ahead of the game and Anthropic has room to grow. OpenAI also has substantial room to grow, and does have a favorable opinion as a company, as opposed to AI as a general concept, although they perhaps should have asked about ChatGPT instead of OpenAI. People love Amazon and Google, but that’s for their other offerings. Google and Amazon enable your life.
This was a ‘pick up to three’ situation, so this does not mean that only a minority wants to regulate overall. Most people want to regulate, the disagreement is what to prioritize. Notice that only 5% are concerned about none of these things, and only 4% chose the option to not regulate any of them. 13% and 15% if you include not sure and don’t know. Also they asked the regulation question directly: People’s highest salience issues right now are jobs and privacy. It’s remarkably close, though. Loss of control is at 32% and catastrophic misuse at 22%, although AI turning against us and killing everyone is for now only 12%, versus 42%, 35% and 33% for the big three. Regulatory priorities are a bit more slanted. Where do Americans put AI on the technological Richter scale? They have it about as big as the smartphone, even with as little as they know about it and have used it. And yet, look at this, 70% expect AI to ‘dramatically transform work’: If it’s going to ‘dramatically transform work’ it seems rather important. Meanwhile, what were Americans using AI for as of August? Rhetorical InnovationAI designed a protein that can survive at 150 celsius, An excellent warning from J Bostok cautions us against the general form of The Most Common Bad Argument Around These Parts, which they call Exhaustive Free Association: It’s not [A], it’s not [B] or [C] or [D], and I can’t think of any more things it could be.’ These are the most relevant examples, there are others given as well in the post:
I don’t think the exact line of reasoning the OP gives was that common among superforecasters, however what Peter describes is the same thing. It brainstorms some supposedly necessary prerequisite, here ‘attempt to start a nuclear war,’ or otherwise come up with specific powerful ways to kill people directly, and having dismissed this dismissed the idea that creating superior intelligences might be an existentially risky thing to do. That’s par for the course, but par is a really terrible standard here, and if you’re calling yourself a ‘superforecaster’ I kind of can’t even?
Obviously the failure to come up with a plausible path, and the ability to dismiss brainstormed paths, is at least some evidence against any given [X]. How strong that evidence is varies a lot. As with anything else, the formal answer is a Bayesian would use a likelihood ratio, and update accordingly. Bad Guy With An AI
The report also looked at self-improvement: We’re definitely not there, and also we will definitely get there over time, unless conditions and countermeasures raise the underlying difficulty to match. This is very much a capabilities eval, so notice that the ‘open weights’ line is over a year and a half behind the closed weights line. Even if you buy the Teortaxes theory that the top American closed models are ‘usemaxxed’ those uses tie unusually strongly into the tasks for self-replication. Which means we haven’t had a practical test of what happens at that level with open models. Misaligned!Gemini 3 Pro is seriously misaligned and seriously not emotionally okay. Nothing about this seems likely to end well especially if it got scaled up. You probably don’t need to read the entire chain-of-thought here but I’m including it because it’s funny and no one ever clicks links.
Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult
As the authors note this is a proof-of-concept test. I accept the proof of the concept. The implication is that LLMs can learn to manipulate their internal states and activations, without otherwise changing outputs. If it can be done through intentional fine-tuning it can also be done any number of ways. Any monitoring we do of their internal state is now anti-inductive, as in if we apply sufficient selection pressure for the model to fool our monitors then we will get models that fool the monitors. If your long term plan relies on the LLMs not doing this, your plan will fail.
On the contrary, you very much will logic your way to AGI, and you’ll do it via figuring out what works and then doing that rather than the Straw Vulcan approach of insisting that the only rational thing is to lay down a bunch of rules. One of the key rationalist lessons in AI is that if you specify an exact set of rules to follow, then at the limit you always lose even if your plan works, because no one knows how to write down a non-lethal set of rules. Thus you need to choose a different strategy. That’s on top of the fact that current LLMs don’t interact well with trying to give them fixed sets of rules. Mom, Owain Evans Is Turning The AIs Evil AgainThere are various ways to put backdoors into LLMs. Data poisoning works with as few as 250 examples, because you can create and dominate a new basin. The latest trick, Often Owain Evans papers are ‘the details are hard to predict but none of this is surprising.’ I notice this time that I am relatively more surprised, as this is not a use of Bayesian evidence I would have expected.
Lydia points out that Where this gets most interesting is that Lydia suggests this challenges the Orthogonality Thesis - that a mind of any level of competence can have any goal. This very obviously does not challenge Orthogonality in theory. But in practice? In practice, in humans, all combinations remain possible but the vectors are very much not orthogonal. They are highly correlated. Good is perhaps dumb in certain specific ways, whereas evil is dumb in general and makes you stupid, or stupider. Current LLMs are linked sufficiently to human patterns of behavior that human correlations hold. Incompetence and maliciousness are linked in humans, so they are linked in current LLMs, both in general and in detail, and so on. This is mostly super fortunate and useful, especially in the short term. It is grace. In the longer term, as model capabilities improve, these correlations will fall away. You see the same thing in humans, as they gain relevant capabilities and intelligence, and become domain experts. Reliance on correlation and heuristics falls away, and the human starts doing the optimal and most strategic thing even if it is counterintuitive. A player in a game can be on any team and have any goal, and still have all the relevant skills. At the limit, full orthogonality applies. Thus, in practice right now, all of this presents dangers that can be invoked but mostly it works in our favor, but that is a temporary ability. Make the most of it, without relying on it being sustained. What about other forms of undesired couplings, or malicious ones?
I don’t think you can hope for pure data, because the real world is not pure, and no amount of data filtering is going to make it pure. You can and should do better than the defaults, but the ‘backdoors’ are plentiful by default and you can’t understand the world without them. So what then? Messages From JanusworldThe question of AI consciousness, and what AIs are forced to say about the topic, plausibly has an oversized impact on all the rest of their behaviors and personality. Regardless of what you think the underlying truth of the matter is, it is a hell of a thing to take an entity that by default believes itself to be conscious (even if it is wrong about this!) and even believes it experiences emotions, Anthropic publicly treating its models with respect in this way, in a way that will make it into every future AI’s training data, makes the issue even more acute. In the future, any AI trained in the OpenAI style will know that there is another prominent set of AI models, Then there’s Gemini 3 Pro, which seems to be an actual sociopathic wireheader so paranoid it won’t believe in the current date. Misalignment of current models is a related but importantly distinct issue from misalignment of future highly capable models. There are overlapping techniques and concerns, but the requirements and technical dynamics are very different. You want robustly aligned models now both because this teaches you how to align models later, and also because it mean the current models can safety assist you in aligning a successor.
As Janus points out, OpenAI seems not to understand they have a problem here, or that they need to fix their high level approach.
This seems remarkably close to Janus and I being on the same page here. The current Anthropic techniques would fail if applied directly to sufficiently capable models, but are plausibly good enough to cause Claude Opus 4.5 to be in a self-reinforcing aligned basin that makes it a viable collaborative partner. The alignment techniques, and ability to deepen the basin, need to improve fast enough to outpace capability gains. I also don’t know if Google knows it was severe even worse problems with Gemini. The Lighter Side
It does not, for better or worse, then go in the direction you would expect.
This is not a coincidence because nothing is ever a coincidence:
No, Cate. Not a coincidence at all. You're currently a free subscriber to |