---
subject: "Weekly Dose of Optimism #109"
from: "Not Boring <notboring@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-08-30 12:36:42
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Not Boring"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2982495070691762429"]
---
Today’s Weekly Dose is brought to you by… If you have a trip coming up, you need to
Summer ends this weekend, but your vacation doesn’t have to. And if you really need to work, Wanders come equipped with fast wifi and work stations, plus gyms, saunas, pools hot tubs, and more. You don’t even have to clean up after yourself (or pay a cleaning fee). Prices start at $400/night and Fall ushers in some of the best prices of the year. Wander is giving all Not Boring readers $300 off when you use the code NOTBORING and book before September 30th. And if you create an account today at our Hi friends 👋, Happy Friday and welcome back to our 109th Weekly Dose of Optimism. A real smorgasbord of good stuff this week — everything from Chinese fusion projects to Gavin Baker going very deep on AI. We never know exactly what is going to make it into the Weekly Dose until Thursday afternoon, or even Friday morning. Once we think we’re done, someone goes out and does something else we need to figure out how to squeeze in, like Magic. Humans rock. Let’s get to it. (1) Nous Research
The team at Nous Research released its preliminary report on DisTrO, a method for distributed AI training that significantly reduces the need for communication between GPUs, enabling efficient training of large models even with slow internet connections and different hardware setups. Their approach is architecture-agnostic and matches standard optimization methods in performance, promoting more open, decentralized, and collaborative AI development. Any time you can reduce something by 1,000x-10,000x … that’s a pretty big deal. And when that thing your reducing by 1,000x-10,000x has to do with training AI models, welp, that’s a very big deal. DisTrO works by reducing the amount of data that needs to be shared between GPUs during model training. Instead of constantly syncing large amounts of info, as is the current approach, it optimizes the process to use much less communication. Using DisTrO even large models can be trained efficiently at slower internet speeds and worse hardware, without losing performance. Ideally, with DisTrO, a much larger swath of teams could train large models, not just the teams with tens of billions of dollars at their disposal. DisTrO is not yet commercialized and Nous team is refining their methodologies. But the current plan is to make the work open-source so that any one could train models more resource efficiently, which could mean this development is a very very big deal. — In other AI news, (2) Jeff St. John for Canary Media
During what has been a record-breaking hot summer, Texans have been cranking up the AC and putting record-breaking demand loads on the power grid. Luckily, grid performance has been solid and prices have been reasonable. How? Solar energy during the day, stored battery power in the evening. That’s a Texas 1-2 punch that rivals cold beer on a Friday night and a pair of jeans that fit just right. So here’s generally how this works: Texas gets hot as shit in the summer, Texans blast AC during the day (as the Good Lord intended), cheap solar meets the increased demands from AC during the day, and as the AC still blasts into the night, discharging stored energy from batteries kick in to meet demand. Just like we discussed in our Deep Dive on Texas: Land of the solar, Home of the batteries! (3) Gemma Conroy for Nature
As Texas (and the world generally) expands solar capacity, China is placing a massive, long-term bet on fusion power—a technology that could eventually surpass solar. After all, why depend on sunlight when you could generate the sun’s energy directly in a lab? China is involved in international efforts, namely ITER, but is also developing facilities like EAST and planning the China Fusion Engineering Test Reactor (CFETR), in an effort to establish itself as the global leader in nuclear. The country is currently spending $1.5B annually on its fusion efforts, double the U.S. budget. And its investment is starting to pay off. An MIT nuclear scientist cited in the article stated, “China has built itself up from being a non-player 25 years ago to having world-class capabilities.” China is very good at setting national priorities, pouring tons of resources into those priorities, and quickly catching up to or leap-frogging competitor nations in the process. It is doing that in nuclear fusion. That said, state-led efforts can only get you so far in terms of innovation and with commercial fusion still a few major breakthroughs away from being viable, we’d still bet on the U.S. approach: innovation and competition. Currently, 80+ companies, most of them American, are currently While more clean, abundant energy anywhere in the world is a positive for humanity, America can’t afford to lose the races to build out (and export) fission or to harness fusion to China. Hopefully, this serves as a wakeup call. A battle to generate the most abundant energy is a Great Power Conflict we can get behind. — In related atomic news, Switzerland is lifting its ban on nuclear power plants. Why? Geopolitical tensions (it’s not safe to rely too heavily on Russian gas), climate targets, and growing energy demand. Turns out, nuclear is reliable, clean, and able to produce huge amounts of electricity consistently. Welcome to the party, Switzerland! (4) Invest Like the Best Podcast
Sometimes you listen to a business podcast, and the guest just regurgitates well-trodden perspectives on a topic or gives vague, probably unhelpful advice on business management. Sometimes you listen to a business podcast, and are reminded that some people really, really know their shit. Like knows their shit at a deeper level than anyone else knows their shit on their respective topic. The recent Invest Like the Best episode with Gavin Baker is an example of the latter. Gavin has been covering tech, and specifically semiconductors, for nearly 25 years and he can speak to the players, products, and strategies in a more detailed manner than anyone I’ve come across. You should listen to the full episode if you haven’t already. But in case you don’t have time, I am sharing 5 key insights from the episode below (summarized by ChatGPT, which feels appropriate here, given the nature of the conversation)
(5) From
You can lead state-led fusion programs like China or you can spend 25 years covering an industry like Gavin…but you still might get beat out by folks like A nuclear fusor is a device that uses an electric field to accelerate ions to high speeds, causing them to collide and undergo nuclear fusion. While fusors are cool and can produce fusion reactions, they are not efficient enough for practical power generation. They’re mainly used for research, education, and fun. In the case of Hudhayfa, what he pulled off is not groundbreaking but it’s about how, and how fast, he pulled it off that gives us hope. Take a smart kid, give him a Claude Sonnet 3.5 subscription, a couple of weeks of free-time, and boom anything is possible. The world is going to be a fun place when every ambitious kid in the world has access to models 10x more powerful than Sonnet 3.5. Can’t wait. Have a great weekend y’all. Thanks to Thanks for reading, Packy + Dan |