---
subject: "Housing Roundup #7"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-03-04 14:59:31
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Legalize housing. It is both a good slogan and also a good idea. The struggle is real, ongoing and ever-present. Do not sleep on it. The Housing Theory of Everything applies broadly, even to the issue of AI. If we built enough housing that life vastly improved and people could envision a positive future, they would be far more inclined to think well about AI. In Brief
Reading the details of Arnade’s complaints pointed to the Housing Theory of Everything and general government regulatory issues. Why are so many of the things not nice, or not there at all? Homelessness, which is caused by lack of housing. The other half, that we spend tons of money for public works that are terrible, is because such government functions are broken. So none of this is terribly complicated.
Legalize Housing
Exactly. We do not need specific ‘affordable housing.’ What we need is to build more housing where people want to live and let supply and demand do the work. So, Senator Warren, what do you propose we do to make that happen?
Otherwise,
Same thing with ‘impact fees’ and other barriers. If they are not doing any work other than throwing up a barrier, get rid of them. If they are doing good work (e.g. raising revenue) then you want to set the price at a level where you still get action.
It also makes sense that one can start with the basics, like pointing out that duplexes are illegal in most places, rather than starting with a high rise. Many don’t know. Others of course know all too well, but duplex construction has broad popular support.
All true, the question is does such rhetoric convince anyone?
One specific note is that 1973 is when we prohibited manufactured homes from being transported on a chassis and then placed on a foundation, killing the industry, He highlights that Longer term, Balsa will hopefully be exploring and pushing these and other Federal housing opportunities as its second agenda item. Standardizing building codes seems like excellent low-hanging fruit. Standardizing zoning would be even better.
This will of course lead to some highly silly situations, in which the right thing to do is build house A, tear it down to build B, then tear that down to build C, and so on. Presumably you want some sort of minimum pause in between. I do like that this gives an additional incentive to move up at the first opportunity. Also a lot of very temporary housing is going to get built, but my guess is that is a minor cost, and hey it creates jobs. How much do government regulations raise the cost of new homes? In many cases, infinitely, because they make the home illegal to build at all.
Regulatory Barriers
A paper by Alex Tabarrok, Vaidehi Tandel and Sahil Gandhi,
This makes sense. Permitting lots of supply is not effective without the demand. If you have the demand, what matters is what can be supplied, which this measures. Future Construction ExpectationsMultifamily housing will come online in large quantities soon, which is great. However it looks to have been a zero interest rate phenomenon.
There is still plenty of eagerness to build housing in the places people want to live, if it were further legalized. But with only marginal opportunities available, and the need to account for long delays and additional costs, the higher interest rates are going to sting. Rents
Inflation-adjusted is the watchword, but so I presume is composition, and this chart is easy to find but highly misleading. I went searching some more,
That seems far more sane, comparing the same metro area to itself over time. That pattern makes a lot more sense. Different Designs
My guess is that America got this one essentially right, and China got it wrong, although neither country did it for the right reasons. The Chinese advantage in light and views is nice. But I think Shear’s note is very important here. I don’t have the lived experience with it, but if you have a ton of green space and a few large towers, then a lot of people are effectively farther away from street level, and with so limited a supply of ground floors you are not going to get interesting areas with lots of opportunity. Our approach is also cheaper. The American mistake seems better than the Chinese mistake. There are rapidly diminishing marginal returns to green space. I am very happy to have a small park very close to us to walk around. It would indeed be really cool to be right by a larger one, especially something as well-designed and expansive as Central Park. But once you have a very close playground and tiny walkable green area, and one reachable large park, additional public green space seems of relatively little value, mostly serving to create more distance. My guess is a synthesis is best. New York actually does a version of this very well, except our density is not high enough. You want enough parks and green space so everyone has some available. You want the majority of the space to be taken up by relatively small buildings that are 6 or 12 (or eventually 24?) stories, often but not always with storefronts. And then you want a bunch of taller buildings as well. LandmarksIt makes sense to have a non-zero number of buildings designated as landmarks. I would however choose zero landmarks and take our chances (and allow those who care to buy the buildings in question, including the city, if they disagree)
History
Note that the scales in the first two graphs are distinct. Public OpinionFrom Democrats were split on whether affordable housing developments should be forced to offer lots of parking spaces, Republicans largely understood that this requirement is dumb. I am curious to see this question asked for general housing projects. I can see this changing the answer both ways. Presumably the original logic was ‘in order to be virtuous and affordable these projects need to offer less parking’ but the standard Democratic position could turn out to be the opposite, ‘you will not cheat the poor people out of a parking space, but if rich people don’t want one I don’t care.’ Both groups strongly agreed that speeding up construction and giving local governments deadlines are good ideas. This is a great idea and also a greatly popular idea, so it should be a relatively easy sell. NIMBY SightingsAlex comments on the last post, not bad but Patrick is still champion for now:
Houses as SavingsPaper says that
The thesis is that marriage rates are declining because marriage no longer represents an assurance of physical security, so it does not enable specialization for having and raising children. Such a strategy can no longer be relied upon without a large bank of marital assets, people realize that, so they don’t see opportunity in getting married, the contract is not useful. I would be careful about attributing too much to this particular mechanism. I do buy the more general argument, that marriage is declining because the contract no longer makes financial sense if it cannot be relied upon. Failure in the form of divorce can be devastating to both parties - the high earner can be put into virtual slavery indefinitely, the low earner left without means of support. Without true commitment the whole thing is bad design. Union Dues
The good news is that in California some unions are coming around, as the above Vox article chronicles. As we’ve discussed a bit previously, it has been a struggle to get them to begrudgingly agree to things such as a rule that, if ‘prevailing wages’ are paid and workers treated well, and not enough officially ‘skilled and trained’ workers are available, other workers could also be hired.
The problem is that the incentives for unions are beyond terrible. They are there to protect the exact existing jobs of the exact existing members, and help them extract as much as possible. Offering to grow the union, and create more good union jobs? They might actively oppose you.
They don’t want to allow more jobs, because if those jobs are union they might later be lost or existing members threatened, and if they are not union then they’re not union. How much does the ‘prevailing wage’ requirement cost? No one knows for sure.
The snappy answer is that if the ‘prevailing wage’ was indeed the prevailing wage, paying it is what you would do anyway. Which tells us this means something else, and a 10%-20% total increase in costs implies it is quite a bit higher indeed, and you don’t get much in the way of higher quality in return. That still seems highly affordable given how things are going these days, if it alone lets you build. The problem is that if others also come for large shares of the pie, for too many others, it can add up fast. Landlords
Construction
If we are spending that money well this is fantastic, and note that the bottom of the chart is indeed the zero point. Are we spending the money well? In the places and for the things we want, and efficiently? Rent
Who are You?
Good Money After Bad
Commercial Real Estate
I would not worry. Austin’s real estate prices have gone through the roof in the last few years. Yes, they are running ‘Field of Dreams’ here, but that should be fine. If the price comes down a bit? Good. High rents are not a benefit. High rents are a cost. I do not much care if some real estate developers lose money. If it turns out Austin ends up with too much commercial space versus not enough residential space to support it, the solution is to build more residential space.
When I think about Tyler’s example of adding a bunch of commercial towers to the Upper East and Upper West Sides of Manhattan, that does not seem obviously good to me. I think it would be good to have a bunch of commercial midrange stuff there, but that going pure vertical (e.g. 30+ stories) in those areas would be a tactical error, destroying vibes people value. Central Park makes it difficult to pull off well. As usual (see discussions of congestion pricing), Tyler Cowen does much not care if inhabitants of Manhattan are happy. San FranciscoIt is on. San Francisco refuses to build, and the state of California is having none of it.
Who will win the fight?
Overall, he is optimistic that the new regime is a vast improvement.
New York City
The key is not to build housing. It is to let people build housing.
I agree that the incentive is worthwhile, but this looks a lot less like ‘there was a real decline in housing construction’ and more like ‘everyone moved their actions in time to quality for a major expiring tax break.’ The question is what happens after 2026, once all that construction finishes.
From 2021 ICYMI: Did you know that if you offer tax breaks for ‘low-income’ housing, but purchases still require large down payments, you are effectively subsidizing the children of the rich who borrow the money from their parents?
AustinGetting rid of parking minimums seems pretty great.
Austin also tried letting developers build taller in exchange for more affordable housing.
A notification problem, you say? Annoying, but ultimately no problem. Let’s put everyone on proper notice. Except it seems they tried that, and shenanigans?
Allan McMurtry is, of course, lying. He wants Austin to continue to technically fail to follow the convoluted notification rules so that he can keep suing to block development. Still, there is lots of good progress:
Kentucky House Bill 102
TokyoTokyo keeps growing and allows lots of freedom to build while keeping prices low. Tyler Cowen proposes that instead those low prices in Tokyo are instead Vancouver
Minneapolis
That is not a small effect. Minneapolis has seen a dramatic drop in rents. For the five cities chosen, the more construction, the better the change in rents, although I presume they are somewhat cherry picked for that. Presumably this involved a lot of good luck. The impact should not be this big from only ~25 new units per 1,000 people, although tipping points are possible. One could look at the timing and propose this has something to do with the riots of 2020, as well, although even excluding that drop we still have a big improvement. As usual, we have the effect size dilemma. Effect is big? Must not be causal, you can ignore it. Effect is not big? Could be random, not big enough to care, you can ignore it.
Minneapolis is still one of a small group of pro-housing cities, successfully built more housing, and saw its rents drop dramatically.
TexasThey are building lots of housing,
Yes. It is that easy. Let’s do it. FloridaIt looks like Ron DeSantis is a fan of legalizing housing at the state level,
Cities Build Housing, Rents Decline
Oakland presumably also has other unique factors, like issues with rising legalized crime and the previous stratospheric level of rent in the Bay area.
Los Angeles
The weird trick is that you offer, in exchange for the housing being 100% affordable, to otherwise get out of the way. As in, you use And presto, 16,150 units applied for since December 2022, more than the total in 2020-2022 combined, with 75% having no subsidies at all. Or rather, the subsidies took forms other than money. That makes them a lot cheaper. One catch is that ‘affordable’ here means cheaper than market, but not that cheap.
It is a very good bet. There is tons of pent-up demand for bare bones apartments, because we don’t let people build bare bones apartments. With a modest discount many will be all over it. Note that none of these projects have actually been built yet. As you would expect, lawsuits are pending. So we should not celebrate yet. There are also lawsuits over the city’s attempt to walk back approvals for a handful of projects in single-family areas, where the order has now unfotunately been walked back. ArgentinaIf nothing else,
Other Places Do Things
Rent Control
I do think that landlords will sometimes seek to ‘hold up’ the current tenant and extract the benefits of not having to move, and that this can be destructive. I don’t think this is important enough to risk installing such a regime, that goes very dangerous places, but the real danger is when you cannot keep pace over time, and 7% should mostly solve that. Jay Parsons covers the trend of implementing such laws, This is, as he points out, like covering climate change denialists and not pointing out that scientists agree that climate change is real. It is that level of established as true. You should treat rent control supporters the way you treat climate change denialists.
Traffic and TransitIn a highly amusing synthesis of housing and transit policy issues, The stated goal is to have the high speed rail line working at 200 miles per hour between Los Angeles and Las Vegas The hope is that once you have one line, getting more lines becomes far more attractive and feels more real. It is very American to start its high speed rail with a line that gives up on getting the right to go to actual central LA and then connects it to Vegas. I suppose one must start somewhere.
Which is indeed the correct way to think about Scott Alexander’s argument that increasing density through more building would increase prices. Perhaps it is true, but if true that is because it enhances value even more, which means we should totally do that. Emmett has How big a tax would you pay, as a real estate developer, to get up-zoning? Note that they greatly underestimated the cost of providing this ‘affordable’ housing:
A simple and obvious solution is to auction off the up-zoning rights. As in, for each neighborhood, decide to allow construction of some fixed number of additional buildings, within new broader limits. Then for each building, auction off the permit to the highest bidder, and then pretend (reminder: money is fungible) to use that money to support affordable housing, or distribute the profits to local residents in some way, or something similar. And of course, if the local residents want to prevent construction so badly, they can buy the permit and not use it.
People Focus. You need bipartisan long term support and community engagement, including reaching out via social media etc. Means to an End. Capacity, connectivity, carbon. OK I guess, sure. System Integration is Vital. Yes, you also need stations and tunnels, who knew. HSR as Environmental Opportunity. Hold that everything bagel for a second. Leadership in Megaprojects. Realistic projections, risk communication, don’t shoot the messenger, ‘own the whole’ and be curious about opposition. OK.
A lot of generic ‘do all the good management things’ and ‘get buy-in from actual everyone.’ Most projects would never happen if they required such standards, but at least they are things one could reasonably aspire to. And then there’s that fourth one…
No. Stop. Seriously. If we cannot do mass transit projects without ensuring they are net benefits on every possible environmental axis, if we cannot compromise at all? If every decision must be made to maximize superficial local greenness if you want a rail line? Then there will be no rail lines. If the planet is about to burn, act like it.
Your periodic reminder that
What is funny is that society today is worthy of much higher trust than society in 1985, except for the part where people would call the cops because the five year old was alone. But, if people did not do that and otherwise acted the way they do today, the world would be a vastly safer, more welcoming place, also you can carry around a cell phone. If we wanted to, we could indeed go back to 1985 airport security. Also 1985 norms about what kids can do on their own. It would be fine.
The Lighter Side
You're currently a free subscriber to |